term wages includes all the earnings of labor, as well when
taken directly by the laborer in the results of his labor
as when received from an employer, it is evident that
the assumption that wages are drawn from capital, on
which as a universal truth such a vast superstructure is
in standard politico-economic treatises so unhesitatingly
built, is at least in large part untrue, and the utmost
that can with any plausibility be affirmed, is that some
wages, i.e. wages received by the laborer from an employer,
are drawn from capital. this restriction of the
major premise at once invalidates all the deductions that
are made from it; but without resting here, let us see
whether even in this restricted sense it accords with the
facts. let us pick up the clew where adam smith
dropped it, and advancing step by step, see whether the
relation of facts which is obvious in the simplest forms
of production does not run through the most complex.
next in simplicity to “that original state of things,”
of which many examples may yet be found, where the
whole produce of labor belongs to the laborer, is the arrangement
in which the laborer, though working for
another person, or with the capital of another person,
receives his wages in kind—that is to say, in the things
his labor produces. in this case it is as clear
as in the case of the self-employing laborer that
the wages are really drawn from the product of the
labor, and not at all from capital. if i hire a man
to gather eggs, to pick berries, or to make shoes, paying
him from the eggs, the berries, or the shoes that his
labor secures, there can be no question that the source
of the wages is the labor for which they are paid. of
this form of hiring is the saer-and-daer stock tenancy,
treated of with such perspicuity by sir henry maine in
his “early history of institutions,” and which so clearly
involved the relation of employer and employed as to
render the acceptor of cattle the man or vassal of the
capitalist who thus employed him. it was on such terms
as these that jacob worked for laban, and to this day,
even in civilized countries, it is not an infrequent mode
of employing labor. the farming of land on shares,
which prevails to a considerable extent in the southern
states of the union and in california, the metayer system
of europe, as well as the many cases in which superintendents,
salesmen, etc., are paid by a percentage of profits,
what are they but the employment of labor for wages
which consist of part of its produce?
the next step in the advance from simplicity to complexity
is where the wages, though estimated in kind,
are paid in an equivalent of something else. for instance,
on american whaling ships the custom is not to
pay fixed wages, but a “lay,” or proportion of the catch,
which varies from a sixteenth to a twelfth to the captain
down to a three-hundredth to the cabin-boy. thus,
when a whaleship comes into new bedford or san francisco
after a successful cruise, she carries in her hold the
wages of her crew, as well as the profits of her owners,
and an equivalent which will reimburse them for all the
stores used up during the voyage. can anything be
clearer than that these wages—this oil and bone which
the crew of the whaler have taken—have not been drawn
from capital, but are really a part of the produce of their
labor? nor is this fact changed or obscured in the
slightest degree where, as a matter of convenience, instead
of dividing up between the crew their proportion
of the oil and bone, the value of each man’s share is estimated
at the market price, and he is paid for it in
money. the money is but the equivalent of the real
wages, the oil and bone. in no way is there any advance
of capital in this payment. the obligation to pay wages
does not accrue until the value from which they are to
be paid is brought into port. at the moment when the
owner takes from his capital money to pay the crew he
adds to his capital oil and bone.
so far there can be no dispute. let us now take
another step, which will bring us to the usual method of
employing labor and paying wages.
the farallone islands, off the bay of san francisco,
are a hatching ground of sea-fowl, and a company who
claim these islands employ men in the proper season to
collect the eggs. they might employ these men for a
proportion of the eggs they gather, as is done in the
whale fishery and probably would do so if there were
much uncertainty attending the business; but as the fowl
are plentiful and tame, and about so many eggs can be
gathered by so much labor, they find it more convenient
to pay their men fixed wages. the men go out and remain
on the islands, gathering the eggs and bringing
them to a landing, whence, at intervals of a few days,
they are taken in a small vessel to san francisco and
sold. when the season is over the men return and are
paid their stipulated wages in coin. does not this transaction
amount to the same thing as if, instead of being
paid in coin, the stipulated wages were paid in an equivalent
of the eggs gathered? does not the coin represent
the eggs, by the sale of which it was obtained, and are
not these wages as much the product of the labor for
which they are paid as the eggs would be in the possession
of a man who gathered them for himself without the
intervention of any employer?
to take another example, which shows by reversion
the identity of wages in money with wages in kind. in
san buenaventura lives a man who makes an excellent
living by shooting for their oil and skins the common
hair seals which frequent the islands forming the santa
barbara channel. when on these sealing expeditions he
takes two or three chinamen along to help him, whom
at first he paid wholly in coin. but it seems that the
chinese highly value some of the organs of the seal,
which they dry and pulverize for medicine, as well as
the long hairs in the whiskers of the male seal, which,
when over a certain length, they greatly esteem for
some purpose that to outside barbarians is not very
clear. and this man soon found that the chinamen
were very willing to take instead of money these parts of
the seals killed, so that now, in large part, he thus pays
them their wages.
now, is not what may be seen in all these cases—the
identity of wages in money with wages in kind—true of
all cases in which wages are paid for productive labor? is
not the fund created by the labor really the fund from
which the wages are paid?
it may, perhaps, be said: “there is this difference—
where a man works for himself, or where, when working
for an employer, he takes his wages in kind, his wages
depend upon the result of his labor. should that, from
any misadventure, prove futile, he gets nothing. when
he works for an employer, however, he gets his wages
anyhow—they depend upon the performance of the labor,
not upon the result of the labor.” but this is evidently
not a real distinction. for on the average, the labor
that is rendered for fixed wages not only yields the
amount of the wages, but more; else employers could
make no profit. when wages are fixed, the employer
takes the whole risk and is compensated for this assurance,
for wages when fixed are always somewhat less than
wages contingent. but though when fixed wages are
stipulated the laborer who has performed his part of the
contract has usually a legal claim upon the employer, it
is frequently, if not generally, the case that the disaster
which prevents the employer from reaping benefit from
the labor prevents him from paying the wages. and in
one important department of industry the employer is
legally exempt in case of disaster, although the contract
be for wages certain and not contingent. for the maxim
of admiralty law is, that “freight is the mother of
wages,” and though the seaman may have performed his
part, the disaster which prevents the ship from earning
freight deprives him of claim for his wages.
in this legal maxim is embodied the truth for which i
am contending. production is always the mother of
wages. without production, wages would not and could
not be. it is from the produce of labor, not from the
advances of capital that wages come.
wherever we analyze the facts this will be found to be
true. for labor always precedes wages. this is as universally
true of wages received by the laborer from an
employer as it is of wages taken directly by the laborer
who is his own employer. in the one class of cases as
in the other, reward is conditioned upon exertion. paid
sometimes by the day, oftener by the week or month,
occasionally by the year, and in many branches of production
by the piece, the payment of wages by an employer
to an employee always implies the previous rendering
of labor by the employee for the benefit of the
employer, for the few cases in which advance payments
are made for personal services are evidently referable
either to charity or to guarantee and purchase. the
name “retainer,” given to advance payments to lawyers,
shows the true character of the transaction, as does the
name “blood money” given in ’longshore vernacular to a
payment which is nominally wages advanced to sailors,
but which in reality is purchase money—both english
and american law considering a sailor as much a chattel
as a pig.
i dwell on this obvious fact that labor always precedes
wages, because it is all-important to an understanding of
the more complicated phenomena of wages that it should
be kept in mind. and obvious as it is, as i have put it,
the plausibility of the proposition that wages are drawn
from capital—a proposition that is made the basis for
such important and far-reaching deductions—comes in
the first instance from a statement that ignores and leads
the attention away from this truth. that statement is,
that labor cannot exert its productive power unless supplied
by capital with maintenance. the unwary reader
at once recognizes the fact that the laborer must have
food, clothing, etc., in order to enable him to perform
the work, and having been told that the food, clothing,
etc., used by productive laborers are capital, he assents
to the conclusion that the consumption of capital is necessary
to the application of labor, and from this it is but
an obvious deduction that industry is limited by capital—that
the demand for labor depends upon the supply of
capital, and hence that wages depend upon the ratio between
the number of laborers looking for employment
and the amount of capital devoted to hiring them.
but i think the discussion in the previous chapter will
enable any one to see wherein lies the fallacy of this reasoning—a
fallacy which has entangled some of the most
acute minds in a web of their own spinning. it is in the
use of the term capital in two senses. in the primary
proposition that capital is necessary to the exertion of
productive labor, the term “capital” is understood as including
all food, clothing, shelter, etc.; whereas, in the
deductions finally drawn from it, the term is used in its
common and legitimate meaning of wealth devoted, not
to the immediate gratification of desire, but to the procurement
of more wealth—of wealth in the hands of employers
as distinguished from laborers. the conclusion
is no more valid than it would be from the acceptance of
the proposition that a laborer cannot go to work without
his breakfast and some clothes, to infer that no more
laborers can go to work than employers first furnish with
breakfasts and clothes. now, the fact is that laborers
generally furnish their own breakfasts and the clothes in
which they go to work; and the further fact is that
capital (in the sense in which the word is used in distinction
to labor) in exceptional cases sometimes may, but is
never compelled to make advances to labor before the
work begins. of all the vast number of unemployed
laborers in the civilized world to-day, there is probably
not a single one willing to work who could not be employed
without any advance of wages. a great proportion
would doubtless gladly go to work on terms which
did not require the payment of wages before the end of
a month; it is doubtful if there are enough to be called
a class who would not go to work and wait for their
wages until the end of the week, as most laborers habitually
do; while there are certainly none who would not
wait for their wages until the end of the day, or if you
please, until the next meal hour. the precise time of
the payment of wages is immaterial; the essential point—the
point i lay stress on—is that it is after the performance
of work.
the payment of wages, therefore, always implies the
previous rendering of labor. now, what does the rendering
of labor in production imply? evidently the production
of wealth, which, if it is to be exchanged or used in
production, is capital. therefore, the payment of capital
in wages pre-supposes a production of capital by the
labor for which the wages are paid. and as the employer
generally makes a profit, the payment of wages is,
so far as he is concerned, but the return to the laborer
of a portion of the capital he has received from the labor.
so far as the employee is concerned, it is but the receipt
of a portion of the capital his labor has previously produced.
as the value paid in the wages is thus exchanged
for a value brought into being by the labor, how can it
be said that wages are drawn from capital or advanced by
capital? as in the exchange of labor for wages the employer
always gets the capital created by the labor before
he pays out capital in the wages, at what point is his
capital lessened even temporarily?
bring the question to the test of facts. take, for instance,
an employing manufacturer who is engaged in
turning raw material into finished products—cotton into
cloth, iron into hardware, leather into boots, or so on, as
may be, and who pays his hands, as is generally the case,
once a week. make an exact inventory of his capital on
monday morning before the beginning of work, and it
will consist of his buildings, machinery, raw materials,
money on hand, and finished products in stock. suppose,
for the sake of simplicity, that he neither buys nor
sells during the week, and after work has stopped and he
has paid his hands on saturday night, take a new inventory
of his capital. the item of money will be less, for
it has been paid out in wages; there will be less raw
material, less coal, etc., and a proper deduction must be
made from the value of the buildings and machinery for
the week’s wear and tear. but if he is doing a remunerative
business, which must on the average be the case,
the item of finished products will be so much greater as
to compensate for all these deficiencies and show in the
summing up an increase of capital. manifestly, then,
the value he paid his hands in wages was not drawn from
his capital, or from any one else’s capital. it came, not
from capital, but from the value created by the labor
itself. there was no more advance of capital than if he
had hired his hands to dig clams, and paid them with a
part of the clams they dug. their wages were as truly
the produce of their labor as were the wages of the
primitive man, when, long “before the appropriation of
land and the accumulation of stock,” he obtained an
oyster by knocking it with a stone from the rocks.
as the laborer who works for an employer does not get
his wages until he has performed the work, his case is
similar to that of the depositor in a bank who cannot
draw money out until he has put money in. and as by
drawing out what he has previously put in, the bank depositor
does not lessen the capital of the bank, neither
can laborers by receiving wages lessen even temporarily
either the capital of the employer or the aggregate capital
of the community. their wages no more come from
capital than the checks of depositors are drawn against
bank capital. it is true that laborers in receiving wages
do not generally receive back wealth in the same form in
which they have rendered it, any more than bank depositors
receive back the identical coins or bank notes they
have deposited, but they receive it in equivalent form,
and as we are justified in saying that the depositor receives
from the bank the money he paid in, so are we
justified in saying that the laborer receives in wages the
wealth he has rendered in labor.
that this universal truth is so often obscured, is
largely due to that fruitful source of economic obscurities,
the confounding of wealth with money; and it is remarkable
to see so many of those who, since dr. adam
smith made the egg stand on its head, have copiously
demonstrated the fallacies of the mercantile system, fall
into delusions of the very same kind in treating of the
relations of capital and labor. money being the general
medium of exchanges, the common flux through which
all transmutations of wealth from one form to another
take place, whatever difficulties may exist to an exchange
will generally show themselves on the side of reduction
to money, and thus it is sometimes easier to exchange
money for any other form of wealth than it is to exchange
wealth in a particular form into money, for the
reason that there are more holders of wealth who desire
to make some exchange than there are who desire to
make any particular exchange. and so a producing employer
who has paid out his money in wages may sometimes
find it difficult to turn quickly back into money
the increased value for which his money has really been
exchanged, and is spoken of as having exhausted or advanced
his capital in the payment of wages. yet, unless
the new value created by the labor is less than the wages
paid, which can be only an exceptional case, the capital
which he had before in money he now has in goods—it
has been changed in form, but not lessened.
there is one branch of production in regard to which
the confusions of thought which arise from the habit of
estimating capital in money are least likely to occur, inasmuch
as its product is the general material and standard
of money. and it so happens that this business furnishes
us, almost side by side, with illustrations of production
passing from the simplest to most complex
forms.
in the early days of california, as afterward in australia,
the placer miner, who found in river bed or surface
deposit the glittering particles which the slow processes
of nature had for ages been accumulating, picked
up or washed out his “wages” (so, too, he called them)
in actual money, for coin being scarce, gold dust passed
as currency by weight, and at the end of the day had his
wages in money in a buckskin bag in his pocket. there
can be no dispute as to whether these wages came from
capital or not. they were manifestly the produce of his
labor. nor could there be any dispute when the holder
of a specially rich claim hired men to work for him and
paid them off in the identical money which their labor
had taken from gulch or bar. as coin became more
abundant, its greater convenience in saving the trouble
and loss of weighing assigned gold dust to the place of a
commodity, and with coin obtained by the sale of the
dust their labor had procured, the employing miner paid
off his hands. where he had coin enough to do so, instead
of selling his gold dust at the nearest store and
paying a dealer’s profit, he retained it until he got
enough to take a trip, or send by express to san francisco,
where at the mint he could have it turned into
coin without charge. while thus accumulating gold
dust he was lessening his stock of coin; just as the manufacturer,
while accumulating a stock of goods, lessens
his stock of money. yet no one would be obtuse enough
to imagine that in thus taking in gold dust and paying
out coin the miner was lessening his capital.
but the deposits that could be worked without preliminary
labor were soon exhausted, and gold mining
rapidly took a more elaborate character. before claims
could be opened so as to yield any return deep shafts had
to be sunk, great dams constructed, long tunnels cut
through the hardest rock, water brought for miles over
mountain ridges and across deep valleys, and expensive
machinery put up. these works could not be constructed
without capital. sometimes their construction
required years, during which no return could be hoped
for, while the men employed had to be paid their wages
every week, or every month. surely, it will be said, in such
cases, even if in no others, that wages do actually come
from capital; are actually advanced by capital; and must
necessarily lessen capital in their payment! surely here,
at least, industry is limited by capital, for without capital
such works could not be carried on! let us see:
it is cases of this class that are always instanced as
showing that wages are advanced from capital. for
where wages are paid before the object of the labor is obtained,
or is finished—as in agriculture, where plowing
and sowing must precede by several months the harvesting
of the crop; as in the erection of buildings, the construction
of ships, railroads, canals, etc.—it is clear that
the owners of the capital paid in wages cannot expect an
immediate return, but, as the phrase is, must “outlay
it,” or “lie out of it” for a time, which sometimes
amounts to many years. and hence, if first principles
are not kept in mind, it is easy to jump to the conclusion
that wages are advanced by capital.
but such cases will not embarrass the reader to whom
in what has preceded i have made myself clearly understood.
an easy analysis will show that these instances
where wages are paid before the product is finished, or
even produced, do not afford any exception to the rule
apparent where the product is finished before wages are
paid.
if i go to a broker to exchange silver for gold, i lay
down my silver, which he counts and puts away, and
then hands me the equivalent in gold, minus his commission.
does the broker advance me any capital?
manifestly not. what he had before in gold he now has
in silver, plus his profit. and as he got the silver before
he paid out the gold, there is on his part not even momentarily
an advance of capital.
now, this operation of the broker is precisely analogous
to what the capitalist does, when, in such cases as we
are now considering, he pays out capital in wages. as
the rendering of labor precedes the payment of wages,
and as the rendering of labor in production implies the
creation of value, the employer receives value before he
pays out value—he but exchanges capital of one form for
capital of another form. for the creation of value does
not depend upon the finishing of the product; it takes
place at every stage of the process of production, as the
immediate result of the application of labor, and hence,
no matter how long the process in which it is engaged,
labor always adds to capital by its exertion before it takes
from capital in its wages.
here is a blacksmith at his forge making picks.
clearly he is making capital—adding picks to his employer’s
capital before he draws money from it in wages.
here is a machinist or boilermaker working on the keel-plates
of a great eastern. is not he also just as clearly
creating value—making capital? the giant steamship,
as the pick, is an article of wealth, an instrument of production,
and though the one may not be completed for
years, while the other is completed in a few minutes,
each day’s work, in the one case as in the other, is as
clearly a production of wealth—an addition to capital.
in the case of the steamship, as in the case of the pick, it
is not the last blow, any more than the first blow, that
creates the value of the finished product—the creation
of value is continuous, it immediately results from the
exertion of labor.
we see this very clearly wherever the division of labor
has made it customary for different parts of the full
process of production to be carried on by different sets
of producers—that is to say, wherever we are in the habit
of estimating the amount of value which the labor expended
in any preparatory stage of production has
created. and a moment’s reflection will show that this
is the case as to the vast majority of products. take a
ship, a building, a jackknife, a book, a lady’s thimble or
a loaf of bread. they are finished products. but they
were not produced at one operation or by one set of producers.
and this being the case, we readily distinguish
different points or stages in the creation of the value
which as completed articles they represent. when we
do not distinguish different parts in the final process of
production we do distinguish the value of the materials.
the value of these materials may often be again decomposed
many times, exhibiting as many clearly defined
steps in the creation of the final value. at each of these
steps we habitually estimate a creation of value, an addition
to capital. the batch of bread which the baker is
taking from the oven has a certain value. but this is
composed in part of the value of the flour from which the
dough was made. and this again is composed of the
value of the wheat, the value given by milling, etc.
iron in the form of pigs is very far from being a completed
product. it must yet pass through several, or,
perhaps, through many, stages of production before it
results in the finished articles that were the ultimate objects
for which the iron ore was extracted from the mine.
yet, is not pig iron capital? and so the process of production
is not really completed when a crop of cotton is
gathered, nor yet when it is ginned and pressed; nor yet
when it arrives at lowell or manchester; nor yet when it
is converted into yarn; nor yet when it becomes cloth;
but only when it is finally placed in the hands of the
consumer. yet at each step in this progress there is
clearly enough a creation of value—an addition to capital.
why, therefore, although we do not so habitually distinguish
and estimate it, is there not a creation of value—an
addition to capital—when the ground is plowed for
the crop? is it because it may possibly be a bad season
and the crop may fail? evidently not; for a like possibility
of misadventure attends every one of the many
steps in the production of the finished article. on the
average a crop is sure to come up, and so much plowing
and sowing will on the average result in so much cotton
in the boll, as surely as so much spinning of cotton yarn
will result in so much cloth.
in short, as the payment of wages is always conditioned
upon the rendering of labor, the payment of
wages in production, no matter how long the process,
never involves any advance of capital, or even temporarily
lessens capital. it may take a year, or even years,
to build a ship, but the creation of value of which the
finished ship will be the sum goes on day by day, and
hour by hour, from the time the keel is laid or even the
ground is cleared. nor by the payment of wages before
the ship is completed, does the master builder lessen
either his capital or the capital of the community, for
the value of the partially completed ship stands in place
of the value paid out in wages. there is no advance of
capital in this payment of wages, for the labor of the
workmen during the week or month creates and renders
to the builder more capital than is paid back to them at
the end of the week or month, as is shown by the fact
that if the builder were at any stage of the construction
asked to sell a partially completed ship he would expect
a profit.
and so, when a sutro or st. gothard tunnel or a
suez canal is cut, there is no advance of capital. the
tunnel or canal, as it is cut, becomes capital as much as
the money spent in cutting it—or, if you please, the
powder, drills, etc., used in the work, and the food,
clothes, etc., used by the workmen—as is shown by the
fact that the value of the capital stock of the company is
not lessened as capital in these forms is gradually
changed into capital in the form of tunnel or canal. on
the contrary, it probably, and on the average, increases
as the work progresses, just as the capital invested in a
speedier mode of production would on the average
increase.
and this is obvious in agriculture also. that the
creation of value does not take place all at once when
the crop is gathered, but step by step during the whole
process which the gathering of the crop concludes, and
that no payment of wages in the interim lessens the
farmer’s capital, is tangible enough when land is sold or
rented during the process of production, as a plowed field
will bring more than an unplowed field, or a field that
has been sown more than one merely plowed. it is
tangible enough when growing crops are sold, as is sometimes
done, or where the farmer does not harvest himself,
but lets a contract to the owner of harvesting machinery.
it is tangible in the case of orchards and vineyards
which, though not yet in bearing, bring prices
proportionate to their age. it is tangible in the case of
horses, cattle and sheep, which increase in value as they
grow toward maturity. and if not always tangible between
what may be called the usual exchange points in
production, this increase of value as surely takes place
with every exertion of labor. hence, where labor is
rendered before wages are paid, the advance of capital is
really made by labor, and is from the employed to the
employer, not from the employer to the employed.
“yet,” it may be said, “in such cases as we have been
considering capital is required!” certainly; i do not
dispute that. but it is not required in order to make
advances to labor. it is required for quite another purpose.
what that purpose is we may readily see.
when wages are paid in kind—that is to say, in wealth
of the same species as the labor produces; as, for instance,
if i hire men to cut wood, agreeing to give them
as wages a portion of the wood they cut, a method sometimes
adopted by the owners or lessees of woodland, it
is evident that no capital is required for the payment of
wages. nor yet when, for the sake of mutual convenience,
arising from the fact that a large quantity of wood
can be more readily and more advantageously exchanged
than a number of small quantities, i agree to pay wages
in money, instead of wood, shall i need any capital,
provided i can make the exchange of the wood for money
before the wages are due. it is only when i cannot
make such an exchange, or such an advantageous exchange
as i desire, until i accumulate a large quantity
of wood that i shall need capital. nor even then shall
i need capital if i can make a partial or tentative exchange
by borrowing on my wood. if i cannot, or do
not choose, either to sell the wood or to borrow upon it,
and yet wish to go ahead accumulating a large stock of
wood, i shall need capital. but manifestly, i need this
capital, not for the payment of wages, but for the accumulation
of a stock of wood. likewise in cutting a
tunnel. if the workmen were paid in tunnel (which, if
convenient, might easily be done by paying them in stock
of the company), no capital for the payment of wages
would be required. it is only when the undertakers
wish to accumulate capital in the shape of a tunnel that
they will need capital. to recur to our first illustration:
the broker to whom i sell my silver cannot carry on
his business without capital. but he does not need this
capital because he makes any advance of capital to
me when he receives my silver and hands me gold. he
needs it because the nature of the business requires the
keeping of a certain amount of capital on hand, in order
that when a customer comes he may be prepared to make
the exchange the customer desires.
and so we shall find it in every branch of production.
capital has never to be set aside for the payment of
wages when the produce of the labor for which the wages
are paid is exchanged as soon as produced; it is only
required when this produce is stored up, or what is to
the individual the same thing, placed in the general current
of exchanges without being at once drawn against—that
is, sold on credit. but the capital thus required is
not required for the payment of wages, nor for advances
to labor, as it is always represented in the produce of the
labor. it is never as an employer of labor that any producer
needs capital; when he does need capital, it is because
he is not only an employer of labor, but a merchant
or speculator in, or an accumulator of, the products of
labor. this is generally the case with employers.
to recapitulate: the man who works for himself gets
his wages in the things he produces, as he produces them,
and exchanges this value into another form whenever
he sells the produce. the man who works for another
for stipulated wages in money works under a contract of
exchange. he also creates his wages as he renders his
labor, but he does not get them except at stated times,
in stated amounts, and in a different form. in performing
the labor he is advancing in exchange; when he gets
his wages the exchange is completed. during the time
he is earning the wages he is advancing capital to his
employer, but at no time, unless wages are paid before
work is done, is the employer advancing capital to him.
whether the employer who receives this produce in exchange
for the wages immediately re-exchanges it, or
keeps it for awhile, no more alters the character of the
transaction than does the final disposition of the product
made by the ultimate receiver, who may, perhaps, be in
another quarter of the globe and at the end of a series of
exchanges numbering hundreds.
but a stumbling block may yet remain, or may recur,
in the mind of the reader.
as the plowman cannot eat the furrow, nor a partially
completed steam engine aid in any way in producing the
clothes the machinist wears, have i not, in the words of
john stuart mill, “forgotten that the people of a country
are maintained and have their wants supplied, not
by the produce of present labor, but of past?” or, to
use the language of a popular elementary work—that of
mrs. fawcett—have i not “forgotten that many
months must elapse between the sowing of the seed and
the time when the produce of that seed is converted into
a loaf of bread,” and that “it is, therefore, evident that
laborers cannot live upon that which their labor is assisting
to produce, but are maintained by that wealth which
their labor, or the labor of others, has previously produced,
which wealth is capital?”
the assumption made in these passages—the assumption
that it is so self-evident that labor must be subsisted from
capital that the proposition has but to be stated to compel
recognition—runs through the whole fabric of current
political economy. and so confidently is it held
that the maintenance of labor is drawn from capital that
the proposition that “population regulates itself by the
funds which are to employ it, and, therefore, always increases
or diminishes with the increase or diminution of
capital,” is regarded as equally axiomatic, and in its
turn made the basis of important reasoning.
yet being resolved, these propositions are seen to be,
not self-evident, but absurd; for they involve the idea
that labor cannot be exerted until the products of labor
are saved—thus putting the product before the producer.
and being examined, they will be seen to derive their
apparent plausibility from a confusion of thought.
i have already pointed out the fallacy, concealed by an
erroneous definition, which underlies the proposition
that because food, raiment and shelter are necessary to
productive labor, therefore industry is limited by capital.
to say that a man must have his breakfast before going
to work is not to say that he cannot go to work unless a
capitalist furnishes him with a breakfast, for his breakfast
may, and in point of fact in any country where there
is not actual famine will, come not from wealth set apart
for the assistance of production, but from wealth set
apart for subsistence. and, as has been previously shown,
food, clothing, etc.—in short, all articles of wealth—are
only capital so long as they remain in the possession of
those who propose, not to consume, but to exchange
them for other commodities or for productive services,
and cease to be capital when they pass into the possession
of those who will consume them; for in that transaction
they pass from the stock of wealth held for the
purpose of procuring other wealth, and pass into the
stock of wealth held for purposes of gratification, irrespective
of whether their consumption will aid in the
production of wealth or not. unless this distinction is
preserved it is impossible to draw the line between the
wealth that is capital and the wealth that is not capital,
even by remitting the distinction to the “mind of the
possessor,” as does john stuart mill. for men do not
eat or abstain, wear clothes or go naked, as they propose
to engage in productive labor or not. they eat because
they are hungry, and wear clothes because they would be
uncomfortable without them. take the food on the
breakfast table of a laborer who will work or not that day
as he gets the opportunity. if the distinction between
capital and non-capital be the support of productive
labor, is this food capital or not? it is as impossible for
the laborer himself as for any philosopher of the ricardo-mill
school to tell. nor yet can it be told when it gets
into his stomach; nor, supposing that he does not get
work at first, but continues the search, can it be told
until it has passed into the blood and tissues. yet the
man will eat his breakfast all the same.
but, though it would be logically sufficient, it is hardly
safe to rest here and leave the argument to turn on the
distinction between wealth and capital. nor is it necessary.
it seems to me that the proposition that present
labor must be maintained by the produce of past labor
will upon analysis prove to be true only in the sense that
the afternoon’s labor must be performed by the aid of
the noonday meal, or that before you eat the hare he
must be caught and cooked. and this, manifestly, is
not the sense in which the proposition is used to support
the important reasoning that is made to hinge upon it.
that sense is, that before a work which will not immediately
result in wealth available for subsistence can be
carried on, there must exist such a stock of subsistence
as will support the laborers during the process. let us
see if this be true:
the canoe which robinson crusoe made with such infinite
toil and pains was a production in which his labor
could not yield an immediate return. but was it necessary
that, before he commenced, he should accumulate a
stock of food sufficient to maintain him while he felled
the tree, hewed out the canoe, and finally launched her
into the sea? not at all. it was necessary only that he
should devote part of his time to the procurement of
food while he was devoting part of his time to the building
and launching of the canoe. or supposing a hundred
men to be landed, without any stock of provisions,
in a new country. will it be necessary for them to accumulate
a season’s stock of provisions before they can
begin to cultivate the soil? not at all. it will be necessary
only that fish, game, berries, etc., shall be so abundant
that the labor of a part of the hundred may suffice
to furnish daily enough of these for the maintenance of
all, and that there shall be such a sense of mutual
interest, or such a correlation of desires, as shall lead
those who in the present get the food to divide (exchange)
with those whose efforts are directed to future
recompense.
what is true in these cases is true in all cases. it is
not necessary to the production of things that cannot be
used as subsistence, or cannot be immediately utilized,
that there should have been a previous production of the
wealth required for the maintenance of the laborers
while the production is going on. it is only necessary
that there should be, somewhere within the circle of exchange,
a contemporaneous production of sufficient subsistence
for the laborers, and a willingness to exchange
this subsistence for the thing on which the labor is being
bestowed.
and as a matter of fact, is it not true, in any normal
condition of things, that consumption is supported by
contemporaneous production?
here is a luxurious idler, who does no productive work
either with head or hand, but lives, we say, upon wealth
which his father left him securely invested in government
bonds. does his subsistence, as a matter of fact,
come from wealth accumulated in the past or from the
productive labor that is going on around him? on his
table are new-laid eggs, butter churned but a few days
before, milk which the cow gave this morning, fish which
twenty-four hours ago were swimming in the sea, meat
which the butcher boy has just brought in time to be
cooked, vegetables fresh from the garden, and fruit from
the orchard—in short, hardly anything that has not recently
left the hand of the productive laborer (for in this
category must be included transporters and distributors
as well as those who are engaged in the first stages of
production), and nothing that has been produced for any
considerable length of time, unless it may be some bottles
of old wine. what this man inherited from his father,
and on which we say he lives, is not actually wealth at
all, but only the power of commanding wealth as others
produce it. and it is from this contemporaneous production
that his subsistence is drawn.
the fifty square miles of london undoubtedly contain
more wealth than within the same space anywhere else
exists. yet were productive labor in london absolutely
to cease, within a few hours people would begin to
die like rotten sheep, and within a few weeks, or at most
a few months, hardly one would be left alive. for an
entire suspension of productive labor would be a disaster
more dreadful than ever yet befell a beleaguered city. it
would not be a mere external wall of circumvallation,
such as titus drew around jerusalem, which would prevent
the constant incoming of the supplies on which a
great city lives, but it would be the drawing of a similar
wall around each household. imagine such a suspension
of labor in any community, and you will see how true it
is that mankind really live from hand to mouth; that it
is the daily labor of the community that supplies the
community with its daily bread.
just as the subsistence of the laborers who built the
pyramids was drawn not from a previously hoarded
stock, but from the constantly recurring crops of the nile
valley; just as a modern government when it undertakes
a great work of years does not appropriate to it wealth
already produced, but wealth yet to be produced, which
is taken from producers in taxes as the work progresses;
so it is that the subsistence of the laborers engaged in
production which does not directly yield subsistence
comes from the production of subsistence in which others
are simultaneously engaged.
if we trace the circle of exchange by which work done
in the production of a great steam engine secures to the
worker bread, meat, clothes and shelter, we shall find
that though between the laborer on the engine and the
producers of the bread, meat, etc., there may be a thousand
intermediate exchanges, the transaction, when reduced
to its lowest terms, really amounts to an exchange
of labor between him and them. now the cause which
induces the expenditure of the labor on the engine is
evidently that some one who has power to give what is
desired by the laborer on the engine wants in exchange
an engine—that is to say, there exists a demand for an
engine on the part of those producing bread, meat, etc.,
or on the part of those who are producing what the producers
of the bread, meat, etc., desire. it is this demand
which directs the labor of the machinist to the production
of the engine, and hence, reversely, the demand of
the machinist for bread, meat, etc., really directs an
equivalent amount of labor to the production of these
things, and thus his labor, actually exerted in the production
of the engine, virtually produces the things in
which he expends his wages.
or, to formularize this principle:
the demand for consumption determines the direction in
which labor will be expended in production.
this principle is so simple and obvious that it needs
no further illustration, yet in its light all the complexities
of our subject disappear, and we thus reach the same
view of the real objects and rewards of labor in the intricacies
of modern production that we gained by observing
in the first beginnings of society the simpler forms of
production and exchange. we see that now, as then,
each laborer is endeavoring to obtain by his exertions the
satisfaction of his own desires; we see that although the
minute division of labor assigns to each producer the
production of but a small part, or perhaps nothing at all, of
the particular things he labors to get, yet, in aiding in the
production of what other producers want, he is directing
other labor to the production of the things he wants—in
effect, producing them himself. and thus, if he make
jack-knives and eat wheat, the wheat is really as much
the produce of his labor as if he had grown it for himself
and left wheat-growers to make their own jack-knives.
we thus see how thoroughly and completely true it
is, that in whatever is taken or consumed by laborers in
return for labor rendered, there is no advance of capital
to the laborers. if i have made jack-knives, and with
the wages received have bought wheat, i have simply exchanged
jack-knives for wheat—added jack-knives to the
existing stock of wealth and taken wheat from it. and
as the demand for consumption determines the direction
in which labor will be expended in production, it cannot
even be said, so long as the limit of wheat production has
not been reached, that i have lessened the stock of
wheat, for, by placing jack-knives in the exchangeable
stock of wealth and taking wheat out, i have determined
labor at the other end of a series of exchanges to the production
of wheat, just as the wheat grower, by putting in
wheat and demanding jack-knives, determined labor to
the production of jack-knives, as the easiest way by
which wheat could be obtained.
and so the man who is following the plow—though
the crop for which he is opening the ground is not yet
sown, and after being sown will take months to arrive at
maturity—he is yet, by the exertion of his labor in plowing,
virtually producing the food he eats and the wages
he receives. for, though plowing is but a part of the
operation of producing a crop, it is a part, and as necessary
a part as harvesting. the doing of it is a step toward
procuring a crop, which, by the assurance which it
gives of the future crop, sets free from the stock constantly
held the subsistence and wages of the plowman.
this is not merely theoretically true, it is practically and
literally true. at the proper time for plowing, let plowing
cease. would not the symptoms of scarcity at once
manifest themselves without waiting for the time of the
harvest? let plowing cease, and would not the effect at
once be felt in counting-room, and machine shop, and
factory? would not loom and spindle soon stand as idle
as the plow? that this would be so, we see in the effect
which immediately follows a bad season. and if this
would be so, is not the man who plows really producing
his subsistence and wages as much as though during the
day or week his labor actually resulted in the things for
which his labor is exchanged?
as a matter of fact, where there is labor looking for
employment, the want of capital does not prevent the
owner of land which promises a crop for which there is a
demand from hiring it. either he makes an agreement
to cultivate on shares, a common method in some parts
of the united states, in which case the laborers, if they
are without means of subsistence, will, on the strength
of the work they are doing, obtain credit at the nearest
store; or, if he prefers to pay wages, the farmer will himself
obtain credit, and thus the work done in cultivation
is immediately utilized or exchanged as it is done. if
anything more will be used up than would be used up if
the laborers were forced to beg instead of to work (for in
any civilized country during a normal condition of things
the laborers must be supported anyhow), it will be the reserve
capital drawn out by the prospect of replacement, and
which is in fact replaced by the work as it is done. for
instance, in the purely agricultural districts of southern
california there was in  a total failure of the crop,
and of millions of sheep nothing remained but their
bones. in the great san joaquin valley were many
farmers without food enough to support their families
until the next harvest time, let alone to support any
laborers. but the rains came again in proper season,
and these very farmers proceeded to hire hands to plow
and to sow. for every here and there was a farmer who
had been holding back part of his crop. as soon as the
rains came he was anxious to sell before the next harvest
brought lower prices, and the grain thus held in reserve,
through the machinery of exchanges and advances,
passed to the use of the cultivators—set free, in effect
produced, by the work done for the next crop.
the series of exchanges which unite production and
consumption may be likened to a curved pipe filled with
water. if a quantity of water is poured in at one end, a
like quantity is released at the other. it is not identically
the same water, but is its equivalent. and so
they who do the work of production put in as they take
out—they receive in subsistence and wages but the produce
of their labor.
it may now be asked, if capital is not required for the
payment of wages or the support of labor during production,
what, then, are its functions?
the previous examination has made the answer clear.
capital, as we have seen, consists of wealth used for the
procurement of more wealth, as distinguished from
wealth used for the direct satisfaction of desire; or, as i
think it may be defined, of wealth in the course of
exchange.
capital, therefore, increases the power of labor to produce
wealth: () by enabling labor to apply itself in
more effective ways, as by digging up clams with a spade
instead of the hand, or moving a vessel by shoveling coal
into a furnace, instead of tugging at an oar. () by enabling
labor to avail itself of the reproductive forces of
nature, as to obtain corn by sowing it, or animals by
breeding them. () by permitting the division of labor,
and thus, on the one hand, increasing the efficiency of
the human factor of wealth, by the utilization of special
capabilities, the acquisition of skill, and the reduction of
waste; and, on the other, calling in the powers of the
natural factor at their highest, by taking advantage of
the diversities of soil, climate and situation, so as to obtain
each particular species of wealth where nature is
most favorable to its production.
capital does not supply the materials which labor
works up into wealth, as is erroneously taught; the materials
of wealth are supplied by nature. but such materials
partially worked up and in the course of exchange
are capital.
capital does not supply or advance wages, as is erroneously
taught. wages are that part of the produce of
his labor obtained by the laborer.
capital does not maintain laborers during the progress
of their work, as is erroneously taught. laborers are
maintained by their labor, the man who produces, in
whole or in part, anything that will exchange for articles
of maintenance, virtually producing that maintenance.
capital, therefore, does not limit industry, as is erroneously
taught, the only limit to industry being the access
to natural material. but capital may limit the form of
industry and the productiveness of industry, by limiting
the use of tools and the division of labor.
that capital may limit the form of industry is clear.
without the factory, there could be no factory operatives;
without the sewing machine, no machine sewing;
without the plow, no plowman; and without a great capital
engaged in exchange, industry could not take the
many special forms which are concerned with exchanges.
it is also as clear that the want of tools must greatly
limit the productiveness of industry. if the farmer
must use the spade because he has not capital enough for
a plow, the sickle instead of the reaping machine, the
flail instead of the thresher; if the machinist must rely
upon the chisel for cutting iron; the weaver on the hand
loom, and so on, the productiveness of industry cannot
be a tithe of what it is when aided by capital in the shape
of the best tools now in use. nor could the division of
labor go further than the very rudest and almost imperceptible
beginnings, nor the exchanges which make it
possible extend beyond the nearest neighbors, unless a
portion of the things produced were constantly kept in
stock or in transit. even the pursuits of hunting,
fishing, gathering nuts, and making weapons could not
be specialized so that an individual could devote himself
to any one, unless some part of what was procured by each
was reserved from immediate consumption, so that he
who devoted himself to the procurement of things of one
kind could obtain the others as he wanted them, and
could make the good luck of one day supply the shortcomings
of the next. while to permit the minute subdivision
of labor that is characteristic of, and necessary to,
high civilization, a great amount of wealth of all descriptions
must be constantly kept in stock or in transit. to
enable the resident of a civilized community to exchange
his labor at option with the labor of those around him
and with the labor of men in the most remote parts of
the globe, there must be stocks of goods in warehouses,
in stores, in the holds of ships, and in railway cars, just
as to enable the denizen of a great city to draw at will
a cupful of water, there must be thousands of millions
of gallons stored in reservoirs and moving through miles
of pipe.
but to say that capital may limit the form of industry
or the productiveness of industry is a very different thing
from saying that capital limits industry. for the dictum
of the current political economy that “capital limits industry,”
means not that capital limits the form of labor
or the productiveness of labor, but that it limits the exertion
of labor. this proposition derives its plausibility
from the assumption that capital supplies labor with materials
and maintenance—an assumption that we have
seen to be unfounded, and which is indeed transparently
preposterous the moment it is remembered that capital is
produced by labor, and hence that there must be labor
before there can be capital. capital may limit the form
of industry and the productiveness of industry; but this
is not to say that there could be no industry without capital,
any more than it is to say that without the power
loom there could be no weaving; without the sewing
machine no sewing; no cultivation without the plow; or
that in a community of one, like that of robinson
crusoe, there could be no labor because there could be
no exchange.
and to say that capital may limit the form and productiveness
of industry is a different thing from saying
that capital does. for the cases in which it can be truly
said that the form of productiveness of the industry of a
community is limited by its capital, will, i think, appear
upon examination to be more theoretical than real. it is
evident that in such a country as mexico or tunis the
larger and more general use of capital would greatly
change the forms of industry and enormously increase
its productiveness; and it is often said of such countries
that they need capital for the development of their resources.
but is there not something back of this—a
want which includes the want of capital? is it not the
rapacity and abuses of government, the insecurity of
property, the ignorance and prejudice of the people, that
prevent the accumulation and use of capital? is not
the real limitation in these things, and not in the want
of capital, which would not be used even if placed there?
we can, of course, imagine a community in which the
want of capital would be the only obstacle to an increased
productiveness of labor, but it is only by imagining a
conjunction of conditions that seldom, if ever, occurs,
except by accident or as a passing phase. a community
in which capital has been swept away by war, conflagration,
or convulsion of nature, and, possibly, a community
composed of civilized people just settled in a new land,
seem to me to furnish the only examples. yet how
quickly the capital habitually used is reproduced in a
community that has been swept by war, has long been
noticed, while the rapid production of the capital it can,
or is disposed to use, is equally noticeable in the case of
a new community.
i am unable to think of any other than such rare and
passing conditions in which the productiveness of labor
is really limited by the want of capital. for, although
there may be in a community individuals who from want
of capital cannot apply their labor as efficiently as they
would, yet so long as there is a sufficiency of capital in the
community at large, the real limitation is not the want of
capital, but the want of its proper distribution. if bad
government rob the laborer of his capital, if unjust laws
take from the producer the wealth with which he would
assist production, and hand it over to those who are mere
pensioners upon industry, the real limitation to the
effectiveness of labor is in misgovernment, and not in
want of capital. and so of ignorance, or custom, or
other conditions which prevent the use of capital. it is
they, not the want of capital, that really constitute the
limitation. to give a circular saw to a terra del
fuegan, a locomotive to a bedouin arab, or a sewing
machine to a flathead squaw, would not be to add to the
efficiency of their labor. neither does it seem possible
by giving anything else to add to their capital, for any
wealth beyond what they had been accustomed to use as
capital would be consumed or suffered to waste. it is
not the want of seeds and tools that keeps the apache
and the sioux from cultivating the soil. if provided
with seeds and tools they would not use them productively
unless at the same time restrained from wandering
and taught to cultivate the soil. if all the capital of a
london were given them in their present condition, it
would simply cease to be capital, for they would only use
productively such infinitesimal part as might assist in
the chase, and would not even use that until all the
edible part of the stock thus showered upon them had
been consumed. yet such capital as they do want
they manage to acquire, and in some forms in spite of
the greatest difficulties. these wild tribes hunt and
fight with the best weapons that american and english
factories produce, keeping up with the latest improvements.
it is only as they became civilized that they
would care for such other capital as the civilized state
requires, or that it would be of any use to them.
in the reign of george iv., some returning missionaries
took with them to england a new zealand chief
called hongi. his noble appearance and beautiful
tatooing attracted much attention, and when about to
return to his people he was presented by the monarch
and some of the religious societies with a considerable
stock of tools, agricultural instruments, and seeds.
the grateful new zealander did use this capital in the
production of food, but it was in a manner of which his
english entertainers little dreamed. in sydney, on his
way back, he exchanged it all for arms and ammunition,
with which, on getting home, he began war against another
tribe with such success that on the first battle field
three hundred of his prisoners were cooked and eaten,
hongi having preluded the main repast by scooping out
and swallowing the eyes and sucking the warm blood of
his mortally wounded adversary, the opposing chief.
but now that their once constant wars have ceased, and
the remnant of the maoris have largely adopted european
habits, there are among them many who have and use
considerable amounts of capital.
likewise it would be a mistake to attribute the simple
modes of production and exchange which are resorted to
in new communities solely to a want of capital. these
modes, which require little capital, are in themselves
rude and inefficient, but when the conditions of such
communities are considered, they will be found in reality
the most effective. a great factory with all the latest
improvements is the most efficient instrument that has
yet been devised for turning wool or cotton into cloth,
but only so where large quantities are to be made. the
cloth required for a little village could be made with far
less labor by the spinning wheel and hand loom. a
perfecting press will, for each man required, print many
thousand impressions while a man and a boy would be
printing a hundred with a stanhope or franklin press;
yet to work off the small edition of a country newspaper
the old-fashioned press is by far the most efficient machine.
to carry occasionally two or three passengers, a
canoe is a better instrument than a steamboat; a few
sacks of flour can be transported with less expenditure
of labor by a pack horse than by a railroad train; to put
a great stock of goods into a cross-roads store in the
backwoods would be but to waste capital. and, generally,
it will be found that the rude devices of production
and exchange which obtain among the sparse populations
of new countries result not so much from the want of
capital as from inability profitably to employ it.
as, no matter how much water is poured in, there can
never be in a bucket more than a bucketful, so no
greater amount of wealth will be used as capital than is
required by the machinery of production and exchange
that under all the existing conditions—intelligence,
habit, security, density of population, etc.—best suit the
people. and i am inclined to think that as a general
rule this amount will be had—that the social organism
secretes, as it were, the necessary amount of capital just
as the human organism in a healthy condition secretes
the requisite fat.
but whether the amount of capital ever does limit the
productiveness of industry, and thus fix a maximum
which wages cannot exceed, it is evident that it is not
from any scarcity of capital that the poverty of the
masses in civilized countries proceeds. for not only do
wages nowhere reach the limit fixed by the productiveness
of industry, but wages are relatively the lowest
where capital is most abundant. the tools and machinery
of production are in all the most progressive countries
evidently in excess of the use made of them, and
any prospect of remunerative employment brings out
more than the capital needed. the bucket is not only
full; it is overflowing. so evident is this, that not only
among the ignorant, but by men of high economic reputation,
is industrial depression attributed to the abundance
of machinery and the accumulation of capital;
and war, which is the destruction of capital, is looked
upon as the cause of brisk trade and high wages—an idea
strangely enough, so great is the confusion of thought
on such matters, countenanced by many who hold that
capital employs labor and pays wages.
our purpose in this inquiry is to solve the problem to
which so many self-contradictory answers are given. in
ascertaining clearly what capital really is and what capital
really does, we have made the first, and an all-important
step. but it is only a first step. let us recapitulate
and proceed.
we have seen that the current theory that wages depend
upon the ratio between the number of laborers and
the amount of capital devoted to the employment of
labor is inconsistent with the general fact that wages and
interest do not rise and fall inversely, but conjointly.
this discrepancy having led us to an examination of
the grounds of the theory, we have seen, further, that,
contrary to the current idea, wages are not drawn from
capital at all, but come directly from the produce of the
labor for which they are paid. we have seen that capital
does not advance wages or subsist laborers, but that
its functions are to assist labor in production with tools,
seed, etc., and with the wealth required to carry on exchanges.
we are thus irresistibly led to practical conclusions so
important as amply to justify the pains taken to make
sure of them.
for if wages are drawn, not from capital, but from the
produce of labor, the current theories as to the relations
of capital and labor are invalid, and all remedies, whether
proposed by professors of political economy or workingmen,
which look to the alleviation of poverty either by
the increase of capital or the restriction of the number
of laborers or the efficiency of their work, must be condemned.
if each laborer in performing the labor really creates
the fund from which his wages are drawn, then wages
cannot be diminished by the increase of laborers, but, on
the contrary, as the efficiency of labor manifestly increases
with the number of laborers, the more laborers, other
things being equal, the higher should wages be.
but this necessary proviso, “other things being equal,”
brings us to a question which must be considered and
disposed of before we can further proceed. that question
is, do the productive powers of nature tend to
diminish with the increasing drafts made upon them by
increasing population?
are god and nature then at strife,
that nature lends such evil dreams?
so careful of the type she seems,
so careless of the single life.
—tennyson.
behind the theory we have been considering lies a
theory we have yet to consider. the current doctrine as
to the derivation and law of wages finds its strongest
support in a doctrine as generally accepted—the doctrine
to which malthus has given his name—that population
naturally tends to increase faster than subsistence.
these two doctrines, fitting in with each other, frame
the answer which the current political economy gives to
the great problem we are endeavoring to solve.
in what has preceded, the current doctrine that wages
are determined by the ratio between capital and laborers
has, i think, been shown to be so utterly baseless as to
excite surprise as to how it could so generally and so
long obtain. it is not to be wondered at that such a
theory should have arisen in a state of society where the
great body of laborers seem to depend for employment
and wages upon a separate class of capitalists, nor yet
that under these conditions it should have maintained
itself among the masses of men, who rarely take the
trouble to separate the real from the apparent. but it
is surprising that a theory which on examination appears
to be so groundless could have been successively accepted
by so many acute thinkers as have during the present
century devoted their powers to the elucidation and
development of the science of political economy.
the explanation of this otherwise unaccountable fact
is to be found in the general acceptance of the malthusian
theory. the current theory of wages has never
been fairly put upon its trial, because, backed by the
malthusian theory, it has seemed in the minds of political
economists a self-evident truth. these two theories
mutually blend with, strengthen, and defend each other,
while they both derive additional support from a principle
brought prominently forward in the discussions of
the theory of rent—viz., that past a certain point the
application of capital and labor to land yields a diminishing
return. together they give such an explanation of
the phenomena presented in a highly organized and
advancing society as seems to fit all the facts, and which
has thus prevented closer investigation.
which of these two theories is entitled to historical
precedence it is hard to say. the theory of population
was not formulated in such a way as to give it the standing
of a scientific dogma until after that had been done
for the theory of wages. but they naturally spring up
and grow with each other, and were both held in a form
more or less crude long prior to any attempt to construct
a system of political economy. it is evident, from several
passages, that though he never fully developed it, the
malthusian theory was in rudimentary form present in
the mind of adam smith, and to this, it seems to me,
must be largely due the misdirection which on the subject
of wages his speculations took. but, however this
may be, so closely are the two theories connected, so
completely do they complement each other, that buckle,
reviewing the history of the development of political
economy in his “examination of the scotch intellect
during the eighteenth century,” attributes mainly to
malthus the honor of “decisively proving” the current
theory of wages by advancing the current theory of the
pressure of population upon subsistence. he says in
his “history of civilization in england,” vol. , chap. :
“scarcely had the eighteenth century passed away when it was
decisively proved that the reward of labor depends solely on two
things; namely, the magnitude of that national fund out of which
all labor is paid, and the number of laborers among whom the fund
is to be divided. this vast step in our knowledge is due, mainly,
though not entirely, to malthus, whose work on population, besides
marking an epoch in the history of speculative thought, has already
produced considerable practical results, and will probably give rise
to others more considerable still. it was published in ; so that
adam smith, who died in , missed what to him would have
been the intense pleasure of seeing how, in it, his own views were
expanded rather than corrected. indeed, it is certain that without
smith there would have been no malthus; that is, unless smith had
laid the foundation, malthus could not have raised the superstructure.”
the famous doctrine which ever since its enunciation
has so powerfully influenced thought, not alone in the
province of political economy, but in regions of even
higher speculation, was formulated by malthus in the
proposition that, as shown by the growth of the north
american colonies, the natural tendency of population
is to double itself at least every twenty-five years, thus
increasing in a geometrical ratio, while the subsistence
that can be obtained from land “under circumstances
the most favorable to human industry could not possibly
be made to increase faster than in an arithmetical ratio,
or by an addition every twenty-five years of a quantity
equal to what it at present produces.” “the necessary
effects of these two different rates of increase, when
brought together,” mr. malthus naïvely goes on to say,
“will be very striking.” and thus (chap. i) he brings
them together:
“let us call the population of this island eleven millions; and
suppose the present produce equal to the easy support of such a
number. in the first twenty-five years the population would be
twenty-two millions, and the food being also doubled, the means of
subsistence would be equal to this increase. in the next twenty-five
years the population would be forty-four millions, and the means of
subsistence only equal to the support of thirty-three millions. in
the next period the population would be equal to eighty-eight millions,
and the means of subsistence just equal to the support of half
that number. and at the conclusion of the first century, the population
would be a hundred and seventy-six millions, and the means of
subsistence only equal to the support of fifty-five millions; leaving a
population of a hundred and twenty-one millions totally unprovided
for.
“taking the whole earth instead of this island, emigration would
of course be excluded; and supposing the present population equal
to a thousand millions, the human species would increase as the
numbers , , , , , , , , , and subsistence as , , , , ,
, , , . in two centuries the population would be to the means
of subsistence as  to ; in three centuries, , to , and in two
thousand years the difference would be almost incalculable.”
such a result is of course prevented by the physical
fact that no more people can exist than can find subsistence,
and hence malthus’ conclusion is, that this tendency
of population to indefinite increase must be held
back either by moral restraint upon the reproductive
faculty, or by the various causes which increase mortality,
which he resolves into vice and misery. such causes as
prevent propagation he styles the preventive check;
such causes as increase mortality he styles the positive
check. this is the famous malthusian doctrine, as
promulgated by malthus himself in the “essay on population.”
it is not worth while to dwell upon the fallacy involved
in the assumption of geometrical and arithmetical
rates of increase, a play upon proportions which hardly
rises to the dignity of that in the familiar puzzle of the
hare and the tortoise, in which the hare is made to chase
the tortoise through all eternity without coming up with
him. for this assumption is not necessary to the malthusian
doctrine, or at least is expressly repudiated by
some of those who fully accept that doctrine; as, for instance,
john stuart mill, who speaks of it as “an unlucky
attempt to give precision to things which do not
admit of it, which every person capable of reasoning
must see is wholly superfluous to the argument.” the
essence of the malthusian doctrine is, that population
tends to increase faster than the power of providing food,
and whether this difference be stated as a geometrical
ratio for population and an arithmetical ratio for subsistence,
as by malthus; or as a constant ratio for population
and a diminishing ratio for subsistence, as by mill,
is only a matter of statement. the vital point, on
which both agree, is, to use the words of malthus, “that
there is a natural tendency and constant effort in population
to increase beyond the means of subsistence.”
the malthusian doctrine, as at present held, may be
thus stated in its strongest and least objectionable form:
that population, constantly tending to increase, must,
when unrestrained, ultimately press against the limits of
subsistence, not as against a fixed, but as against an
elastic barrier, which makes the procurement of subsistence
progressively more and more difficult. and thus,
wherever reproduction has had time to assert its power,
and is unchecked by prudence, there must exist that degree
of want which will keep population within the
bounds of subsistence.
although in reality not more repugnant to the sense
of harmonious adaptation by creative beneficence and wisdom
than the complacent no-theory which throws the
responsibility for poverty and its concomitants upon the
inscrutable decrees of providence, without attempting to
trace them, this theory, in avowedly making vice and
suffering the necessary results of a natural instinct with
which are linked the purest and sweetest affections,
comes rudely in collision with ideas deeply rooted in the
human mind, and it was, as soon as formally promulgated,
fought with a bitterness in which zeal was often
more manifest than logic. but it has triumphantly
withstood the ordeal, and in spite of the refutations of
the godwins, the denunciations of the cobbetts, and all
the shafts that argument, sarcasm, ridicule, and sentiment
could direct against it, to-day it stands in the world
of thought as an accepted truth, which compels the
recognition even of those who would fain disbelieve it.
the causes of its triumph, the sources of its strength,
are not obscure. seemingly backed by an indisputable
arithmetical truth—that a continuously increasing population
must eventually exceed the capacity of the earth
to furnish food or even standing room, the malthusian
theory is supported by analogies in the animal and vegetable
kingdoms, where life everywhere beats wastefully
against the barriers that hold its different species in
check—analogies to which the course of modern thought,
in leveling distinctions between different forms of life,
has given a greater and greater weight; and it is apparently
corroborated by many obvious facts, such as the
prevalence of poverty, vice, and misery amid dense populations;
the general effect of material progress in increasing
population without relieving pauperism; the
rapid growth of numbers in newly settled countries and
the evident retardation of increase in more densely settled
countries by the mortality among the class condemned
to want.
the malthusian theory furnishes a general principle
which accounts for these and similar facts, and accounts
for them in a way which harmonizes with the doctrine
that wages are drawn from capital, and with all the principles
that are deduced from it. according to the current
doctrine of wages, wages fall as increase in the number
of laborers necessitates a more minute division of
capital; according to the malthusian theory, poverty
appears as increase in population necessitates the more
minute division of subsistence. it requires but the
identification of capital with subsistence, and number of
laborers with population, an identification made in the
current treatises on political economy, where the terms
are often converted, to make the two propositions as
identical formally as they are substantially. and thus
it is, as stated by buckle in the passage previously
quoted, that the theory of population advanced by malthus
has appeared to prove decisively the theory of wages
advanced by smith.
ricardo, who a few years subsequent to the publication
of the “essay on population” corrected the mistake
into which smith had fallen as to the nature and cause
of rent, furnished the malthusian theory an additional
support by calling attention to the fact that rent would
increase as the necessities of increasing population forced
cultivation to less and less productive lands, or to less
and less productive points on the same lands, thus explaining
the rise of rent. in this way was formed a
triple combination, by which the malthusian theory has
been buttressed on both sides—the previously received
doctrine of wages and the subsequently received doctrine
of rent exhibiting in this view but special examples of
the operation of the general principle to which the name
of malthus has been attached—the fall in wages and the
rise in rents which come with increasing population
being but modes in which the pressure of population
upon subsistence shows itself.
thus taking its place in the very framework of political
economy (for the science as currently accepted has
undergone no material change or improvement since the
time of ricardo, though in some minor points it has been
cleared and illustrated), the malthusian theory, though
repugnant to sentiments before alluded to, is not repugnant
to other ideas, which, in older countries at least,
generally prevail among the working classes; but, on
the contrary, like the theory of wages by which it is
supported and in turn supports, it harmonizes with
them. to the mechanic or operative the cause of low
wages and of the inability to get employment is obviously
the competition caused by the pressure of numbers, and
in the squalid abodes of poverty what seems clearer than
that there are too many people?
but the great cause of the triumph of this theory is,
that, instead of menacing any vested right or antagonizing
any powerful interest, it is eminently soothing and
reassuring to the classes who, wielding the power of
wealth, largely dominate thought. at a time when old
supports were falling away, it came to the rescue of the
special privileges by which a few monopolize so much
of the good things of this world, proclaiming a natural
cause for the want and misery which, if attributed to
political institutions, must condemn every government
under which they exist. the “essay on population”
was avowedly a reply to william godwin’s “inquiry concerning
political justice,” a work asserting the principle
of human equality; and its purpose was to justify existing
inequality by shifting the responsibility for it from
human institutions to the laws of the creator. there
was nothing new in this, for wallace, nearly forty years
before, had brought forward the danger of excessive
multiplication as the answer to the demands of justice
for an equal distribution of wealth; but the circumstances
of the times were such as to make the same idea,
when brought forward by malthus, peculiarly grateful
to a powerful class, in whom an intense fear of any questioning
of the existing state of things had been generated
by the outburst of the french revolution.
now, as then, the malthusian doctrine parries the demand
for reform, and shelters selfishness from question
and from conscience by the interposition of an inevitable
necessity. it furnishes a philosophy by which dives as he
feasts can shut out the image of lazarus who faints with
hunger at his door; by which wealth may complacently button
up its pocket when poverty asks an alms, and the rich
christian bend on sundays in a nicely upholstered pew
to implore the good gifts of the all father without any
feeling of responsibility for the squalid misery that is
festering but a square away. for poverty, want, and
starvation are by this theory not chargeable either to individual
greed or to social mal-adjustments; they are
the inevitable results of universal laws, with which, if it
were not impious, it were as hopeless to quarrel as with
the law of gravitation. in this view, he who in the
midst of want has accumulated wealth, has but fenced
in a little oasis from the driving sand which else would
have overwhelmed it. he has gained for himself, but
has hurt nobody. and even if the rich were literally to
obey the injunctions of christ and divide their wealth
among the poor, nothing would be gained. population
would be increased, only to press again upon the limits
of subsistence or capital, and the equality that would be
produced would be but the equality of common misery.
and thus reforms which would interfere with the interests
of any powerful class are discouraged as hopeless.
as the moral law forbids any forestalling of the methods
by which the natural law gets rid of surplus population
and thus holds in check a tendency to increase potent
enough to pack the surface of the globe with human
beings as sardines are packed in a box, nothing can
really be done, either by individual or by combined
effort, to extirpate poverty, save to trust to the efficacy
of education and preach the necessity of prudence.
a theory that, falling in with the habits of thought of
the poorer classes, thus justifies the greed of the rich
and the selfishness of the powerful, will spread quickly
and strike its roots deep. this has been the case with
the theory advanced by malthus.
and of late years the malthusian theory has received
new support in the rapid change of ideas as to the origin
of man and the genesis of species. that buckle was
right in saying that the promulgation of the malthusian
theory marked an epoch in the history of speculative
thought could, it seems to me, be easily shown; yet to
trace its influence in the higher domains of philosophy,
of which buckle’s own work is an example, would,
though extremely interesting, carry us beyond the scope
of this investigation. but how much be reflex and how
much original, the support which is given to the malthusian
theory by the new philosophy of development, now
rapidly spreading in every direction, must be noted in
any estimate of the sources from which this theory derives
its present strength. as in political economy, the
support received from the doctrine of wages and the
doctrine of rent combined to raise the malthusian theory
to the rank of a central truth, so the extension of similar
ideas to the development of life in all its forms has the
effect of giving it a still higher and more impregnable
position. agassiz, who, to the day of his death, was a
strenuous opponent of the new philosophy, spoke of
darwinism as “malthus all over,” and darwin himself
says the struggle for existence “is the doctrine of malthus
applied with manifold force to the whole animal and
vegetable kingdoms.”
it does not, however, seem to me exactly correct to
say that the theory of development by natural selection
or survival of the fittest is extended malthusianism, for
the doctrine of malthus did not originally and does not
necessarily involve the idea of progression. but this was
soon added to it. mcculloch attributes to the “principle
of increase” social improvement and the progress
of the arts, and declares that the poverty that it engenders
acts as a powerful stimulus to the development of
industry, the extension of science and the accumulation
of wealth by the upper and middle classes, without which
stimulus society would quickly sink into apathy and decay.
what is this but the recognition in regard to
human society of the developing effects of the “struggle
for existence” and “survival of the fittest,” which we
are now told on the authority of natural science have
been the means which nature has employed to bring
forth all the infinitely diversified and wonderfully
adapted forms which the teeming life of the globe assumes?
what is it but the recognition of the force,
which, seemingly cruel and remorseless, has yet in the
course of unnumbered ages developed the higher from
the lower type, differentiated the man and the monkey,
and made the nineteenth century succeed the age of
stone?
thus commended and seemingly proved, thus linked
and buttressed, the malthusian theory—the doctrine
that poverty is due to the pressure of population against
subsistence, or, to put it in its other form, the doctrine
that the tendency to increase in the number of laborers
must always tend to reduce wages to the minimum on
which laborers can reproduce—is now generally accepted
as an unquestionable truth, in the light of which social
phenomena are to be explained, just as for ages the
phenomena of the sidereal heavens were explained upon
the supposition of the fixity of the earth, or the facts of
geology upon that of the literal inspiration of the mosaic
record. if authority were alone to be considered, formally
to deny this doctrine would require almost as much
audacity as that of the colored preacher who recently
started out on a crusade against the opinion that the
earth moves around the sun, for in one form or another,
the malthusian doctrine has received in the intellectual
world an almost universal indorsement, and in the best
as in the most common literature of the day may be seen
cropping out in every direction. it is indorsed by
economists and by statesmen, by historians and by
natural investigators; by social science congresses and
by trade unions; by churchmen and by materialists; by
conservatives of the strictest sect and by the most radical
of radicals. it is held and habitually reasoned from by
many who never heard of malthus and who have not the
slightest idea of what his theory is.
nevertheless, as the grounds of the current theory of
wages have vanished when subjected to a candid examination,
so, do i believe, will vanish the grounds of this,
its twin. in proving that wages are not drawn from
capital we have raised this antæus from the earth.
the general acceptance of the malthusian theory and
the high authority by which it is indorsed have seemed
to me to make it expedient to review its grounds and
the causes which have conspired to give it such a dominating
influence in the discussion of social questions.
but when we subject the theory itself to the test of
straightforward analysis, it will, i think, be found as
utterly untenable as the current theory of wages.
in the first place, the facts which are marshaled in
support of this theory do not prove it, and the analogies
do not countenance it.
and in the second place, there are facts which conclusively
disprove it.
i go to the heart of the matter in saying that there is
no warrant, either in experience or analogy, for the assumption
that there is any tendency in population to
increase faster than subsistence. the facts cited to show
this simply show that where, owing to the sparseness of
population, as in new countries, or where, owing to the
unequal distribution of wealth, as among the poorer
classes in old countries, human life is occupied with the
physical necessities of existence, the tendency to reproduce
is at a rate which would, were it to go on unchecked,
some time exceed subsistence. but it is not a
legitimate inference from this that the tendency to reproduce
would show itself in the same force where population
was sufficiently dense and wealth distributed with
sufficient evenness to lift a whole community above the
necessity of devoting their energies to a struggle for mere
existence. nor can it be assumed that the tendency to
reproduce, by causing poverty, must prevent the existence
of such a community; for this, manifestly, would
be assuming the very point at issue, and reasoning in a
circle. and even if it be admitted that the tendency to
multiply must ultimately produce poverty, it cannot
from this alone be predicated of existing poverty that it
is due to this cause, until it be shown that there are no
other causes which can account for it—a thing in the
present state of government, laws, and customs, manifestly
impossible.
this is abundantly shown in the “essay on population”
itself. this famous book, which is much oftener
spoken of than read, is still well worth perusal, if only
as a literary curiosity. the contrast between the merits
of the book itself and the effect it has produced, or is at
least credited with (for though sir james stewart, mr.
townsend, and others, share with malthus the glory of
discovering “the principle of population,” it was the
publication of the “essay on population” that brought
it prominently forward), is, it seems to me, one of the
most remarkable things in the history of literature; and
it is easy to understand how godwin, whose “political
justice” provoked the “essay on population,” should
until his old age have disdained a reply. it begins with
the assumption that population tends to increase in a
geometrical ratio, while subsistence can at best be made
to increase only in an arithmetical ratio—an assumption
just as valid, and no more so, than it would be, from the
fact that a puppy doubled the length of his tail while he
added so many pounds to his weight, to assert a geometric
progression of tail and an arithmetical progression
of weight. and, the inference from the assumption is
just such as swift in satire might have credited to the
savans of a previously dogless island, who, by bringing
these two ratios together, might deduce the very “striking
consequence” that by the time the dog grew to a
weight of fifty pounds his tail would be over a mile long,
and extremely difficult to wag, and hence recommend
the prudential check of a bandage as the only alternative
to the positive check of constant amputations.
commencing with such an absurdity, the essay includes
a long argument for the imposition of a duty on the importation,
and the payment of a bounty for the exportation
of corn, an idea that has long since been sent to the
limbo of exploded fallacies. and it is marked throughout
the argumentative portions by passages which show
on the part of the reverend gentleman the most ridiculous
incapacity for logical thought—as, for instance,
that if wages were to be increased from eighteen pence
or two shillings per day to five shillings, meat would
necessarily increase in price from eight or nine pence to
two or three shillings per pound, and the condition of
the laboring classes would therefore not be improved, a
statement to which i can think of no parallel so close as
a proposition i once heard a certain printer gravely advance—that
because an author, whom he had known,
was forty years old when he was twenty, the author must
now be eighty years old because he (the printer) was
forty. this confusion of thought does not merely crop
out here and there; it characterizes the whole work.
the main body of the book is taken up with what is in
reality a refutation of the theory which the book advances,
for malthus’ review of what he calls the positive
checks to population is simply the showing that the results
which he attributes to over-population actually
arise from other causes. of all the cases cited, and
pretty much the whole globe is passed over in the survey,
in which vice and misery check increase by limiting marriages
or shortening the term of human life, there is not
a single case in which the vice and misery can be traced
to an actual increase in the number of mouths over the
power of the accompanying hands to feed them; but in
every case the vice and misery are shown to spring either
from unsocial ignorance and rapacity, or from bad government,
unjust laws or destructive warfare.
nor what malthus failed to show has any one since
him shown. the globe may be surveyed and history
may be reviewed in vain for any instance of a considerable
country in which poverty and want can be fairly
attributed to the pressure of an increasing population.
whatever be the possible dangers involved in the power
of human increase, they have never yet appeared. whatever
may some time be, this never yet has been the evil
that has afflicted mankind. population always tending
to overpass the limit of subsistence! how is it, then,
that this globe of ours, after all the thousands, and it is
now thought millions, of years that man has been upon
the earth, is yet so thinly populated? how is it, then,
that so many of the hives of human life are now deserted—that
once cultivated fields are rank with jungle, and
the wild beast licks her cubs where once were busy
haunts of men?
it is a fact, that, as we count our increasing millions,
we are apt to lose sight of—nevertheless it is a fact—that
in what we know of the world’s history decadence of
population is as common as increase. whether the
aggregate population of the earth is now greater than at
any previous epoch is a speculation which can deal only
with guesses. since montesquieu, in the early part of
the last century, asserted, what was then probably the
prevailing impression, that the population of the earth
had, since the christian era, greatly declined, opinion
has run the other way. but the tendency of recent investigation
and exploration has been to give greater
credit to what have been deemed the exaggerated accounts
of ancient historians and travelers, and to reveal indications
of denser populations and more advanced civilizations
than had before been suspected, as well as of a
higher antiquity in the human race. and in basing our
estimates of population upon the development of trade,
the advance of the arts, and the size of cities, we are apt
to underrate the density of population which the intensive
cultivations, characteristic of the earlier civilizations,
are capable of maintaining—especially where irrigation
is resorted to. as we may see from the closely
cultivated districts of china and europe a very great
population of simple habits can readily exist with very
little commerce and a much lower stage of those arts in
which modern progress has been most marked, and without
that tendency to concentrate in cities which modern
populations show.
be this as it may, the only continent which we can be
sure now contains a larger population than ever before is
europe. but this is not true of all parts of europe.
certainly greece, the mediterranean islands, and turkey
in europe, probably italy, and possibly spain, have contained
larger populations than now, and this may be
likewise true of northwestern and parts of central and
eastern europe.
america also has increased in population during the
time we know of it; but this increase is not so great as is
popularly supposed, some estimates giving to peru alone
at the time of the discovery a greater population than
now exists on the whole continent of south america.
and all the indications are that previous to the discovery
the population of america had been declining. what
great nations have run their course, what empires have
arisen and fallen in “that new world which is the old,”
we can only imagine. but fragments of massive ruins yet
attest a grander pre-incan civilization; amid the tropical
forests of yucatan and central america are the remains of
great cities forgotten ere the spanish conquest; mexico, as
cortez found it, showed the superimposition of barbarism
upon a higher social development, while through a great
part of what is now the united states are scattered
mounds which prove a once relatively dense population,
and here and there, as in the lake superior copper
mines, are traces of higher arts than were known to the
indians with whom the whites came in contact.
as to africa there can be no question. northern africa
can contain but a fraction of the population that
it had in ancient times; the nile valley once held an enormously
greater population than now, while south of the
sahara there is nothing to show increase within historic
times, and widespread depopulation was certainly caused
by the slave trade.
as for asia, which even now contains more than half
the human race, though it is not much more than half
as densely populated as europe, there are indications
that both india and china once contained larger populations
than now, while that great breeding ground of men
from which issued swarms that overran both countries
and sent great waves of people rolling upon europe,
must have been once far more populous. but the most
marked change is in asia minor, syria, babylonia,
persia, and in short that vast district which yielded to
the conquering arms of alexander. where were once
great cities and teeming populations are now squalid
villages and barren wastes.
it is somewhat strange that among all the theories
that have been raised, that of a fixed quantity to human
life on this earth has not been broached. it would at
least better accord with historical facts than that of the
constant tendency of population to outrun subsistence.
it is clear that population has here ebbed and there
flowed; its centers have changed; new nations have
arisen and old nations declined; sparsely settled districts
have become populous and populous districts have lost
their population; but as far back as we can go without
abandoning ourselves wholly to inference, there is nothing
to show continuous increase, or even clearly to
show an aggregate increase from time to time. the
advance of the pioneers of peoples has, so far as we can
discern, never been into uninhabited lands—their march
has always been a battle with some other people previously
in possession; behind dim empires vaguer ghosts
of empire loom. that the population of the world must
have had its small beginnings we confidently infer, for
we know that there was a geologic era when human life
could not have existed, and we cannot believe that men
sprang up all at once, as from the dragon teeth sowed by
cadmus; yet through long vistas, where history, tradition
and antiquities shed a light that is lost in faint glimmers,
we may discern large populations. and during
these long periods the principle of population has not
been strong enough fully to settle the world, or even so
far as we can clearly see materially to increase its aggregate
population. compared with its capacities to support
human life the earth as a whole is yet most sparsely
populated.
there is another broad, general fact which cannot fail
to strike any one who, thinking of this subject, extends
his view beyond modern society. malthusianism predicates
a universal law—that the natural tendency of population
is to outrun subsistence. if there be such a law,
it must, wherever population has attained a certain
density, become as obvious as any of the great natural
laws which have been everywhere recognized. how is
it, then, that neither in classical creeds and codes, nor in
those of the jews, the egyptians, the hindoos, the
chinese, nor any of the peoples who have lived in close
association and have built up creeds and codes, do we
find any injunctions to the practice of the prudential
restraints of malthus; but that, on the contrary, the wisdom
of the centuries, the religions of the world, have
always inculcated ideas of civic and religious duty the
very reverse of those which the current political economy
enjoins, and which annie besant is now trying to
popularize in england?
and it must be remembered that there have been
societies in which the community guaranteed to every
member employment and subsistence. john stuart mill
says (book ii, chap. xii, sec. ), that to do this without
state regulation of marriages and births, would be to
produce a state of general misery and degradation.
“these consequences,” he says, “have been so often and
so clearly pointed out by authors of reputation that
ignorance of them on the part of educated persons is no
longer pardonable.” yet in sparta, in peru, in paraguay,
as in the industrial communities which appear
almost everywhere to have constituted the primitive
agricultural organization, there seems to have been an
utter ignorance of these dire consequences of a natural
tendency.
besides the broad, general facts i have cited, there are
facts of common knowledge which seem utterly inconsistent
with such an overpowering tendency to multiplication.
if the tendency to reproduce be so strong as malthusianism
supposes, how is it that families so often become
extinct—families in which want is unknown? how
is it, then, that when every premium is offered by hereditary
titles and hereditary possessions, not alone to the
principle of increase, but to the preservation of genealogical
knowledge and the proving up of descent, that
in such an aristocracy as that of england, so many peerages
should lapse, and the house of lords be kept up
from century to century only by fresh creations?
for the solitary example of a family that has survived
any great lapse of time, even though assured of subsistence
and honor, we must go to unchangeable china.
the descendants of confucius still exist there, and enjoy
peculiar privileges and consideration, forming, in fact,
the only hereditary aristocracy. on the presumption
that population tends to double every twenty-five years,
they should, in , years after the death of confucius,
have amounted to ,,,,,,,,
souls. instead of any such unimaginable number, the descendants
of confucius, , years after his death, in the
reign of kanghi, numbered , males, or say ,
souls. this is quite a discrepancy, and is the more striking
when it is remembered that the esteem in which this
family is held on account of their ancestor, “the most
holy ancient teacher,” has prevented the operation of
the positive check, while the maxims of confucius inculcate
anything but the prudential check.
yet, it may be said, that even this increase is a great
one. twenty-two thousand persons descended from a
single pair in , years is far short of the malthusian
rate. nevertheless, it is suggestive of possible overcrowding.
but consider. increase of descendants does not show
increase of population. it could only do this when the
breeding was in and in. smith and his wife have a son
and daughter, who marry respectively some one else’s
daughter and son, and each have two children. smith
and his wife would thus have four grandchildren; but
there would be in the one generation no greater number
than in the other—each child would have four grandparents.
and supposing this process were to go on, the
line of descent might constantly spread out into hundreds,
thousands and millions; but in each generation of
descendants there would be no more individuals than in
any previous generation of ancestors. the web of generations
is like lattice-work or the diagonal threads in
cloth. commencing at any point at the top, the eye follows
lines which at the bottom widely diverge; but beginning
at any point at the bottom, the lines diverge in
the same way to the top. how many children a man
may have is problematical. but that he had two parents
is certain, and that these again had two parents each
is also certain. follow this geometrical progression
through a few generations and see if it does not lead to
quite as “striking consequences” as mr. malthus’ peopling
of the solar systems.
but from such considerations as these let us advance
to a more definite inquiry. i assert that the cases commonly
cited as instances of over-population will not bear
investigation. india, china, and ireland furnish the
strongest of these cases. in each of these countries,
large numbers have perished by starvation and large
classes are reduced to abject misery or compelled to
emigrate. but is this really due to over-population?
comparing total population with total area, india and
china are far from being the most densely populated
countries of the world. according to the estimates of
mm. behm and wagner, the population of india is but
 to the square mile and that of china , whereas
saxony has a population of  to the square mile; belgium
; england ; the netherlands ; italy 
and japan . there are thus in both countries large
areas unused or not fully used, but even in their more
densely populated districts there can be no doubt that
either could maintain a much greater population in a
much higher degree of comfort, for in both countries is
labor applied to production in the rudest and most inefficient
ways, and in both countries great natural resources
are wholly neglected. this arises from no innate
deficiency in the people, for the hindoo, as comparative
philology has shown, is of our own blood, and china possessed
a high degree of civilization and the rudiments of
the most important modern inventions when our ancestors
were wandering savages. it arises from the form
which the social organization has in both countries taken,
which has shackled productive power and robbed industry
of its reward.
in india from time immemorial, the working classes
have been ground down by exactions and oppressions into
a condition of helpless and hopeless degradation. for
ages and ages the cultivator of the soil has esteemed
himself happy if, of his produce, the extortion of the
strong hand left him enough to support life and furnish
seed; capital could nowhere be safely accumulated or to
any considerable extent be used to assist production; all
wealth that could be wrung from the people was in the
possession of princes who were little better than robber
chiefs quartered on the country, or in that of their
farmers or favorites, and was wasted in useless or worse
than useless luxury, while religion, sunken into an elaborate
and terrible superstition, tyrannized over the mind
as physical force did over the bodies of men. under
these conditions, the only arts that could advance were
those that ministered to the ostentation and luxury of
the great. the elephants of the rajah blazed with gold
of exquisite workmanship, and the umbrellas that symbolized
his regal power glittered with gems; but the plow
of the ryot was only a sharpened stick. the ladies of
the rajah’s harem wrapped themselves in muslins so fine
as to take the name of woven wind, but the tools of the
artisan were of the poorest and rudest description, and
commerce could only be carried on, as it were, by stealth.
is it not clear that this tyranny and insecurity have
produced the want and starvation of india; and not, as
according to buckle, the pressure of population upon
subsistence that has produced the want, and the want the
tyranny. says the rev. william tennant, a chaplain
in the service of the east india company, writing in
, two years before the publication of the “essay on
population:”
“when we reflect upon the great fertility of hindostan, it is
amazing to consider the frequency of famine. it is evidently not
owing to any sterility of soil or climate; the evil must be traced to
some political cause, and it requires but little penetration to discover
it in the avarice and extortion of the various governments. the
great spur to industry, that of security, is taken away. hence no
man raises more grain than is barely sufficient for himself, and the
first unfavorable season produces a famine.
“the mogul government at no period offered full security to the
prince, still less to his vassals; and to peasants the most scanty protection
of all. it was a continued tissue of violence and insurrection,
treachery and punishment, under which neither commerce nor the
arts could prosper, nor agriculture assume the appearance of a system.
its downfall gave rise to a state still more afflictive, since
anarchy is worse than misrule. the mohammedan government,
wretched as it was, the european nations have not the merit of overturning.
it fell beneath the weight of its own corruption, and had
already been succeeded by the multifarious tyranny of petty chiefs,
whose right to govern consisted in their treason to the state, and
whose exactions on the peasants were as boundless as their avarice.
the rents to government were, and, where natives rule, still are,
levied twice a year by a merciless banditti, under the semblance of
an army, who wantonly destroy or carry off whatever part of the
produce may satisfy their caprice or satiate their avidity, after having
hunted the ill-fated peasants from the villages to the woods. any
attempt of the peasants to defend their persons or property within
the mud walls of their villages only calls for the more signal vengeance
on those useful, but ill-fated mortals. they are then surrounded
and attacked with musketry and field pieces till resistance
ceases, when the survivors are sold, and their habitations burned and
leveled with the ground. hence you will frequently meet with the
ryots gathering up the scattered remnants of what had yesterday
been their habitation, if fear has permitted them to return; but
oftener the ruins are seen smoking, after a second visitation of this
kind, without the appearance of a human being to interrupt the
awful silence of desolation. this description does not apply to the
mohammedan chieftains alone; it is equally applicable to the rajahs
in the districts governed by hindoos.”
to this merciless rapacity, which would have produced
want and famine were the population but one to a
square mile and the land a garden of eden, succeeded,
in the first era of british rule in india, as merciless a
rapacity, backed by a far more irresistible power. says
macaulay, in his essay on lord clive:
“enormous fortunes were rapidly accumulated at calcutta, while
millions of human beings were reduced to the extremity of wretchedness.
they had been accustomed to live under tyranny, but never
under tyranny like this. they found the little finger of the company
thicker than the loins of surajah dowlah. * * * it resembled
the government of evil genii, rather than the government of human
tyrants. sometimes they submitted in patient misery. sometimes
they fled from the white man as their fathers had been used to fly
from the maharatta, and the palanquin of the english traveler was
often carried through silent villages and towns that the report of his
approach had made desolate.”
upon horrors that macaulay thus but touches, the
vivid eloquence of burke throws a stronger light—whole
districts surrendered to the unrestrained cupidity of the
worst of human kind, poverty-stricken peasants fiendishly
tortured to compel them to give up their little
hoards, and once populous tracts turned into deserts.
but the lawless license of early english rule has been
long restrained. to all that vast population the strong
hand of england has given a more than roman peace;
the just principles of english law have been extended
by an elaborate system of codes and law officers designed
to secure to the humblest of these abject peoples the
rights of anglo-saxon freemen; the whole peninsula has
been intersected by railways, and great irrigation works
have been constructed. yet, with increasing frequency,
famine has succeeded famine, raging with greater
intensity over wider areas.
is not this a demonstration of the malthusian theory?
does it not show that no matter how much the possibilities
of subsistence are increased, population still continues
to press upon it? does it not show, as malthus
contended, that, to shut up the sluices by which superabundant
population is carried off, is but to compel
nature to open new ones, and that unless the sources of
human increase are checked by prudential regulation,
the alternative of war is famine? this has been the
orthodox explanation. but the truth, as may be seen in
the facts brought forth in recent discussions of indian
affairs in the english periodicals, is that these famines,
which have been, and are now, sweeping away their millions,
are no more due to the pressure of population upon
the natural limits of subsistence than was the desolation
of the carnatic when hyder ali’s horsemen burst upon it
in a whirlwind of destruction.
the millions of india have bowed their necks beneath
the yokes of many conquerors, but worst of all is the
steady, grinding weight of english domination—a weight
which is literally crushing millions out of existence, and,
as shown by english writers, is inevitably tending to a
most frightful and widespread catastrophe. other conquerors
have lived in the land, and, though bad and
tyrannous in their rule, have understood and been understood
by the people; but india now is like a great
estate owned by an absentee and alien landlord. a most
expensive military and civil establishment is kept up,
managed and officered by englishmen who regard india
as but a place of temporary exile; and an enormous sum,
estimated as at least £,, annually, raised from a
population where laborers are in many places glad in
good times to work for -/d. to d. a day, is drained
away to england in the shape of remittances, pensions,
home charges of the government, etc.—a tribute for
which there is no return. the immense sums lavished
on railroads have, as shown by the returns, been economically
unproductive; the great irrigation works are for
the most part costly failures. in large parts of india
the english, in their desire to create a class of landed
proprietors, turned over the soil in absolute possession to
hereditary tax-gatherers, who rack-rent the cultivators
most mercilessly. in other parts, where the rent is still
taken by the state in the shape of a land tax, assessments
are so high, and taxes are collected so relentlessly, as to
drive the ryots, who get but the most scanty living in
good seasons, into the claws of money lenders, who are,
if possible, even more rapacious than the zemindars.
upon salt, an article of prime necessity everywhere, and
of especial necessity where food is almost exclusively
vegetable, a tax of nearly twelve hundred per cent. is
imposed, so that its various industrial uses are prohibited,
and large bodies of the people cannot get enough to
keep either themselves or their cattle in health. below
the english officials are a horde of native employees who
oppress and extort. the effect of english law, with its
rigid rules, and, to the native, mysterious proceedings,
has been but to put a potent instrument of plunder into
the hands of the native money lenders, from whom the
peasants are compelled to borrow on the most extravagant
terms to meet their taxes, and to whom they are
easily induced to give obligations of which they know
not the meaning. “we do not care for the people of
india,” writes florence nightingale, with what seems
like a sob. “the saddest sight to be seen in the east—nay,
probably in the world—is the peasant of our eastern
empire.” and she goes on to show the causes of
the terrible famines, in taxation which takes from the
cultivators the very means of cultivation, and the actual
slavery to which the ryots are reduced as “the consequences
of our own laws;” producing in “the most fertile
country in the world, a grinding, chronic semi-starvation
in many places where what is called famine does
not exist.” “the famines which have been devastating
india,” says h. m. hyndman, “are in the main financial
famines. men and women cannot get food, because
they cannot save the money to buy it. yet we are
driven, so we say, to tax these people more.” and he
shows how, even from famine stricken districts, food is
exported in payment of taxes, and how the whole of
india is subjected to a steady and exhausting drain,
which, combined with the enormous expenses of government,
is making the population year by year poorer.
the exports of india consist almost exclusively of agricultural
products. for at least one-third of these, as
mr. hyndman shows, no return whatever is received;
they represent tribute—remittances made by englishmen
in india, or expenses of the english branch of the
indian government. and for the rest, the return is for
the most part government stores, or articles of comfort
and luxury used by the english masters of india. he
shows that the expenses of government have been enormously
increased under imperial rule; that the relentless
taxation of a population so miserably poor that the
masses are not more than half fed, is robbing them of
their scanty means for cultivating the soil; that the
number of bullocks (the indian draft animal) is decreasing,
and the scanty implements of culture being given up
to money lenders, from whom “we, a business people, are
forcing the cultivators to borrow at , ,  per cent.
to build and pay the interest on the cost of vast public
works, which have never paid nearly five per cent.”
says mr. hyndman: “the truth is that indian society
as a whole has been frightfully impoverished under our
rule, and that the process is now going on at an exceedingly
rapid rate”—a statement which cannot be doubted,
in view of the facts presented not only by such writers
as i have referred to, but by indian officials themselves.
the very efforts made by the government to alleviate
famines do, by the increased taxation imposed, but intensify
and extend their real cause. although in the
recent famine in southern india six millions of people,
it is estimated, perished of actual starvation, and the
great mass of those who survived were actually stripped,
yet the taxes were not remitted and the salt tax, already
prohibitory to the great bulk of these poverty stricken
people, was increased forty per cent., just as after the terrible
bengal famine in  the revenue was actually
driven up, by raising assessments upon the survivors and
rigorously enforcing collection.
in india now, as in india in past times, it is only the
most superficial view that can attribute want and starvation
to pressure of population upon the ability of the
land to produce subsistence. could the cultivators
retain their little capital—could they be released from
the drain which, even in non-famine years, reduces great
masses of them to a scale of living not merely below
what is deemed necessary for the sepoys, but what english
humanity gives to the prisoners in the jails—reviving
industry, assuming more productive forms, would
undoubtedly suffice to keep a much greater population.
there are still in india great areas uncultivated, vast
mineral resources untouched, and it is certain that the
population of india does not reach, as within historical
times it never has reached, the real limit of the soil to
furnish subsistence, or even the point where this power
begins to decline with the increasing drafts made upon
it. the real cause of want in india has been, and yet is,
the rapacity of man, not the niggardliness of nature.
what is true of india is true of china. densely populated
as china is in many parts, that the extreme poverty
of the lower classes is to be attributed to causes similar
to those which have operated in india, and not to too
great population, is shown by many facts. insecurity
prevails, production goes on under the greatest disadvantages,
and exchange is closely fettered. where the
government is a succession of squeezings, and security
for capital of any sort must be purchased of a mandarin;
where men’s shoulders are the great reliance for inland
transportation; where the junk is obliged to be constructed
so as to unfit it for a sea-boat; where piracy is a
regular trade, and robbers often march in regiments,
poverty would prevail and the failure of a crop result in
famine, no matter how sparse the population. that
china is capable of supporting a much greater population
is shown not only by the great extent of uncultivated land
to which all travelers testify, but by the immense unworked
mineral deposits which are there known to exist.
china, for instance, is said to contain the largest and
finest deposit of coal yet anywhere discovered. how
much the working of these coal beds would add to the
ability to support a greater population, may readily be
imagined. coal is not food, it is true; but its production
is equivalent to the production of food. for, not only
may coal be exchanged for food, as is done in all mining
districts, but the force evolved by its consumption may
be used in the production of food, or may set labor free
for the production of food.
neither in india nor china, therefore, can poverty and
starvation be charged to the pressure of population
against subsistence. it is not dense population, but the
causes which prevent social organization from taking its
natural development and labor from securing its full
return, that keep millions just on the verge of starvation,
and every now and again force millions beyond it.
that the hindoo laborer thinks himself fortunate to get
a handful of rice, that the chinese eat rats and puppies,
is no more due to the pressure of population than it is
due to the pressure of population that the digger indians
live on grasshoppers, or the aboriginal inhabitants of
australia eat the worms found in rotten wood.
let me be understood. i do not mean merely to say
that india or china could, with a more highly developed
civilization, maintain a greater population, for to this
any malthusian would agree. the malthusian doctrine
does not deny that an advance in the productive arts
would permit a greater population to find subsistence.
but the malthusian theory affirms—and this is its essence—that,
whatever be the capacity for production, the
natural tendency of population is to come up with it,
and, in the endeavor to press beyond it, to produce, to
use the phrase of malthus, that degree of vice and misery
which is necessary to prevent further increase; so that as
productive power is increased, population will correspondingly
increase, and in a little time produce the
same results as before. what i say is this: that nowhere
is there any instance which will support this theory;
that nowhere can want be properly attributed to the
pressure of population against the power to procure subsistence
in the then existing degree of human knowledge;
that everywhere the vice and misery attributed to over-population
can be traced to the warfare, tyranny, and
oppression which prevent knowledge from being utilized
and deny the security essential to production. the reason
why the natural increase of population does not produce
want, we shall come to hereafter. the fact that it
has not yet anywhere done so, is what we are now concerned
with. this fact is obvious with regard to india
and china. it will be obvious, too, wherever we trace
to their causes the results which on superficial view are
often taken to proceed from over-population.
ireland, of all european countries, furnishes the great
stock example of over-population. the extreme poverty
of the peasantry and the low rate of wages there prevailing,
the irish famine, and irish emigration, are constantly
referred to as a demonstration of the malthusian
theory worked out under the eyes of the civilized world.
i doubt if a more striking instance can be cited of the
power of a preaccepted theory to blind men as to the
true relations of facts. the truth is, and it lies on the
surface, that ireland has never yet had a population
which the natural powers of the country, in the existing
state of the productive arts, could not have maintained
in ample comfort. at the period of her greatest population
(-) ireland contained something over eight
millions of people. but a very large proportion of them
managed merely to exist—lodging in miserable cabins,
clothed with miserable rags, and with but potatoes for
their staple food. when the potato blight came, they
died by thousands. but was it the inability of the soil
to support so large a population that compelled so many
to live in this miserable way, and exposed them to starvation
on the failure of a single root crop? on the contrary,
it was the same remorseless rapacity that robbed
the indian ryot of the fruits of his toil and left him to
starve where nature offered plenty. a merciless banditti
of tax-gatherers did not march through the land plundering
and torturing, but the laborer was just as effectually
stripped by as merciless a horde of landlords, among
whom the soil had been divided as their absolute possession,
regardless of any rights of those who lived upon it.
consider the conditions of production under which
this eight millions managed to live until the potato
blight came. it was a condition to which the words
used by mr. tennant in reference to india may as appropriately
be applied—“the great spur to industry, that of
security, was taken away.” cultivation was for the
most part carried on by tenants at will, who, even if the
rack-rents which they were forced to pay had permitted
them, did not dare to make improvements which would
have been but the signal for an increase of rent. labor
was thus applied in the most inefficient and wasteful
manner, and labor was dissipated in aimless idleness
that, with any security for its fruits, would have been
applied unremittingly. but even under these conditions,
it is a matter of fact that ireland did more than
support eight millions. for when her population was at
its highest, ireland was a food-exporting country. even
during the famine, grain and meat and butter and cheese
were carted for exportation along roads lined with the
starving and past trenches into which the dead were
piled. for these exports of food, or at least for a great
part of them, there was no return. so far as the people
of ireland were concerned, the food thus exported might
as well have been burned up or thrown into the sea, or
never produced. it went not as an exchange, but as a
tribute—to pay the rent of absentee landlords; a levy
wrung from producers by those who in no wise contributed
to production.
had this food been left to those who raised it; had the
cultivators of the soil been permitted to retain and use
the capital their labor produced; had security stimulated
industry and permitted the adoption of economical
methods, there would have been enough to support in
bounteous comfort the largest population ireland ever
had, and the potato blight might have come and gone
without stinting a single human being of a full meal.
for it was not the imprudence “of irish peasants,” as
english economists coldly say, which induced them to
make the potato the staple of their food. irish emigrants,
when they can get other things, do not live upon
the potato, and certainly in the united states the prudence
of the irish character, in endeavoring to lay by
something for a rainy day, is remarkable. they lived on
the potato, because rack-rents stripped everything else
from them. the truth is, that the poverty and misery
of ireland have never been fairly attributable to over-population.
mcculloch, writing in , says, in note iv to
“wealth of nations:”
“the wonderful density of population in ireland is the immediate
cause of the abject poverty and depressed condition of the great
bulk of the people. it is not too much to say that there are at
present more than double the persons in ireland it is, with its existing
means of production, able either fully to employ or to maintain
in a moderate state of comfort.”
as in  the population of ireland was given as
,,, we may set it down in  as about eight
millions. thus, to change mcculloch’s negative into an
affirmative, ireland would, according to the over-population
theory, have been able to employ fully and maintain
in a moderate state of comfort something less than
four million persons. now, in the early part of the preceding
century, when dean swift wrote his “modest
proposal,” the population of ireland was about two millions.
as neither the means nor the arts of production
had perceptibly advanced in ireland during the interval,
then—if the abject poverty and depressed condition of
the irish people in  were attributable to over-population—there
should, upon mcculloch’s own admission,
have been in ireland in  more than full employment,
and much more than a moderate state of comfort, for
the whole two millions. yet, instead of this being the
case, the abject poverty and depressed condition of the
irish people in  were such, that, with burning, blistering
irony, dean swift proposed to relieve surplus
population by cultivating a taste for roasted babies, and
bringing yearly to the shambles, as dainty food for the
rich, , irish infants!
it is difficult for one who has been looking over the
literature of irish misery, as while writing this chapter i
have been doing, to speak in decorous terms of the complacent
attribution of irish want and suffering to over-population
which are to be found even in the works of
such high-minded men as mill and buckle. i know of
nothing better calculated to make the blood boil than
the cold accounts of the grasping, grinding tyranny to
which the irish people have been subjected, and to
which, and not to any inability of the land to support its
population, irish pauperism and irish famine are to be
attributed; and were it not for the enervating effect
which the history of the world proves to be everywhere
the result of abject poverty, it would be difficult to resist
something like a feeling of contempt for a race who,
stung by such wrongs, have only occasionally murdered
a landlord!
whether over-population ever did cause pauperism and
starvation, may be an open question; but the pauperism
and starvation of ireland can no more be attributed to
this cause than can the slave trade be attributed to the
over-population of africa, or the destruction of jerusalem
to the inability of subsistence to keep pace with
reproduction. had ireland been by nature a grove of
bananas and bread-fruit, had her coasts been lined by the
guano-deposits of the chinchas, and the sun of lower
latitudes warmed into more abundant life her moist soil,
the social conditions that have prevailed there would
still have brought forth poverty and starvation. how
could there fail to be pauperism and famine in a country
where rack-rents wrested from the cultivator of the soil
all the produce of his labor except just enough to maintain
life in good seasons; where tenure at will forbade
improvements and removed incentive to any but the most
wasteful and poverty-stricken culture; where the tenant
dared not accumulate capital, even if he could get it, for
fear the landlord would demand it in the rent; where in
fact he was an abject slave, who, at the nod of a human
being like himself, might at any time be driven from his
miserable mud cabin, a houseless, homeless, starving
wanderer, forbidden even to pluck the spontaneous fruits
of the earth, or to trap a wild hare to satisfy his hunger?
no matter how sparse the population, no matter what
the natural resources, are not pauperism and starvation
necessary consequences in a land where the producers of
wealth are compelled to work under conditions which
deprive them of hope, of self-respect, of energy, of thrift;
where absentee landlords drain away without return at
least a fourth of the net produce of the soil, and when,
besides them, a starving industry must support resident
landlords, with their horses and hounds, agents, jobbers,
middlemen and bailiffs, an alien state church to insult
religious prejudices, and an army of policemen and soldiers
to overawe and hunt down any opposition to the
iniquitous system? is it not impiety far worse than
atheism to charge upon natural laws misery so caused?
what is true in these three cases will be found upon
examination true of all cases. so far as our knowledge
of facts goes, we may safely deny that the increase
of population has ever yet pressed upon subsistence
in such a way as to produce vice and misery; that
increase of numbers has ever yet decreased the relative
production of food. the famines of india, china, and
ireland can no more be credited to over-population than
the famines of sparsely populated brazil. the vice and
misery that come of want can no more be attributed
to the niggardliness of nature than can the six millions
slain by the sword of genghis khan, tamerlane’s
pyramid of skulls, or the extermination of the ancient
britons or of the aboriginal inhabitants of the west
indies.
if we turn from an examination of the facts brought
forward in illustration of the malthusian theory to consider
the analogies by which it is supported, we shall find
the same inconclusiveness.
the strength of the reproductive force in the animal
and vegetable kingdoms—such facts as that a single pair
of salmon might, if preserved from their natural enemies
for a few years, fill the ocean; that a pair of rabbits
would, under the same circumstances, soon overrun a
continent; that many plants scatter their seeds by the
hundred fold, and some insects deposit thousands of
eggs; and that everywhere through these kingdoms each
species constantly tends to press, and when not limited
by the number of its enemies, evidently does press,
against the limits of subsistence—is constantly cited,
from malthus down to the text-books of the present day,
as showing that population likewise tends to press against
subsistence, and, when unrestrained by other means, its
natural increase must necessarily result in such low
wages and want, or, if that will not suffice, and the increase
still goes on, in such actual starvation, as will
keep it within the limits of subsistence.
but is this analogy valid? it is from the vegetable
and animal kingdoms that man’s food is drawn, and
hence the greater strength of the reproductive force in
the vegetable and animal kingdoms than in man simply
proves the power of subsistence to increase faster than
population. does not the fact that all of the things
which furnish man’s subsistence have the power to multiply
many fold—some of them many thousand fold, and
some of them many million or even billion fold—while
he is only doubling his numbers, show that, let human
beings increase to the full extent of their reproductive
power, the increase of population can never exceed subsistence?
this is clear when it is remembered that
though in the vegetable and animal kingdoms each
species, by virtue of its reproductive power, naturally
and necessarily presses against the conditions which limit
its further increase, yet these conditions are nowhere
fixed and final. no species reaches the ultimate limit of
soil, water, air, and sunshine; but the actual limit of
each is in the existence of other species, its rivals, its
enemies, or its food. thus the conditions which limit
the existence of such of these species as afford him subsistence
man can extend (in some cases his mere appearance
will extend them), and thus the reproductive forces
of the species which supply his wants, instead of wasting
themselves against their former limit, start forward in
his service at a pace which his powers of increase cannot
rival. if he but shoot hawks, food-birds will increase,
if he but trap foxes the wild rabbits will multiply;
the honey bee moves with the pioneer, and on the organic
matter with which man’s presence fills the rivers,
fishes feed.
even if any consideration of final causes be excluded;
even if it be not permitted to suggest that the high and
constant reproductive force in vegetables and animals
has been ordered to enable them to subserve the uses of
man, and that therefore the pressure of the lower forms
of life against subsistence does not tend to show that it
must likewise be so with man, “the roof and crown of
things;” yet there still remains a distinction between
man and all other forms of life that destroys the analogy.
of all living things, man is the only one who can give
play to the reproductive forces, more powerful than his
own, which supply him with food. beast, insect, bird,
and fish take only what they find. their increase is at
the expense of their food, and when they have reached
the existing limits of food, their food must increase before
they can increase. but unlike that of any other
living thing, the increase of man involves the increase of
his food. if bears instead of men had been shipped
from europe to the north american continent, there
would now be no more bears than in the time of columbus,
and possibly fewer, for bear food would not have
been increased nor the conditions of bear life extended,
by the bear immigration, but probably the reverse. but
within the limits of the united states alone, there are
now forty-five millions of men where then there were
only a few hundred thousand, and yet there is now within
that territory much more food per capita for the forty-five
millions than there was then for the few hundred
thousand. it is not the increase of food that has caused
this increase of men; but the increase of men that has
brought about the increase of food. there is more food,
simply because there are more men.
here is a difference between the animal and the man.
both the jay-hawk and the man eat chickens, but the
more jay-hawks the fewer chickens, while the more men
the more chickens. both the seal and the man eat
salmon, but when a seal takes a salmon there is a salmon
the less, and were seals to increase past a certain point
salmon must diminish; while by placing the spawn of the
salmon under favorable conditions man can so increase
the number of salmon as more than to make up for all he
may take, and thus, no matter how much men may increase,
their increase need never outrun the supply of
salmon.
in short, while all through the vegetable and animal
kingdoms the limit of subsistence is independent of the
thing subsisted, with man the limit of subsistence is,
within the final limits of earth, air, water, and sunshine,
dependent upon man himself. and this being the case,
the analogy which it is sought to draw between the lower
forms of life and man manifestly fails. while vegetables
and animals do press against the limits of subsistence,
man cannot press against the limits of his subsistence
until the limits of the globe are reached. observe, this
is not merely true of the whole, but of all the parts. as
we cannot reduce the level of the smallest bay or harbor
without reducing the level not merely of the ocean with
which it communicates, but of all the seas and oceans of
the world, so the limit of subsistence in any particular
place is not the physical limit of that place, but the
physical limit of the globe. fifty square miles of soil
will in the present state of the productive arts yield subsistence
for only some thousands of people, but on the
fifty square miles which comprise the city of london
some three and a half millions of people are maintained,
and subsistence increases as population increases. so far
as the limit of subsistence is concerned, london may grow
to a population of a hundred millions, or five hundred
millions, or a thousand millions, for she draws for subsistence
upon the whole globe, and the limit which subsistence
sets to her growth in population is the limit of
the globe to furnish food for its inhabitants.
but here will arise another idea from which the malthusian
theory derives great support—that of the diminishing
productiveness of land. as conclusively proving
the law of diminishing productiveness it is said in the
current treatises that were it not true that beyond a certain
point land yields less and less to additional applications
of labor and capital, increasing population would
not cause any extension of cultivation, but that all the
increased supplies needed could and would be raised
without taking into cultivation any fresh ground. assent
to this seems to involve assent to the doctrine that
the difficulty of obtaining subsistence must increase with
increasing population.
but i think the necessity is only in seeming. if the
proposition be analyzed it will be seen to belong to a
class that depend for validity upon an implied or suggested
qualification—a truth relatively, which taken absolutely
becomes a non-truth. for that man cannot
exhaust or lessen the powers of nature follows from the
indestructibility of matter and the persistence of force.
production and consumption are only relative terms.
speaking absolutely, man neither produces nor consumes.
the whole human race, were they to labor to
infinity, could not make this rolling sphere one atom
heavier or one atom lighter, could not add to or diminish
by one iota the sum of the forces whose everlasting circling
produces all motion and sustains all life. as the
water that we take from the ocean must again return to
the ocean, so the food we take from the reservoirs of
nature is, from the moment we take it, on its way back
to those reservoirs. what we draw from a limited extent
of land may temporarily reduce the productiveness
of that land, because the return may be to other land, or
may be divided between that land and other land, or,
perhaps, all land; but this possibility lessens with increasing
area, and ceases when the whole globe is considered.
that the earth could maintain a thousand billions
of people as easily as a thousand millions is a necessary
deduction from the manifest truths that, at least so
far as our agency is concerned, matter is eternal and
force must forever continue to act. life does not use
up the forces that maintain life. we come into the
material universe bringing nothing; we take nothing
away when we depart. the human being, physically
considered, is but a transient form of matter, a changing
mode of motion. the matter remains and the force
persists. nothing is lessened, nothing is weakened.
and from this it follows that the limit to the population
of the globe can be only the limit of space.
now this limitation of space—this danger that the
human race may increase beyond the possibility of finding
elbow room—is so far off as to have for us no more practical
interest than the recurrence of the glacial period or
the final extinguishment of the sun. yet remote and
shadowy as it is, it is this possibility which gives to the
malthusian theory its apparently self-evident character.
but if we follow it, even this shadow will disappear.
it, also, springs from a false analogy. that vegetable
and animal life tend to press against the limits of space
does not prove the same tendency in human life.
granted that man is only a more highly developed
animal; that the ring-tailed monkey is a distant relative
who has gradually developed acrobatic tendencies, and
the hump-backed whale a far-off connection who in early
life took to the sea—granted that back of these he is kin
to the vegetable, and is still subject to the same laws as
plants, fishes, birds, and beasts. yet there is still this
difference between man and all other animals—he is the
only animal whose desires increase as they are fed; the
only animal that is never satisfied. the wants of every
other living thing are uniform and fixed. the ox of to-day
aspires to no more than did the ox when man first
yoked him. the sea gull of the english channel, who
poises himself above the swift steamer, wants no better
food or lodging than the gulls who circled round as the
keels of cæsar’s galleys first grated on a british beach.
of all that nature offers them, be it ever so abundant, all
living things save man can take, and care for, only
enough to supply wants which are definite and fixed.
the only use they can make of additional supplies or
additional opportunities is to multiply.
but not so with man. no sooner are his animal wants
satisfied than new wants arise. food he wants first, as
does the beast; shelter next, as does the beast; and these
given, his reproductive instincts assert their sway, as do
those of the beast. but here man and beast part company.
the beast never goes further; the man has but
set his feet on the first step of an infinite progression—a
progression upon which the beast never enters; a progression
away from and above the beast.
the demand for quantity once satisfied, he seeks
quality. the very desires that he has in common with
the beast become extended, refined, exalted. it is not
merely hunger, but taste, that seeks gratification in food;
in clothes, he seeks not merely comfort, but adornment;
the rude shelter becomes a house; the undiscriminating
sexual attraction begins to transmute itself into subtile influences,
and the hard and common stock of animal life
to blossom and to bloom into shapes of delicate beauty.
as power to gratify his wants increases, so does aspiration
grow. held down to lower levels of desire, lucullus
will sup with lucullus; twelve boars turn on spits that
antony’s mouthful of meat maybe done to a turn; every
kingdom of nature be ransacked to add to cleopatra’s
charms, and marble colonnades and hanging gardens and
pyramids that rival the hills arise. passing into higher
forms of desire, that which slumbered in the plant and fitfully
stirred in the beast, awakes in the man. the eyes
of the mind are opened, and he longs to know. he
braves the scorching heat of the desert and the icy blasts
of the polar sea, but not for food; he watches all night,
but it is to trace the circling of the eternal stars. he
adds toil to toil, to gratify a hunger no animal has felt;
to assuage a thirst no beast can know.
out upon nature, in upon himself, back through the
mists that shroud the past, forward into the darkness
that overhangs the future, turns the restless desire that
arises when the animal wants slumber in satisfaction.
beneath things, he seeks the law; he would know how
the globe was forged and the stars were hung, and trace
to their origins the springs of life. and, then, as the
man develops his nobler nature, there arises the desire
higher yet—the passion of passions, the hope of hopes—the
desire that he, even he, may somehow aid in making
life better and brighter, in destroying want and sin, sorrow
and shame. he masters and curbs the animal; he
turns his back upon the feast and renounces the place of
power; he leaves it to others to accumulate wealth, to
gratify pleasant tastes, to bask themselves in the warm
sunshine of the brief day. he works for those he never
saw and never can see; for a fame, or maybe but for a
scant justice, that can only come long after the clods
have rattled upon his coffin lid. he toils in the advance,
where it is cold, and there is little cheer from men, and
the stones are sharp and the brambles thick. amid the
scoffs of the present and the sneers that stab like knives,
he builds for the future; he cuts the trail that progressive
humanity may hereafter broaden into a highroad.
into higher, grander spheres desire mounts and beckons,
and a star that rises in the east leads him on. lo! the
pulses of the man throb with the yearnings of the god—he
would aid in the process of the suns!
is not the gulf too wide for the analogy to span? give
more food, open fuller conditions of life, and the vegetable
or animal can but multiply; the man will develop.
in the one the expansive force can but extend existence
in new numbers; in the other, it will inevitably tend to
extend existence in higher forms and wider powers.
man is an animal; but he is an animal plus something
else. he is the mythic earth-tree, whose roots are in the
ground, but whose topmost branches may blossom in the
heavens!
whichever way it be turned, the reasoning by which
this theory of the constant tendency of population to
press against the limits of subsistence is supported shows
an unwarranted assumption, an undistributed middle, as
the logicians would say. facts do not warrant it, analogy
does not countenance it. it is a pure chimera of
the imagination, such as those that for a long time prevented
men from recognizing the rotundity and motion
of the earth. it is just such a theory as that underneath
us everything not fastened to the earth must fall
off; as that a ball dropped from the mast of a ship in
motion must fall behind the mast; as that a live fish
placed in a vessel full of water will displace no water.
it is as unfounded, if not as grotesque, as an assumption
we can imagine adam might have made had he been of
an arithmetical turn of mind and figured on the growth
of his first baby from the rate of its early months. from
the fact that at birth it weighed ten pounds and in eight
months thereafter twenty pounds, he might, with the
arithmetical knowledge which some sages have supposed
him to possess, have ciphered out a result quite as striking
as that of mr. malthus; namely, that by the time it
got to be ten years old it would be as heavy as an ox, at
twelve as heavy as an elephant, and at thirty would
weigh no less than ,,, tons.
the fact is, there is no more reason for us to trouble
ourselves about the pressure of population upon subsistence
than there was for adam to worry himself about the
rapid growth of his baby. so far as an inference is
really warranted by facts and suggested by analogy, it is
that the law of population includes such beautiful adaptations
as investigation has already shown in other
natural laws, and that we are no more warranted in assuming
that the instinct of reproduction, in the natural
development of society, tends to produce misery and vice,
than we should be in assuming that the force of gravitation
must hurl the moon to the earth and the earth to the
sun, or than in assuming from the contraction of water
with reductions of temperature down to thirty-two
degrees that rivers and lakes must freeze to the bottom
with every frost, and the temperate regions of earth be
thus rendered uninhabitable by even moderate winters.
that, besides the positive and prudential checks of malthus,
there is a third check which comes into play with
the elevation of the standard of comfort and the development
of the intellect, is pointed to by many well-known
facts. the proportion of births is notoriously greater in
new settlements, where the struggle with nature leaves
little opportunity for intellectual life, and among the
poverty-bound classes of older countries, who in the
midst of wealth are deprived of all its advantages and reduced
to all but an animal existence, than it is among
the classes to whom the increase of wealth has brought
independence, leisure, comfort, and a fuller and more
varied life. this fact, long ago recognized in the
homely adage, “a rich man for luck, and a poor man for
children,” was noted by adam smith, who says it is not
uncommon to find a poor half-starved highland woman
has been the mother of twenty-three or twenty-four children,
and is everywhere so clearly perceptible that it is
only necessary to allude to it.
if the real law of population is thus indicated, as i
think it must be, then the tendency to increase, instead
of being always uniform, is strong where a greater population
would give increased comfort, and where the perpetuity
of the race is threatened by the mortality induced
by adverse conditions; but weakens just as the
higher development of the individual becomes possible
and the perpetuity of the race is assured. in other
words, the law of population accords with and is subordinate
to the law of intellectual development, and any
danger that human beings may be brought into a world
where they cannot be provided for arises not from the
ordinances of nature, but from social mal-adjustments
that in the midst of wealth condemn men to want. the
truth of this will, i think, be conclusively demonstrated
when, after having cleared the ground, we trace out the
true laws of social growth. but it would disturb the
natural order of the argument to anticipate them now.
if i have succeeded in maintaining a negative—in showing
that the malthusian theory is not proved by the reasoning
by which it is supported—it is enough for the
present. in the next chapter i propose to take the
affirmative and show that it is disproved by facts.
so deeply rooted and thoroughly entwined with the
reasonings of the current political economy is this doctrine
that increase of population tends to reduce wages
and produce poverty, so completely does it harmonize
with many popular notions, and so liable is it to recur in
different shapes, that i have thought it necessary to meet
and show in some detail the insufficiency of the arguments
by which it is supported, before bringing it to the
test of facts; for the general acceptance of this theory
adds a most striking instance to the many which the history
of thought affords of how easily men ignore facts
when blindfolded by a preaccepted theory.
to the supreme and final test of facts we can easily
bring this theory. manifestly the question whether increase
of population necessarily tends to reduce wages
and cause want, is simply the question whether it tends
to reduce the amount of wealth that can be produced by
a given amount of labor.
this is what the current doctrine holds. the accepted
theory is, that the more that is required from nature the
less generously does she respond, so that doubling the
application of labor will not double the product; and
hence, increase of population must tend to reduce wages
and deepen poverty, or, in the phrase of malthus, must
result in vice and misery. to quote the language of
john stuart mill:
“a greater number of people cannot, in any given state of civilization,
be collectively so well provided for as a smaller. the
niggardliness of nature, not the injustice of society, is the cause of
the penalty attached to over-population. an unjust distribution of
wealth does not aggravate the evil, but, at most, causes it be somewhat
earlier felt. it is in vain to say that all mouths which the increase
of mankind calls into existence bring with them hands. the
new mouths require as much food as the old ones, and the hands do
not produce as much. if all instruments of production were held in
joint property by the whole people, and the produce divided with
perfect equality among them, and if in a society thus constituted,
industry were as energetic and the produce as ample as at the present
time, there would be enough to make all the existing population extremely
comfortable; but when that population had doubled itself,
as, with existing habits of the people, under such an encouragement,
it undoubtedly would in little more than twenty years, what would
then be their condition? unless the arts of production were in the
same time improved in an almost unexampled degree, the inferior
soils which must be resorted to, and the more laborious and scantily
remunerative cultivation which must be employed on the superior
soils, to procure food for so much larger a population, would, by an
insuperable necessity, render every individual in the community
poorer than before. if the population continued to increase at the
same rate, a time would soon arrive when no one would have more
than mere necessaries, and, soon after, a time when no one would
have a sufficiency of those, and the further increase of population
would be arrested by death.”
all this i deny. i assert that the very reverse of these
propositions is true. i assert that in any given state of
civilization a greater number of people can collectively
be better provided for than a smaller. i assert that the
injustice of society, not the niggardliness of nature, is
the cause of the want and misery which the current
theory attributes to over-population. i assert that the
new mouths which an increasing population calls into
existence require no more food than the old ones, while
the hands they bring with them can in the natural order
of things produce more. i assert that, other things being
equal, the greater the population, the greater the comfort
which an equitable distribution of wealth would
give to each individual. i assert that in a state of
equality the natural increase of population would constantly
tend to make every individual richer instead of
poorer.
i thus distinctly join issue, and submit the question to
the test of facts.
but observe (for even at the risk of repetition i wish
to warn the reader against a confusion of thought that
is observable even in writers of great reputation), that
the question of fact into which this issue resolves itself is
not in what stage of population is most subsistence produced?
but in what stage of population is there exhibited
the greatest power of producing wealth? for the power
of producing wealth in any form is the power of producing
subsistence—and the consumption of wealth in any
form, or of wealth-producing power, is equivalent to the
consumption of subsistence. i have, for instance, some
money in my pocket. with it i may buy either food or
cigars or jewelry or theater tickets, and just as i expend
my money do i determine labor to the production of
food, of cigars, of jewelry, or of theatrical representations.
a set of diamonds has a value equal to so many
barrels of flour—that is to say, it takes on the average as
much labor to produce the diamonds as it would to produce
so much flour. if i load my wife with diamonds, it
is as much an exertion of subsistence-producing power
as though i had devoted so much food to purposes of
ostentation. if i keep a footman, i take a possible plowman
from the plow. the breeding and maintenance of
a race-horse require care and labor which would suffice
for the breeding and maintenance of many work-horses.
the destruction of wealth involved in a general illumination
or the firing of a salute is equivalent to the burning
up of so much food; the keeping of a regiment of soldiers,
or of a war-ship and her crew, is the diversion to
unproductive uses of labor that could produce subsistence
for many thousands of people. thus the power of
any population to produce the necessaries of life is not
to be measured by the necessaries of life actually produced,
but by the expenditure of power in all modes.
there is no necessity for abstract reasoning. the
question is one of simple fact. does the relative power
of producing wealth decrease with the increase of population?
the facts are so patent that it is only necessary to call
attention to them. we have, in modern times, seen
many communities advance in population. have they
not at the same time advanced even more rapidly in
wealth? we see many communities still increasing in
population. are they not also increasing their wealth
still faster? is there any doubt that while england has
been increasing her population at the rate of two per
cent. per annum, her wealth has been growing in still
greater proportion? is it not true that while the population
of the united states has been doubling every
twenty-nine years her wealth has been doubling at
much shorter intervals? is it not true that under similar
conditions—that is to say, among communities of
similar people in a similar stage of civilization—the most
densely populated community is also the richest? are
not the more densely populated eastern states richer in
proportion to population than the more sparsely populated
western or southern states? is not england,
where population is even denser than in the eastern
states of the union, also richer in proportion? where
will you find wealth devoted with the most lavishness to
non-productive use—costly buildings, fine furniture, luxurious
equipages, statues, pictures, pleasure gardens and
yachts? is it not where population is densest rather
than where it is sparsest? where will you find in largest
proportion those whom the general production suffices to
keep without productive labor on their part—men of income
and of elegant leisure, thieves, policemen, menial
servants, lawyers, men of letters, and the like? is it not
where population is dense rather than where it is sparse?
whence is it that capital overflows for remunerative investment?
is it not from densely populated countries to
sparsely populated countries? these things conclusively
show that wealth is greatest where population is densest;
that the production of wealth to a given amount of labor
increases as population increases. these things are apparent
wherever we turn our eyes. on the same level of
civilization, the same stage of the productive arts, government,
etc., the most populous countries are always
the most wealthy.
let us take a particular case, and that a case which of
all that can be cited seems at first blush best to support
the theory we are considering—the case of a community
where, while population has largely increased, wages
have greatly decreased, and it is not a matter of dubious
inference but of obvious fact that the generosity of
nature has lessened. that community is california.
when upon the discovery of gold the first wave of immigration
poured into california it found a country in
which nature was in the most generous mood. from
the river banks and bars the glittering deposits of thousands
of years could be taken by the most primitive appliances,
in amounts which made an ounce ($) per day
only ordinary wages. the plains, covered with nutritious
grasses, were alive with countless herds of horses
and cattle, so plenty that any traveler was at liberty to
shift his saddle to a fresh steed, or to kill a bullock if he
needed a steak, leaving the hide, its only valuable part,
for the owner. from the rich soil which came first
under cultivation, the mere plowing and sowing brought
crops that in older countries, if procured at all, can only
be procured by the most thorough manuring and cultivation.
in early california, amid this profusion of
nature, wages and interest were higher than anywhere
else in the world.
this virgin profusion of nature has been steadily giving
way before the greater and greater demands which an
increasing population has made upon it. poorer and
poorer diggings have been worked, until now no diggings
worth speaking of can be found, and gold mining
requires much capital, large skill, and elaborate machinery,
and involves great risks. “horses cost money,”
and cattle bred on the sage-brush plains of nevada are
brought by railroad across the mountains and killed in
san francisco shambles, while farmers are beginning to
save their straw and look for manure, and land is in cultivation
which will hardly yield a crop three years out
of four without irrigation. at the same time wages and
interest have steadily gone down. many men are now
glad to work for a week for less than they once demanded
for the day, and money is loaned by the year for a rate
which once would hardly have been thought extortionate
by the month. is the connection between the reduced
productiveness of nature and the reduced rate of wages
that of cause and effect? is it true that wages are lower
because labor yields less wealth? on the contrary! instead
of the wealth-producing power of labor being less
in california in  than in , i am convinced that
it is greater. and, it seems to me, that no one who
considers how enormously during these years the efficiency
of labor in california has been increased by roads,
wharves, flumes, railroads, steamboats, telegraphs, and
machinery of all kinds; by a closer connection with the
rest of the world; and by the numberless economies resulting
from a larger population, can doubt that the
return which labor receives from nature in california is
on the whole much greater now than it was in the days of
unexhausted placers and virgin soil—the increase in the
power of the human factor having more than compensated
for the decline in the power of the natural factor.
that this conclusion is the correct one is proved by many
facts which show that the consumption of wealth is now
much greater, as compared with the number of laborers,
than it was then. instead of a population composed almost
exclusively of men in the prime of life, a large proportion
of women and children are now supported, and
other non-producers have increased in much greater ratio
than the population; luxury has grown far more than
wages have fallen; where the best houses were cloth and
paper shanties, are now mansions whose magnificence
rivals european palaces; there are liveried carriages on
the streets of san francisco and pleasure yachts on her
bay; the class who can live sumptuously on their incomes
has steadily grown; there are rich men beside whom the
richest of the earlier years would seem little better than
paupers—in short, there are on every hand the most
striking and conclusive evidences that the production
and consumption of wealth have increased with even
greater rapidity than the increase of population, and that
if any class obtains less it is solely because of the greater
inequality of distribution.
what is obvious in this particular instance is obvious
where the survey is extended. the richest countries
are not those where nature is most prolific; but those
where labor is most efficient—not mexico, but massachusetts;
not brazil, but england. the countries where
population is densest and presses hardest upon the capabilities
of nature, are, other things being equal, the
countries where the largest proportion of the produce
can be devoted to luxury and the support of non-producers,
the countries where capital overflows, the countries
that upon exigency, such as war, can stand the
greatest drain. that the production of wealth must, in
proportion to the labor employed, be greater in a densely
populated country like england than in new countries
where wages and interest are higher, is evident from the
fact that, though a much smaller proportion of the population
is engaged in productive labor, a much larger surplus
is available for other purposes than that of supplying
physical needs. in a new country the whole available
force of the community is devoted to production—there
is no well man who does not do productive work of some
kind, no well woman exempt from household tasks.
there are no paupers or beggars, no idle rich, no class
whose labor is devoted to ministering to the convenience
or caprice of the rich, no purely literary or scientific
class, no criminal class who live by preying upon society,
no large class maintained to guard society against them.
yet with the whole force of the community thus devoted
to production, no such consumption of wealth in proportion
to the whole population takes place, or can be
afforded, as goes on in the old country; for, though the
condition of the lowest class is better, and there is no one
who cannot get a living, there is no one who gets much
more—few or none who can live in anything like what
would be called luxury, or even comfort, in the older
country. that is to say, that in the older country the
consumption of wealth in proportion to population is
greater, although the proportion of labor devoted to the
production of wealth is less—or that fewer laborers produce
more wealth; for wealth must be produced before it
can be consumed.
it may, however, be said, that the superior wealth of
older countries is due not to superior productive power,
but to the accumulations of wealth which the new country
has not yet had time to make.
it will be well for a moment to consider this idea of
accumulated wealth. the truth is, that wealth can be
accumulated but to a slight degree, and that communities
really live, as the vast majority of individuals live, from
hand to mouth. wealth will not bear much accumulation;
except in a few unimportant forms it will not keep.
the matter of the universe, which, when worked up by
labor into desirable forms, constitutes wealth, is constantly
tending back to its original state. some forms
of wealth will last for a few hours, some for a few days,
some for a few months, some for a few years; and there
are very few forms of wealth that can be passed from one
generation to another. take wealth in some of its most
useful and permanent forms—ships, houses, railways,
machinery. unless labor is constantly exerted in preserving
and renewing them, they will almost immediately
become useless. stop labor in any community, and
wealth would vanish almost as the jet of a fountain
vanishes when the flow of water is shut off. let labor
again exert itself, and wealth will almost as immediately
reappear. this has been long noticed where war or
other calamity has swept away wealth, leaving population
unimpaired. there is not less wealth in london to-day
because of the great fire of ; nor yet is there less
wealth in chicago because of the great fire of . on
those fire-swept acres have arisen, under the hand of
labor, more magnificent buildings, filled with greater
stocks of goods; and the stranger who, ignorant of the
history of the city, passes along those stately avenues
would not dream that a few years ago all lay so black and
bare. the same principle—that wealth is constantly recreated—is
obvious in every new city. given the same
population and the same efficiency of labor, and the town
of yesterday will possess and enjoy as much as the town
founded by the romans. no one who has seen melbourne
or san francisco can doubt that if the population
of england were transported to new zealand, leaving all
accumulated wealth behind, new zealand would soon be
as rich as england is now; or, conversely, that if the
population of england were reduced to the sparseness of
the present population of new zealand, in spite of accumulated
wealth, they would soon be as poor. accumulated
wealth seems to play just about such a part in relation
to the social organism as accumulated nutriment
does to the physical organism. some accumulated wealth
is necessary, and to a certain extent it may be drawn
upon in exigencies; but the wealth produced by past generations
can no more account for the consumption of
the present than the dinners he ate last year can supply a
man with present strength.
but without these considerations, which i allude to
more for their general than for their special bearing, it
is evident that superior accumulations of wealth can account
for greater consumption of wealth only in cases where
accumulated wealth is decreasing, and that wherever the
volume of accumulated wealth is maintained, and even
more obviously where it is increasing, a greater consumption
of wealth must imply a greater production of
wealth. now, whether we compare different communities
with each other, or the same community at different
times, it is obvious that the progressive state, which is
marked by increase of population, is also marked by an
increased consumption and an increased accumulation of
wealth, not merely in the aggregate, but per capita.
and hence, increase of population, so far as it has yet
anywhere gone, does not mean a reduction, but an increase
in the average production of wealth.
and the reason of this is obvious. for, even if the
increase of population does reduce the power of the
natural factor of wealth, by compelling a resort to poorer
soils, etc., it yet so vastly increases the power of the
human factor as more than to compensate. twenty
men working together will, where nature is niggardly,
produce more than twenty times the wealth that one man
can produce where nature is most bountiful. the denser
the population the more minute becomes the subdivision
of labor, the greater the economies of production and
distribution, and, hence, the very reverse of the malthusian
doctrine is true; and, within the limits in which we
have reason to suppose increase would still go on, in any
given state of civilization a greater number of people can
produce a larger proportionate amount of wealth, and
more fully supply their wants, than can a smaller
number.
look simply at the facts. can anything be clearer
than that the cause of the poverty which festers in the
centers of civilization is not in the weakness of the productive
forces? in countries where poverty is deepest,
the forces of production are evidently strong enough, if
fully employed, to provide for the lowest not merely
comfort but luxury. the industrial paralysis, the commercial
depression which curses the civilized world to-day,
evidently springs from no lack of productive power.
whatever be the trouble, it is clearly not in the want of
ability to produce wealth.
it is this very fact—that want appears where productive
power is greatest and the production of wealth is
largest—that constitutes the enigma which perplexes the
civilized world, and which we are trying to unravel.
evidently the malthusian theory, which attributes want
to the decrease of productive power, will not explain it.
that theory is utterly inconsistent with all the facts. it
is really a gratuitous attribution to the laws of god of
results which, even from this examination, we may infer
really spring from the mal-adjustments of men—an inference
which, as we proceed, will become a demonstration.
for we have yet to find what does produce poverty amid
advancing wealth.
the machines that are first invented to perform any particular
movement are always the most complex, and succeeding artists
generally discover that with fewer wheels, with fewer principles of
motion than had originally been employed, the same effects may be
more easily produced. the first philosophical systems, in the same
manner, are always the most complex, and a particular connecting
chain, or principle, is generally thought necessary to unite every two
seemingly disjointed appearances; but it often happens that one
great connecting principle is afterward found to be sufficient to bind
together all the discordant phenomena that occur in a whole species
of things.—adam smith, essay on the principles which lead and
direct philosophical inquiries, as illustrated by the history of
astronomy.
the preceding examination has, i think, conclusively
shown that the explanation currently given, in the name
of political economy, of the problem we are attempting
to solve, is no explanation at all.
that with material progress wages fail to increase, but
rather tend to decrease, cannot be explained by the theory
that the increase of laborers constantly tends to divide
into smaller portions the capital sum from which wages
are paid. for, as we have seen, wages do not come from
capital, but are the direct produce of labor. each productive
laborer, as he works, creates his wages, and with
every additional laborer there is an addition to the true
wages fund—an addition to the common stock of wealth,
which, generally speaking, is considerably greater than
the amount he draws in wages.
nor, yet, can it be explained by the theory that nature
yields less to the increasing drafts which an increasing
population make upon her; for the increased efficiency
of labor makes the progressive state a state of continually
increasing production per capita, and the countries of
densest population, other things being equal, are always
the countries of greatest wealth.
so far, we have only increased the perplexities of the
problem. we have overthrown a theory which did, in
some sort of fashion, explain existing facts; but in doing
so have only made existing facts seem more inexplicable.
it is as though, while the ptolemaic theory was yet in
its strength, it had been proved simply that the sun and
stars do not revolve about the earth. the phenomena
of day and night, and of the apparent motion of the
celestial bodies, would yet remain unexplained, inevitably
to reinstate the old theory unless a better one took
its place. our reasoning has led us to the conclusion
that each productive laborer produces his own wages, and
that increase in the number of laborers should increase
the wages of each; whereas, the apparent facts are that
there are many laborers who cannot obtain remunerative
employment, and that increase in the number of laborers
brings diminution of wages. we have, in short, proved
that wages ought to be highest where in reality they are
lowest.
nevertheless, even in doing this we have made some
progress. next to finding what we look for, is to discover
where it is useless to look. we have at least narrowed
the field of inquiry. for this, at least, is now
clear—that the cause which, in spite of the enormous
increase of productive power, confines the great body of
producers to the least share of the product upon which
they will consent to live, is not the limitation of capital,
nor yet the limitation of the powers of nature which
respond to labor. as it is not, therefore, to be found in
the laws which bound the production of wealth, it must
be sought in the laws which govern distribution. to
them let us turn.
it will be necessary to review in its main branches the
whole subject of the distribution of wealth. to discover
the cause which, as population increases and the productive
arts advance, deepens the poverty of the lowest
class, we must find the law which determines what part
of the produce is distributed to labor as wages. to find
the law of wages, or at least to make sure when we have
found it, we must also determine the laws which fix the
part of the produce which goes to capital and the part
which goes to land owners, for as land, labor, and capital
join in producing wealth, it is between these three that
the produce must be divided. what is meant by the
produce or production of a community is the sum of the
wealth produced by that community—the general fund
from which, as long as previously existing stock is not
lessened, all consumption must be met and all revenues
drawn. as i have already explained, production does
not merely mean the making of things, but includes the
increase of value gained by transporting or exchanging
things. there is a produce of wealth in a purely commercial
community, as there is in a purely agricultural
or manufacturing community; and in the one case, as in
the others, some part of this produce will go to capital,
some part to labor, and some part, if land have any value,
to the owners of land. as a matter of fact, a portion of
the wealth produced is constantly going to the replacement
of capital, which is constantly consumed and constantly
replaced. but it is not necessary to take this into
account, as it is eliminated by considering capital as
continuous, which, in speaking or thinking of it, we
habitually do. when we speak of the produce, we mean,
therefore, that part of the wealth produced above what is
necessary to replace the capital consumed in production;
and when we speak of interest, or the return to capital,
we mean what goes to capital after its replacement or
maintenance.
it is, further, a matter of fact, that in every community
which has passed the most primitive stage some
portion of the produce is taken in taxation and consumed
by government. but it is not necessary, in seeking
the laws of distribution, to take this into consideration.
we may consider taxation either as not existing,
or as by so much reducing the produce. and so, too, of
what is taken from the produce by certain forms of monopoly,
which will be considered in a subsequent chapter
(chap. iv), and which exercise powers analogous to taxation.
after we have discovered the laws of distribution
we can then see what bearing, if any, taxation has upon
them.
we must discover these laws of distribution for ourselves—or,
at least, two out of the three. for, that they
are not, at least as a whole, correctly apprehended by the
current political economy, may be seen, irrespective of
our preceding examination of one of them, in any of
the standard treatises.
this is evident, in the first place, from the terminology
employed.
in all politico-economic works we are told that the
three factors in production are land, labor, and capital,
and that the whole produce is primarily distributed into
three corresponding parts. three terms, therefore, are
needed, each of which shall clearly express one of these
parts to the exclusion of the others. rent, as defined,
clearly enough expresses the first of these parts—that
which goes to the owners of land. wages, as defined,
clearly enough expresses the second—that part which
constitutes the return to labor. but as to the third
term—that which should express the return to capital—there
is in the standard works a most puzzling ambiguity
and confusion.
of words in common use, that which comes nearest to
exclusively expressing the idea of return for the use of
capital, is interest, which, as commonly used, implies
the return for the use of capital, exclusive of any labor
in its use or management, and exclusive of any risk, except
such as may be involved in the security. the word
profits, as commonly used, is almost synonymous with
revenue; it means a gain, an amount received in excess
of an amount expended, and frequently includes receipts
that are properly rent; while it nearly always includes
receipts which are properly wages, as well as compensations
for the risk peculiar to the various uses of capital.
unless extreme violence is done to the meaning of the
word, it cannot, therefore, be used in political economy
to signify that share of the produce which goes to capital,
in contradistinction to those parts which go to labor
and to land owners.
now, all this is recognized in the standard works on
political economy. adam smith well illustrates how
wages and compensation for risk largely enter into profits,
pointing out how the large profits of apothecaries
and small retail dealers are in reality wages for their
labor, and not interest on their capital; and how the
great profits sometimes made in risky businesses, such as
smuggling and the lumber trade, are really but compensations
for risk, which, in the long run, reduce the
returns to capital so used to the ordinary, or below the
ordinary, rate. similar illustrations are given in most of
the subsequent works, where profit is formally defined in
its common sense, with, perhaps, the exclusion of rent.
in all these works, the reader is told that profits are
made up of three elements—wages of superintendence,
compensation for risk, and interest, or the return for the
use of capital.
thus, neither in its common meaning nor in the meaning
expressly assigned to it in the current political economy,
can profits have any place in the discussion of the
distribution of wealth between the three factors of production.
either in its common meaning or in the meaning
expressly assigned to it, to talk about the distribution
of wealth into rent, wages, and profits is like talking of
the division of mankind into men, women, and human
beings.
yet this, to the utter bewilderment of the reader, is
what is done in all the standard works. after formally
decomposing profits into wages of superintendence, compensation
for risk, and interest—the net return for the
use of capital—they proceed to treat of the distribution
of wealth between the rent of land, the wages of labor,
and the profits of capital.
i doubt not that there are thousands of men who have
vainly puzzled their brains over this confusion of terms,
and abandoned the effort in despair, thinking that as the
fault could not be in such great thinkers, it must be in
their own stupidity. if it is any consolation to such men
they may turn to buckle’s “history of civilization,” and
see how a man who certainly got a marvelously clear idea
of what he read, and who had read carefully the principal
economists from smith down, was inextricably confused
by this jumble of profits and interest. for buckle (vol.
, chap. ii, and notes) persistently speaks of the distribution
of wealth into rent, wages, interest, and profits.
and this is not to be wondered at. for, after
formally decomposing profits into wages of superintendence,
insurance, and interest, these economists, in assigning
causes which fix the general rate of profit, speak
of things which evidently affect only that part of profits
which they have denominated interest; and then, in
speaking of the rate of interest, either give the meaningless
formula of supply and demand, or speak of causes
which affect the compensation for risk; evidently using
the word in its common sense, and not in the economic
sense they have assigned to it, from which compensation
for risk is eliminated. if the reader will take up john
stuart mill’s “principles of political economy,” and
compare the chapter on profits (book ii, chap. ) with
the chapter on interest (book iii, chap. ), he will see
the confusion thus arising exemplified in the case of the
most logical of english economists, in a more striking
manner than i would like to characterize.
now, such men have not been led into such confusion
of thought without a cause. if they, one after another,
have followed dr. adam smith, as boys play “follow my
leader,” jumping where he jumped, and falling where
he fell, it has been that there was a fence where he
jumped and a hole where he fell.
the difficulty from which this confusion has sprung is
in the preaccepted theory of wages. for reasons which
i have before assigned, it has seemed to them a self-evident
truth that the wages of certain classes of laborers
depended upon the ratio between capital and the number
of laborers. but there are certain kinds of reward
for exertion to which this theory evidently will not
apply, so the term wages has in use been contracted to
include only wages in the narrow common sense. this
being the case, if the term interest were used, as consistently
with their definitions it should have been used, to
represent the third part of the division of the produce,
all rewards of personal exertion, save those of what are
commonly called wage-workers, would clearly have been
left out. but by treating the division of wealth as between
rent, wages, and profits, instead of between rent,
wages, and interest, this difficulty is glossed over, all
wages which will not fall under the preaccepted law of
wages being vaguely grouped under profits, as wages of
superintendence.
to read carefully what economists say about the distribution
of wealth is to see that, though they correctly
define it, wages, as they use it in this connection, is what
logicians would call an undistributed term—it does not
mean all wages, but only some wages—viz., the wages of
manual labor paid by an employer. so other wages are
thrown over with the return to capital, and included
under the term profits, and any clear distinction between
the returns to capital and the returns to human exertion
thus avoided. the fact is that the current political economy
fails to give any clear and consistent account of the
distribution of wealth. the law of rent is clearly stated,
but it stands unrelated. the rest is a confused and
incoherent jumble.
the very arrangement of these works shows this confusion
and inconclusiveness of thought. in no politico-economic
treatise that i know of are these laws of distribution
brought together, so that the reader can take
them in at a glance and recognize their relation to each
other; but what is said about each one is enveloped in a
mass of political and moral reflections and dissertations.
and the reason is not far to seek. to bring together the
three laws of distribution as they are now taught, is to
show at a glance that they lack necessary relation.
the laws of the distribution of wealth are obviously
laws of proportion, and must be so related to each other
that any two being given the third may be inferred.
for to say that one of the three parts of a whole is increased
or decreased, is to say that one or both of the
other parts is, reversely, decreased or increased. if tom,
dick, and harry are partners in business, the agreement
which fixes the share of one in the profits must at the
same time fix either the separate or the joint shares of
the other two. to fix tom’s share at forty per cent. is
to leave but sixty per cent. to be divided between dick
and harry. to fix dick’s share at forty per cent. and
harry’s share at thirty-five per cent. is to fix tom’s share
at twenty-five per cent.
but between the laws of the distribution of wealth, as
laid down in the standard works, there is no such relation.
if we fish them out and bring them together, we
find them to be as follows:
wages are determined by the ratio between the amount
of capital devoted to the payment and subsistence of
labor and the number of laborers seeking employment.
rent is determined by the margin of cultivation; all
lands yielding as rent that part of their produce which
exceeds what an equal application of labor and capital
could procure from the poorest land in use.
interest is determined by the equation between the demands
of borrowers and the supply of capital offered by
lenders. or, if we take what is given as the law of profits,
it is determined by wages, falling as wages rise and rising
as wages fall—or, to use the phrase of mill, by the
cost of labor to the capitalist.
the bringing together of these current statements of
the laws of the distribution of wealth shows at a glance
that they lack the relation to each other which the true
laws of distribution must have. they do not correlate
and co-ordinate. hence, at least two of these three laws
are either wrongly apprehended or wrongly stated. this
tallies with what we have already seen, that the current
apprehension of the law of wages, and, inferentially, of
the law of interest, will not bear examination. let us,
then, seek the true laws of the distribution of the produce
of labor into wages, rent, and interest. the proof
that we have found them will be in their correlation—that
they meet, and relate, and mutually bound each
other.
with profits this inquiry has manifestly nothing to do.
we want to find what it is that determines the division
of their joint produce between land, labor, and capital;
and profits is not a term that refers exclusively to any
one of these three divisions. of the three parts into
which profits are divided by political economists—namely,
compensation for risk, wages of superintendence,
and return for the use of capital—the latter falls under
the term interest, which includes all the returns for the
use of capital, and excludes everything else; wages of superintendence
falls under the term wages, which includes
all returns for human exertion, and excludes everything
else; and compensation for risk has no place whatever, as
risk is eliminated when all the transactions of a community
are taken together. i shall, therefore, consistently
with the definitions of political economists, use the term
interest as signifying that part of the produce which goes
to capital.
to recapitulate:
land, labor, and capital are the factors of production.
the term land includes all natural opportunities or
forces; the term labor, all human exertion; and the term
capital, all wealth used to produce more wealth. in returns
to these three factors is the whole produce distributed.
that part which goes to land owners as payment
for the use of natural opportunities is called rent;
that part which constitutes the reward of human exertion
is called wages; and that part which constitutes the
return for the use of capital is called interest. these
terms mutually exclude each other. the income of any
individual may be made up from any one, two, or all
three of these sources; but in the effort to discover the
laws of distribution we must keep them separate.
let me premise the inquiry which we are about to undertake
by saying that the miscarriage of political economy,
which i think has now been abundantly shown, can,
it seems to me, be traced to the adoption of an erroneous
standpoint. living and making their observations in a
state of society in which a capitalist generally rents land
and hires labor, and thus seems to be the undertaker or
first mover in production, the great cultivators of the
science have been led to look upon capital as the prime
factor in production, land as its instrument, and labor
as its agent or tool. this is apparent on every page—in
the form and course of their reasoning, in the character
of their illustrations, and even in their choice of terms.
everywhere capital is the starting point, the capitalist
the central figure. so far does this go that both smith
and ricardo use the term “natural wages” to express the
minimum upon which laborers can live; whereas, unless
injustice is natural, all that the laborer produces should
rather be held as his natural wages. this habit of looking
upon capital as the employer of labor has led both to
the theory that wages depend upon the relative abundance
of capital, and to the theory that interest varies
inversely with wages, while it has led away from truths
that but for this habit would have been apparent. in
short, the misstep which, so far as the great laws of distribution
are concerned, has led political economy into
the jungles, instead of upon the mountain tops, was
taken when adam smith, in his first book, left the
standpoint indicated in the sentence, “the produce of
labor constitutes the natural recompense or wages of
labor,” to take that in which capital is considered as
employing labor and paying wages.
but when we consider the origin and natural sequence
of things, this order is reversed; and capital instead of
first is last; instead of being the employer of labor, it is
in reality employed by labor. there must be land before
labor can be exerted, and labor must be exerted
before capital can be produced. capital is a result of
labor, and is used by labor to assist it in further production.
labor is the active and initial force, and labor is
therefore the employer of capital. labor can be exerted
only upon land, and it is from land that the matter
which it transmutes into wealth must be drawn. land
therefore is the condition precedent, the field and material
of labor. the natural order is land, labor, capital;
and, instead of starting from capital as our initial point,
we should start from land.
there is another thing to be observed. capital is not
a necessary factor in production. labor exerted upon
land can produce wealth without the aid of capital, and
in the necessary genesis of things must so produce
wealth before capital can exist. therefore the law of
rent and the law of wages must correlate each other and
form a perfect whole without reference to the law of
capital, as otherwise these laws would not fit the cases
which can readily be imagined, and which to some degree
actually exist, in which capital takes no part in production.
and as capital is, as is often said, but stored-up
labor, it is but a form of labor, a subdivision of the general
term labor; and its law must be subordinate to, and
independently correlate with, the law of wages, so as to
fit cases in which the whole produce is divided between
labor and capital, without any deduction for rent. to
resort to the illustration before used: the division of the
produce between land, labor and capital must be as it
would be between tom, dick, and harry, if tom and
dick were the original partners, and harry came in but
as an assistant to and sharer with dick.
the term rent, in its economic sense—that is, when
used, as i am using it, to distinguish that part of the
produce which accrues to the owners of land or other
natural capabilities by virtue of their ownership—differs
in meaning from the word rent as commonly used. in
some respects this economic meaning is narrower than
the common meaning; in other respects it is wider.
it is narrower in this: in common speech, we apply
the word rent to payments for the use of buildings, machinery,
fixtures, etc., as well as to payments for the use
of land or other natural capabilities; and in speaking of
the rent of a house or the rent of a farm, we do not
separate the price for the use of the improvements from
the price for the use of the bare land. but in the economic
meaning of rent, payments for the use of any of the
products of human exertion are excluded, and of the
lumped payments for the use of houses, farms, etc., only
that part is rent which constitutes the consideration for
the use of the land—that part paid for the use of buildings
or other improvements being properly interest, as it
is a consideration for the use of capital.
it is wider in this: in common speech we speak of rent
only when owner and user are distinct persons. but in
the economic sense there is also rent where the same person
is both owner and user. where owner and user are
thus the same person, whatever part of his income he
might obtain by letting the land to another is rent, while
the return for his labor and capital are that part of his
income which they would yield him did he hire instead
of owning the land. rent is also expressed in a selling
price. when land is purchased, the payment which is
made for the ownership, or right to perpetual use, is rent
commuted or capitalized. if i buy land for a small price
and hold it until i can sell it for a large price, i have
become rich, not by wages for my labor or by interest
upon my capital, but by the increase of rent. rent, in
short, is the share in the wealth produced which the exclusive
right to the use of natural capabilities gives to
the owner. wherever land has an exchange value there
is rent in the economic meaning of the term. wherever
land having a value is used, either by owner or hirer,
there is rent actual; wherever it is not used, but still has
a value, there is rent potential. it is this capacity of
yielding rent which gives value to land. until its ownership
will confer some advantage, land has no value.
thus rent or land value does not arise from the productiveness
or utility of land. it in no wise represents
any help or advantage given to production, but simply
the power of securing apart of the results of production.
no matter what are its capabilities, land can yield no
rent and have no value until some one is willing to give
labor or the results of labor for the privilege of using it;
and what any one will thus give depends not upon the
capacity of the land, but upon its capacity as compared
with that of land that can be had for nothing. i may
have very rich land, but it will yield no rent and have no
value so long as there is other land as good to be had
without cost. but when this other land is appropriated,
and the best land to be had for nothing is inferior, either
in fertility, situation, or other quality, my land will begin
to have a value and yield rent. and though the productiveness
of my land may decrease, yet if the productiveness
of the land to be had without charge decreases
in greater proportion, the rent i can get, and consequently
the value of my land, will steadily increase.
rent, in short, is the price of monopoly, arising from the
reduction to individual ownership of natural elements
which human exertion can neither produce nor increase.
if one man owned all the land accessible to any community,
he could, of course, demand any price or condition
for its use that he saw fit; and, as long as his ownership
was acknowledged, the other members of the community
would have but death or emigration as the alternative
to submission to his terms. this has been the
case in many communities; but in the modern form of
society, the land, though generally reduced to individual
ownership, is in the hands of too many different persons
to permit the price which can be obtained for its
use to be fixed by mere caprice or desire. while each
individual owner tries to get all he can, there is a limit
to what he can get, which constitutes the market price
or market rent of the land, and which varies with different
lands and at different times. the law, or relation,
which, under these circumstances of free competition
among all parties, the condition which in tracing out the
principles of political economy is always to be assumed,
determines what rent or price can be got by the owner,
is styled the law of rent. this fixed with certainty, we
have more than a starting point from which the laws
which regulate wages and interest may be traced. for,
as the distribution of wealth is a division, in ascertaining
what fixes the share of the produce which goes as rent,
we also ascertain what fixes the share which is left for
wages, where there is no co-operation of capital; and what
fixes the joint share left for wages and interest, where
capital does co-operate in production.
fortunately, as to the law of rent there is no necessity
for discussion. authority here coincides with common
sense, and the accepted dictum of the current political
economy has the self-evident character of a geometric
axiom. this accepted law of rent, which john stuart
mill denominates the pons asinorum of political economy,
is sometimes styled “ricardo’s law of rent,” from the
fact that, although not the first to announce it, he first
brought it prominently into notice. it is:
the rent of land is determined by the excess of its
produce over that which the same application can secure
from the least productive land in use.
this law, which of course applies to land used for
other purposes than agriculture, and to all natural
agencies, such as mines, fisheries, etc., has been exhaustively
explained and illustrated by all the leading economists
since ricardo. but its mere statement has all the
force of a self-evident proposition, for it is clear that the
effect of competition is to make the lowest reward for
which labor and capital will engage in production, the
highest that they can claim; and hence to enable the
owner of more productive land to appropriate in rent all
the return above that required to recompense labor and
capital at the ordinary rate—that is to say, what they can
obtain upon the least productive land in use, or at the
least productive point, where, of course, no rent is paid.
perhaps it may conduce to a fuller understanding of
the law of rent to put it in this form: the ownership of
a natural agent of production will give the power of appropriating
so much of the wealth produced by the exertion
of labor and capital upon it as exceeds the return
which the same application of labor and capital could
secure in the least productive occupation in which they
freely engage.
this, however, amounts to precisely the same thing,
for there is no occupation in which labor and capital can
engage which does not require the use of land; and, furthermore,
the cultivation or other use of land will always
be carried to as low a point of remuneration, all things
considered, as is freely accepted in any other pursuit.
suppose, for instance, a community in which part of the
labor and capital is devoted to agriculture and part to
manufactures. the poorest land cultivated yields an
average return which we will call , and  therefore
will be the average return to labor and capital, as
well in manufactures as in agriculture. suppose that
from some permanent cause the return in manufactures
is now reduced to . clearly, the labor and capital
engaged in manufactures will turn to agriculture; and
the process will not stop until, either by the extension of
cultivation to inferior lands or to inferior points on the
same land, or by an increase in the relative value of manufactured
products, owing to the diminution of production—or,
as a matter of fact, by both processes—the yield
to labor and capital in both pursuits has, all things considered,
been brought again to the same level, so that
whatever be the final point of productiveness at which
manufactures are still carried on, whether it be 
or  or , cultivation will also be extended to that
point. and, thus, to say that rent will be the excess
in productiveness over the yield at the margin, or
lowest point, of cultivation, is the same thing as to say
that it will be the excess of produce over what the same
amount of labor and capital obtains in the least remunerative
occupation.
the law of rent is, in fact, but a deduction from the
law of competition, and amounts simply to the assertion
that as wages and interest tend to a common level, all
that part of the general production of wealth which exceeds
what the labor and capital employed could have
secured for themselves, if applied to the poorest natural
agent in use, will go to land owners in the shape of rent.
it rests, in the last analysis, upon the fundamental principle,
which is to political economy what the attraction
of gravitation is to physics—that men will seek to gratify
their desires with the least exertion.
this, then, is the law of rent. although many standard
treatises follow too much the example of ricardo,
who seems to view it merely in its relation to agriculture,
and in several places speaks of manufactures yielding no
rent, when, in truth, manufactures and exchange yield
the highest rents, as is evinced by the greater value of
land in manufacturing and commercial cities, thus hiding
the full importance of the law, yet, ever since the
time of ricardo, the law itself has been clearly apprehended
and fully recognized. but not so its corollaries.
plain as they are, the accepted doctrine of wages (backed
and fortified not only as has been hitherto explained,
but by considerations whose enormous weight will be seen
when the logical conclusion toward which we are tending
is reached) has hitherto prevented their recognition.
yet, is it not as plain as the simplest geometrical demonstration,
that the corollary of the law of rent is the law
of wages, where the division of the produce is simply between
rent and wages; or the law of wages and interest
taken together, where the division is into rent, wages,
and interest? stated reversely, the law of rent is necessarily
the law of wages and interest taken together, for
it is the assertion, that no matter what be the production
which results from the application of labor and capital,
these two factors will receive in wages and interest only
such part of the produce as they could have produced on
land free to them without the payment of rent—that is,
the least productive land or point in use. for, if, of the
produce, all over the amount which labor and capital
could secure from land for which no rent is paid must go
to land owners as rent, then all that can be claimed by
labor and capital as wages and interest is the amount
which they could have secured from land yielding no rent.
or to put it in algebraic form:
as produce = rent + wages + interest,
therefore, produce-rent = wages + interest.
thus wages and interest do not depend upon the produce
of labor and capital, but upon what is left after
rent is taken out; or, upon the produce which they could
obtain without paying rent—that is, from the poorest
land in use. and hence, no matter what be the increase
in productive power, if the increase in rent keeps pace
with it, neither wages nor interest can increase.
the moment this simple relation is recognized, a flood
of light streams in upon what was before inexplicable,
and seemingly discordant facts range themselves under
an obvious law. the increase of rent which goes on in
progressive countries is at once seen to be the key which
explains why wages and interest fail to increase with increase
of productive power. for the wealth produced
in every community is divided into two parts by what
may be called the rent line, which is fixed by the margin
of cultivation, or the return which labor and capital could
obtain from such natural opportunities as are free to
them without the payment of rent. from the part of
the produce below this line wages and interest must be
paid. all that is above goes to the owners of land.
thus, where the value of land is low, there may be a
small production of wealth, and yet a high rate of wages
and interest, as we see in new countries. and, where the
value of land is high, there may be a very large production
of wealth, and yet a low rate of wages and interest,
as we see in old countries. and, where productive power
increases, as it is increasing in all progressive countries,
wages and interest will be affected, not by the increase,
but by the manner in which rent is affected. if the
value of land increases proportionately, all the increased
production will be swallowed up by rent, and wages and
interest will remain as before. if the value of land increases
in greater ratio than productive power, rent will
swallow up even more than the increase; and while the
produce of labor and capital will be much larger, wages
and interest will fall. it is only when the value of land
fails to increase as rapidly as productive power, that wages
and interest can increase with the increase of productive
power. all this is exemplified in actual fact.
having made sure of the law of rent, we have obtained
as its necessary corollary the law of wages, where
the division is between rent and wages; and the law of
wages and interest taken together, where the division is
between the three factors. what proportion of the produce
is taken as rent must determine what proportion is
left for wages, if but land and labor are concerned; or to
be divided between wages and interest, if capital joins in
the production.
but without reference to this deduction, let us seek
each of these laws separately and independently. if,
when obtained in this way, we find that they correlate,
our conclusions will have the highest certainty.
and, inasmuch as the discovery of the law of wages is
the ultimate purpose of our inquiry, let us take up first
the subject of interest.
i have already referred to the difference in meaning
between the terms profits and interest. it may be worth
while, further, to say that interest, as an abstract term in
the distribution of wealth, differs in meaning from the
word as commonly used, in this: that it includes all returns
for the use of capital, and not merely those that
pass from borrower to lender; and that it excludes compensation
for risk, which forms so great a part of what is
commonly called interest. compensation for risk is evidently
only an equalization of return between different
employments of capital. what we want to find is, what
fixes the general rate of interest proper? the different
rates of compensation for risk added to this will give the
current rates of commercial interest.
now, it is evident that the greatest differences in what
is ordinarily called interest are due to differences in risk;
but it is also evident that between different countries and
different times there are also considerable variations in
the rate of interest proper. in california at one time
two per cent. a month would not have been considered
extravagant interest on security on which loans could
now be effected at seven or eight per cent. per annum,
and though some part of the difference may be due to an
increased sense of general stability, the greater part is
evidently due to some other general cause. in the
united states generally the rate of interest has been
higher than in england; and in the newer states of the
union higher than in the older states; and the tendency
of interest to sink as society progresses is well marked
and has long been noticed. what is the law which will
bind all these variations together and exhibit their cause?
it is not worth while to dwell more than has hitherto
incidentally been done upon the failure of the current
political economy to determine the true law of interest.
its speculations upon this subject have not the definiteness
and coherency which have enabled the accepted doctrine
of wages to withstand the evidence of fact, and do
not require the same elaborate review. that they run
counter to the facts is evident. that interest does not
depend on the productiveness of labor and capital is
proved by the general fact that where labor and capital
are most productive interest is lowest. that it does not
depend reversely upon wages (or the cost of labor), lowering
as wages rise, and increasing as wages fall, is proved
by the general fact that interest is high when and where
wages are high, and low when and where wages are low.
let us begin at the beginning. the nature and functions
of capital have already been sufficiently shown, but
even at the risk of something like a digression, let us
endeavor to ascertain the cause of interest before considering
its law. for in addition to aiding our inquiry by
giving us a firmer and clearer grasp of the subject now
in hand, it may lead to conclusions whose practical importance
will be hereafter apparent.
what is the reason and justification of interest? why
should the borrower pay back to the lender more than
he received? these questions are worth answering, not
merely from their speculative, but from their practical
importance. the feeling that interest is the robbery of
industry is widespread and growing, and on both sides of
the atlantic shows itself more and more in popular literature
and in popular movements. the expounders of
the current political economy say that there is no conflict
between labor and capital, and oppose as injurious to
labor, as well as to capital, all schemes for restricting the
reward which capital obtains; yet in the same works the
doctrine is laid down that wages and interest bear to each
other an inverse relation, and that interest will be low or
high as wages are high or low. clearly, then, if this
doctrine is correct, the only objection that from the
standpoint of the laborer can be logically made to any
scheme for the reduction of interest is that it will not
work, which is manifestly very weak ground while ideas
of the omnipotence of legislatures are yet so widespread;
and though such an objection may lead to the abandonment
of any one particular scheme, it will not prevent
the search for another.
why should interest be? interest, we are told, in all
the standard works, is the reward of abstinence. but,
manifestly, this does not sufficiently account for it. abstinence
is not an active, but a passive quality; it is not a
doing—it is simply a not doing. abstinence in itself
produces nothing. why, then, should any part of what
is produced be claimed for it? if i have a sum of money
which i lock up for a year, i have exercised as much abstinence
as though i had loaned it. yet, though in the
latter case i will expect it to be returned to me with an
additional sum by way of interest, in the former i will
have but the same sum, and no increase. but the abstinence
is the same. if it be said that in lending it i
do the borrower a service, it may be replied that he also
does me a service in keeping it safely—a service that
under some conditions may be very valuable, and for
which i would willingly pay, rather than not have it;
and a service which, as to some forms of capital, may be
even more obvious than as to money. for there are
many forms of capital which will not keep, but must be
constantly renewed; and many which are onerous to
maintain if one has no immediate use for them. so, if
the accumulator of capital helps the user of capital by
loaning it to him, does not the user discharge the debt
in full when he hands it back? is not the secure preservation,
the maintenance, the re-creation of capital, a
complete offset to the use? accumulation is the end
and aim of abstinence. abstinence can go no further
and accomplish no more; nor of itself can it even do
this. if we were merely to abstain from using it, how
much wealth would disappear in a year! and how little
would be left at the end of two years! hence, if more is
demanded for abstinence than the safe return of capital,
is not labor wronged? such ideas as these underlie the
widespread opinion that interest can accrue only at the
expense of labor, and is in fact a robbery of labor which
in a social condition based on justice would be abolished.
the attempts to refute these views do not appear to me
always successful. for instance, as it illustrates the
usual reasoning, take bastiat’s oft-quoted illustration of
the plane. one carpenter, james, at the expense of
ten days’ labor, makes himself a plane, which will last
in use for  of the  working days of the year.
william, another carpenter, proposes to borrow the
plane for a year, offering to give back at the end of
that time, when the plane will be worn out, a new
plane equally as good. james objects to lending the
plane on these terms, urging that if he merely gets back
a plane he will have nothing to compensate him for the
loss of the advantage which the use of the plane during
the year would give him. william, admitting this,
agrees not merely to return a plane, but, in addition, to
give james a new plank. the agreement is carried out
to mutual satisfaction. the plane is used up during the
year, but at the end of the year james receives as good
a one, and a plank in addition. he lends the new plane
again and again, until finally it passes into the hands of
his son, “who still continues to lend it,” receiving a
plank each time. this plank, which represents interest,
is said to be a natural and equitable remuneration, as by
giving it in return for the use of the plane, william
“obtains the power which exists in the tool to increase
the productiveness of labor,” and is no worse off than he
would have been had he not borrowed the plane; while
james obtains no more than he would have had if he had
retained and used the plane instead of lending it.
is this really so? it will be observed that it is not
affirmed that james could make the plane and william
could not, for that would be to make the plank the reward
of superior skill. it is only that james had abstained
from consuming the result of his labor until he
had accumulated it in the form of a plane—which is the
essential idea of capital.
now, if james had not lent the plane he could have
used it for  days, when it would have been worn out,
and he would have been obliged to take the remaining
ten days of the working year to make a new plane. if
william had not borrowed the plane he would have taken
ten days to make himself a plane, which he could have
used for the remaining  days. thus, if we take a
plank to represent the fruits of a day’s labor with the
aid of a plane, at the end of the year, had no borrowing
taken place, each would have stood with reference to the
plane as he commenced, james with a plane, and william
with none, and each would have had as the result of the
year’s work  planks. if the condition of the borrowing
had been what william first proposed, the return of
a new plane, the same relative situation would have been
secured. william would have worked for  days, and
taken the last ten days to make the new plane to return
to james. james would have taken the first ten days of
the year to make another plane which would have lasted
for  days, when he would have received a new plane
from william. thus, the simple return of the plane
would have put each in the same position at the end of
the year as if no borrowing had taken place. james
would have lost nothing to the gain of william, and william
would have gained nothing to the loss of james.
each would have had the return his labor would otherwise
have yielded—viz.,  planks, and james would
have had the advantage with which he started, a new
plane.
but when, in addition to the return of a plane, a
plank is given, james at the end of the year will be in a
better position than if there had been no borrowing, and
william in a worse. james will have  planks and a
new plane, and william  planks and no plane. if
william now borrows the plank as well as the plane on the
same terms as before, he will at the end of the year have
to return to james a plane, two planks and a fraction
of a plank; and if this difference be again borrowed, and
so on, is it not evident that the income of the one will
progressively decline, and that of the other will progressively
increase, until at length, if the operation be continued,
the time will come when, as the result of the
original lending of a plane, james will obtain the whole
result of william’s labor—that is to say, william will become
virtually his slave?
is interest, then, natural and equitable? there is
nothing in this illustration to show it to be. evidently
what bastiat (and many others) assigns as the basis of
interest, “the power which exists in the tool to increase
the productiveness of labor,” is neither in justice nor in
fact the basis of interest. the fallacy which makes
bastiat’s illustration pass as conclusive with those who
do not stop to analyze it, as we have done, is that with
the loan of the plane they associate the transfer of the
increased productive power which a plane gives to labor.
but this is really not involved. the essential thing
which james loaned to william was not the increased
power which labor acquires from using planes. to suppose
this, we should have to suppose that the making
and using of planes was a trade secret or a patent right,
when the illustration would become one of monopoly,
not of capital. the essential thing which james loaned
to william was not the privilege of applying his labor in
a more effective way, but the use of the concrete result of
ten days’ labor. if “the power which exists in tools to
increase the productiveness of labor” were the cause of
interest, then the rate of interest would increase with
the march of invention. this is not so. nor yet will i
be expected to pay more interest if i borrow a fifty-dollar
sewing machine than if i borrow fifty dollars’ worth of
needles; if i borrow a steam engine than if i borrow a
pile of bricks of equal value. capital, like wealth, is
interchangeable. it is not one thing; it is anything to
that value within the circle of exchange. nor yet does
the improvement of tools add to the reproductive power
of capital; it adds to the productive power of labor.
and i am inclined to think that if all wealth consisted
of such things as planes, and all production was such as
that of carpenters—that is to say, if wealth consisted but
of the inert matter of the universe, and production of
working up this inert matter into different shapes, that
interest would be but the robbery of industry, and could
not long exist. this is not to say that there would be no
accumulation, for though the hope of increase is a
motive for turning wealth into capital, it is not the
motive, or, at least, not the main motive, for accumulating.
children will save their pennies for christmas;
pirates will add to their buried treasure; eastern princes
will accumulate hoards of coin; and men like stewart or
vanderbilt, having become once possessed of the passion
of accumulating, would continue as long as they could to
add to their millions, even though accumulation brought
no increase. nor yet is it to say that there would be no
borrowing or lending, for this, to a large extent, would
be prompted by mutual convenience. if william had a
job of work to be immediately begun and james one that
would not commence until ten days thereafter, there
might be a mutual advantage in the loan of the plane,
though no plank should be given.
but all wealth is not of the nature of planes, or planks,
or money, which has no reproductive power; nor is all
production merely the turning into other forms of this
inert matter of the universe. it is true that if i put
away money, it will not increase. but suppose, instead,
i put away wine. at the end of a year i will have an
increased value, for the wine will have improved in
quality. or supposing that in a country adapted to
them, i set out bees; at the end of a year i will have
more swarms of bees, and the honey which they have
made. or, supposing, where there is a range, i turn out
sheep, or hogs, or cattle; at the end of the year i will,
upon the average, also have an increase.
now what gives the increase in these cases is something
which, though it generally requires labor to utilize
it, is yet distinct and separable from labor—the active
power of nature; the principle of growth, of reproduction,
which everywhere characterizes all the forms of
that mysterious thing or condition which we call life.
and it seems to me that it is this which is the cause of
interest, or the increase of capital over and above that
due to labor. there are, so to speak, in the movements
which make up the everlasting flux of nature, certain
vital currents, which will, if we use them, aid us, with a
force independent of our own efforts, in turning matter
into the forms we desire—that is to say, into wealth.
while many things might be mentioned which, like
money, or planes, or planks, or engines, or clothing,
have no innate power of increase, yet other things are
included in the terms wealth and capital which, like
wine, will of themselves increase in quality up to a certain
point; or, like bees or cattle, will of themselves increase
in quantity; and certain other things, such as
seeds, which, though the conditions which enable them
to increase may not be maintained without labor, yet
will, when these conditions are maintained, yield an increase,
or give a return over and above that which is to
be attributed to labor.
now the interchangeability of wealth necessarily involves
an average between all the species of wealth of
any special advantage which accrues from the possession
of any particular species, for no one would keep capital
in one form when it could be changed into a more advantageous
form. no one, for instance, would grind
wheat into flour and keep it on hand for the convenience
of those who desire from time to time to exchange wheat
or its equivalent for flour, unless he could by such exchange
secure an increase equal to that which, all things
considered, he could secure by planting his wheat. no
one, if he could keep them, would exchange a flock of
sheep now for their net weight in mutton to be returned
next year; for by keeping the sheep he would not only
have the same amount of mutton next year, but also the
lambs and the fleeces. no one would dig an irrigating
ditch, unless those who by its aid are enabled to utilize
the reproductive forces of nature would give him such
a portion of the increase they receive as to make his capital
yield him as much as theirs. and so, in any circle
of exchange, the power of increase which the reproductive
or vital force of nature gives to some species of
capital must average with all; and he who lends, or uses
in exchange, money, or planes, or bricks, or clothing, is
not deprived of the power to obtain an increase, any
more than if he had lent or put to a reproductive use so
much capital in a form capable of increase.
there is also in the utilization of the variations in the
powers of nature and of man which is effected by exchange,
an increase which somewhat resembles that produced
by the vital forces of nature. in one place, for
instance, a given amount of labor will secure  in
vegetable food or  in animal food. in another place,
these conditions are reversed, and the same amount of
labor will produce  in vegetable food or  in animal.
in the one place, the relative value of vegetable
to animal food will be as two to one, and in the other as
one to two; and, supposing equal amounts of each to be required,
the same amount of labor will in either place secure
 of both. but by devoting labor in the one place to
the procurement of vegetable food, and in the other, to
the procurement of animal food, and exchanging to the
quantity required, the people of each place will be enabled
by the given amount of labor to procure 
of both, less the losses and expenses of exchange; so
that in each place the produce which is taken from
use and devoted to exchange brings back an increase.
thus whittington’s cat, sent to a far country where cats
are scarce and rats are plenty, returns in bales of goods
and bags of gold.
of course, labor is necessary to exchange, as it is to
the utilization of the reproductive forces of nature, and
the produce of exchange, as the produce of agriculture,
is clearly the produce of labor; but yet, in the one case
as in the other, there is a distinguishable force cooperating
with that of labor, which makes it impossible to
measure the result solely by the amount of labor expended,
but renders the amount of capital and the time
it is in use integral parts in the sum of forces. capital
aids labor in all of the different modes of production, but
there is a distinction between the relations of the two in
such modes of production as consist merely of changing
the form or place of matter, as planing boards or mining
coal; and such modes of production as avail themselves
of the reproductive forces of nature, or of the power
of increase arising from differences in the distribution
of natural and human powers, such as the raising of
grain or the exchange of ice for sugar. in production
of the first kind, labor alone is the efficient cause; when
labor stops, production stops. when the carpenter
drops his plane as the sun sets, the increase of value,
which he with his plane is producing, ceases until he begins
his labor again the following morning. when the
factory bell rings for closing, when the mine is shut
down, production ends until work is resumed. the intervening
time, so far as regards production, might as
well be blotted out. the lapse of days, the change of
seasons is no element in the production that depends
solely upon the amount of labor expended. but in the
other modes of production to which i have referred, and
in which the part of labor may be likened to the operations
of lumbermen who throw their logs into the
stream, leaving it to the current to carry them to the
boom of the sawmill many miles below, time is an element.
the seed in the ground germinates and grows
while the farmer sleeps or plows new fields, and the everflowing
currents of air and ocean bear whittington’s cat
toward the rat-tormented ruler in the regions of romance.
to recur now to bastiat’s illustration. it is evident
that if there is any reason why william at the end of the
year should return to james more than an equally good
plane, it does not spring, as bastiat has it, from the increased
power which the tool gives to labor, for that, as i
have shown, is not an element; but it springs from the
element of time—the difference of a year between the
lending and return of the plane. now, if the view is
confined to the illustration, there is nothing to suggest
how this element should operate, for a plane at the end
of the year has no greater value than a plane at the beginning.
but if we substitute for the plane a calf, it is
clearly to be seen that to put james in as good a position
as if he had not lent, william at the end of the year
must return, not a calf, but a cow. or, if we suppose
that the ten days’ labor had been devoted to planting
corn, it is evident that james would not have been fully
recompensed if at the end of the year he had received
simply so much planted corn, for during the year the
planted corn would have germinated and grown and multiplied;
and so if the plane had been devoted to exchange,
it might during the year have been turned over
several times, each exchange yielding an increase to
james. now, therefore, as james’ labor might have
been applied in any of those ways—or what amounts to
the same thing, some of the labor devoted to making
planes might have been thus transferred—he will not
make a plane for william to use for the year unless he
gets back more than a plane. and william can afford to
give back more than a plane, because the same general
average of the advantages of labor applied in different
modes will enable him to obtain from his labor an advantage
from the element of time. it is this general
averaging, or as we may say, “pooling” of advantages,
which necessarily takes place where the exigencies of
society require the simultaneous carrying on of the different
modes of production, which gives to the possession of
wealth incapable in itself of increase an advantage similar
to that which attaches to wealth used in such a way
as to gain from the element of time. and, in the last
analysis, the advantage which is given by the lapse of
time springs from the generative force of nature and the
varying powers of nature and of man.
were the quality and capacity of matter everywhere
uniform, and all productive power in man, there would
be no interest. the advantage of superior tools might
at times be transferred on terms resembling the payment
of interest, but such transactions would be irregular and
intermittent—the exception, not the rule. for the power
of obtaining such returns would not, as now, inhere in
the possession of capital, and the advantage of time
would operate only in peculiar circumstances. that i,
having a thousand dollars, can certainly let it out at interest,
does not arise from the fact that there are others,
not having a thousand dollars, who will gladly pay me
for the use of it, if they can get it no other way; but
from the fact that the capital which my thousand dollars
represents has the power of yielding an increase to
whomsoever has it, even though he be a millionaire.
for the price which anything will bring does not depend
upon what the buyer would be willing to give rather than
go without it, so much as upon what the seller can otherwise
get. for instance, a manufacturer who wishes to
retire from business has machinery to the value of $,.
if he cannot, should he sell, take this $,
and invest it so that it will yield him interest, it will
be immaterial to him, risk being eliminated, whether he
obtains the whole price at once or in installments, and if
the purchaser has the requisite capital, which we must
suppose in order that the transaction may rest on its own
merits, it will be immaterial whether he pay at once or
after a time. if the purchaser has not the required capital,
it may be to his convenience that payments should be delayed,
but it would be only in exceptional circumstances
that the seller would ask, or the buyer would consent, to
pay any premium on this account; nor in such cases
would this premium be properly interest. for interest
is not properly a payment made for the use of capital,
but a return accruing from the increase of capital. if
the capital did not yield an increase, the cases would be
few and exceptional in which the owner would get a
premium. william would soon find out if it did not pay
him to give a plank for the privilege of deferring payment
on james’ plane.
in short, when we come to analyze production we find
it to fall into three modes—viz:
adapting, or changing natural products either in form
or in place so as to fit them for the satisfaction of human
desire.
growing, or utilizing the vital forces of nature, as by
raising vegetables or animals.
exchanging, or utilizing, so as to add to the general
sum of wealth, the higher powers of those natural forces
which vary with locality, or of those human forces which
vary with situation, occupation, or character.
in each of these three modes of production capital
may aid labor—or, to speak more precisely, in the first
mode capital may aid labor, but is not absolutely necessary;
in the others capital must aid labor, or is necessary.
now, while by adapting capital in proper forms we
may increase the effective power of labor to impress
upon matter the character of wealth, as when we adapt
wood and iron to the form and use of a plane; or iron,
coal, water, and oil to the form and use of a steam
engine; or stone, clay, timber, and iron to that of a
building, yet the characteristic of this use of capital is,
that the benefit is in the use. when, however, we employ
capital in the second of these modes, as when we
plant grain in the ground, or place animals on a stock
farm, or put away wine to improve with age, the benefit
arises, not from the use, but from the increase. and so,
when we employ capital in the third of these modes, and
instead of using a thing we exchange it, the benefit is in
the increase or greater value of the things received in
return.
primarily, the benefits which arise from use go to labor,
and the benefits which arise from increase, to capital.
but, inasmuch as the division of labor and the interchangeability
of wealth necessitate and imply an averaging
of benefits, in so far as these different modes of production
correlate with each other, the benefits that arise
from one will average with the benefits that arise from
the others, for neither labor nor capital will be devoted
to any mode of production while any other mode which
is open to them will yield a greater return. that is to
say, labor expended in the first mode of production will
get, not the whole return, but the return minus such part
as is necessary to give to capital such an increase as it
could have secured in the other modes of production, and
capital engaged in the second and third modes will obtain,
not the whole increase, but the increase minus what
is sufficient to give to labor such reward as it could have
secured if expended in the first mode.
thus interest springs from the power of increase which
the reproductive forces of nature, and the in effect analogous
capacity for exchange, give to capital. it is not
an arbitrary, but a natural thing; it is not the result of a
particular social organization, but of laws of the universe
which underlie society. it is, therefore, just.
they who talk about abolishing interest fall into an
error similar to that previously pointed out as giving its
plausibility to the doctrine that wages are drawn from
capital. when they thus think of interest, they think
only of that which is paid by the user of capital to the
owner of capital. but, manifestly, this is not all interest,
but only some interest. whoever uses capital and
obtains the increase it is capable of giving receives interest.
if i plant and care for a tree until it comes to
maturity, i receive, in its fruit, interest upon the capital
i have thus accumulated—that is, the labor i have expended.
if i raise a cow, the milk which she yields me,
morning and evening, is not merely the reward of the
labor then exerted; but interest upon the capital which
my labor, expended in raising her, has accumulated in
the cow. and so, if i use my own capital in directly aiding
production, as by machinery, or in indirectly aiding
production, in exchange, i receive a special and distinguishable
advantage from the reproductive character
of capital, which is as real, though perhaps not as clear,
as though i had lent my capital to another and he had
paid me interest.
the belief that interest is the robbery of industry is, i
am persuaded, in large part due to a failure to discriminate
between what is really capital and what is not, and
between profits which are properly interest and profits
which arise from other sources than the use of capital.
in the speech and literature of the day every one is
styled a capitalist who possesses what, independent of
his labor, will yield him a return, while whatever is thus
received is spoken of as the earnings or takings of capital,
and we everywhere hear of the conflict of labor and
capital. whether there is, in reality, any conflict between
labor and capital, i do not yet ask the reader to
make up his mind; but it will be well here to clear away
some misapprehensions which confuse the judgment.
attention has already been called to the fact that land
values, which constitute such an enormous part of what
is commonly called capital, are not capital at all; and
that rent, which is as commonly included in the receipts
of capital, and which takes an ever-increasing portion of
the produce of an advancing community, is not the earnings
of capital, and must be carefully separated from interest.
it is not necessary now to dwell further upon
this point. attention has likewise been called to the
fact that the stocks, bonds, etc., which constitute another
great part of what is commonly called capital,
are not capital at all; but, in some of their shapes, these
evidences of indebtedness so closely resemble capital,
and in some cases actually perform, or seem to perform,
the functions of capital, while they yield a return to their
owners which is not only spoken of as interest, but has
every semblance of interest, that it is worth while, before
attempting to clear the idea of interest from some other
ambiguities that beset it, to speak again of these at
greater length.
nothing can be capital, let it always be remembered,
that is not wealth—that is to say, nothing can be capital
that does not consist of actual, tangible things, not the
spontaneous offerings of nature, which have in themselves,
and not by proxy, the power of directly or indirectly
ministering to human desire.
thus, a government bond is not capital, nor yet is it
the representative of capital. the capital that was once
received for it by the government has been consumed unproductively—blown
away from the mouths of cannon,
used up in war ships, expended in keeping men marching
and drilling, killing and destroying. the bond cannot
represent capital that has been destroyed. it does
not represent capital at all. it is simply a solemn declaration
that the government will, some time or other,
take by taxation from the then existing stock of the people,
so much wealth, which it will turn over to the holder
of the bond; and that, in the meanwhile, it will, from
time to time, take, in the same way, enough to make up
to the holder the increase which so much capital as it
some day promises to give him would yield him were it
actually in his possession. the immense sums which are
thus taken from the produce of every modern country to
pay interest on public debts are not the earnings or increase
of capital—are not really interest in the strict
sense of the term, but are taxes levied on the produce of
labor and capital, leaving so much less for wages and so
much less for real interest.
but, supposing the bonds have been issued for the
deepening of a river bed, the construction of lighthouses,
or the erection of a public market; or supposing, to embody
the same idea while changing the illustration, they
have been issued by a railroad company. here they do
represent capital, existing and applied to productive
uses, and like stock in a dividend paying company may
be considered as evidences of the ownership of capital.
but they can be so considered only in so far as they actually
represent capital, and not as they have been issued
in excess of the capital used. nearly all our railroad
companies and other incorporations are loaded down in
this way. where one dollar’s worth of capital has been
really used, certificates for two, three, four, five, or even
ten, have been issued, and upon this fictitious amount
interest or dividends are paid with more or less regularity.
now, what, in excess of the amount due as interest
to the real capital invested, is thus earned by these
companies and thus paid out, as well as the large sums
absorbed by managing rings and never accounted for, is
evidently not taken from the aggregate produce of the
community on account of the services rendered by capital—it
is not interest. if we are restricted to the terminology
of economic writers who decompose profits into
interest, insurance, and wages of superintendence, it
must fall into the category of wages of superintendence.
but while wages of superintendence clearly enough
include the income derived from such personal qualities
as skill, tact, enterprise, organizing ability, inventive
power, character, etc., to the profits we are speaking of
there is another contributing element, which can only arbitrarily
be classed with these—the element of monopoly.
when james i. granted to his minion the exclusive
privilege of making gold and silver thread, and prohibited,
under severe penalties, every one else from making
such thread, the income which buckingham enjoyed in
consequence did not arise from the interest upon the
capital invested in the manufacture, nor from the skill,
etc., of those who really conducted the operations, but
from what he got from the king—viz., the exclusive
privilege—in reality the power to levy a tax for his own
purposes upon all the users of such thread. from a
similar source comes a large part of the profits which
are commonly confounded with the earnings of capital.
receipts from the patents granted for a limited term of
years for the purpose of encouraging invention are clearly
attributable to this source, as are the returns derived from
monopolies created by protective tariffs under the pretense
of encouraging home industry. but there is another
far more insidious and far more general form of
monopoly. in the aggregation of large masses of capital
under a common control there is developed a new and
essentially different power from that power of increase
which is a general characteristic of capital and which
gives rise to interest. while the latter is, so to speak,
constructive in its nature, the power which, as aggregation
proceeds, rises upon it is destructive. it is a power
of the same kind as that which james granted to buckingham,
and it is often exercised with as reckless a disregard,
not only of the industrial, but of the personal
rights of individuals. a railroad company approaches a
small town as a highwayman approaches his victim.
the threat, “if you do not accede to our terms we will
leave your town two or three miles to one side!” is as
efficacious as the “stand and deliver,” when backed by
a cocked pistol. for the threat of the railroad company
is not merely to deprive the town of the benefits which
the railroad might give; it is to put it in a far worse position
than if no railroad had been built. or if, where
there is water communication, an opposition boat is put
on; rates are reduced until she is forced off, and then
the public are compelled to pay the cost of the operation,
just as the rohillas were obliged to pay the forty lacs
with which surajah dowlah hired of warren hastings an
english force to assist him in desolating their country
and decimating their people. and just as robbers unite
to plunder in concert and divide the spoil, so do the
trunk lines of railroad unite to raise rates and pool their
earnings, or the pacific roads form a combination with
the pacific mail steamship company by which toll gates
are virtually established on land and ocean. and just as
buckingham’s creatures, under authority of the gold
thread patent, searched private houses, and seized papers
and persons for purposes of lust and extortion, so does
the great telegraph company which, by the power of associated
capital deprives the people of the united states
of the full benefits of a beneficent invention, tamper
with correspondence and crush out newspapers which
offend it.
it is necessary only to allude to these things, not to
dwell on them. every one knows the tyranny and
rapacity with which capital when concentrated in large
amounts is frequently wielded to corrupt, to rob, and to
destroy. what i wish to call the reader’s attention to is
that profits thus derived are not to be confounded with
the legitimate returns of capital as an agent of production.
they are for the most part to be attributed to a
maladjustment of forces in the legislative department of
government, and to a blind adherence to ancient barbarisms
and the superstitious reverence for the technicalities
of a narrow profession in the administration of law; while
the general cause which in advancing communities tends,
with the concentration of wealth, to the concentration
of power, is the solution of the great problem we are seeking
for, but have not yet found.
any analysis will show that much of the profits which
are, in common thought, confounded with interest are in
reality due, not to the power of capital, but to the
power of concentrated capital, or of concentrated capital
acting upon bad social adjustments. and it will also
show that what are clearly and properly wages of superintendence
are very frequently confounded with the
earnings of capital.
and, so, profits properly due to the elements of risk
are frequently confounded with interest. some people
acquire wealth by taking chances which to the majority
of people must necessarily bring loss. such are many
forms of speculation, and especially that mode of
gambling known as stock dealing. nerve, judgment,
the possession of capital, skill in what in lower forms of
gambling are known as the arts of the confidence man
and blackleg, give advantage to the individual; but,
just as at a gaming table, whatever one gains some one
else must lose.
now, taking the great fortunes that are so often referred
to as exemplifying the accumulative power of capital—the
dukes of westminster and marquises of bute,
the rothschilds, astors, stewarts, vanderbilts, goulds,
stanfords, and floods—it is upon examination readily
seen that they have been built up, in greater or less part,
not by interest, but by elements such as we have been
reviewing.
how necessary it is to note the distinctions to which i
have been calling attention is shown in current discussions,
where the shield seems alternately white or black
as the standpoint is shifted from one side to the other.
on the one hand we are called upon to see, in the existence
of deep poverty side by side with vast accumulations
of wealth, the aggressions of capital on labor, and
in reply it is pointed out that capital aids labor, and
hence we are asked to conclude that there is nothing
unjust or unnatural in the wide gulf between rich and
poor; that wealth is but the reward of industry, intelligence,
and thrift; and poverty but the punishment of
indolence, ignorance, and imprudence.
let us turn now to the law of interest, keeping in
mind two things to which attention has heretofore been
called—viz:
first—that it is not capital which employs labor, but
labor which employs capital.
second—that capital is not a fixed quantity, but can
always be increased or decreased, () by the greater or
less application of labor to the production of capital, and
() by the conversion of wealth into capital, or capital
into wealth, for capital being but wealth applied in a certain
way, wealth is the larger and inclusive term.
it is manifest that under conditions of freedom the
maximum that can be given for the use of capital will be
the increase it will bring, and the minimum or zero will
be the replacement of capital; for above the one point
the borrowing of capital would involve a loss, and below
the other, capital could not be maintained.
observe, again: it is not, as is carelessly stated by
some writers, the increased efficiency given to labor by
the adaptation of capital to any special form or use which
fixes this maximum, but the average power of increase
which belongs to capital generally. the power of applying
itself in advantageous forms is a power of labor,
which capital as capital cannot claim nor share. a bow
and arrows will enable an indian to kill, let us say, a
buffalo every day, while with sticks and stones he could
hardly kill one in a week; but the weapon maker of the
tribe could not claim from the hunter six out of every
seven buffaloes killed as a return for the use of a bow
and arrows; nor will capital invested in a woolen factory
yield to the capitalist the difference between the produce
of the factory and what the same amount of labor could
have obtained with the spinning-wheel and hand-loom.
william when he borrows a plane from james does not
in that obtain the advantage of the increased efficiency of
labor when using a plane for the smoothing of boards over
what it has when smoothing them with a shell or flint.
the progress of knowledge has made the advantage involved
in the use of planes a common property and power
of labor. what he gets from james is merely such advantage
as the element of a year’s time will give to the
possession of so much capital as is represented by the
plane.
now, if the vital forces of nature which give an advantage
to the element of time be the cause of interest,
it would seem to follow that this maximum rate of interest
would be determined by the strength of these forces
and the extent to which they are engaged in production.
but while the reproductive force of nature seems to vary
enormously, as, for instance, between the salmon, which
spawns thousands of eggs, and the whale, which brings
forth a single calf at intervals of years; between the rabbit
and the elephant, the thistle and the gigantic redwood,
it appears from the way the natural balance is
maintained that there is an equation between the reproductive
and destructive forces of nature, which in effect
brings the principle of increase to a uniform point. this
natural balance man has within narrow limits the power
to disturb, and by the modification of natural conditions
may avail himself at will of the varying strength of the
reproductive force in nature. but when he does so,
there arises from the wide scope of his desires another
principle which brings about in the increase of wealth a
similar equation and balance to that which is effected in
nature between the different forms of life. this equation
exhibits itself through values. if, in a country
adapted to both, i go to raising rabbits and you to raising
horses, my rabbits may, until the natural limit is
reached, increase faster than your horses. but my capital
will not increase faster, for the effect of the varying
rates of increase will be to lower the value of rabbits as
compared with horses, and to increase the value of horses
as compared with rabbits.
though the varying strength of the vital forces of
nature is thus brought to uniformity, there may be a difference
in the different stages of social development as to
the proportionate extent to which, in the aggregate production
of wealth, these vital forces are enlisted. but
as to this, there are two remarks to be made. in the
first place, although in such a country as england the
part taken by manufactures in the aggregate wealth production
has very much increased as compared with the
part taken by agriculture, yet it is to be noticed that to
a very great extent this is true only of the political or
geographical division, and not of the industrial community.
for industrial communities are not limited by
political divisions, or bounded by seas or mountains.
they are limited only by the scope of their exchanges,
and the proportion which in the industrial economy of
england agriculture and stock-raising bear to manufactures
is averaged with iowa and illinois, with texas and
california, with canada and india, with queensland and
the baltic—in short, with every country to which the
world-wide exchanges of england extend. in the next
place, it is to be remarked that although in the progress
of civilization the tendency is to the relative increase of
manufactures, as compared with agriculture, and consequently
to a proportionately less reliance upon the
reproductive forces of nature, yet this is accompanied
by a corresponding extension of exchanges, and hence a
greater calling in of the power of increase which thus
arises. so these tendencies, to a great extent, and, probably,
so far as we have yet gone, completely, balance each
other, and preserve the equilibrium which fixes the average
increase of capital, or the normal rate of interest.
now, this normal point of interest, which lies between
the necessary maximum and the necessary minimum of
the return to capital, must, wherever it rests, be such
that all things (such as the feeling of security, desire for
accumulation, etc.) considered, the reward of capital and
the reward of labor will be equal—that is to say, will give
an equally attractive result for the exertion or sacrifice
involved. it is impossible, perhaps, to formulate this
point, as wages are habitually estimated in quantity and
interest in a ratio; but if we suppose a given quantity of
wealth to be the produce of a given amount of labor, cooperating
for a stated time with a certain amount of
capital, the proportion in which the produce would be
divided between the labor and the capital would afford
a comparison. there must be such a point at, or rather,
about, which the rate of interest must tend to settle;
since, unless such an equilibrium were effected, labor
would not accept the use of capital, or capital would not
be placed at the disposal of labor. for labor and capital
are but different forms of the same thing—human exertion.
capital is produced by labor; it is, in fact, but
labor impressed upon matter—labor stored up in matter,
to be released again as needed, as the heat of the sun
stored up in coal is released in the furnace. the use of
capital in production is, therefore, but a mode of labor.
as capital can be used only by being consumed, its use
is the expenditure of labor, and for the maintenance of
capital, its production by labor must be commensurate
with its consumption in aid of labor. hence the principle
that, under circumstances which permit free competition,
operates to bring wages to a common standard
and profits to a substantial equality—the principle that
men will seek to gratify their desires with the least exertion—operates
to establish and maintain this equilibrium
between wages and interest.
this natural relation between interest and wages—this
equilibrium at which both will represent equal returns to
equal exertions—may be stated in a form which suggests
a relation of opposition; but this opposition is only apparent.
in a partnership between dick and harry, the
statement that dick receives a certain proportion of
the profits implies that the portion of harry is less or
greater as dick’s is greater or less; but where, as in this
case, each gets only what he adds to the common fund,
the increase of the portion of the one does not decrease
what the other receives.
and this relation fixed, it is evident that interest and
wages must rise and fall together, and that interest cannot
be increased without increasing wages; nor wages
lowered without depressing interest. for if wages fall,
interest must also fall in proportion, else it becomes
more profitable to turn labor into capital than to apply
it directly; while, if interest falls, wages must likewise
proportionately fall, or else the increment of capital
would be checked.
we are, of course, not speaking of particular wages
and particular interest, but of the general rate of wages
and the general rate of interest, meaning always by interest
the return which capital can secure, less insurance
and wages of superintendence. in a particular case, or
a particular employment, the tendency of wages and interest
to an equilibrium may be impeded; but between the
general rate of wages and the general rate of interest,
this tendency must be prompt to act. for though in a
particular branch of production the line may be clearly
drawn between those who furnish labor and those who
furnish capital, yet even in communities where there is
the sharpest distinction between the general class laborers
and the general class capitalists, these two classes
shade off into each other by imperceptible gradations,
and on the extremes where the two classes meet in the
same persons, the interaction which restores equilibrium,
or rather prevents its disturbance, can go on without obstruction,
whatever obstacles may exist where the separation
is complete. and, furthermore, it must be remembered,
as has before been stated, that capital is but a
portion of wealth, distinguished from wealth generally
only by the purpose to which it is applied, and, hence,
the whole body of wealth has upon the relations of capital
and labor the same equalizing effect that a fly-wheel
has upon the motion of machinery, taking up capital
when it is in excess and giving it out again when there
is a deficiency, just as a jeweler may give his wife diamonds
to wear when he has a superabundant stock, and
put them in his showcase again when his stock becomes
reduced. thus any tendency on the part of interest to
rise above the equilibrium with wages must immediately
beget not only a tendency to direct labor to the production
of capital, but also the application of wealth to the
uses of capital; while any tendency of wages to rise above
the equilibrium with interest must in like manner beget
not only a tendency to turn labor from the production of
capital, but also to lessen the proportion of capital by
diverting from a productive to a non-productive use
some of the articles of wealth of which capital is composed.
to recapitulate: there is a certain relation or ratio between
wages and interest, fixed by causes, which, if not
absolutely permanent, slowly change, at which enough
labor will be turned into capital to supply the capital
which, in the degree of knowledge, state of the arts,
density of population, character of occupations, variety,
extent and rapidity of exchanges, will be demanded for
production, and this relation or ratio the interaction of
labor and capital constantly maintains; hence interest
must rise and fall with the rise and fall of wages.
to illustrate: the price of flour is determined by the
price of wheat and cost of milling. the cost of milling
varies slowly and but little, the difference being, even at
long intervals, hardly perceptible; while the price of
wheat varies frequently and largely. hence we correctly
say that the price of flour is governed by the price of
wheat. or, to put the proposition in the same form as
the preceding: there is a certain relation or ratio between
the value of wheat and the value of flour, fixed by
the cost of milling, which relation or ratio the interaction
between the demand for flour and the supply of
wheat constantly maintains; hence the price of flour
must rise and fall with the rise and fall of the price of
wheat.
or, as, leaving the connecting link, the price of wheat,
to inference, we say that the price of flour depends upon
the character of the seasons, wars, etc., so may we put the
law of interest in a form which directly connects it with
the law of rent, by saying that the general rate of interest
will be determined by the return to capital upon the poorest
land to which capital is freely applied—that is to say,
upon the best land open to it without the payment of
rent. thus we bring the law of interest into a form
which shows it to be a corollary of the law of rent.
we may prove this conclusion in another way: for
that interest must decrease as rent increases, we can
plainly see if we eliminate wages. to do this, we must,
to be sure, imagine a universe organized on totally different
principles. nevertheless, we may imagine what
carlyle would call a fool’s paradise, where the production
of wealth went on without the aid of labor, and solely by
the reproductive force of capital—where sheep bore
ready-made clothing on their backs, cows presented butter
and cheese, and oxen, when they got to the proper
point of fatness, carved themselves into beefsteaks and
roasting ribs; where houses grew from the seed, and a
jackknife thrown upon the ground would take root and
in due time bear a crop of assorted cutlery. imagine
certain capitalists transported, with their capital in appropriate
forms, to such a place. manifestly, they would
get, as the return for their capital, the whole amount of
wealth it produced only so long as none of its produce
was demanded as rent. when rent arose, it would
come out of the produce of capital, and as it increased,
the return to the owners of capital must necessarily
diminish. if we imagine the place where capital possessed
this power of producing wealth without the aid of
labor to be of limited extent, say an island, we shall see
that as soon as capital had increased to the limit of the
island to support it, the return to capital must fall to a
trifle above its minimum of mere replacement, and the
land owners would receive nearly the whole produce as
rent, for the only alternative capitalists would have
would be to throw their capital into the sea. or, if we
imagine such an island to be in communication with the
rest of the world, the return to capital would settle at the
rate of return in other places. interest there would be
neither higher nor lower than anywhere else. rent would
obtain the whole of the superior advantage, and the
land of such an island would have a great value.
to sum up, the law of interest is this:
the relation between wages and interest is determined
by the average power of increase which attaches to capital
from its use in reproductive modes. as rent arises, interest
will fall as wages fall, or will be determined by the
margin of cultivation.
i have endeavored at this length to trace out and illustrate
the law of interest more in deference to the existing
terminology and modes of thought than from the real
necessities of our inquiry, were it unembarrassed by befogging
discussions. in truth, the primary division of
wealth in distribution is dual, not tripartite. capital is
but a form of labor, and its distinction from labor is in
reality but a subdivision, just as the division of labor into
skilled and unskilled would be. in our examination we
have reached the same point as would have been attained
had we simply treated capital as a form of labor, and
sought the law which divides the produce between rent
and wages; that is to say, between the possessors of the
two factors, natural substances and powers, and human
exertion—which two factors by their union produce all
wealth.
we have by inference already obtained the law of
wages. but to verify the deduction and to strip the
subject of all ambiguities, let us seek the law from an
independent starting point.
there is, of course, no such thing as a common rate of
wages, in the sense that there is at any given time and
place a common rate of interest. wages, which include
all returns received from labor, not only vary with the
differing powers of individuals, but, as the organization
of society becomes elaborate, vary largely as between
occupations. nevertheless, there is a certain general
relation between all wages, so that we express a clear and
well-understood idea when we say that wages are higher
or lower in one time or place than in another. in their
degrees, wages rise and fall in obedience to a common
law. what is this law?
the fundamental principle of human action—the law
that is to political economy what the law of gravitation
is to physics—is that men seek to gratify their desires
with the least exertion. evidently, this principle must
bring to an equality, through the competition it induces,
the reward gained by equal exertions under similar circumstances.
when men work for themselves, this
equalization will be largely affected by the equation of
prices; and between those who work for themselves and
those who work for others, the same tendency to equalization
will operate. now, under this principle, what, in
conditions of freedom, will be the terms at which one
man can hire others to work for him? evidently, they
will be fixed by what the men could make if laboring for
themselves. the principle which will prevent him from
having to give anything above this, except what is necessary
to induce the change, will also prevent them from
taking less. did they demand more, the competition of
others would prevent them from getting employment.
did he offer less, none would accept the terms, as they
could obtain greater results by working for themselves.
thus, although the employer wishes to pay as little as
possible, and the employee to receive as much as possible,
wages will be fixed by the value or produce of such
labor to the laborers themselves. if wages are temporarily
carried either above or below this line, a tendency
to carry them back at once arises.
but the result, or the earnings of labor, as is readily
seen in those primary and fundamental occupations in
which labor first engages, and which, even in the most
highly developed condition of society, still form the base
of production, does not depend merely upon the intensity
or quality of the labor itself. wealth is the product
of two factors, land and labor, and what a given amount
of labor will yield will vary with the powers of the
natural opportunities to which it is applied. this being
the case, the principle that men seek to gratify their desires
with the least exertion will fix wages at the produce
of such labor at the point of highest natural productiveness
open to it. now, by virtue of the same principle,
the highest point of natural productiveness open to
labor under existing conditions will be the lowest point
at which production continues, for men, impelled by a
supreme law of the human mind to seek the satisfaction
of their desires with the least exertion, will not expend
labor at a lower point of productiveness while a higher is
open to them. thus the wages which an employer must
pay will be measured by the lowest point of natural productiveness
to which production extends, and wages will
rise or fall as this point rises or falls.
to illustrate: in a simple state of society, each man,
as is the primitive mode, works for himself—some in
hunting, let us say, some in fishing, some in cultivating
the ground. cultivation, we will suppose, has just begun,
and the land in use is all of the same quality, yielding
a similar return to similar exertions. wages, therefore—for,
though there is neither employer nor employed,
there are yet wages—will be the full produce of
labor, and, making allowance for the difference of agreeableness,
risk, etc., in the three pursuits, they will be on
the average equal in each—that is to say, equal exertions
will yield equal results. now, if one of their number
wishes to employ some of his fellows to work for him instead
of for themselves, he must pay wages fixed by this
full, average produce of labor.
let a period of time elapse. cultivation has extended,
and, instead of land of the same quality, embraces
lands of different qualities. wages, now, will not
be as before, the average produce of labor. they will be
the average produce of labor at the margin of cultivation,
or the point of lowest return. for, as men seek to
satisfy their desires with the least possible exertion, the
point of lowest return in cultivation must yield to labor
a return equivalent to the average return in hunting and
fishing. labor will no longer yield equal returns to
equal exertions, but those who expend their labor on the
superior land will obtain a greater produce for the same
exertion than those who cultivate the inferior land.
wages, however, will still be equal, for this excess which
the cultivators of the superior land receive is in reality
rent, and if land has been subjected to individual ownership
will give it a value. now, if, under these changed
circumstances, one member of this community wishes to
hire others to work for him, he will have to pay only
what the labor yields at the lowest point of cultivation.
if thereafter the margin of cultivation sinks to points of
lower and lower productiveness, so must wages sink; if,
on the contrary, it rises, so also must wages rise; for,
just as a free body tends to take the shortest route to
the earth’s center, so do men seek the easiest mode to
the gratification of their desires.
here, then, we have the law of wages, as a deduction
from a principle most obvious and most universal. that
wages depend upon the margin of cultivation—that they
will be greater or less as the produce which labor can obtain
from the highest natural opportunities open to it is
greater or less, flows from the principle that men will
seek to satisfy their wants with the least exertion.
now, if we turn from simple social states to the complex
phenomena of highly civilized societies, we shall find
upon examination that they also fall under this law.
in such societies, wages differ widely, but they still
bear a more or less definite and obvious relation to each
other. this relation is not invariable, as at one time a
philosopher of repute may earn by his lectures many fold
the wages of the best mechanic, and at another can
hardly hope for the pay of a footman; as in a great city
occupations may yield relatively high wages, which in a
new settlement would yield relatively low wages; yet
these variations between wages may, under all conditions,
and in spite of arbitrary divergences caused by custom,
law, etc., be traced to certain circumstances. in one of
his most interesting chapters adam smith thus enumerates
the principal circumstances “which make up for a
small pecuniary gain in some employments and counterbalance
a great one in others: first, the agreeableness or
disagreeableness of the employments themselves. secondly,
the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty and
expense of learning them. thirdly, the constancy or inconstancy
of employment in them. fourthly, the small
or great trust which must be reposed in them. fifthly,
the probability or improbability of success in them.” it
is not necessary to dwell in detail on these causes of variation
in wages between different employments. they
have been admirably explained and illustrated by adam
smith and the economists who have followed him, who
have well worked out the details, even if they have failed
to apprehend the main law.
the effect of all the circumstances which give rise to
the differences between wages in different occupations
may be included as supply and demand, and it is perfectly
correct to say that the wages in different occupations
will vary relatively according to differences in the
supply and demand of labor—meaning by demand the
call which the community as a whole makes for services
of the particular kind, and by supply the relative amount
of labor which, under the existing conditions, can be determined
to the performance of those particular services.
but though this is true as to the relative differences of
wages, when it is said, as is commonly said, that the general
rate of wages is determined by supply and demand,
the words are meaningless. for supply and demand are
but relative terms. the supply of labor can only mean
labor offered in exchange for labor or the produce of
labor, and the demand for labor can only mean labor or
the produce of labor offered in exchange for labor. supply
is thus demand, and demand supply, and, in the whole
community, one must be co-extensive with the other.
this is clearly apprehended by the current political economy
in relation to sales, and the reasoning of ricardo,
mill, and others, which proves that alterations in supply
and demand cannot produce a general rise or fall of
values, though they may cause a rise or fall in the value
of a particular thing, is as applicable to labor. what
conceals the absurdity of speaking generally of supply
and demand in reference to labor is the habit of considering
the demand for labor as springing from capital and
as something distinct from labor; but the analysis to
which this idea has been heretofore subjected has sufficiently
shown its fallacy. it is indeed evident from the
mere statement, that wages can never permanently exceed
the produce of labor, and hence that there is no
fund from which wages can for any time be drawn, save
that which labor constantly creates.
but, though all the circumstances which produce the
differences in wages between occupations may be considered
as operating through supply and demand, they, or
rather, their effects, for sometimes the same cause operates
in both ways, may be separated into two classes, according
as they tend only to raise apparent wages or as
they tend to raise real wages—that is, to increase the
average reward for equal exertion. the high wages of
some occupations much resemble what adam smith compares
them to, the prizes of a lottery, in which the great
gain of one is made up from the losses of many others.
this is not only true of the professions by means of
which dr. smith illustrates the principle, but is largely
true of the wages of superintendence in mercantile pursuits,
as shown by the fact that over ninety per cent. of
the mercantile firms that commence business ultimately
fail. the higher wages of those occupations which can
be prosecuted only in certain states of the weather, or
are otherwise intermittent and uncertain, are also of
this class; while differences that arise from hardship,
discredit, unhealthiness, etc., imply differences of sacrifice,
the increased compensation for which only preserves
the level of equal returns for equal exertions. all
these differences are, in fact, equalizations, arising from
circumstances which, to use the words of adam smith,
“make up for a small pecuniary gain in some employments
and counterbalance a great one in others.” but,
besides these merely apparent differences, there are real
differences in wages between occupations, which are
caused by the greater or less rarity of the qualities required—greater
abilities or skill, whether natural or
acquired, commanding on the average greater wages.
now, these qualities, whether natural or acquired, are
essentially analogous to differences in strength and quickness
in manual labor, and as in manual labor the higher
wages paid the man who can do more would be based
upon wages paid to those who can do only the average
amount, so wages in the occupations requiring superior
abilities and skill must depend upon the common wages
paid for ordinary abilities and skill.
it is, indeed, evident from observation, as it must be
from theory, that whatever be the circumstances which
produce the differences of wages in different occupations,
and although they frequently vary in relation to each
other, producing, as between time and time, and place
and place, greater or less relative differences, yet the rate
of wages in one occupation is always dependent on the
rate in another, and so on, down, until the lowest and
widest stratum of wages is reached, in occupations where
the demand is more nearly uniform and in which there is
the greatest freedom to engage.
for, although barriers of greater or less difficulty may
exist, the amount of labor which can be determined to
any particular pursuit is nowhere absolutely fixed. all
mechanics could act as laborers, and many laborers could
readily become mechanics; all storekeepers could act as
shopmen, and many shopmen could easily become storekeepers;
many farmers would, upon inducement, become
hunters or miners, fishermen or sailors, and many hunters,
miners, fishermen, and sailors know enough of farming
to turn their hands to it on demand. in each
occupation there are men who unite it with others, or
who alternate between occupations, while the young men
who are constantly coming in to fill up the ranks of labor
are drawn in the direction of the strongest inducements
and least resistances. and further than this, all the
gradations of wages shade into each other by imperceptible
degrees, instead of being separated by clearly defined
gulfs. the wages, even of the poorer paid mechanics,
are generally higher than the wages of simple laborers,
but there are always some mechanics who do not, on the
whole, make as much as some laborers; the best paid
lawyers receive much higher wages than the best paid
clerks, but the best paid clerks make more than some
lawyers, and in fact the worst paid clerks make more
than the worst paid lawyers. thus, on the verge of each
occupation, stand those to whom the inducements between
one occupation and another are so nicely balanced
that the slightest change is sufficient to determine their
labor in one direction or another. thus, any increase or
decrease in the demand for labor of a certain kind cannot,
except temporarily, raise wages in that occupation
above, nor depress them below, the relative level with
wages in other occupations, which is determined by the
circumstances previously adverted to, such as relative
agreeableness or continuity of employment, etc. even,
as experience shows, where artificial barriers are imposed
to this interaction, such as limiting laws, guild regulations,
the establishment of caste, etc., they may interfere
with, but cannot prevent, the maintenance of this
equilibrium. they operate only as dams, which pile up
the water of a stream above its natural level, but cannot
prevent its overflow.
thus, although they may from time to time alter in
relation to each other, as the circumstances which determine
relative levels change, yet it is evident that wages
in all strata must ultimately depend upon wages in the
lowest and widest stratum—the general rate of wages
rising or falling as these rise or fall.
now, the primary and fundamental occupations, upon
which, so to speak, all others are built up, are evidently
those which procure wealth directly from nature; hence
the law of wages in them must be the general law of
wages. and, as wages in such occupations clearly depend
upon what labor can produce at the lowest point of
natural productiveness to which it is habitually applied;
therefore, wages generally depend upon the margin of
cultivation, or, to put it more exactly, upon the highest
point of natural productiveness to which labor is free to
apply itself without the payment of rent.
so obvious is this law that it is often apprehended
without being recognized. it is frequently said of such
countries as california and nevada that cheap labor
would enormously aid their development, as it would enable
the working of the poorer but most extensive
deposits of ore. a relation between low wages and a
low point of production is perceived by those who talk
in this way, but they invert cause and effect. it is not
low wages which will cause the working of low-grade ore,
but the extension of production to the lower point which
will diminish wages. if wages could be arbitrarily forced
down, as has sometimes been attempted by statute, the
poorer mines would not be worked so long as richer
mines could be worked. but if the margin of production
were arbitrarily forced down, as it might be, were
the superior natural opportunities in the ownership of
those who chose rather to wait for future increase of
value than to permit them to be used now, wages would
necessarily fall.
the demonstration is complete. the law of wages we
have thus obtained is that which we previously obtained
as the corollary of the law of rent, and it completely
harmonizes with the law of interest. it is, that:
wages depend upon the margin of production, or upon
the produce which labor can obtain at the highest point of
natural productiveness open to it without the payment of
rent.
this law of wages accords with and explains universal
facts that without its apprehension seem unrelated and
contradictory. it shows that:
where land is free and labor is unassisted by capital,
the whole produce will go to labor as wages.
where land is free and labor is assisted by capital,
wages will consist of the whole produce, less that part
necessary to induce the storing up of labor as capital.
where land is subject to ownership and rent arises,
wages will be fixed by what labor could secure from the
highest natural opportunities open to it without the
payment of rent.
where natural opportunities are all monopolized,
wages may be forced by the competition among laborers
to the minimum at which laborers will consent to reproduce.
this necessary minimum of wages (which by smith
and ricardo is denominated the point of “natural
wages,” and by mill supposed to regulate wages, which
will be higher or lower as the working classes consent to
reproduce at a higher or lower standard of comfort) is,
however, included in the law of wages as previously
stated, as it is evident that the margin of production
cannot fall below that point at which enough will be left
as wages to secure the maintenance of labor.
like ricardo’s law of rent of which it is the corollary,
this law of wages carries with it its own proof and becomes
self-evident by mere statement. for it is but an
application of the central truth that is the foundation of
economic reasoning—that men will seek to satisfy their
desires with the least exertion. the average man will
not work for an employer for less, all things considered,
than he can earn by working for himself; nor yet will he
work for himself for less than he can earn by working
for an employer, and hence the return which labor can
secure from such natural opportunities as are free to it
must fix the wages which labor everywhere gets. that
is to say, the line of rent is the necessary measure of the
line of wages. in fact, the accepted law of rent depends
for its recognition upon a previous, though in many cases
it seems to be an unconscious, acceptance of this law of
wages. what makes it evident that land of a particular
quality will yield as rent the surplus of its produce
over that of the least productive land in use, is the apprehension
of the fact that the owner of the higher
quality of land can procure the labor to work his land by
the payment of what that labor could produce if exerted
upon land of the poorer quality.
in its simpler manifestations, this law of wages is recognized
by people who do not trouble themselves about
political economy, just as the fact that a heavy body
would fall to the earth was long recognized by those who
never thought of the law of gravitation. it does not require
a philosopher to see that if in any country natural
opportunities were thrown open which would enable
laborers to make for themselves wages higher than the
lowest now paid, the general rate of wages would rise;
while the most ignorant and stupid of the placer miners
of early california knew that as the placers gave out or
were monopolized, wages must fall. it requires no fine-spun
theory to explain why wages are so high relatively
to production in new countries where land is yet unmonopolized.
the cause is on the surface. one man will
not work for another for less than his labor will really
yield, when he can go upon the next quarter section and
take up a farm for himself. it is only as land becomes
monopolized and these natural opportunities are shut off
from labor, that laborers are obliged to compete with
each other for employment, and it becomes possible for
the farmer to hire hands to do his work while he maintains
himself on the difference between what their labor
produces and what he pays them for it.
adam smith himself saw the cause of high wages where
land was yet open to settlement, though he failed to appreciate
the importance and connection of the fact. in
treating of the causes of the prosperity of new colonies
(chapter vii, book iv, “wealth of nations,”) he says:
“every colonist gets more land than he can possibly cultivate.
he has no rent and scarce any taxes to pay. * * he is eager,
therefore, to collect laborers from every quarter and to pay them the
most liberal wages. but these liberal wages, joined to the plenty
and cheapness of land, soon make these laborers leave him in order
to become landlords themselves, and to reward with equal liberality
other laborers who soon leave them for the same reason they left
their first masters.”
this chapter contains numerous expressions which,
like the opening sentence in the chapter on the wages
of labor, show that adam smith failed to appreciate
the true laws of the distribution of wealth only because
he turned away from the more primitive forms of society
to look for first principles amid complex social manifestations,
where he was blinded by a preaccepted theory
of the functions of capital, and, as it seems to me, by a
vague acceptance of the doctrine which, two years after
his death, was formulated by malthus. and it is impossible
to read the works of the economists who since the
time of smith have endeavored to build up and elucidate
the science of political economy without seeing how, over
and over again, they stumble over the law of wages without
once recognizing it. yet, “if it were a dog it would
bite them!” indeed, it is difficult to resist the impression
that some of them really saw this law of wages, but,
fearful of the practical conclusions to which it would
lead, preferred to ignore and cover it up, rather than use
it as the key to problems which without it are so perplexing.
a great truth to an age which has rejected and
trampled on it, is not a word of peace, but a sword!
perhaps it may be well to remind the reader, before
closing this chapter, of what has been before stated—that
i am using the word wages not in the sense of a
quantity, but in the sense of a proportion. when i say
that wages fall as rent rises, i do not mean that the
quantity of wealth obtained by laborers as wages is necessarily
less, but that the proportion which it bears to
the whole produce is necessarily less. the proportion
may diminish while the quantity remains the same or
even increases. if the margin of cultivation descends
from the productive point which we will call , to
the productive point we will call , the rent of all
lands that before paid rent will increase by this difference,
and the proportion of the whole produce which
goes to laborers as wages will to the same extent diminish;
but if, in the meantime, the advance of the arts or
the economies that become possible with greater population
have so increased the productive power of labor that
at  the same exertion will produce as much wealth
as before at , laborers will get as wages as great a
quantity as before, and the relative fall of wages will
not be noticeable in any diminution of the necessaries
or comforts of the laborer, but only in the increased
value of land and the greater incomes and more lavish
expenditure of the rent-receiving class.
the conclusions we have reached as to the laws which
govern the distribution of wealth recast a large and most
important part of the science of political economy, as at
present taught, overthrowing some of its most highly
elaborated theories and shedding a new light on some of
its most important problems. yet, in doing this, no
disputable ground has been occupied; not a single fundamental
principle advanced that is not already recognized.
the law of interest and the law of wages which we
have substituted for those now taught are necessary deductions
from the great law which alone makes any
science of political economy possible—the all-compelling
law that is as inseparable from the human mind as attraction
is inseparable from matter, and without which
it would be impossible to previse or calculate upon any
human action, the most trivial or the most important.
this fundamental law, that men seek to gratify their desires
with the least exertion, becomes, when viewed in its
relation to one of the factors of production, the law of
rent; in relation to another, the law of interest; and in
relation to a third, the law of wages. and in accepting
the law of rent, which, since the time of ricardo, has
been accepted by every economist of standing, and
which, like a geometrical axiom, has but to be understood
to compel assent, the law of interest and law of
wages, as i have stated them, are inferentially accepted,
as its necessary sequences. in fact, it is only relatively
that they can be called sequences, as in the recognition
of the law of rent they too must be recognized. for on
what depends the recognition of the law of rent? evidently
upon the recognition of the fact that the effect of
competition is to prevent the return to labor and capital
being anywhere greater than upon the poorest land in
use. it is in seeing this that we see that the owner of
land will be able to claim as rent all of its produce which
exceeds what would be yielded to an equal application of
labor and capital on the poorest land in use.
the harmony and correlation of the laws of distribution
as we have now apprehended them are in striking
contrast with the want of harmony which characterizes
these laws as presented by the current political economy.
let us state them side by side:
the current statement.
the true statement.
rent depends on the margin
 of cultivation, rising as it falls and falling as it rises.
rent depends on the margin
 of cultivation, rising as it falls and falling as it rises.
wages depend upon the
 ratio between the number of laborers and the amount
 of capital devoted to their employment.
wages depend on the margin
 of cultivation, falling as it falls and rising as it
 rises.
interest depends upon the
 equation between the supply of and demand for
 capital; or, as is stated of profits, upon wages (or
 the cost of labor), rising as wages fall, and falling
 as wages rise.
interest (its ratio with wages
 being fixed by the net power of increase which
 attaches to capital) depends on the margin of
 cultivation, falling as it falls and rising as it rises.
in the current statement the laws of distribution have
no common center, no mutual relation; they are not the
correlating divisions of a whole, but measures of different
qualities. in the statement we have given, they
spring from one point, support and supplement each
other, and form the correlating divisions of a complete
whole.
we have now obtained a clear, simple, and consistent
theory of the distribution of wealth, which accords with
first principles and existing facts, and which, when understood,
will commend itself as self-evident.
before working out this theory, i have deemed it necessary
to show conclusively the insufficiency of current
theories; for, in thought, as in action, the majority of
men do but follow their leaders, and a theory of wages
which has not merely the support of the highest names,
but is firmly rooted in common opinions and prejudices,
will, until it has been proved untenable, prevent any
other theory from being even considered, just as the
theory that the earth was the center of the universe prevented
any consideration of the theory that it revolves
on its own axis and circles round the sun, until it was
clearly shown that the apparent movements of the
heavenly bodies could not be explained in accordance
with the theory of the fixity of the earth.
there is in truth a marked resemblance between the
science of political economy, as at present taught, and
the science of astronomy, as taught previous to the recognition
of the copernican theory. the devices by
which the current political economy endeavors to explain
the social phenomena that are now forcing themselves
upon the attention of the civilized world may well be
compared to the elaborate system of cycles and epicycles
constructed by the learned to explain the celestial phenomena
in a manner according with the dogmas of authority
and the rude impressions and prejudices of the unlearned.
and, just as the observations which showed
that this theory of cycles and epicycles could not explain
all the phenomena of the heavens cleared the way for
the consideration of the simpler theory that supplanted
it, so will a recognition of the inadequacy of the current
theories to account for social phenomena clear the way
for the consideration of a theory that will give to political
economy all the simplicity and harmony which the
copernican theory gave to the science of astronomy.
but at this point the parallel ceases. that “the fixed
and steadfast earth” should be really whirling through
space with inconceivable velocity is repugnant to the
first apprehensions of men in every state and situation;
but the truth i wish to make clear is naturally perceived,
and has been recognized in the infancy of every people,
being obscured only by the complexities of the civilized
state, the warpings of selfish interests, and the false direction
which the speculations of the learned have taken.
to recognize it, we have but to come back to first principles
and heed simple perceptions. nothing can be
clearer than the proposition that the failure of wages to
increase with increasing productive power is due to the
increase of rent.
three things unite to production—labor, capital, and
land.
three parties divide the produce—the laborer, the
capitalist, and the land owner.
if, with an increase of production the laborer gets no
more and the capitalist no more it is a necessary inference
that the land owner reaps the whole gain.
and the facts agree with the inference. though
neither wages nor interest anywhere increase as material
progress goes on, yet the invariable accompaniment and
mark of material progress is the increase of rent—the
rise of land values.
the increase of rent explains why wages and interest
do not increase. the cause which gives to the land
holder is the cause which denies to the laborer and capitalist.
that wages and interest are higher in new than
in old countries is not, as the standard economists say,
because nature makes a greater return to the application
of labor and capital, but because land is cheaper, and,
therefore, as a smaller proportion of the return is taken
by rent, labor and capital can keep for their share a
larger proportion of what nature does return. it is not
the total produce, but the net produce, after rent has
been taken from it, that determines what can be divided
as wages and interest. hence, the rate of wages and interest
is everywhere fixed, not so much by the productiveness
of labor as by the value of land. wherever the
value of land is relatively low, wages and interest are
relatively high; wherever land is relatively high, wages
and interest are relatively low.
if production had not passed the simple stage in which
all labor is directly applied to the land and all wages are
paid in its produce, the fact that when the land owner
takes a larger portion the laborer must put up with a
smaller portion could not be lost sight of.
but the complexities of production in the civilized
state, in which so great a part is borne by exchange, and
so much labor is bestowed upon materials after they have
been separated from the land, though they may to the
unthinking disguise, do not alter the fact that all production
is still the union of the two factors, land and
labor, and that rent (the share of the land holder) cannot
be increased except at the expense of wages (the
share of the laborer) and interest (the share of capital).
just as the portion of the crop, which in the simpler
forms of industrial organization the owner of agricultural
land receives at the end of the harvest as his rent,
lessens the amount left to the cultivator as wages and
interest, so does the rental of land on which a manufacturing
or commercial city is built lessen the amount
which can be divided as wages and interest between the
laborer and capital there engaged in the production and
exchange of wealth.
in short, the value of land depending wholly upon the
power which its ownership gives of appropriating wealth
created by labor, the increase of land values is always at
the expense of the value of labor. and, hence, that the
increase of productive power does not increase wages, is
because it does increase the value of land. rent swallows
up the whole gain and pauperism accompanies
progress.
it is unnecessary to refer to facts. they will suggest
themselves to the reader. it is the general fact, observable
everywhere, that as the value of land increases, so
does the contrast between wealth and want appear. it is
the universal fact, that where the value of land is highest,
civilization exhibits the greatest luxury side by side
with the most piteous destitution. to see human beings
in the most abject, the most helpless and hopeless condition,
you must go, not to the unfenced prairies and the
log cabins of new clearings in the backwoods, where man
single-handed is commencing the struggle with nature,
and land is yet worth nothing, but to the great cities,
where the ownership of a little patch of ground is a
fortune.
hitherto, it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet
made have lightened the day’s toil of any human being.—john
stuart mill.
do ye hear the children weeping, o my brothers,
ere the sorrow comes with years?
they are leaning their young heads against their mothers,
and that cannot stop their tears.
the young lambs are bleating in the meadows;
the young birds are chirping in the nest;
the young fawns are playing with the shadows;
the young flowers are blowing toward the west—
but the young, young children, o, my brothers,
they are weeping bitterly!
they are weeping in the playtime of the others,
in the country of the free.
—mrs. browning.
in identifying rent as the receiver of the increased production
which material progress gives, but which labor
fails to obtain; in seeing that the antagonism of interests
is not between labor and capital, as is popularly believed,
but is in reality between labor and capital on the one side
and land ownership on the other, we have reached a conclusion
that has most important practical bearings. but
it is not worth while to dwell on them now, for we have
not yet fully solved the problem which was at the outset
proposed. to say that wages remain low because rent
advances is like saying that a steamboat moves because
its wheels turn around. the further question is, what
causes rent to advance? what is the force or necessity
that, as productive power increases, distributes a greater
and greater proportion of the produce as rent?
the only cause pointed out by ricardo as advancing
rent is the increase of population, which by requiring
larger supplies of food necessitates the extension of cultivation
to inferior lands, or to points of inferior production
on the same lands, and in current works of other
authors attention is so exclusively directed to the extension
of production from superior to inferior lands as the
cause of advancing rents that mr. carey (followed by
professor perry and others) has imagined that he has
overthrown the ricardian theory of rent by denying that
the progress of agriculture is from better to worse lands.
now, while it is unquestionably true that the increasing
pressure of population which compels a resort to inferior
points of production will raise rents, and does
raise rents, i do not think that all the deductions commonly
made from this principle are valid, nor yet that it
fully accounts for the increase of rent as material progress
goes on. there are evidently other causes which
conspire to raise rent, but which seem to have been
wholly or partially hidden by the erroneous views as to
the functions of capital and genesis of wages which have
been current. to see what these are, and how they
operate, let us trace the effect of material progress upon
the distribution of wealth.
the changes which constitute or contribute to material
progress are three: () increase in population; () improvements
in the arts of production and exchange; and
() improvements in knowledge, education, government,
police, manners, and morals, so far as they increase the
power of producing wealth. material progress, as commonly
understood, consists of these three elements or
directions of progression, in all of which the progressive
nations have for some time past been advancing, though
in different degrees. as, considered in the light of material
forces or economies, the increase of knowledge, the
betterment of government, etc., have the same effect as
improvements in the arts, it will not be necessary in this
view to consider them separately. what bearing intellectual
or moral progress, merely as such, has upon our
problem we may hereafter consider. we are at present
dealing with material progress, to which these things
contribute only as they increase wealth-producing power,
and shall see their effects when we see the effect of
improvements in the arts.
to ascertain the effects of material progress upon the
distribution of wealth, let us, therefore, consider the
effects of increase of population apart from improvement
in the arts, and then the effect of improvement in the
arts apart from increase of population.
the manner in which increasing population advances
rent, as explained and illustrated in current treatises, is
that the increased demand for subsistence forces production
to inferior soil or to inferior productive points.
thus, if, with a given population, the margin of cultivation
is at , all lands of productive power over  will
pay rent. if the population be doubled, an additional
supply is required, which cannot be obtained without an
extension of cultivation that will cause lands to yield
rent that before yielded none. if the extension be to ,
then all the land between  and  will yield rent and
have a value, and all land over  will yield increased
rent and have increased value.
it is here that the malthusian doctrine receives from
the current elucidations of the theory of rent the support
of which i spoke when enumerating the causes that
have combined to give that doctrine an almost undisputed
sway in current thought. according to the malthusian
theory, the pressure of population against subsistence
becomes progressively harder as population
increases, and although two hands come into the world
with every new mouth, it becomes, to use the language
of john stuart mill, harder and harder for the new
hands to supply the new mouths. according to ricardo’s
theory of rent, rent arises from the difference in productiveness
of the lands in use, and as explained by ricardo
and the economists who have followed him, the advance
in rents which, experience shows, accompanies increasing
population, is caused by the inability of procuring more
food except at a greater cost, which thus forces the margin
of population to lower and lower points of production,
commensurately increasing rent. thus the two
theories, as i have before explained, are made to harmonize
and blend, the law of rent becoming but a special
application of the more general law propounded by malthus,
and the advance of rents with increasing population
a demonstration of its resistless operation. i refer
to this incidentally, because it now lies in our way to see
the misapprehension which has enlisted the doctrine of
rent in the support of a theory to which it in reality
gives no countenance. the malthusian theory has been
already disposed of, and the cumulative disproof which
will prevent the recurrence of a lingering doubt will be
given when it is shown, further on, that the phenomena
attributed to the pressure of population against subsistence
would, under existing conditions, manifest themselves
were population to remain stationary.
the misapprehension to which i now refer, and which,
to a proper understanding of the effect of increase of
population upon the distribution of wealth, it is necessary
to clear up, is the presumption, expressed or implied
in all the current reasoning upon the subject of rent in
connection with population, that the recourse to lower
points of production involves a smaller aggregate produce
in proportion to the labor expended; though that this is
not always the case is clearly recognized in connection
with agricultural improvements, which, to use the words
of mill, are considered “as a partial relaxation of the
bonds which confine the increase of population.” but it
is not involved even where there is no advance in the
arts, and the recourse to lower points of production is
clearly the result of the increased demand of an increased
population. for increased population, of itself, and
without any advance in the arts, implies an increase in
the productive power of labor. the labor of  men,
other things being equal, will produce much more than
one hundred times as much as the labor of one man, and
the labor of , men much more than ten times as
much as the labor of  men; and, so, with every additional
pair of hands which increasing population brings,
there is a more than proportionate addition to the productive
power of labor. thus, with an increasing population,
there may be a recourse to lower natural powers
of production, not only without any diminution in the
average production of wealth as compared to labor, but
without any diminution at the lowest point. if population
be doubled, land of but  productiveness may
yield to the same amount of labor as much as land
of  productiveness could before yield. for it must
not be forgotten (what often is forgotten) that the
productiveness either of land or labor is not to be measured
in any one thing, but in all desired things. a
settler and his family may raise as much corn on land
a hundred miles away from the nearest habitation
as they could raise were their land in the center of a
populous district. but in the populous district they
could obtain with the same labor as good a living from
much poorer land, or from land of equal quality could
make as good a living after paying a high rent, because
in the midst of a large population their labor would have
become more effective; not, perhaps, in the production
of corn, but in the production of wealth generally—or
the obtaining of all the commodities and services which
are the real object of their labor.
but even where there is a diminution in the productiveness
of labor at the lowest point—that is to say,
where the increasing demand for wealth has driven production
to a lower point of natural productiveness than
the addition to the power of labor from increasing population
suffices to make up for—it does not follow that the
aggregate production, as compared with the aggregate
labor, has been lessened.
let us suppose land of diminishing qualities. the best
would naturally be settled first, and as population increased
production would take in the next lower quality,
and so on. but, as the increase of population, by permitting
greater economies, adds to the effectiveness of
labor, the cause which brought each quality of land successively
into cultivation would at the same time increase
the amount of wealth that the same quality of labor
could produce from it. but it would also do more than
this—it would increase the power of producing wealth
on all the superior lands already in cultivation. if the
relations of quantity and quality were such that increasing
population added to the effectiveness of labor faster
than it compelled a resort to less productive qualities of
land, though the margin of cultivation would fall and
rent would rise, the minimum return to labor would increase.
that is to say, though wages as a proportion
would fall, wages as a quantity would rise. the average
production of wealth would increase. if the relations
were such that the increasing effectiveness of labor just
compensated for the diminishing productiveness of the
land as it was called into use, the effect of increasing
population would be to increase rent by lowering the
margin of cultivation without reducing wages as a
quantity, and to increase the average production. if we
now suppose population still increasing, but, between
the poorest quality of land in use and the next lower
quality, to be a difference so great that the increased
power of labor which comes with the increased population
that brings it into cultivation cannot compensate
for it—the minimum return to labor will be reduced, and
with the rise of rents, wages will fall, not only as a proportion,
but as a quantity. but unless the descent in
the quality of land is far more precipitous than we can
well imagine, or than, i think, ever exists, the average
production will still be increased, for the increased effectiveness
which comes by reason of the increased population
that compels resort to the inferior quality of land
attaches to all labor, and the gain on the superior qualities
of land will more than compensate for the diminished
production on the quality last brought in. the aggregate
wealth production, as compared with the aggregate
expenditure of labor, will be greater, though its distribution
will be more unequal.
thus, increase of population, as it operates to extend
production to lower natural levels, operates to increase
rent and reduce wages as a proportion, and may or may
not reduce wages as a quantity; while it seldom can, and
probably never does, reduce the aggregate production of
wealth as compared with the aggregate expenditure of
labor, but on the contrary increases, and frequently
largely increases it.
but while the increase of population thus increases
rent by lowering the margin of cultivation, it is a mistake
to look upon this as the only mode by which rent
advances as population grows. increasing population
increases rent, without reducing the margin of cultivation;
and notwithstanding the dicta of such writers as
mcculloch, who assert that rent would not arise were
there an unbounded extent of equally good land, increases
it without reference to the natural qualities of
land, for the increased powers of co-operation and exchange
which come with increased population are
equivalent to—nay, i think we can say without metaphor,
that they give—an increased capacity to land.
i do not mean to say merely that, like an improvement
in the methods or tools of production, the increased
power which comes with increased population gives to
the same labor an increased result, which is equivalent
to an increase in the natural powers of land; but that
it brings out a superior power in labor, which is localized
on land—which attaches not to labor generally, but only
to labor exerted on particular land; and which thus inheres
in the land as much as any qualities of soil, climate,
mineral deposit, or natural situation, and passes, as they
do, with the possession of the land.
an improvement in the method of cultivation which,
with the same outlay, will give two crops a year in place
of one, or an improvement in tools and machinery which
will double the result of labor, will manifestly, on a particular
piece of ground, have the same effect on the produce
as a doubling of the fertility of the land. but the
difference is in this respect—the improvement in method
or in tools can be utilized on any land; but the improvement
in fertility can be utilized only on the particular
land to which it applies. now, in large part, the increased
productiveness of labor which arises from increased
population can be utilized only on particular
land, and on particular land in greatly varying degrees.
here, let us imagine, is an unbounded savannah,
stretching off in unbroken sameness of grass and flower,
tree and rill, till the traveler tires of the monotony.
along comes the wagon of the first immigrant. where
to settle he cannot tell—every acre seems as good as
every other acre. as to wood, as to water, as to fertility,
as to situation, there is absolutely no choice, and he
is perplexed by the embarrassment of richness. tired
out with the search for one place that is better than
another, he stops—somewhere, anywhere—and starts to
make himself a home. the soil is virgin and rich, game
is abundant, the streams flash with the finest trout.
nature is at her very best. he has what, were he in a
populous district, would make him rich; but he is very
poor. to say nothing of the mental craving, which
would lead him to welcome the sorriest stranger, he
labors under all the material disadvantages of solitude.
he can get no temporary assistance for any work that
requires a greater union of strength than that afforded
by his own family, or by such help as he can permanently
keep. though he has cattle, he cannot often have fresh
meat, for to get a beefsteak he must kill a bullock. he
must be his own blacksmith, wagonmaker, carpenter, and
cobbler—in short, a “jack of all trades and master of
none.” he cannot have his children schooled, for, to
do so, he must himself pay and maintain a teacher.
such things as he cannot produce himself, he must buy
in quantities and keep on hand, or else go without, for
he cannot be constantly leaving his work and making a
long journey to the verge of civilization; and when
forced to do so, the getting of a vial of medicine or the
replacement of a broken auger may cost him the labor of
himself and horses for days. under such circumstances,
though nature is prolific, the man is poor. it is an easy
matter for him to get enough to eat; but beyond this,
his labor will suffice to satisfy only the simplest wants in
the rudest way.
soon there comes another immigrant. although
every quarter section of the boundless plain is as good
as every other quarter section, he is not beset by any
embarrassment as to where to settle. though the land
is the same, there is one place that is clearly better for
him than any other place, and that is where there is
already a settler and he may have a neighbor. he settles
by the side of the first comer, whose condition is at
once greatly improved, and to whom many things are
now possible that were before impossible, for two men
may help each other to do things that one man could
never do.
another immigrant comes, and, guided by the same
attraction, settles where there are already two. another,
and another, until around our first comer there are a
score of neighbors. labor has now an effectiveness
which, in the solitary state, it could not approach. if
heavy work is to be done, the settlers have a log-rolling,
and together accomplish in a day what singly would require
years. when one kills a bullock, the others take
part of it, returning when they kill, and thus they have
fresh meat all the time. together they hire a schoolmaster,
and the children of each are taught for a fractional
part of what similar teaching would have cost the
first settler. it becomes a comparatively easy matter to
send to the nearest town, for some one is always going.
but there is less need for such journeys. a blacksmith
and a wheelwright soon set up shops, and our settler can
have his tools repaired for a small part of the labor it
formerly cost him. a store is opened and he can get
what he wants as he wants it; a post-office, soon added,
gives him regular communication with the rest of the
world. then come a cobbler, a carpenter, a harness-maker,
a doctor; and a little church soon arises. satisfactions
become possible that in the solitary state were
impossible. there are gratifications for the social and
the intellectual nature—for that part of the man that
rises above the animal. the power of sympathy, the
sense of companionship, the emulation of comparison and
contrast, open a wider, and fuller, and more varied life.
in rejoicing, there are others to rejoice; in sorrow, the
mourners do not mourn alone. there are husking bees,
and apple parings, and quilting parties. though the
ballroom be unplastered and the orchestra but a fiddle,
the notes of the magician are yet in the strain, and
cupid dances with the dancers. at the wedding, there
are others to admire and enjoy; in the house of death,
there are watchers; by the open grave, stands human
sympathy to sustain the mourners. occasionally, comes
a straggling lecturer to open up glimpses of the world
of science, of literature, or of art; in election times,
come stump speakers, and the citizen rises to a sense of
dignity and power, as the cause of empires is tried before
him in the struggle of john doe and richard roe for his
support and vote. and, by and by, comes the circus,
talked of months before, and opening to children whose
horizon has been the prairie, all the realms of the imagination—princes
and princesses of fairy tale, mail-clad
crusaders and turbaned moors, cinderella’s fairy coach,
and the giants of nursery lore; lions such as crouched
before daniel, or in circling roman amphitheater tore
the saints of god; ostriches who recall the sandy deserts;
camels such as stood around when the wicked brethren
raised joseph from the well and sold him into bondage;
elephants such as crossed the alps with hannibal, or felt
the sword of the maccabees; and glorious music that
thrills and builds in the chambers of the mind as rose
the sunny dome of kubla khan.
go to our settler now, and say to him: “you have so
many fruit trees which you planted; so much fencing,
such a well, a barn, a house—in short, you have by your
labor added so much value to this farm. your land
itself is not quite so good. you have been cropping it,
and by and by it will need manure. i will give you the
full value of all your improvements if you will give it to
me, and go again with your family beyond the verge of
settlement.” he would laugh at you. his land yields
no more wheat or potatoes than before, but it does yield
far more of all the necessaries and comforts of life. his
labor upon it will bring no heavier crops, and, we will
suppose, no more valuable crops, but it will bring far
more of all the other things for which men work. the
presence of other settlers—the increase of population—has
added to the productiveness, in these things, of labor
bestowed upon it, and this added productiveness gives it
a superiority over land of equal natural quality where
there are as yet no settlers. if no land remains to be
taken up, except such as is as far removed from population
as was our settler’s land when he first went upon it,
the value or rent of this land will be measured by the
whole of this added capability. if, however, as we have
supposed, there is a continuous stretch of equal land, over
which population is now spreading, it will not be necessary
for the new settler to go into the wilderness, as did
the first. he will settle just beyond the other settlers,
and will get the advantage of proximity to them. the
value or rent of our settler’s land will thus depend on the
advantage which it has, from being at the center of
population, over that on the verge. in the one case, the
margin of production will remain as before; in the other,
the margin of production will be raised.
population still continues to increase, and as it increases
so do the economies which its increase permits,
and which in effect add to the productiveness of the land.
our first settler’s land, being the center of population,
the store, the blacksmith’s forge, the wheelwright’s shop,
are set up on it, or on its margin, where soon arises a
village, which rapidly grows into a town, the center of
exchanges for the people of the whole district. with no
greater agricultural productiveness than it had at first,
this land now begins to develop a productiveness of a
higher kind. to labor expended in raising corn, or
wheat, or potatoes, it will yield no more of those things
than at first; but to labor expended in the subdivided
branches of production which require proximity to other
producers, and, especially, to labor expended in that
final part of production, which consists in distribution,
it will yield much larger returns. the wheat-grower
may go further on, and find land on which his labor will
produce as much wheat, and nearly as much wealth; but
the artisan, the manufacturer, the storekeeper, the professional
man, find that their labor expended here, at the
center of exchanges, will yield them much more than if
expended even at a little distance away from it; and this
excess of productiveness for such purposes the landowner
can claim just as he could an excess in its wheat-producing
power. and so our settler is able to sell in
building lots a few of his acres for prices which it would
not bring for wheat-growing if its fertility had been multiplied
many times. with the proceeds, he builds himself
a fine house, and furnishes it handsomely. that is
to say, to reduce the transaction to its lowest terms, the
people who wish to use the land build and furnish the
house for him, on condition that he will let them avail
themselves of the superior productiveness which the increase
of population has given the land.
population still keeps on increasing, giving greater
and greater utility to the land, and more and more wealth
to its owner. the town has grown into a city—a st.
louis, a chicago or a san francisco—and still it grows.
production is here carried on upon a great scale, with
the best machinery and the most favorable facilities; the
division of labor becomes extremely minute, wonderfully
multiplying efficiency; exchanges are of such volume and
rapidity that they are made with the minimum of friction
and loss. here is the heart, the brain, of the vast social
organism that has grown up from the germ of the first
settlement; here has developed one of the great ganglions
of the human world. hither run all roads, hither
set all currents, through all the vast regions round
about. here, if you have anything to sell, is the
market; here, if you have anything to buy, is the largest
and the choicest stock. here intellectual activity is
gathered into a focus, and here springs that stimulus
which is born of the collision of mind with mind. here
are the great libraries, the storehouses and granaries of
knowledge, the learned professors, the famous specialists.
here are museums and art galleries, collections of
philosophical apparatus, and all things rare, and valuable,
and best of their kind. here come great actors, and
orators, and singers, from all over the world. here, in
short, is a center of human life, in all its varied manifestations.
so enormous are the advantages which this land now
offers for the application of labor that instead of one
man with a span of horses scratching over acres, you may
count in places thousands of workers to the acre, working
tier on tier, on floors raised one above the other, five,
six, seven and eight stories from the ground, while underneath
the surface of the earth engines are throbbing
with pulsations that exert the force of thousands of
horses.
all these advantages attach to the land; it is on this
land and no other that they can be utilized, for here is
the center of population—the focus of exchanges, the
market place and workshop of the highest forms of industry.
the productive powers which density of population
has attached to this land are equivalent to the
multiplication of its original fertility by the hundred fold
and the thousand fold. and rent, which measures the
difference between this added productiveness and that of
the least productive land in use, has increased accordingly.
our settler, or whoever has succeeded to his
right to the land, is now a millionaire. like another
rip van winkle, he may have lain down and slept; still
he is rich—not from anything he has done, but from the
increase of population. there are lots from which for
every foot of frontage the owner may draw more than an
average mechanic can earn; there are lots that will sell
for more than would suffice to pave them with gold coin.
in the principal streets are towering buildings, of
granite, marble, iron, and plate glass, finished in the
most expensive style, replete with every convenience.
yet they are not worth as much as the land upon which
they rest—the same land, in nothing changed, which
when our first settler came upon it had no value at all.
that this is the way in which the increase of population
powerfully acts in increasing rent, whoever, in a
progressive country, will look around him, may see for
himself. the process is going on under his eyes. the
increasing difference in the productiveness of the land in
use, which causes an increasing rise in rent, results not
so much from the necessities of increased population
compelling the resort to inferior land, as from the increased
productiveness which increased population gives
to the lands already in use. the most valuable lands on
the globe, the lands which yield the highest rent, are not
lands of surpassing natural fertility, but lands to which
a surpassing utility has been given by the increase of
population.
the increase of productiveness or utility which increase
of population gives to certain lands, in the way to
which i have been calling attention, attaches, as it were,
to the mere quality of extension. the valuable quality
of land that has become a center of population is its
superficial capacity—it makes no difference whether it is
fertile, alluvial soil like that of philadelphia; rich bottom
land like that of new orleans; a filled-in marsh like that
of st. petersburg, or a sandy waste like the greater part
of san francisco.
and where value seems to arise from superior natural
qualities, such as deep water and good anchorage, rich
deposits of coal and iron, or heavy timber, observation
also shows that these superior qualities are brought out,
rendered tangible, by population. the coal and iron
fields of pennsylvania, that to-day are worth enormous
sums, were fifty years ago valueless. what is the efficient
cause of the difference? simply the difference in population.
the coal and iron beds of wyoming and montana,
which to-day are valueless, will, in fifty years from
now, be worth millions on millions, simply because, in
the meantime, population will have greatly increased.
it is a well provisioned ship, this on which we sail
through space. if the bread and beef above decks seem
to grow scarce, we but open a hatch and there is a new
supply, of which before we never dreamed. and very
great command over the services of others comes to
those who as the hatches are opened are permitted to
say, “this is mine!”
to recapitulate: the effect of increasing population
upon the distribution of wealth is to increase rent, and
consequently to diminish the proportion of the produce
which goes to capital and labor, in two ways: first, by
lowering the margin of cultivation. second, by bringing
out in land special capabilities otherwise latent, and
by attaching special capabilities to particular lands.
i am disposed to think that the latter mode, to which
little attention has been given by political economists, is
really the more important. but this, in our inquiry, is
not a matter of moment.
eliminating improvements in the arts, we have seen
the effects of increase of population upon the distribution
of wealth. eliminating increase of population, let us
now see what effect improvements in the arts of production
have upon distribution.
we have seen that increase of population increases
rent, rather by increasing the productiveness of labor
than by decreasing it. if it can now be shown that, irrespective
of the increase of population, the effect of improvements
in methods of production and exchange is to
increase rent, the disproof of the malthusian theory—and
of all the doctrines derived from or related to it—will
be final and complete, for we shall have accounted
for the tendency of material progress to lower wages and
depress the condition of the lowest class, without recourse
to the theory of increasing pressure against the
means of subsistence.
that this is the case will, i think, appear on the
slightest consideration.
the effect of inventions and improvements in the productive
arts is to save labor—that is, to enable the same
result to be secured with less labor, or a greater result
with the same labor.
now, in a state of society in which the existing power
of labor served to satisfy all material desires, and there
was no possibility of new desires being called forth by
the opportunity of gratifying them, the effect of labor-saving
improvements would be simply to reduce the
amount of labor expended. but such a state of society,
if it can anywhere be found, which i do not believe,
exists only where the human most nearly approaches
the animal. in the state of society called civilized, and
which in this inquiry we are concerned with, the very
reverse is the case. demand is not a fixed quantity,
that increases only as population increases. in each individual
it rises with his power of getting the things demanded.
man is not an ox, who, when he has eaten his
fill, lies down to chew the cud; he is the daughter of the
horse leech, who constantly asks for more. “when i get
some money,” said erasmus, “i will buy me some greek
books and afterward some clothes.” the amount of
wealth produced is nowhere commensurate with the
desire for wealth, and desire mounts with every additional
opportunity for gratification.
this being the case, the effect of labor-saving improvements
will be to increase the production of wealth. now,
for the production of wealth, two things are required—labor
and land. therefore, the effect of labor-saving
improvements will be to extend the demand for land,
and wherever the limit of the quality of land in use is
reached, to bring into cultivation lands of less natural
productiveness, or to extend cultivation on the same
lands to a point of lower natural productiveness. and
thus, while the primary effect of labor-saving improvements
is to increase the power of labor, the secondary
effect is to extend cultivation, and, where this lowers the
margin of cultivation, to increase rent. thus, where
land is entirely appropriated, as in england, or where it
is either appropriated or is capable of appropriation as
rapidly as it is needed for use, as in the united states,
the ultimate effect of labor-saving machinery or improvements
is to increase rent without increasing wages or
interest.
it is important that this be fully understood, for it
shows that effects attributed by current theories to increase
of population are really due to the progress of invention,
and explains the otherwise perplexing fact that
labor-saving machinery everywhere fails to benefit
laborers.
yet, to grasp fully this truth, it is necessary to keep
in mind what i have already more than once adverted to—the
interchangeability of wealth. i refer to this again,
only because it is so persistently forgotten or ignored by
writers who speak of agricultural production as though it
were to be distinguished from production in general, and
of food or subsistence as though it were not included in
the term wealth.
let me ask the reader to bear in mind, what has
already been sufficiently illustrated, that the possession or
production of any form of wealth is virtually the possession
or production of any other form of wealth for which
it will exchange—in order that he may clearly see that it
is not merely improvements which effect a saving in
labor directly applied to land that tend to increase rent,
but all improvements that in any way save labor.
that the labor of any individual is applied exclusively
to the production of one form of wealth is solely the
result of the division of labor. the object of labor on
the part of any individual is not the obtainment of
wealth in one particular form, but the obtainment of
wealth in all the forms that consort with his desires.
and, hence, an improvement which effects a saving in
the labor required to produce one of the things desired,
is, in effect, an increase in the power of producing all
the other things. if it take half a man’s labor to keep
him in food, and the other half to provide him clothing
and shelter, an improvement which would increase his
power of producing food would also increase his power
of providing clothing and shelter. if his desires for
more or better food, and for more or better clothing and
shelter, were equal, an improvement in one department
of labor would be precisely equivalent to a like improvement
in the other. if the improvement consisted in a
doubling of the power of his labor in producing food,
he would give one-third less labor to the production of
food, and one-third more to the providing of clothing
and shelter. if the improvement doubled his power to
provide clothing and shelter he would give one-third less
labor to the production of these things, and one-third
more to the production of food. in either case, the
result would be the same—he would be enabled with the
same labor to get one-third more in quantity or quality
of all the things he desired.
and, so, where production is carried on by the division
of labor between individuals, an increase in the power of
producing one of the things sought by production in the
aggregate adds to the power of obtaining others, and
will increase the production of the others, to an extent
determined by the proportion which the saving of labor
bears to the total amount of labor expended, and by the
relative strength of desires. i am unable to think of any
form of wealth, the demand for which would not be increased
by a saving in the labor required to produce the
others. hearses and coffins have been selected as examples
of things for which the demand is little likely to
increase; but this is true only as to quantity. that increased
power of supply would lead to a demand for
more expensive hearses and coffins, no one can doubt
who has noticed how strong is the desire to show regard
for the dead by costly funerals.
nor is the demand for food limited, as in economic
reasoning is frequently, but erroneously, assumed. subsistence
is often spoken of as though it were a fixed
quantity; but it is fixed only as having a definite
minimum. less than a certain amount will not keep a
human being alive, and less than a somewhat larger
amount will not keep a human being in good health.
but, above this minimum, the subsistence which a
human being can use may be increased almost indefinitely.
adam smith says, and ricardo indorses the
statement, that the desire for food is limited in every
man by the narrow capacity of the human stomach; but
this, manifestly, is true only in the sense that when a
man’s belly is filled, hunger is satisfied. his demands
for food have no such limit. the stomach of a louis
xiv., a louis xv., or a louis xvi., could not hold or
digest more than the stomach of a french peasant of
equal stature, yet, while a few rods of ground would
supply the black bread and herbs which constituted the
subsistence of the peasant, it took hundreds of thousands
of acres to supply the demands of the king, who, besides
his own wasteful use of the finest qualities of food, required
immense supplies for his servants, horses and
dogs. and in the common facts of daily life, in the unsatisfied,
though perhaps latent, desires which each one
has, we may see how every increase in the power of producing
any form of wealth must result in an increased
demand for land and the direct products of land. the
man who now uses coarse food, and lives in a small house,
will, as a rule, if his income be increased, use more costly
food, and move to a larger house. if he grows richer
and richer he will procure horses, servants, gardens and
lawns, his demand for the use of land constantly increasing
with his wealth. in the city where i write, is a man—but
the type of men everywhere to be found—who
used to boil his own beans and fry his own bacon, but
who, now that he has got rich, maintains a town house
that takes up a whole block and would answer for a first-class
hotel, two or three country houses with extensive
grounds, a large stud of racers, a breeding farm, private
track, etc. it certainly takes at least a thousand
times, it may be several thousand times, as much land
to supply the demands of this man now as it did when
he was poor.
and, so, every improvement or invention, no matter
what it be, which gives to labor the power of producing
more wealth, causes an increased demand for land and
its direct products, and thus tends to force down the
margin of cultivation, just as would the demand caused
by an increased population. this being the case, every
labor-saving invention, whether it be a steam plow, a
telegraph, an improved process of smelting ores, a perfecting
printing press, or a sewing machine, has a tendency
to increase rent.
or to state this truth concisely:
wealth in all its forms being the product of labor applied
to land or the products of land, any increase in the power
of labor, the demand for wealth being unsatisfied, will be
utilized in procuring more wealth, and thus increase the
demand for land.
to illustrate this effect of labor-saving machinery and
improvements, let us suppose a country where, as in all
the countries of the civilized world, the land is in the
possession of but a portion of the people. let us suppose
a permanent barrier fixed to further increase of
population, either by the enactment and strict enforcement
of an herodian law, or from such a change in
manners and morals as might result from an extensive
circulation of annie besant’s pamphlets. let the margin
of cultivation, or production, be represented by .
thus land or other natural opportunities which, from
the application of labor and capital, will yield a return
of , will just give the ordinary rate of wages and interest,
without yielding any rent; while all lands yielding
to equal applications of labor and capital more than 
will yield the excess as rent. population remaining
fixed, let there be made inventions and improvements
which will reduce by one-tenth the expenditure of labor
and capital necessary to produce the same amount of
wealth. now, either one-tenth of the labor and capital
may be freed, and production remain the same as before;
or the same amount of labor and capital may be employed,
and production be correspondingly increased.
but the industrial organization, as in all civilized countries,
is such that labor and capital, and especially labor,
must press for employment on any terms—the industrial
organization is such that mere laborers are not in a position
to demand their fair share in the new adjustment,
and that any reduction in the application of labor to production
will, at first, at least, take the form, not of giving
each laborer the same amount of produce for less work,
but of throwing some of the laborers out of work and
giving them none of the produce. now, owing to the
increased efficiency of labor secured by the new improvements,
as great a return can be secured at the point of
natural productiveness represented by , as before at .
thus, the unsatisfied desire for wealth, the competition
of labor and capital for employment, would insure the
extension of the margin of production, we will say to ,
and thus rent would be increased by the difference between
 and , while wages and interest, in quantity,
would be no more than before, and, in proportion to the
whole produce, would be less. there would be a
greater production of wealth, but land owners would get
the whole benefit, subject to temporary deductions,
which will be hereafter stated.
if invention and improvement still go on, the efficiency
of labor will be still further increased, and the amount
of labor and capital necessary to produce a given result
further diminished. the same causes will lead to the
utilization of this new gain in productive power for the
production of more wealth; the margin of cultivation
will be again extended, and rent will increase, both in
proportion and amount, without any increase in wages
and interest. and, so, as invention and improvement
go on, constantly adding to the efficiency of labor, the
margin of production will be pushed lower and lower,
and rent constantly increased, though population should
remain stationary.
i do not mean to say that the lowering of the margin
of production would always exactly correspond with the
increase in productive power, any more than i mean to
say that the process would be one of clearly defined
steps. whether, in any particular case, the lowering of
the margin of production lags behind or exceeds the increase
in productive power, will depend, i conceive, upon
what may be called the area of productiveness that can
be utilized before cultivation is forced to the next lowest
point. for instance, if the margin of cultivation be at
, improvements which enable the same produce to be
obtained with one-tenth less capital and labor will not
carry the margin to , if the area having a productiveness
of  is sufficient to employ all the labor and
capital displaced from the cultivation of the superior
lands. in this case, the margin of cultivation would
rest at , and rents would be increased by the difference
between  and , and wages and interest by
the difference between  and . but if, with the same
increase in productive power the area of productiveness
between  and  should not be sufficient to employ all
the displaced labor and capital, the margin of cultivation
must, if the same amount of labor and capital press for
employment, be carried lower than . in this case,
rent would gain more than the increase in the product,
and wages and interest would be less than before the improvements
which increased productive power.
nor is it precisely true that the labor set free by each
improvement will all be driven to seek employment in
the production of more wealth. the increased power of
satisfaction, which each fresh improvement gives to a
certain portion of the community, will be utilized in demanding
leisure or services, as well as in demanding
wealth. some laborers will, therefore, become idlers
and some will pass from the ranks of productive to those
of unproductive laborers—the proportion of which, as
observation shows, tends to increase with the progress of
society.
but, as i shall presently refer to a cause, as yet unconsidered,
which constantly tends to lower the margin of
cultivation, to steady the advance of rent, and even carry
it beyond the proportion that would be fixed by the
actual margin of cultivation, it is not worth while to
take into account these perturbations in the downward
movement of the margin of cultivation and the upward
movement of rent. all i wish to make clear is that,
without any increase in population, the progress of invention
constantly tends to give a larger proportion of
the produce to the owners of land, and a smaller and
smaller proportion to labor and capital.
and, as we can assign no limits to the progress of invention,
neither can we assign any limits to the increase
of rent, short of the whole produce. for, if labor-saving
inventions went on until perfection was attained, and
the necessity of labor in the production of wealth was
entirely done away with, then everything that the earth
could yield could be obtained without labor, and the
margin of cultivation would be extended to zero. wages
would be nothing, and interest would be nothing, while
rent would take everything. for the owners of the
land, being enabled without labor to obtain all the wealth
that could be procured from nature, there would be no
use for either labor or capital, and no possible way in
which either could compel any share of the wealth produced.
and no matter how small population might be,
if anybody but the land owners continued to exist, it
would be at the whim or by the mercy of the land owners—they
would be maintained either for the amusement
of the land owners, or, as paupers, by their bounty.
this point, of the absolute perfection of labor-saving
inventions, may seem very remote, if not impossible of
attainment; but it is a point toward which the march of
invention is every day more strongly tending. and in
the thinning out of population in the agricultural districts
of great britain, where small farms are being converted
into larger ones, and in the great machine-worked
wheat-fields of california and dakota, where one may
ride for miles and miles through waving grain without
seeing a human habitation, there are already suggestions
of the final goal toward which the whole civilized world
is hastening. the steam plow and the reaping machine
are creating in the modern world latifundia of the same
kind that the influx of slaves from foreign wars created
in ancient italy. and to many a poor fellow as he is
shoved out of his accustomed place and forced to move
on—as the roman farmers were forced to join the proletariat
of the great city, or sell their blood for bread in
the ranks of the legions—it seems as though these labor-saving
inventions were in themselves a curse, and we
hear men talking of work, as though the wearying strain
of the muscles were, in itself, a thing to be desired.
in what has preceded, i have, of course, spoken of inventions
and improvements when generally diffused. it
is hardly necessary to say that as long as an invention or
an improvement is used by so few that they derive a
special advantage from it, it does not, to the extent of
this special advantage, affect the general distribution of
wealth. so, in regard to the limited monopolies created
by patent laws, or by the causes which give the same
character to railroad and telegraph lines, etc. although
generally mistaken for profits of capital, the special profits
thus arising are really the returns of monopoly, as has
been explained in a previous chapter, and, to the extent
that they subtract from the benefits of an improvement,
do not primarily affect general distribution. for instance,
the benefits of a railroad or similar improvement
in cheapening transportation are diffused or monopolized,
as its charges are reduced to a rate which will yield ordinary
interest on the capital invested, or kept up to a
point which will yield an extraordinary return, or cover
the stealing of the constructors or directors. and, as is
well known, the rise in rent or land values corresponds
with the reduction in the charges.
as has before been said, in the improvements which
advance rent, are not only to be included the improvements
which directly increase productive power, but also
such improvements in government, manners, and morals
as indirectly increase it. considered as material forces,
the effect of all these is to increase productive power,
and, like improvements in the productive arts, their
benefit is ultimately monopolized by the possessors of
the land. a notable instance of this is to be found in
the abolition of protection by england. free trade has
enormously increased the wealth of great britain, without
lessening pauperism. it has simply increased rent.
and if the corrupt governments of our great american
cities were to be made models of purity and economy, the
effect would simply be to increase the value of land, not
to raise either wages or interest.
we have now seen that while advancing population
tends to advance rent, so all the causes that in a progressive
state of society operate to increase the productive
power of labor tend, also, to advance rent, and not
to advance wages or interest. the increased production
of wealth goes ultimately to the owners of land in increased
rent; and, although, as improvement goes on,
advantages may accrue to individuals not land holders,
which concentrate in their hands considerable portions of
the increased produce, yet there is in all this improvement
nothing which tends to increase the general return
either to labor or to capital.
but there is a cause, not yet adverted to, which must
be taken into consideration fully to explain the influence
of material progress upon the distribution of wealth.
that cause is the confident expectation of the future
enhancement of land values, which arises in all progressive
countries from the steady increase of rent, and which
leads to speculation, or the holding of land for a higher
price than it would then otherwise bring.
we have hitherto assumed, as is generally assumed in
elucidations of the theory of rent, that the actual margin
of cultivation always coincides with what may be termed
the necessary margin of cultivation—that is to say, we
have assumed that cultivation extends to less productive
points only as it becomes necessary from the fact that
natural opportunities are at the more productive points
fully utilized.
this, probably, is the case in stationary or very slowly
progressing communities, but in rapidly progressing
communities, where the swift and steady increase of rent
gives confidence to calculations of further increase, it is
not the case. in such communities, the confident expectation
of increased prices produces, to a greater or
less extent, the effects of a combination among land
holders, and tends to the withholding of land from use,
in expectation of higher prices, thus forcing the margin
of cultivation farther than required by the necessities of
production.
this cause must operate to some extent in all progressive
communities, though in such countries as england,
where the tenant system prevails in agriculture, it may
be shown more in the selling price of land than in the
agricultural margin of cultivation, or actual rent. but
in communities like the united states, where the user of
land generally prefers, if he can, to own it, and where
there is a great extent of land to overrun, it operates
with enormous power.
the immense area over which the population of the
united states is scattered shows this. the man who
sets out from the eastern seaboard in search of the margin
of cultivation, where he may obtain land without
paying rent, must, like the man who swam the river to
get a drink, pass for long distances through half-tilled
farms, and traverse vast areas of virgin soil, before he
reaches the point where land can be had free of rent—i.e.,
by homestead entry or pre-emption. he (and, with
him, the margin of cultivation) is forced so much farther
than he otherwise need have gone, by the speculation
which is holding these unused lands in expectation of increased
value in the future. and when he settles, he
will, in his turn, take up, if he can, more land than he
can use, in the belief that it will soon become valuable;
and so those who follow him are again forced farther on
than the necessities of production require, carrying the
margin of cultivation to still less productive, because still
more remote points.
the same thing may be seen in every rapidly growing
city. if the land of superior quality as to location were
always fully used before land of inferior quality were
resorted to, no vacant lots would be left as a city extended,
nor would we find miserable shanties in the midst
of costly buildings. these lots, some of them extremely
valuable, are withheld from use, or from the full use to
which they might be put, because their owners, not being
able or not wishing to improve them, prefer, in expectation
of the advance of land values, to hold them for a
higher rate than could now be obtained from those willing
to improve them. and, in consequence of this land
being withheld from use, or from the full use of which
it is capable, the margin of the city is pushed away so
much farther from the center.
but when we reach the limits of the growing city—the
actual margin of building, which corresponds to the margin
of cultivation in agriculture—we shall not find the
land purchasable at its value for agricultural purposes, as
it would be were rent determined simply by present requirements;
but we shall find that for a long distance
beyond the city land bears a speculative value, based
upon the belief that it will be required in the future for
urban purposes, and that to reach the point at which land
can be purchased at a price not based upon urban rent,
we must go very far beyond the actual margin of urban
use.
or, to take another case of a different kind, instances
similar to which may doubtless be found in every locality.
there is in marin county, within easy access of san
francisco, a fine belt of redwood timber. naturally,
this would be first used, before resorting for the supply
of the san francisco market to timber lands at a much
greater distance. but it yet remains uncut, and lumber
procured many miles beyond is daily hauled past it on
the railroad, because its owner prefers to hold for the
greater price it will bring in the future. thus, by the
withholding from use of this body of timber, the margin
of production of redwood is forced so much farther up
and down the coast range. that mineral land, when
reduced to private ownership, is frequently withheld
from use while poorer deposits are worked, is well known,
and in new states it is common to find individuals who
are called “land poor”—that is, who remain poor, sometimes
almost to deprivation, because they insist on holding
land, which they themselves cannot use, at prices at
which no one else can profitably use it.
to recur now to the illustration we made use of in the
preceding chapter: with the margin of cultivation
standing at , an increase in the power of production
takes place, which renders the same result obtainable
with one-tenth less labor. for reasons before stated,
the margin of production must now be forced down, and
if it rests at , the return to labor and capital will be
the same as before, when the margin stood at .
whether it will be forced to  or be forced lower depends
upon what i have called the area of productiveness which
intervenes between  and . but if the confident expectation
of a further increase of rents leads the land
owners to demand  rent for  land,  for , and  for
 land, and to withhold their land from use until these
terms are complied with, the area of productiveness may
be so reduced that the margin of cultivation must fall to
 or even lower; and thus, as the result of the increase
in the efficiency of labor, laborers would get less than
before, while interest would be proportionately reduced,
and rent would increase in greater ratio than the increase
in productive power.
whether we formulate it as an extension of the margin
of production, or as a carrying of the rent line beyond
the margin of production, the influence of speculation in
land in increasing rent is a great fact which cannot be
ignored in any complete theory of the distribution of
wealth in progressive countries. it is the force, evolved
by material progress, which tends constantly to increase
rent in a greater ratio than progress increases production,
and thus constantly tends, as material progress goes on
and productive power increases, to reduce wages, not
merely relatively, but absolutely. it is this expansive
force which, operating with great power in new countries,
brings to them, seemingly long before their time,
the social diseases of older countries; produces “tramps”
on virgin acres, and breeds paupers on half-tilled soil.
in short, the general and steady advance in land values
in a progressive community necessarily produces that additional
tendency to advance which is seen in the case of
commodities when any general and continuous cause operates
to increase their price. as, during the rapid depreciation
of currency which marked the latter days of
the southern confederacy, the fact that whatever was
bought one day could be sold for a higher price the next,
operated to carry up the prices of commodities even
faster than the depreciation of the currency, so does the
steady increase of land values, which material progress
produces, operate still further to accelerate the increase.
we see this secondary cause operating in full force in
those manias of land speculation which mark the growth
of new communities; but though these are the abnormal
and occasional manifestations, it is undeniable that the
cause steadily operates, with greater or less intensity, in
all progressive societies.
the cause which limits speculation in commodities,
the tendency of increasing price to draw forth additional
supplies, cannot limit the speculative advance in land
values, as land is a fixed quantity, which human agency
can neither increase nor diminish; but there is nevertheless
a limit to the price of land, in the minimum required
by labor and capital as the condition of engaging in production.
if it were possible continuously to reduce
wages until zero were reached, it would be possible continuously
to increase rent until it swallowed up the
whole produce. but as wages cannot be permanently
reduced below the point at which laborers will consent
to work and reproduce, nor interest below the point at
which capital will be devoted to production, there is a
limit which restrains the speculative advance of rent.
hence speculation cannot have the same scope to advance
rent in countries where wages and interest are
already near the minimum, as in countries where they
are considerably above it. yet that there is in all progressive
countries a constant tendency in the speculative
advance of rent to overpass the limit where production
would cease, is, i think, shown by recurring seasons of
industrial paralysis—a matter which will be more fully
examined in the next book.
to whomsoever the soil at any time belongs, to him belong the
fruits of it. white parasols, and elephants mad with pride are the
flowers of a grant of land.—sir wm. jones’ translation of an indian
grant of land, found at tanna.
the widow is gathering nettles for her children’s dinner; a perfumed
seigneur, delicately lounging in the œil de bœuf, hath an
alchemy whereby he will extract from her the third nettle, and call
it rent.—carlyle.
our long inquiry is ended. we may now marshal the
results.
to begin with the industrial depressions, to account
for which so many contradictory and self-contradictory
theories are broached.
a consideration of the manner in which the speculative
advance in land values cuts down the earnings of
labor and capital and checks production leads, i think,
irresistibly to the conclusion that this is the main cause
of those periodical industrial depressions to which every
civilized country, and all civilized countries together,
seem increasingly liable.
i do not mean to say that there are not other proximate
causes. the growing complexity and interdependence
of the machinery of production, which makes each
shock or stoppage propagate itself through a widening
circle; the essential defect of currencies which contract
when most needed, and the tremendous alternations in
volume that occur in the simpler forms of commercial
credit, which, to a much greater extent than currency in
any form, constitute the medium or flux of exchanges;
the protective tariffs which present artificial barriers to
the interplay of productive forces, and other similar
causes, undoubtedly bear important part in producing
and continuing what are called hard times. but, both
from the consideration of principles and the observation
of phenomena, it is clear that the great initiatory cause
is to be looked for in the speculative advance of land
values.
in the preceding chapter i have shown that the speculative
advance in land values tends to press the margin of
cultivation, or production, beyond its normal limit, thus
compelling labor and capital to accept of a smaller return,
or (and this is the only way they can resist the
tendency) to cease production. now, it is not only
natural that labor and capital should resist the crowding
down of wages and interest by the speculative advance of
rent, but they are driven to this in self-defense, inasmuch
as there is a minimum of return below which labor cannot
exist nor capital be maintained. hence, from the
fact of speculation in land, we may infer all the phenomena
which mark these recurring seasons of industrial
depression.
given a progressive community, in which population is
increasing and one improvement succeeds another, and
land must constantly increase in value. this steady increase
naturally leads to speculation in which future increase
is anticipated, and land values are carried beyond
the point at which, under the existing conditions of
production, their accustomed returns would be left to
labor and capital. production, therefore, begins to stop.
not that there is necessarily, or even probably, an absolute
diminution in production; but that there is what in
a progressive community would be equivalent to an absolute
diminution of production in a stationary community—a
failure in production to increase proportionately,
owing to the failure of new increments of labor and
capital to find employment at the accustomed rates.
this stoppage of production at some points must necessarily
show itself at other points of the industrial network,
in a cessation of demand, which would again check
production there, and thus the paralysis would communicate
itself through all the interlacings of industry and
commerce, producing everywhere a partial disjointing of
production and exchange, and resulting in the phenomena
that seem to show overproduction or overconsumption,
according to the standpoint from which
they are viewed.
the period of depression thus ensuing would continue
until () the speculative advance in rents had been lost;
or () the increase in the efficiency of labor, owing to the
growth of population and the progress of improvement,
had enabled the normal rent line to overtake the speculative
rent line; or () labor and capital had become
reconciled to engaging in production for smaller returns.
or, most probably, all three of these causes would co-operate
to produce a new equilibrium, at which all the
forces of production would again engage, and a season of
activity ensue; whereupon rent would begin to advance
again, a speculative advance again take place, production
again be checked, and the same round be gone over.
in the elaborate and complicated system of production
which is characteristic of modern civilization, where,
moreover, there is no such thing as a distinct and independent
industrial community, but geographically or
politically separated communities blend and interlace
their industrial organizations in different modes and
varying measures, it is not to be expected that effect
should be seen to follow cause as clearly and definitely as
would be the case in a simpler development of industry,
and in a community forming a complete and distinct industrial
whole; but, nevertheless, the phenomena actually
presented by these alternate seasons of activity and
depression clearly correspond with those we have inferred
from the speculative advance of rent.
deduction thus shows the actual phenomena as resulting
from the principle. if we reverse the process, it is
as easy by induction to reach the principle by tracing up
the phenomena.
these seasons of depression are always preceded by
seasons of activity and speculation, and on all hands the
connection between the two is admitted—the depression
being looked upon as the reaction from the speculation,
as the headache of the morning is the reaction from the
debauch of the night. but as to the manner in which
the depression results from the speculation, there are two
classes or schools of opinion, as the attempts made on
both sides of the atlantic to account for the present industrial
depression will show.
one school says that the speculation produced the depression
by causing overproduction, and point to the
warehouses filled with goods that cannot be sold at
remunerative prices, to mills closed or working on half
time, to mines shut down and steamers laid up, to money
lying idly in bank vaults, and workmen compelled to
idleness and privation. they point to these facts as
showing that the production has exceeded the demand
for consumption, and they point, moreover, to the fact
that when government during war enters the field as an
enormous consumer, brisk times prevail, as in the united
states during the civil war and in england during the
napoleonic struggle.
the other school says that the speculation has produced
the depression by leading to overconsumption,
and point to full warehouses, rusting steamers, closed
mills, and idle workmen as evidences of a cessation of
effective demand, which, they say, evidently results from
the fact that people, made extravagant by a fictitious
prosperity, have lived beyond their means, and are now
obliged to retrench—that is, to consume less wealth.
they point, moreover, to the enormous consumption of
wealth by wars, by the building of unremunerative railroads,
by loans to bankrupt governments, etc., as extravagances
which, though not felt at the time, just as the
spendthrift does not at the moment feel the impairment
of his fortune, must now be made up by a season of
reduced consumption.
now, each of these theories evidently expresses one
side or phase of a general truth, but each of them evidently
fails to comprehend the full truth. as an explanation
of the phenomena, each is equally and utterly
preposterous.
for while the great masses of men want more wealth
than they can get, and while they are willing to give for
it that which is the basis and raw material of wealth—their
labor—how can there be overproduction? and
while the machinery of production wastes and producers
are condemned to unwilling idleness, how can there be
overconsumption?
when, with the desire to consume more, there co-exist
the ability and willingness to produce more, industrial
and commercial paralysis cannot be charged either to
overproduction or to overconsumption. manifestly,
the trouble is that production and consumption cannot
meet and satisfy each other.
how does this inability arise? it is evidently and by
common consent the result of speculation. but of speculation
in what?
certainly not of speculation in things which are the
products of labor—in agricultural or mineral productions,
or manufactured goods, for the effect of speculation in
such things, as is well shown in current treatises that
spare me the necessity of illustration, is simply to equalize
supply and demand, and to steady the interplay of
production and consumption by an action analogous to
that of a fly-wheel in a machine.
therefore, if speculation be the cause of these industrial
depressions, it must be speculation in things not the
production of labor, but yet necessary to the exertion of
labor in the production of wealth—of things of fixed
quantity; that is to say, it must be speculation in land.
that land speculation is the true cause of industrial
depression is, in the united states, clearly evident. in
each period of industrial activity land values have steadily
risen, culminating in speculation which carried them
up in great jumps. this has been invariably followed by
a partial cessation of production, and its correlative, a
cessation of effective demand (dull trade), generally
accompanied by a commercial crash; and then has succeeded
a period of comparative stagnation, during which
the equilibrium has been again slowly established, and
the same round been run again. this relation is
observable throughout the civilized world. periods of
industrial activity always culminate in a speculative
advance of land values, followed by symptoms of checked
production, generally shown at first by cessation of demand
from the newer countries, where the advance in
land values has been greatest.
that this must be the main explanation of these
periods of depression, will be seen by an analysis of the
facts.
all trade, let it be remembered, is the exchange of
commodities for commodities, and hence the cessation
of demand for some commodities, which marks the depression
of trade, is really a cessation in the supply of
other commodities. that dealers find their sales declining
and manufacturers find orders falling off, while the
things which they have to sell, or stand ready to make,
are things for which there is yet a widespread desire,
simply shows that the supply of other things, which in
the course of trade would be given for them, has declined.
in common parlance we say that “buyers have
no money,” or that “money is becoming scarce,” but in
talking in this way we ignore the fact that money is but
the medium of exchange. what the would-be buyers
really lack is not money, but commodities which they
can turn into money—what is really becoming scarcer, is
produce of some sort. the diminution of the effective
demand of consumers is therefore but a result of the
diminution of production.
this is seen very clearly by storekeepers in a manufacturing
town when the mills are shut down and operatives
thrown out of work. it is the cessation of production
which deprives the operatives of means to make the
purchases they desire, and thus leaves the storekeeper
with what, in view of the lessened demand, is a superabundant
stock, and forces him to discharge some of his
clerks and otherwise reduce his demands. and the cessation
of demand (i am speaking, of course, of general
cases and not of any alteration in relative demand from
such causes as change of fashion), which has left the
manufacturer with superabundant stock and compelled
him to discharge his hands, must arise in the same way.
somewhere, it may be at the other end of the world, a
check in production has produced a check in the demand
for consumption. that demand is lessened without want
being satisfied, shows that production is somewhere
checked.
people want the things the manufacturer makes as
much as ever, just as the operatives want the things the
storekeeper has to sell. but they do not have as much
to give for them. production has somewhere been
checked, and this reduction in the supply of some things
has shown itself in cessation of demand for others, the
check propagating itself through the whole framework
of industry and exchange. now, the industrial pyramid
manifestly rests on the land. the primary and fundamental
occupations, which create a demand for all
others, are evidently those which extract wealth from
nature, and, hence, if we trace from one exchange point
to another, and from one occupation to another, this
check to production, which shows itself in decreased
purchasing power, we must ultimately find it in some
obstacle which checks labor in expending itself on land.
and that obstacle, it is clear, is the speculative advance
in rent, or the value of land, which produces the same
effects, as in fact, it is, a lock-out of labor and capital by
land owners. this check to production, beginning at
the basis of interlaced industry, propagates itself from
exchange point to exchange point, cessation of supply
becoming failure of demand, until, so to speak, the
whole machine is thrown out of gear, and the spectacle
is everywhere presented of labor going to waste while
laborers suffer from want.
this strange and unnatural spectacle of large numbers
of willing men who cannot find employment is enough
to suggest the true cause to whomsoever can think consecutively.
for, though custom has dulled us to it, it is
a strange and unnatural thing that men who wish to labor,
in order to satisfy their wants, cannot find the opportunity—as,
since labor is that which produces wealth, the
man who seeks to exchange labor for food, clothing, or
any other form of wealth, is like one who proposes to
give bullion for coin, or wheat for flour. we talk about
the supply of labor and the demand for labor, but, evidently,
these are only relative terms. the supply of
labor is everywhere the same—two hands always come
into the world with one mouth, twenty-one boys to every
twenty girls; and the demand for labor must always
exist as long as men want things which labor alone can
procure. we talk about the “want of work,” but, evidently,
it is not work that is short while want continues;
evidently, the supply of labor cannot be too great, nor
the demand for labor too small, when people suffer for
the lack of things that labor produces. the real trouble
must be that supply is somehow prevented from satisfying
demand, that somewhere there is an obstacle which
prevents labor from producing the things that laborers
want.
take the case of any one of these vast masses of unemployed
men, to whom, though he never heard of malthus,
it to-day seems that there are too many people in
the world. in his own wants, in the needs of his anxious
wife, in the demands of his half-cared-for, perhaps even
hungry and shivering children, there is demand enough
for labor, heaven knows! in his own willing hands is
the supply. put him on a solitary island, and though cut
off from all the enormous advantages which the co-operation,
combination, and machinery of a civilized
community give to the productive powers of man, yet his
two hands can fill the mouths and keep warm the backs
that depend upon them. yet where productive power is
as its highest development they cannot. why? is it
not because in the one case he has access to the material
and forces of nature, and in the other this access is
denied?
is it not the fact that labor is thus shut off from
nature which can alone explain the state of things that
compels men to stand idle who would willingly supply
their wants by their labor? the proximate cause of enforced
idleness with one set of men may be the cessation
of demand on the part of other men for the particular
things they produce, but trace this cause from point to
point, from occupation to occupation, and you will find
that enforced idleness in one trade is caused by enforced
idleness in another, and that the paralysis which produces
dullness in all trades cannot be said to spring from
too great a supply of labor or too small a demand for
labor, but must proceed from the fact that supply cannot
meet demand by producing the things which satisfy want
and are the object of labor.
now, what is necessary to enable labor to produce
these things, is land. when we speak of labor creating
wealth, we speak metaphorically. man creates nothing.
the whole human race, were they to labor forever, could
not create the tiniest mote that floats in a sunbeam—could
not make this rolling sphere one atom heavier or
one atom lighter. in producing wealth, labor, with the
aid of natural forces, but works up, into the forms desired,
pre-existing matter, and, to produce wealth, must,
therefore, have access to this matter and to these forces—that
is to say, to land. the land is the source of all
wealth. it is the mine from which must be drawn the
ore that labor fashions. it is the substance to which
labor gives the form. and, hence, when labor cannot
satisfy its wants, may we not with certainty infer that it
can be from no other cause than that labor is denied
access to land?
when in all trades there is what we call scarcity
of employment; when, everywhere, labor wastes, while
desire is unsatisfied, must not the obstacle which prevents
labor from producing the wealth it needs, lie at
the foundation of the industrial structure? that foundation
is land. milliners, optical instrument makers,
gilders, and polishers, are not the pioneers of new settlements.
miners did not go to california or australia because
shoemakers, tailors, machinists, and printers were
there. but those trades followed the miners, just as
they are now following the gold diggers into the black
hills and the diamond diggers into south africa. it is
not the storekeeper who is the cause of the farmer, but
the farmer who brings the storekeeper. it is not the
growth of the city that develops the country, but the
development of the country that makes the city grow.
and, hence, when, through all trades, men willing to
work cannot find opportunity to do so, the difficulty
must arise in the employment that creates a demand for
all other employments—it must be because labor is shut
out from land.
in leeds or lowell, in philadelphia or manchester, in
london or new york, it may require a grasp of first
principles to see this; but where industrial development
has not become so elaborate, nor the extreme links of the
chain so widely separated, one has but to look at obvious
facts. although not yet thirty years old, the city of san
francisco, both in population and in commercial importance,
ranks among the great cities of the world, and,
next to new york, is the most metropolitan of american
cities. though not yet thirty years old, she has had for
some years an increasing number of unemployed men.
clearly, here, it is because men cannot find employment
in the country that there are so many unemployed in the
city; for when the harvest opens they go trooping out,
and when it is over they come trooping back to the city
again. if these now unemployed men were producing
wealth from the land, they would not only be employing
themselves, but would be employing all the mechanics of
the city, giving custom to the storekeepers, trade to the
merchants, audiences to the theaters, and subscribers
and advertisements to the newspapers—creating effective
demand that would be felt in new england and old
england, and wherever throughout the world come the
articles that, when they have the means to pay for them,
such a population consumes.
now, why is it that this unemployed labor cannot
employ itself upon the land? not that the land is all in
use. though all the symptoms that in older countries
are taken as showing a redundancy of population are beginning
to manifest themselves in san francisco, it is
idle to talk of redundancy of population in a state that
with greater natural resources than france has not yet a
million of people. within a few miles of san francisco
is unused land enough to give employment to every man
who wants it. i do not mean to say that every unemployed
man could turn farmer or build himself a house,
if he had the land; but that enough could and would do
so to give employment to the rest. what is it, then,
that prevents labor from employing itself on this land?
simply, that it has been monopolized and is held at
speculative prices, based not upon present value, but
upon the added value that will come with the future
growth of population.
what may thus be seen in san francisco by whoever is
willing to see, may, i doubt not, be seen as clearly in
other places.
the present commercial and industrial depression,
which first clearly manifested itself in the united states
in , and has spread with greater or less intensity over
the civilized world, is largely attributed to the undue extension
of the railroad system, with which there are many
things that seem to show its relation. i am fully conscious
that the construction of railroads before they are actually
needed may divert capital and labor from more to less
productive employments, and make a community poorer
instead of richer; and when the railroad mania was at its
highest, i pointed this out in a political tract addressed
to the people of california; but to assign to this wasting
of capital such a widespread industrial dead-lock seems
to me like attributing an unusually low tide to the drawing
of a few extra bucketfuls of water. the waste of
capital and labor during the civil war was enormously
greater than it could possibly be by the construction of
unnecessary railroads, but without producing any such
result. and, certainly, there seems to be little sense in
talking of the waste of capital and labor in railroads as
causing this depression, when the prominent feature of
the depression has been the superabundance of capital
and labor seeking employment.
yet, that there is a connection between the rapid construction
of railroads and industrial depression, any one
who understands what increased land values mean, and
who has noticed the effect which the construction of
railroads has upon land speculation, can easily see.
wherever a railroad was built or projected, lands sprang
up in value under the influence of speculation, and thousands
of millions of dollars were added to the nominal
values which capital and labor were asked to pay outright,
or to pay in installments, as the price of being
allowed to go to work and produce wealth. the inevitable
result was to check production, and this check
to production propagated itself in a cessation of demand,
which checked production to the furthest verge of the
wide circle of exchanges, operating with accumulated
force in the centers of the great industrial commonwealth
into which commerce links the civilized world.
the primary operations of this cause can, perhaps, be
nowhere more clearly traced than in california, which,
from its comparative isolation, has constituted a peculiarly
well-defined community.
until almost its close, the last decade was marked in
california by the same industrial activity which was
shown in the northern states, and, in fact, throughout
the civilized world, when the interruption of exchanges
and the disarrangement of industry caused by the war
and the blockade of southern ports is considered. this
activity could not be attributed to inflation of the currency
or to lavish expenditures of the general government,
to which in the eastern states the comparative
activity of the same period has since been attributed;
for, in spite of legal tender laws, the pacific coast adhered
to a coin currency, and the taxation of the federal government
took away very much more than was returned
in federal expenditures. it was attributable solely to
normal causes, for, though placer mining was declining,
the nevada silver mines were being opened, wheat and
wool were beginning to take the place of gold in the
table of exports, and an increasing population and the
improvement in the methods of production and exchange
were steadily adding to the efficiency of labor.
with this material progress went on a steady enhancement
in land values—its consequence. this steady
advance engendered a speculative advance, which, with
the railroad era, ran up land values in every direction.
if the population of california had steadily grown when
the long, costly, fever-haunted isthmus route was the
principal mode of communication with the atlantic
states, it must, it was thought, increase enormously with
the opening of a road which would bring new york
harbor and san francisco bay within seven days’ easy
travel, and when in the state itself the locomotive took
the place of stage coach and freight wagon. the expected
increase of land values which would thus accrue
was discounted in advance. lots on the outskirts of
san francisco rose hundreds and thousands per cent.,
and farming land was taken up and held for high prices,
in whichever direction an immigrant was likely to go.
but the anticipated rush of immigrants did not take
place. labor and capital could not pay so much for
land and make fair returns. production was checked,
if not absolutely, at least relatively. as the transcontinental
railroad approached completion, instead of increased
activity symptoms of depression began to manifest
themselves; and, when it was completed, to the
season of activity had succeeded a period of depression
which has not since been fully recovered from, during
which wages and interest have steadily fallen. what i
have called the actual rent line, or margin of cultivation,
is thus (as well as by the steady march of improvement
and increase of population, which, though slower than it
otherwise would have been, still goes on) approaching
the speculative rent line, but the tenacity with which a
speculative advance in the price of land is maintained in
a developing community is well known.
now, what thus went on in california went on in every
progressive section of the union. everywhere that a
railroad was built or projected, land was monopolized in
anticipation, and the benefit of the improvement was
discounted in increased land values. the speculative
advance in rent thus outrunning the normal advance,
production was checked, demand was decreased, and
labor and capital were turned back from occupations
more directly concerned with land, to glut those in
which the value of land is a less perceptible element. it
is thus that the rapid extension of railroads is related to
the succeeding depression.
and what went on in the united states went on in a
greater or less obvious degree all over the progressive
world. everywhere land values have been steadily increasing
with material progress, and everywhere this
increase begot a speculative advance. the impulse of
the primary cause not only radiated from the newer sections
of the union to the older sections, and from the
united states to europe, but everywhere the primary
cause was acting. and, hence, a world-wide depression
of industry and commerce, begotten of a world-wide
material progress.
there is one thing which, it may seem, i have overlooked,
in attributing these industrial depressions to the
speculative advance of rent or land values as a main and
primary cause. the operation of such a cause, though
it may be rapid, must be progressive—resembling a pressure,
not a blow. but these industrial depressions seem
to come suddenly—they have, at their beginning, the
character of a paroxysm, followed by a comparative
lethargy, as if of exhaustion. everything seems to be
going on as usual, commerce and industry vigorous and
expanding, when suddenly there comes a shock, as of a
thunderbolt out of a clear sky—a bank breaks, a great
manufacturer or merchant fails, and, as if a blow had
thrilled through the entire industrial organization, failure
succeeds failure, and on every side workmen are
discharged from employment, and capital shrinks into
profitless security.
let me explain what i think to be the reason of this:
to do so, we must take into account the manner in
which exchanges are made, for it is by exchanges that all
the varied forms of industry are linked together into one
mutually related and interdependent organization. to
enable exchanges to be made between producers far removed
by space and time, large stocks must be kept in
store and in transit, and this, as i have already explained,
i take to be the great function of capital, in addition to
that of supplying tools and seed. these exchanges are,
perhaps necessarily, largely made upon credit—that is to
say, the advance upon one side is made before the return
is received on the other.
now, without stopping to inquire as to the causes, it is
manifest that these advances are, as a rule, from the
more highly organized and later developed industries to
the more fundamental. the west coast african, for
instance, who exchanges palm oil and cocoanuts for
gaudy calico and birmingham idols, gets his return immediately;
the english merchant, on the contrary, has
to lay out of his goods a long while before he gets his
returns. the farmer can sell his crop as soon as it is
harvested, and for cash; the great manufacturer must
keep a large stock, send his goods long distances to
agents, and, generally, sell on time. thus, as advances
and credits are generally from what we may call the secondary,
to what we may call the primary industries, it
follows that any check to production which proceeds
from the latter will not immediately manifest itself in
the former. the system of advances and credits constitutes,
as it were, an elastic connection, which will give
considerably before breaking, but which, when it breaks,
will break with a snap.
or, to illustrate in another way what i mean: the great
pyramid of gizeh is composed of layers of masonry, the
bottom layer, of course, supporting all the rest. could
we by some means gradually contract this bottom layer,
the upper part of the pyramid would for some time
retain its form, and then, when gravitation at length
overcame the adhesiveness of the material, would not
diminish gradually and regularly, but would break off
suddenly, in large pieces. now, the industrial organization
may be likened to such a pyramid. what is the
proportion which in a given stage of social development
the various industries bear to each other, it is difficult,
and perhaps impossible, to say; but it is obvious that
there is such a proportion, just as in a printer’s font of
type there is a certain proportion between the various
letters. each form of industry, as it is developed by
division of labor, springs from and rises out of the others,
and all rest ultimately upon land; for, without land,
labor is as impotent as would be a man in void space.
to make the illustration closer to the condition of a
progressive country, imagine a pyramid composed of superimposed
layers—the whole constantly growing and
expanding. imagine the growth of the layer nearest the
ground to be checked. the others will for a time keep
on expanding—in fact, for the moment, the tendency
will be to quicker expansion, for the vital force which is
refused scope on the ground layer will strive to find vent
in those above—until, at length, there is a decided overbalance
and a sudden crumbling along all the faces of
the pyramid.
that the main cause and general course of the recurring
paroxysms of industrial depression, which are becoming
so marked a feature of modern social life, are thus explained,
is, i think, clear. and let the reader remember
that it is only the main causes and general courses of
such phenomena that we are seeking to trace or that, in
fact, it is possible to trace with any exactness. political
economy can deal, and has need to deal, only with
general tendencies. the derivative forces are so multiform,
the actions and reactions are so various, that the
exact character of the phenomena cannot be predicted.
we know that if a tree is cut through it will fall, but
precisely in what direction will be determined by the inclination
of the trunk, the spread of the branches, the
impact of the blows, the quarter and force of the wind;
and even a bird lighting on a twig, or a frightened
squirrel leaping from bough to bough, will not be without
its influence. we know that an insult will arouse a
feeling of resentment in the human breast, but to say how
far and in what way it will manifest itself, would require
a synthesis which would build up the entire man and all
his surroundings, past and present.
the manner in which the sufficient cause to which i
have traced them explains the main features of these industrial
depressions is in striking contrast with the contradictory
and self-contradictory attempts which have
been made to explain them on the current theories of the
distribution of wealth. that a speculative advance in
rent or land values invariably precedes each of these sea
sons of industrial depression is everywhere clear. that
they bear to each other the relations of cause and effect,
is obvious to whomsoever considers the necessary relations
between land and labor.
and that the present depression is running its course,
and that, in the manner previously indicated, a new
equilibrium is being established, which will result in
another season of comparative activity, may already be
seen in the united states. the normal rent line and the
speculative rent line are being brought together: () by
the fall in speculative land values, which is very evident
in the reduction of rents and shrinkage of real estate
values in the principal cities. () by the increased efficiency
of labor, arising from the growth of population and
the utilization of new inventions and discoveries, some of
which almost as important as that of the use of steam we
seem to be on the verge of grasping. () by the lowering
of the habitual standard of interest and wages, which,
as to interest, is shown by the negotiation of a government
loan at four per cent., and as to wages is too generally
evident for any special citation. when the equilibrium
is thus re-established, a season of renewed activity,
culminating in a speculative advance of land values
will set in. but wages and interest will not recover
their lost ground. the net result of all these perturbations
or wave-like movements is the gradual forcing of
wages and interest toward their minimum. these temporary
and recurring depressions exhibit, in fact, as was
noticed in the opening chapter, but intensifications of
the general movement which accompanies material
progress.
the great problem, of which these recurring seasons
of industrial depression are but peculiar manifestations,
is now, i think, fully solved, and the social phenomena
which all over the civilized world appall the philanthropist
and perplex the statesman, which hang with clouds
the future of the most advanced races, and suggest
doubts of the reality and ultimate goal of what we have
fondly called progress, are now explained.
the reason why, in spite of the increase of productive
power, wages constantly tend to a minimum which will give
but a bare living, is that, with increase in productive power,
rent tends to even greater increase, thus producing a constant
tendency to the forcing down of wages.
in every direction, the direct tendency of advancing
civilization is to increase the power of human labor to
satisfy human desires—to extirpate poverty, and to banish
want and the fear of want. all the things in which
progress consists, all the conditions which progressive
communities are striving for, have for their direct and
natural result the improvement of the material (and consequently
the intellectual and moral) condition of all
within their influence. the growth of population, the
increase and extension of exchanges, the discoveries of
science, the march of invention, the spread of education,
the improvement of government, and the amelioration of
manners, considered as material forces, have all a direct
tendency to increase the productive power of labor—not
of some labor, but of all labor; not in some departments
of industry, but in all departments of industry; for the
law of the production of wealth in society is the law of
“each for all, and all for each.”
but labor cannot reap the benefits which advancing
civilization thus brings, because they are intercepted.
land being necessary to labor, and being reduced to
private ownership, every increase in the productive power
of labor but increases rent—the price that labor must pay
for the opportunity to utilize its powers; and thus all
the advantages gained by the march of progress go to the
owners of land, and wages do not increase. wages cannot
increase; for the greater the earnings of labor the
greater the price that labor must pay out of its earnings
for the opportunity to make any earnings at all. the
mere laborer has thus no more interest in the general
advance of productive power than the cuban slave has in
advance in the price of sugar. and just as an advance
in the price of sugar may make the condition of the
slave worse, by inducing the master to drive him harder,
so may the condition of the free laborer be positively, as
well as relatively, changed for the worse by the increase
in the productive power of his labor. for, begotten of
the continuous advance of rents, arises a speculative
tendency which discounts the effect of future improvements
by a still further advance of rent, and thus tends,
where this has not occurred from the normal advance of
rent, to drive wages down to the slave point—the point
at which the laborer can just live.
and thus robbed of all the benefits of the increase in
productive power, labor is exposed to certain effects of
advancing civilization which, without the advantages
that naturally accompany them, are positive evils, and of
themselves tend to reduce the free laborer to the helpless
and degraded condition of the slave.
for all improvements which add to productive power as
civilization advances consist in, or necessitate, a still further
subdivision of labor, and the efficiency of the whole
body of laborers is increased at the expense of the independence
of the constituents. the individual laborer
acquires knowledge of and skill in but an infinitesimal
part of the varied processes which are required to supply
even the commonest wants. the aggregate produce of
the labor of a savage tribe is small, but each member is
capable of an independent life. he can build his own
habitation, hew out or stitch together his own canoe,
make his own clothing, manufacture his own weapons,
snares, tools and ornaments. he has all the knowledge
of nature possessed by his tribe—knows what vegetable
productions are fit for food, and where they may be
found; knows the habits and resorts of beasts, birds,
fishes, and insects; can pilot himself by the sun or the
stars, by the turning of blossoms or the mosses on the
trees; is, in short, capable of supplying all his wants.
he may be cut off from his fellows and still live; and
thus possesses an independent power which makes him a
free contracting party in his relations to the community
of which he is a member.
compare with this savage the laborer in the lowest
ranks of civilized society, whose life is spent in producing
but one thing, or oftener but the infinitesimal
part of one thing, out of the multiplicity of things that
constitute the wealth of society and go to supply even
the most primitive wants; who not only cannot make
even the tools required for his work, but often works
with tools that he does not own, and can never hope to
own. compelled to even closer and more continuous
labor than the savage, and gaining by it no more than
the savage gets—the mere necessaries of life—he loses
the independence of the savage. he is not only unable
to apply his own powers to the direct satisfaction of his
own wants, but, without the concurrence of many others,
he is unable to apply them indirectly to the satisfaction
of his wants. he is a mere link in an enormous chain of
producers and consumers, helpless to separate himself,
and helpless to move, except as they move. the worse
his position in society, the more dependent is he on society;
the more utterly unable does he become to do anything
for himself. the very power of exerting his labor
for the satisfaction of his wants passes from his own control,
and may be taken away or restored by the actions
of others, or by general causes over which he has no more
influence than he has over the motions of the solar system.
the primeval curse comes to be looked upon as a
boon, and men think, and talk, and clamor, and legislate
as though monotonous manual labor in itself were a good
and not an evil, an end and not a means. under such
circumstances, the man loses the essential quality of
manhood—the godlike power of modifying and controlling
conditions. he becomes a slave, a machine, a commodity—a
thing, in some respects, lower than the
animal.
i am no sentimental admirer of the savage state. i do
not get my ideas of the untutored children of nature
from rousseau, or chateaubriand, or cooper. i am conscious
of its material and mental poverty, and its low and
narrow range. i believe that civilization is not only the
natural destiny of man, but the enfranchisement, elevation,
and refinement of all his powers, and think that it
is only in such moods as may lead him to envy the cud-chewing
cattle, that a man who is free to the advantages
of civilization could look with regret upon the savage
state. but, nevertheless, i think no one who will open
his eyes to the facts can resist the conclusion that there
are in the heart of our civilization large classes with
whom the veriest savage could not afford to exchange.
it is my deliberate opinion that if, standing on the
threshold of being, one were given the choice of entering
life as a tierra del fuegan, a black fellow of australia,
an esquimaux in the arctic circle, or among the lowest
classes in such a highly civilized country as great britain,
he would make infinitely the better choice in selecting
the lot of the savage. for those classes who in the
midst of wealth are condemned to want suffer all the
privations of the savage, without his sense of personal
freedom; they are condemned to more than his narrowness
and littleness, without opportunity for the growth
of his rude virtues; if their horizon is wider, it is but to
reveal blessings that they cannot enjoy.
there are some to whom this may seem like exaggeration,
but it is only because they have never suffered
themselves to realize the true condition of those classes
upon whom the iron heel of modern civilization presses
with full force. as de tocqueville observes, in one of
his letters to mme. swetchine, “we so soon become used
to the thought of want that we do not feel that an evil
which grows greater to the sufferer the longer it lasts becomes
less to the observer by the very fact of its duration;”
and perhaps the best proof of the justice of this
observation is that in cities where there exists a pauper
class and a criminal class, where young girls shiver as
they sew for bread, and tattered and barefooted children
make a home in the streets, money is regularly raised to
send missionaries to the heathen! send missionaries to
the heathen! it would be laughable if it were not so sad.
baal no longer stretches forth his hideous, sloping arms;
but in christian lands mothers slay their infants for a
burial fee! and i challenge the production from any
authentic accounts of savage life of such descriptions of
degradation as are to be found in official documents of
highly civilized countries—in reports of sanitary commissioners
and of inquiries into the condition of the
laboring poor.
the simple theory which i have outlined (if indeed it
can be called a theory which is but the recognition of the
most obvious relations) explains this conjunction of poverty
with wealth, of low wages with high productive
power, of degradation amid enlightenment, of virtual
slavery in political liberty. it harmonizes, as results
flowing from a general and inexorable law, facts otherwise
most perplexing, and exhibits the sequence and relation
between phenomena that without reference to it
are diverse and contradictory. it explains why interest
and wages are higher in new than in older communities,
though the average, as well as the aggregate, production
of wealth is less. it explains why improvements which
increase the productive power of labor and capital increase
the reward of neither. it explains what is commonly
called the conflict between labor and capital, while
proving the real harmony of interest between them. it
cuts the last inch of ground from under the fallacies of
protection, while showing why free trade fails to benefit
permanently the working classes. it explains why want
increases with abundance, and wealth tends to greater
and greater aggregations. it explains the periodically
recurring depressions of industry without recourse either
to the absurdity of “overproduction” or the absurdity
of “overconsumption.” it explains the enforced idleness
of large numbers of would-be producers, which
wastes the productive force of advanced communities,
without the absurd assumption that there is too little
work to do or that there are too many to do it. it explains
the ill effects upon the laboring classes which
often follow the introduction of machinery, without
denying the natural advantages which the use of machinery
gives. it explains the vice and misery which
show themselves amid dense population, without attributing
to the laws of the all-wise and all-beneficent
defects which belong only to the short-sighted and selfish
enactments of men.
this explanation is in accordance with all the facts.
look over the world to-day. in countries the most
widely differing—under conditions the most diverse as to
government, as to industries, as to tariffs, as to currency—you
will find distress among the working classes; but
everywhere that you thus find distress and destitution in
the midst of wealth you will find that the land is monopolized;
that instead of being treated as the common
property of the whole people, it is treated as the private
property of individuals; that, for its use by labor, large
revenues are extorted from the earnings of labor. look
over the world to-day, comparing different countries with
each other, and you will see that it is not the abundance
of capital or the productiveness of labor that makes
wages high or low; but the extent to which the monopolizers
of land can, in rent, levy tribute upon the earnings
of labor. is it not a notorious fact, known to the most
ignorant, that new countries, where the aggregate wealth
is small, but where land is cheap, are always better countries
for the laboring classes than the rich countries,
where land is dear? wherever you find land relatively
low, will you not find wages relatively high? and
wherever land is high, will you not find wages low? as
land increases in value, poverty deepens and pauperism
appears. in the new settlements, where land is cheap,
you will find no beggars, and the inequalities in condition
are very slight. in the great cities, where land is
so valuable that it is measured by the foot, you will find
the extremes of poverty and of luxury. and this disparity
in condition between the two extremes of the social
scale may always be measured by the price of land.
land in new york is more valuable than in san francisco;
and in new york, the san franciscan may see
squalor and misery that will make him stand aghast.
land is more valuable in london than in new york;
and in london, there is squalor and destitution worse
than that of new york.
compare the same country in different times, and the
same relation is obvious. as the result of much investigation,
hallam says he is convinced that the wages of
manual labor were greater in amount in england during
the middle ages than they are now. whether this is so
or not, it is evident that they could not have been much,
if any, less. the enormous increase in the efficiency of
labor, which even in agriculture is estimated at seven or
eight hundred per cent., and in many branches of industry
is almost incalculable, has only added to rent. the
rent of agricultural land in england is now, according to
professor rogers,  times as great, measured in
money, as it was  years ago, and  times as great,
measured in wheat; while in the rent of building land,
and mineral land, the advance has been enormously
greater. according to the estimate of professor fawcett,
the capitalized rental value of the land of england
now amounts to £,,,, or $,,,—that
is to say, a few thousand of the people of england hold a
lien upon the labor of the rest, the capitalized value of
which is more than twice as great as, at the average price
of southern negroes in  would be the value of her
whole population were they slaves.
in belgium and flanders, in france and germany, the
rent and selling price of agricultural land have doubled
within the last thirty years. in short, increased power
of production has everywhere added to the value of land;
nowhere has it added to the value of labor; for though
actual wages may in some places have somewhat risen, the
rise is clearly attributable to other causes. in more
places they have fallen—that is, where it has been possible
for them to fall—for there is a minimum below
which laborers cannot keep up their numbers. and,
everywhere, wages, as a proportion of the produce, have
decreased.
how the black death brought about the great rise of
wages in england in the fourteenth century is clearly
discernible, in the efforts of the land holders to regulate
wages by statute. that that awful reduction in population,
instead of increasing, really reduced the effective
power of labor, there can be no doubt; but the lessening
of competition for land still more greatly reduced rent,
and wages advanced so largely that force and penal laws
were called in to keep them down. the reverse effect
followed the monopolization of land that went on in
england during the reign of henry viii., in the inclosure
of commons and the division of the church lands
between the panders and parasites who were thus enabled
to found noble families. the result was the same
as that to which a speculative increase in land values
tends. according to malthus (who, in his “principles of
political economy,” mentions the fact without connecting
it with land tenures), in the reign of henry vii.,
half a bushel of wheat would purchase but little more
than a day’s common labor, but in the latter part of the
reign of elizabeth, half a bushel of wheat would purchase
three days’ common labor. i can hardly believe that the
reduction in wages could have been so great as this comparison
would indicate; but that there was a reduction in
common wages, and great distress among the laboring
classes, is evident from the complaints of “sturdy
vagrants” and the statutes made to suppress them. the
rapid monopolization of the land, the carrying of the
speculative rent line beyond the normal rent line, produced
tramps and paupers, just as like effects from like
causes have lately been evident in the united states.
“land which went heretofore for twenty or forty
pounds a year,” said hugh latimer, “now is let for fifty
or a hundred. my father was a yeoman, and had no
lands of his own; only he had a farm at a rent of three or
four pounds by the year at the uttermost, and thereupon
he tilled so much as kept half a dozen men. he had
walk for a hundred sheep, and my mother milked thirty
kine; he was able and did find the king a harness with
himself and his horse when he came to the place that he
should receive the king’s wages. i can remember that i
buckled his harness when he went to blackheath field.
he kept me to school; he married my sisters with five
pound apiece, so that he brought them up in godliness
and fear of god. he kept hospitality for his neighbors
and some alms he gave to the poor. and all this he did
of the same farm, where he that now hath it payeth sixteen
pounds rent or more by year, and is not able to do
anything for his prince, for himself, nor for his children,
nor to give a cup of drink to the poor.”
“in this way,” said sir thomas more, referring to the
ejectment of small farmers which characterized this advance
of rent, “it comes to pass that these poor wretches,
men, women, husbands, orphans, widows, parents with
little children, householders greater in number than in
wealth, all of these emigrate from their native fields,
without knowing where to go.”
and so from the stuff of the latimers and mores—from
the sturdy spirit that amid the flames of the oxford
stake cried, “play the man, master ridley!” and the
mingled strength and sweetness that neither prosperity
could taint nor the ax of the executioner abash—were
evolved thieves and vagrants, the mass of criminality and
pauperism that still blights the innermost petals and preys
a gnawing worm at the root of england’s rose.
but it were as well to cite historical illustrations of
the attraction of gravitation. the principle is as universal
and as obvious. that rent must reduce wages, is
as clear as that the greater the subtractor the less the
remainder. that rent does reduce wages, any one,
wherever situated, can see by merely looking around
him.
there is no mystery as to the cause which so suddenly
and so largely raised wages in california in , and in
australia in . it was the discovery of the placer
mines in unappropriated land to which labor was free
that raised the wages of cooks in san francisco restaurants
to $ a month, and left ships to rot in the harbor
without officers or crew until their owners would consent
to pay rates that in any other part of the globe seemed
fabulous. had these mines been on appropriated land,
or had they been immediately monopolized so that rent
could have arisen, it would have been land values that
would have leaped upward, not wages. the comstock
lode has been richer than the placers, but the comstock
lode was readily monopolized, and it is only by virtue of
the strong organization of the miners’ association and
the fears of the damage which it might do, that enables
men to get four dollars a day for parboiling themselves
two thousand feet underground, where the air that they
breathe must be pumped down to them. the wealth of
the comstock lode has added to rent. the selling price
of these mines runs up into hundreds of millions, and it
has produced individual fortunes whose monthly returns
can be estimated only in hundreds of thousands, if not in
millions. nor is there any mystery about the cause
which has operated to reduce wages in california from
the maximum of the early days to very nearly a level
with wages in the eastern states, and that is still operating
to reduce them. the productiveness of labor has not
decreased, on the contrary it has increased, as i have before
shown; but, out of what it produces labor has now
to pay rent. as the placer deposits were exhausted,
labor had to resort to the deeper mines and to agricultural
land, but monopolization of these being permitted,
men now walk the streets of san francisco ready to go to
work for almost anything—for natural opportunities are
now no longer free to labor.
the truth is self-evident. put to any one capable of
consecutive thought this question:
“suppose there should arise from the english channel
or the german ocean a no-man’s land on which common
labor to an unlimited amount should be able to make ten
shillings a day and which should remain unappropriated
and of free access, like the commons which once comprised
so large a part of english soil. what would be
the effect upon wages in england?”
he would at once tell you that common wages
throughout england must soon increase to ten shillings
a day.
and in response to another question, “what would be
the effect on rents?” he would at a moment’s reflection
say that rents must necessarily fall; and if he thought out
the next step he would tell you that all this would happen
without any very large part of english labor being
diverted to the new natural opportunities, or the forms
and direction of industry being much changed; only that
kind of production being abandoned which now yields to
labor and to landlord together less than labor could secure
on the new opportunities. the great rise in wages
would be at the expense of rent.
take now the same man or another—some hard-headed
business man, who has no theories, but knows how to
make money. say to him: “here is a little village; in
ten years it will be a great city—in ten years the railroad
will have taken the place of the stage coach, the electric
light of the candle; it will abound with all the machinery
and improvements that so enormously multiply
the effective power of labor. will, in ten years, interest
be any higher?”
he will tell you, “no!”
“will the wages of common labor be any higher; will
it be easier for a man who has nothing but his labor to
make an independent living?”
he will tell you, “no; the wages of common labor will
not be any higher; on the contrary, all the chances are
that they will be lower; it will not be easier for the mere
laborer to make an independent living; the chances are
that it will be harder.”
“what, then, will be higher?”
“rent; the value of land. go, get yourself a piece of
ground, and hold possession.”
and if, under such circumstances, you take his advice,
you need do nothing more. you may sit down and
smoke your pipe; you may lie around like the lazzaroni
of naples or the leperos of mexico; you may go up in a
balloon, or down a hole in the ground; and without doing
one stroke of work, without adding one iota to the
wealth of the community, in ten years you will be rich!
in the new city you may have a luxurious mansion; but
among its public buildings will be an almshouse.
in all our long investigation we have been advancing
to this simple truth: that as land is necessary to the
exertion of labor in the production of wealth, to command
the land which is necessary to labor, is to command
all the fruits of labor save enough to enable labor to
exist. we have been advancing as through an enemy’s
country, in which every step must be secured, every position
fortified, and every by-path explored; for this simple
truth, in its application to social and political problems, is
hid from the great masses of men partly by its very
simplicity, and in greater part by widespread fallacies
and erroneous habits of thought which lead them to look
in every direction but the right one for an explanation
of the evils which oppress and threaten the civilized
world. and back of these elaborate fallacies and misleading
theories is an active, energetic power, a power
that in every country, be its political forms what they
may, writes laws and molds thought—the power of a vast
and dominant pecuniary interest.
but so simple and so clear is this truth, that to see it
fully once is always to recognize it. there are pictures
which, though looked at again and again, present only a
confused labyrinth of lines or scroll work—a landscape,
trees, or something of the kind—until once the attention
is called to the fact that these things make up a face or a
figure. this relation once recognized, is always afterward
clear. it is so in this case. in the light of this
truth all social facts group themselves in an orderly relation,
and the most diverse phenomena are seen to
spring from one great principle. it is not in the relations
of capital and labor; it is not in the pressure of
population against subsistence, that an explanation of
the unequaled development of our civilization is to be
found. the great cause of inequality in the distribution
of wealth is inequality in the ownership of land. the
ownership of land is the great fundamental fact which
ultimately determines the social, the political, and consequently
the intellectual and moral condition of a people.
and it must be so. for land is the habitation of
man, the storehouse upon which he must draw for all his
needs, the material to which his labor must be applied
for the supply of all his desires; for even the products
of the sea cannot be taken, the light of the sun enjoyed,
or any of the forces of nature utilized, without the use
of land or its products. on the land we are born, from
it we live, to it we return again—children of the soil as
truly as is the blade of grass or the flower of the field.
take away from man all that belongs to land, and he is
but a disembodied spirit. material progress cannot rid
us of our dependence upon land; it can but add to the
power of producing wealth from land; and hence, when
land is monopolized, it might go on to infinity without
increasing wages or improving the condition of those who
have but their labor. it can but add to the value of
land and the power which its possession gives. everywhere,
in all times, among all peoples, the possession of
land is the base of aristocracy, the foundation of great
fortunes, the source of power. as said the brahmins,
ages ago—
“to whomsoever the soil at any time belongs, to him belong
the fruits of it. white parasols and elephants mad
with pride are the flowers of a grant of land.”
this memorial edition of the writings of
henry george is limited to one thousand
numbered copies, of which this is
no. 
vol. ii.
copyright, , by
henry george
the de vinne press.
a new and fair division of the goods and rights of this world
should be the main object of those who conduct human affairs.—de
tocqueville.
when the object is to raise the permanent condition of a people,
small means do not merely produce small effects; they produce no
effect at all.—john stuart mill.
in tracing to its source the cause of increasing poverty
amid advancing wealth, we have discovered the remedy;
but before passing to that branch of our subject it will
be well to review the tendencies or remedies which are
currently relied on or advocated. the remedy to which
our conclusions point is at once radical and simple—so
radical that, on the one side, it will not be fairly considered
so long as any faith remains in the efficacy of less
caustic measures; so simple that, on the other side, its
real efficacy and comprehensiveness are likely to be overlooked,
until the effect of more elaborate measures is
estimated.
the tendencies and measures which current literature
and discussions show to be more or less relied on or advocated
as calculated to relieve poverty and distress
among the masses may be divided into six classes. i do
not mean that there are so many distinct parties or
schools of thought, but merely that, for the purpose of
our inquiry, prevailing opinions and proposed measures
may be so grouped for review. remedies which for the
sake of greater convenience and clearness we shall consider
separately are often combined in thought.
there are many persons who still retain a comfortable
belief that material progress will ultimately extirpate
poverty, and there are many who look to prudential restraint
upon the increase of population as the most
efficacious means, but the fallacy of these views has already
been sufficiently shown. let us now consider what
may be hoped for:
i. from greater economy in government.
ii. from the better education of the working classes
and improved habits of industry and thrift.
iii. from combinations of workmen for the advance
of wages.
iv. from the co-operation of labor and capital.
v. from governmental direction and interference.
vi. from a more general distribution of land.
under these six heads i think we may in essential form
review all hopes and propositions for the relief of social
distress short of the simple but far-reaching measure
which i shall propose.
i.—from greater economy in government.
until a very few years ago it was an article of faith
with americans—a belief shared by european liberals—that
the poverty of the down-trodden masses of the old
world was due to aristocratic and monarchical institutions.
this belief has rapidly passed away with the appearance
in the united states, under republican institutions,
of social distress of the same kind, if not of the
same intensity, as that prevailing in europe. but social
distress is still largely attributed to the immense burdens
which existing governments impose—the great debts,
the military and naval establishments, the extravagance
which is characteristic as well of republican as of monarchical
rulers, and especially characteristic of the administration
of great cities. to these must be added, in
the united states, the robbery involved in the protective
tariff, which for every twenty-five cents it puts in the
treasury takes a dollar and it may be four or five out of
the pocket of the consumer. now, there seems to be an
evident connection between the immense sums thus
taken from the people and the privations of the lower
classes, and it is upon a superficial view natural to suppose
that a reduction in the enormous burdens thus
uselessly imposed would make it easier for the poorest to
get a living. but a consideration of the matter in the
light of the economic principles heretofore traced out
will show that this would not be the effect. a reduction
in the amount taken from the aggregate produce of a
community by taxation would be simply equivalent to
an increase in the power of net production. it would in
effect add to the productive power of labor just as do the
increasing density of population and improvement in the
arts. and as the advantage in the one case goes, and
must go, to the owners of land, in increased rent, so
would the advantage in the other.
from the produce of the labor and capital of england
are now supported the burden of an immense debt, an
established church, an expensive royal family, a large
number of sinecurists, a great army and great navy.
suppose the debt repudiated, the church disestablished,
the royal family set adrift to make a living for themselves,
the sinecurists cut off, the army disbanded, the
officers and men of the navy discharged and the ships
sold. an enormous reduction in taxation would thus
become possible. there would be a great addition to
the net produce which remains to be distributed among
the parties to production. but it would be only such an
addition as improvement in the arts has been for a long
time constantly making, and not so great an addition as
steam and machinery have made within the last twenty
or thirty years. and as these additions have not alleviated
pauperism, but have only increased rent, so would
this. english land owners would reap the whole benefit.
i will not dispute that if all these things could be
done suddenly, and without the destruction and expense
involved in a revolution, there might be a temporary improvement
in the condition of the lowest class; but such
a sudden and peaceable reform is manifestly impossible.
and if it were, any temporary improvement would, by
the process we now see going on in the united states,
be ultimately swallowed up by increased land values.
and, so, in the united states, if we were to reduce
public expenditures to the lowest possible point, and meet
them by revenue taxation, the benefit could certainly
not be greater than that which railroads have brought.
there would be more wealth left in the hands of the people
as a whole, just as the railroads have put more wealth
in the hands of the people as a whole, but the same inexorable
laws would operate as to its distribution. the
condition of those who live by their labor would not ultimately
be improved.
a dim consciousness of this pervades—or, rather, is
beginning to pervade—the masses, and constitutes one
of the grave political difficulties that are closing in
around the american republic. those who have nothing
but their labor, and especially the proletarians of the
cities—a growing class—care little about the prodigality
of government, and in many cases are disposed to look
upon it as a good thing—“furnishing employment,” or
“putting money in circulation.” tweed, who robbed
new york as a guerrilla chief might levy upon a captured
town (and who was but a type of the new banditti
who are grasping the government of all our cities), was
undoubtedly popular with a majority of the voters,
though his thieving was notorious, and his spoils were
blazoned in big diamonds and lavish personal expenditure.
after his indictment, he was triumphantly elected
to the senate; and, even when a recaptured fugitive,
was frequently cheered on his way from court to prison.
he had robbed the public treasury of many millions, but
the proletarians felt that he had not robbed them. and
the verdict of political economy is the same as theirs.
let me be clearly understood. i do not say that governmental
economy is not desirable; but simply that reduction
in the expenses of government can have no
direct effect in extirpating poverty and increasing wages,
so long as land is monopolized.
although this is true, yet even with sole reference to
the interests of the lowest class, no effort should be
spared to keep down useless expenditures. the more
complex and extravagant government becomes, the more
it gets to be a power distinct from and independent of
the people, and the more difficult does it become to bring
questions of real public policy to a popular decision.
look at our elections in the united states—upon what
do they turn? the most momentous problems are pressing
upon us, yet so great is the amount of money in politics,
so large are the personal interests involved, that the
most important questions of government are but little
considered. the average american voter has prejudices,
party feelings, general notions of a certain kind, but he
gives to the fundamental questions of government not
much more thought than a street-car horse does to the
profits of the line. were this not the case, so many hoary
abuses could not have survived and so many new ones
been added. anything that tends to make government
simple and inexpensive tends to put it under control of
the people and to bring questions of real importance to
the front. but no reduction in the expenses of government
can of itself cure or mitigate the evils that arise
from a constant tendency to the unequal distribution of
wealth.
ii.—from the diffusion of education and improved
habits of industry and thrift.
there is, and always has been, a widespread belief
among the more comfortable classes that the poverty and
suffering of the masses are due to their lack of industry,
frugality, and intelligence. this belief, which at once
soothes the sense of responsibility and flatters by its suggestion
of superiority, is probably even more prevalent
in countries like the united states, where all men are
politically equal, and where, owing to the newness of
society, the differentiation into classes has been of individuals
rather than of families, than it is in older countries,
where the lines of separation have been longer, and
are more sharply, drawn. it is but natural for those who
can trace their own better circumstances to the superior
industry and frugality that gave them a start, and the
superior intelligence that enabled them to take advantage
of every opportunity, to imagine that those who remain
poor do so simply from lack of these qualities.
but whoever has grasped the laws of the distribution
of wealth, as in previous chapters they have been traced
out, will see the mistake in this notion. the fallacy is
similar to that which would be involved in the assertion
that every one of a number of competitors might win a
race. that any one might is true; that every one might
is impossible.
for, as soon as land acquires a value, wages, as we
have seen, do not depend upon the real earnings or product
of labor, but upon what is left to labor after rent is
taken out; and when land is all monopolized, as it is
everywhere except in the newest communities, rent must
drive wages down to the point at which the poorest paid
class will be just able to live and reproduce, and thus
wages are forced to a minimum fixed by what is called
the standard of comfort—that is, the amount of necessaries
and comforts which habit leads the working classes
to demand as the lowest on which they will consent to
maintain their numbers. this being the case, industry,
skill, frugality, and intelligence can avail the individual
only in so far as they are superior to the general level—just
as in a race speed can avail the runner only in so far
as it exceeds that of his competitors. if one man work
harder, or with superior skill or intelligence than ordinary,
he will get ahead; but if the average of industry,
skill, or intelligence be brought up to the higher point,
the increased intensity of application will secure but the
old rate of wages, and he who would get ahead must
work harder still.
one individual may save money from his wages by living
as dr. franklin did when, during his apprenticeship
and early journeyman days, he concluded to practice
vegetarianism; and many poor families might be made
more comfortable by being taught to prepare the cheap
dishes to which franklin tried to limit the appetite of his
employer keimer, as a condition to his acceptance of the
position of confuter of opponents to the new religion of
which keimer wished to become the prophet, but if the
working classes generally came to live in that way, wages
would ultimately fall in proportion, and whoever wished
to get ahead by the practice of economy, or to mitigate
poverty by teaching it, would be compelled to devise
some still cheaper mode of keeping soul and body together.
if, under existing conditions, american mechanics
would come down to the chinese standard of
living, they would ultimately have to come down to the
chinese standard of wages; or if english laborers would
content themselves with the rice diet and scanty clothing
of the bengalee, labor would soon be as ill paid in england
as in bengal. the introduction of the potato into
ireland was expected to improve the condition of the
poorer classes, by increasing the difference between the
wages they received and the cost of their living. the
consequences that did ensue were a rise of rent and a
lowering of wages, and, with the potato blight, the ravages
of famine among a population that had already reduced
its standard of comfort so low that the next step
was starvation.
and, so, if one individual work more hours than the
average, he will increase his wages; but the wages of all
cannot be increased in this way. it is notorious that in
occupations where working hours are long, wages are not
higher than where working hours are shorter; generally
the reverse, for the longer the working day, the more
helpless does the laborer become—the less time has he to
look around him and develop other powers than those
called forth by his work; the less becomes his ability to
change his occupation or to take advantage of circumstances.
and, so, the individual workman who gets his
wife and children to assist him may thus increase his income;
but in occupations where it has become habitual
for the wife and children of the laborer to supplement his
work, it is notorious that the wages earned by the whole
family do not on the average exceed those of the head of
the family in occupations where it is usual for him only
to work. swiss family labor in watch making competes
in cheapness with american machinery. the bohemian
cigar makers of new york, who work, men, women, and
children, in their tenement-house rooms, have reduced
the prices of cigar making to less than the chinese in
san francisco were getting.
these general facts are well known. they are fully
recognized in standard politico-economic works, where,
however, they are explained upon the malthusian theory
of the tendency of population to multiply up to the
limit of subsistence. the true explanation, as i have
sufficiently shown, is in the tendency of rent to reduce
wages.
as to the effects of education, it may be worth while
to say a few words specially, for there is a prevailing disposition
to attribute to it something like a magical influence.
now, education is only education in so far as it
enables a man more effectively to use his natural powers,
and this is something that what we call education in very
great part fails to do. i remember a little girl, pretty
well along in her school geography and astronomy, who
was much astonished to find that the ground in her
mother’s back yard was really the surface of the earth,
and, if you talk with them, you will find that a good deal
of the knowledge of many college graduates is much like
that of the little girl. they seldom think any better,
and sometimes not so well as men who have never been
to college.
a gentleman who had spent many years in australia,
and knew intimately the habits of the aborigines (rev.
dr. bleesdale), after giving some instances of their wonderful
skill in the use of their weapons, in foretelling
changes in the wind and weather and in trapping the
shyest birds, once said to me: “i think it a great mistake
to look on these black fellows as ignorant. their
knowledge is different from ours, but in it they are generally
better educated. as soon as they begin to toddle,
they are taught to play with little boomerangs and other
weapons, to observe and to judge, and, when they are
old enough to take care of themselves, they are fully able
to do so—are, in fact, in reference to the nature of their
knowledge, what i should call well-educated gentlemen;
which is more than i can say for many of our young fellows
who have had what we call the best advantages, but
who enter upon manhood unable to do anything either
for themselves or for others.”
be this as it may, it is evident that intelligence, which
is or should be the aim of education, until it induces and
enables the masses to discover and remove the cause of
the unequal distribution of wealth, can operate upon
wages only by increasing the effective power of labor. it
has the same effect as increased skill or industry. and
it can raise the wages of the individual only in so far as
it renders him superior to others. when to read and
write were rare accomplishments, a clerk commanded
high respect and large wages, but now the ability to read
and write has become so nearly universal as to give no
advantage. among the chinese the ability to read and
write seems absolutely universal, but wages in china
touch the lowest possible point. the diffusion of intelligence,
except as it may make men discontented with a
state of things which condemns producers to a life of toil
while non-producers loll in luxury, cannot tend to raise
wages generally, or in any way improve the condition of
the lowest class—the “mud-sills” of society, as a southern
senator once called them—who must rest on the soil,
no matter how high the superstructure may be carried.
no increase of the effective power of labor can increase
general wages, so long as rent swallows up all the gain.
this is not merely a deduction from principles. it is the
fact, proved by experience. the growth of knowledge
and the progress of invention have multiplied the effective
power of labor over and over again without increasing
wages. in england there are over a million paupers.
in the united states almshouses are increasing and
wages are decreasing.
it is true that greater industry and skill, greater prudence,
and a higher intelligence, are, as a rule, found
associated with a better material condition of the working
classes; but that this is effect, not cause, is shown by
the relation of the facts. wherever the material condition
of the laboring classes has been improved, improvement
in their personal qualities has followed, and wherever
their material condition has been depressed, deterioration
in these qualities has been the result; but nowhere
can improvement in material condition be shown as the
result of the increase of industry, skill, prudence, or intelligence
in a class condemned to toil for a bare living,
though these qualities when once attained (or, rather,
their concomitant—the improvement in the standard of
comfort) offer a strong, and, in many cases, a sufficient,
resistance to the lowering of material condition.
the fact is, that the qualities that raise man above the
animal are superimposed on those which he shares with
the animal, and that it is only as he is relieved from the
wants of his animal nature that his intellectual and moral
nature can grow. compel a man to drudgery for the
necessities of animal existence, and he will lose the incentive
to industry—the progenitor of skill—and will
do only what he is forced to do. make his condition
such that it cannot be much worse, while there is little
hope that anything he can do will make it much better,
and he will cease to look beyond the day. deny him
leisure—and leisure does not mean the want of employment,
but the absence of the need which forces to uncongenial
employment—and you cannot, even by running
the child through a common school and supplying the
man with a newspaper, make him intelligent.
it is true that improvement in the material condition
of a people or class may not show immediately in mental
and moral improvement. increased wages may at first
be taken out in idleness and dissipation. but they will
ultimately bring increased industry, skill, intelligence,
and thrift. comparisons between different countries;
between different classes in the same country; between
the same people at different periods; and between the
same people when their conditions are changed by emigration,
show, as an invariable result, that the personal
qualities of which we are speaking appear as material
conditions are improved, and disappear as material conditions
are depressed. poverty is the slough of despond
which bunyan saw in his dream, and into which good
books may be tossed forever without result. to make
people industrious, prudent, skillful, and intelligent,
they must be relieved from want. if you would have the
slave show the virtues of the freeman, you must first
make him free.
iii.—from combinations of workmen.
it is evident from the laws of distribution, as previously
traced, that combinations of workmen can advance
wages, and this not at the expense of other workmen,
as is sometimes said, nor yet at the expense of
capital, as is generally believed; but, ultimately, at the
expense of rent. that no general advance in wages can
be secured by combination; that any advance in particular
wages thus secured must reduce other wages or the
profits of capital, or both—are ideas that spring from the
erroneous notion that wages are drawn from capital.
the fallacy of these ideas is demonstrated, not alone by
the laws of distribution as we have worked them out, but
by experience, so far as it has gone. the advance of
wages in particular trades by combinations of workmen,
of which there are many examples, has nowhere shown
any effect in lowering wages in other trades, or in reducing
the rate of profits. except as it may affect his fixed
capital or current engagements, a diminution of wages
can benefit, and an increase of wages injure an employer
only in so far as it gives him an advantage or puts
him at a disadvantage as compared with other employers.
the employer who first succeeds in reducing the wages
of his hands, or is first compelled to pay an advance,
gains an advantage, or is put at a disadvantage in regard
to his competitors, which ceases when the movement includes
them also. so far, however, as the change in
wages affects his contracts or stock on hand, by changing
the relative cost of production, it may be to him a real
gain or loss, though this gain or loss, being purely relative,
disappears when the whole community is considered.
and, if the change in wages works a change in
relative demand, it may render capital fixed in machinery,
buildings, or otherwise, more or less profitable.
but, in this, a new equilibrium is soon reached; for,
especially in a progressive country, fixed capital is only
somewhat less mobile than circulating capital. if there
is too little in a certain form, the tendency of capital to
assume that form soon brings it up to the required
amount; if there is too much, the cessation of increment
soon restores the level.
but, while a change in the rate of wages in any particular
occupation may induce a change in the relative
demand for labor, it can produce no change in the aggregate
demand. for instance, let us suppose that a
combination of the workmen engaged in any particular
manufacture raise wages in one country, while a combination
of employers reduce wages in the same manufacture
in another country. if the change be great
enough, the demand, or part of the demand, in the first
country will now be supplied by importation of such
manufactures from the second. but, evidently, this increase
in importations of a particular kind must necessitate
either a corresponding decrease in importations of
other kinds, or a corresponding increase in exportations.
for, it is only with the produce of its labor and capital
that one country can demand, or can obtain, in exchange,
the produce of the labor and capital of another. the
idea that the lowering of wages can increase, or the increase
of wages can diminish, the trade of a country, is
as baseless as the idea that the prosperity of a country
can be increased by taxes on imports, or diminished by
the removal of restrictions on trade. if all wages in any
particular country were to be doubled, that country
would continue to export and import the same things,
and in the same proportions; for exchange is determined
not by absolute, but by relative, cost of production.
but, if wages in some branches of production were
doubled, and in others not increased, or not increased so
much, there would be a change in the proportion of the
various things imported, but no change in the proportion
between exports and imports.
while most of the objections made to the combination
of workmen for the advance of wages are thus baseless,
while the success of such combinations cannot reduce
other wages, or decrease the profits of capital, or injuriously
affect national prosperity, yet so great are the difficulties
in the way of the effective combinations of laborers,
that the good that can be accomplished by them is
extremely limited, while there are inherent disadvantages
in the process.
to raise wages in a particular occupation or occupations,
which is all that any combination of workmen yet
made has been equal to attempting, is manifestly a task
the difficulty of which progressively increases. for the
higher are wages of any particular kind raised above their
normal level with other wages, the stronger are the tendencies
to bring them back. thus, if a printers’ union,
by a successful or threatened strike, raise the wages of
typesetting ten per cent. above the normal rate as compared
with other wages, relative demand and supply are
at once affected. on the one hand, there is a tendency
to a diminution of the amount of typesetting called for;
and, on the other, the higher rate of wages tends to increase
the number of compositors in ways the strongest
combination cannot altogether prevent. if the increase
be twenty per cent., these tendencies are much stronger;
if it is fifty per cent., they become stronger still, and so
on. so that practically—even in countries like england,
where the lines between different trades are much more
distinct and difficult to pass than in countries like the
united states—that which trades’ unions, even when
supporting each other, can do in the way of raising wages
is comparatively little, and this little, moreover, is confined
to their own sphere, and does not affect the lower
stratum of unorganized laborers, whose condition most
needs alleviation and ultimately determines that of all
above them. the only way by which wages could be
raised to any extent and with any permanence by this
method would be by a general combination, such as was
aimed at by the internationals, which should include
laborers of all kinds. but such a combination may be
set down as practically impossible, for the difficulties of
combination, great enough in the most highly paid and
smallest trades, become greater and greater as we descend
in the industrial scale.
nor, in the struggle of endurance, which is the only
method which combinations not to work for less than a
certain minimum have of effecting the increase of wages,
must it be forgotten who are the real parties pitted
against each other. it is not labor and capital. it is
laborers on the one side and the owners of land on the
other. if the contest were between labor and capital, it
would be on much more equal terms. for the power of
capital to stand out is only some little greater than that
of labor. capital not only ceases to earn anything when
not used, but it goes to waste—for in nearly all its forms
it can be maintained only by constant reproduction. but
land will not starve like laborers or go to waste like capital—its
owners can wait. they may be inconvenienced,
it is true, but what is inconvenience to them, is destruction
to capital and starvation to labor.
the agricultural laborers in certain parts of england
are now endeavoring to combine for the purpose of securing
an increase in their miserably low wages. if it was
capital that was receiving the enormous difference between
the real produce of their labor and the pittance
they get out of it, they would have but to make an
effective combination to secure success; for the farmers,
who are their direct employers, can afford to go without
labor but little, if any, better than the laborers can afford
to go without wages. but the farmers cannot yield
much without a reduction of rent; and thus it is between
the land owners and the laborers that the real struggle
must come. suppose the combination to be so thorough
as to include all agricultural laborers, and to prevent
from doing so all who might be tempted to take their
places. the laborers refuse to work except at a considerable
advance of wages; the farmers can give it only by
securing a considerable reduction of rent, and have no
way to back their demands except as the laborers back
theirs, by refusing to go on with production. if cultivation
thus comes to a dead-lock, the land owners would
lose only their rent, while the land improved by lying
fallow. but the laborers would starve. and if english
laborers of all kinds were united in one grand league for
a general increase of wages, the real contest would be the
same, and under the same conditions. for wages could
not be increased except to the decrease of rent; and in a
general dead-lock, land owners could live, while laborers
of all sorts must starve or emigrate. the owners of the
land of england are by virtue of their ownership the
masters of england. so true is it that “to whomsoever
the soil at any time belongs, to him belong the fruits of
it.” the white parasols and the elephants mad with
pride passed with the grant of english land, and the people
at large can never regain their power until that grant
is resumed. what is true of england, is universally
true.
it may be said that such a dead-lock in production
could never occur. this is true; but true only because
no such thorough combination of labor as might produce
it is possible. but the fixed and definite nature of land
enables land owners to combine much more easily and
efficiently than either laborers or capitalists. how easy
and efficient their combination is, there are many historical
examples. and the absolute necessity for the use
of land, and the certainty in all progressive countries
that it must increase in value, produce among land
owners, without any formal combination, all the effects
that could be produced by the most rigorous combination
among laborers or capitalists. deprive a laborer of opportunity
of employment, and he will soon be anxious to
get work on any terms, but when the receding wave of
speculation leaves nominal land values clearly above real
values, whoever has lived in a growing country knows
with what tenacity land owners hold on.
and, besides these practical difficulties in the plan of
forcing by endurance an increase of wages, there are in
such methods inherent disadvantages which workingmen
should not blink. i speak without prejudice, for i am
still an honorary member of the union which, while
working at my trade, i always loyally supported. but,
see: the methods by which a trade union can alone act
are necessarily destructive; its organization is necessarily
tyrannical. a strike, which is the only recourse by
which a trade union can enforce its demands, is a destructive
contest—just such a contest as that to which
an eccentric, called “the money king,” once, in the
early days of san francisco, challenged a man who
had taunted him with meanness, that they should go
down to the wharf and alternately toss twenty-dollar
pieces into the bay until one gave in. the struggle of
endurance involved in a strike is, really, what it has
often been compared to—a war; and, like all war, it
lessens wealth. and the organization for it must, like
the organization for war, be tyrannical. as even the
man who would fight for freedom, must, when he enters
an army, give up his personal freedom and become a
mere part in a great machine, so must it be with workmen
who organize for a strike. these combinations are,
therefore, necessarily destructive of the very things
which workmen seek to gain through them—wealth and
freedom.
there is an ancient hindoo mode of compelling the
payment of a just debt, traces of something akin to
which sir henry maine has found in the laws of the
irish brehons. it is called, sitting dharna—the creditor
seeking enforcement of his debt by sitting down at the
door of the debtor, and refusing to eat or drink until he
is paid.
like this is the method of labor combinations. in
their strikes, trades’ unions sit dharna. but, unlike the
hindoo, they have not the power of superstition to back
them.
iv.—from co-operation.
it is now, and has been for some time, the fashion to
preach co-operation as the sovereign remedy for the
grievances of the working classes. but, unfortunately
for the efficacy of co-operation as a remedy for social
evils, these evils, as we have seen, do not arise from any
conflict between labor and capital; and if co-operation
were universal, it could not raise wages or relieve poverty.
this is readily seen.
co-operation is of two kinds—co-operation in supply
and co-operation in production. now, co-operation in
supply, let it go as far as it may in excluding middlemen,
only reduces the cost of exchanges. it is simply a device
to save labor and eliminate risk, and its effect upon distribution
can be only that of the improvements and
inventions which have in modern times so wonderfully
cheapened and facilitated exchanges—viz., to increase
rent. and co-operation in production is simply a reversion
to that form of wages which still prevails in the
whaling service, and is there termed a “lay.” it is the
substitution of proportionate wages for fixed wages—a
substitution of which there are occasional instances in
almost all employments; or, if the management is left to
the workmen, and the capitalist but takes his proportion
of the net produce, it is simply the system that has prevailed
to a large extent in european agriculture since
the days of the roman empire—the colonial or metayer
system. all that is claimed for co-operation in production
is, that it makes the workman more active and industrious—in
other words, that it increases the efficiency
of labor. thus its effect is in the same direction as the
steam engine, the cotton gin, the reaping machine—in
short, all the things in which material progress consists,
and it can produce only the same result—viz., the increase
of rent.
it is a striking proof of how first principles are ignored
in dealing with social problems, that in current economic
and semi-economic literature so much importance is attached
to co-operation as a means for increasing wages
and relieving poverty. that it can have no such general
tendency is apparent.
waiving all the difficulties that under present conditions
beset co-operation either of supply or of production,
and supposing it so extended as to supplant present
methods—that co-operative stores made the connection
between producer and consumer with the minimum of
expense, and co-operative workshops, factories, farms,
and mines, abolished the employing capitalist who pays
fixed wages, and greatly increased the efficiency of labor—what
then? why, simply that it would become possible
to produce the same amount of wealth with less
labor, and consequently that the owners of land, the
source of all wealth, could command a greater amount of
wealth for the use of their land. this is not a matter
of mere theory; it is proved by experience and by existing
facts. improved methods and improved machinery
have the same effect that co-operation aims at—of reducing
the cost of bringing commodities to the consumer
and increasing the efficiency of labor, and it is in these
respects that the older countries have the advantage of
new settlements. but, as experience has amply shown,
improvements in the methods and machinery of production
and exchange have no tendency to improve the condition
of the lowest class, and wages are lower and poverty
deeper where exchange goes on at the minimum of
cost and production has the benefit of the best machinery.
the advantage but adds to rent.
but suppose co-operation between producers and land
owners? that would simply amount to the payment of
rent in kind—the same system under which much land is
rented in california and the southern states where the
land owner gets a share of the crop. save as a matter
of computation it in no wise differs from the system
which prevails in england of a fixed money rent. call
it co-operation, if you choose, the terms of the co-operation
would still be fixed by the laws which determine
rent, and wherever land was monopolized, increase in
productive power would simply give the owners of the
land the power to demand a larger share.
that co-operation is by so many believed to be the solution
of the “labor question” arises from the fact that,
where it has been tried, it has in many instances improved
perceptibly the condition of those immediately
engaged in it. but this is due simply to the fact that
these cases are isolated. just as industry, economy, or
skill may improve the condition of the workmen who
possess them in superior degree, but cease to have this
effect when improvement in these respects becomes general,
so a special advantage in procuring supplies, or a
special efficiency given to some labor, may secure advantages
which would be lost as soon as these improvements
became so general as to affect the general relations of distribution.
and the truth is, that, save possibly in educational
effects, co-operation can produce no general
results that competition will not produce. just as the
cheap-for-cash stores have a similar effect upon prices as
the co-operative supply associations, so does competition
in production lead to a similar adjustment of forces and
division of proceeds as would co-operative production.
that increasing productive power does not add to the
reward of labor, is not because of competition, but because
competition is one-sided. land, without which
there can be no production, is monopolized, and the
competition of producers for its use forces wages to a
minimum and gives all the advantage of increasing productive
power to land owners, in higher rents and
increased land values. destroy this monopoly, and competition
could exist only to accomplish the end which
co-operation aims at—to give to each what he fairly
earns. destroy this monopoly, and industry must become
the co-operation of equals.
v.—from governmental direction and interference.
the limits within which i wish to keep this book will
not permit an examination in detail of the methods in
which it is proposed to mitigate or extirpate poverty by
governmental regulation of industry and accumulation,
and which in their most thorough-going form are called
socialistic. nor is it necessary, for the same defects
attach to them all. these are the substitution of governmental
direction for the play of individual action, and
the attempt to secure by restriction what can better be
secured by freedom. as to the truths that are involved
in socialistic ideas i shall have something to say hereafter;
but it is evident that whatever savors of regulation
and restriction is in itself bad, and should not be resorted
to if any other mode of accomplishing the same
end presents itself. for instance, to take one of the
simplest and mildest of the class of measures i refer to—a
graduated tax on incomes. the object at which it
aims, the reduction or prevention of immense concentrations
of wealth, is good; but this means involves the
employment of a large number of officials clothed with
inquisitorial powers; temptations to bribery, and perjury,
and all other means of evasion, which beget a
demoralization of opinion, and put a premium upon unscrupulousness
and a tax upon conscience; and, finally,
just in proportion as the tax accomplishes its effect, a
lessening in the incentive to the accumulation of wealth,
which is one of the strong forces of industrial progress.
while, if the elaborate schemes for regulating everything
and finding a place for everybody could be carried
out, we should have a state of society resembling that of
ancient peru, or that which, to their eternal honor, the
jesuits instituted and so long maintained in paraguay.
i will not say that such a state as this is not a better
social state than that to which we now seem to be tending,
for in ancient peru, though production went on
under the greatest disadvantages, from the want of iron
and the domestic animals, yet there was no such thing as
want, and the people went to their work with songs.
but this it is unnecessary to discuss. socialism in anything
approaching such a form, modern society cannot
successfully attempt. the only force that has ever
proved competent for it—a strong and definite religious
faith—is wanting and is daily growing less. we have
passed out of the socialism of the tribal state, and cannot
re-enter it again except by a retrogression that would
involve anarchy and perhaps barbarism. our governments,
as is already plainly evident, would break down
in the attempt. instead of an intelligent award of
duties and earnings, we should have a roman distribution
of sicilian corn, and the demagogue would soon
become the imperator.
the ideal of socialism is grand and noble; and it is, i
am convinced, possible of realization; but such a state
of society cannot be manufactured—it must grow. society
is an organism, not a machine. it can live only by
the individual life of its parts. and in the free and natural
development of all the parts will be secured the
harmony of the whole. all that is necessary to social
regeneration is included in the motto of those russian
patriots sometimes called nihilists—“land and liberty!”
vi.—from a more general distribution of land.
there is a rapidly growing feeling that the tenure of
land is in some manner connected with the social distress
which manifests itself in the most progressive
countries; but this feeling as yet mostly shows itself in
propositions which look to the more general division of
landed property—in england, free trade in land, tenant
right, or the equal partition of landed estates among
heirs; in the united states, restrictions upon the size of
individual holdings. it has been also proposed in england
that the state should buy out the landlords, and in
the united states that grants of money should be made
to enable the settlements of colonies upon public lands.
the former proposition let us pass for the present; the
latter, so far as its distinctive feature is concerned, falls
into the category of the measures considered in the last
section. it needs no argument to show to what abuses
and demoralization grants of public money or credit
would lead.
how what the english writers call “free trade in land”—the
removal of duties and restrictions upon conveyances—could
facilitate the division of ownership in agricultural
land, i cannot see, though it might to some
extent have that effect as regards town property. the
removal of restrictions upon buying and selling would
merely permit the ownership of land to assume more
quickly the form to which it tends. now, that the tendency
in great britain is to concentration is shown by the
fact that, in spite of the difficulties interposed by the
cost of transfer, land ownership has been and is steadily
concentrating there, and that this tendency is a general
one is shown by the fact that the same process of concentration
is observable in the united states. i say
this unhesitatingly in regard to the united states, although
statistical tables are sometimes quoted to show a
different tendency. but how, in such a country as the
united states, the ownership of land may be really concentrating,
while census tables show rather a diminution
in the average size of holdings, is readily seen. as land
is brought into use, and, with the growth of population,
passes from a lower to a higher or intenser use, the size
of holdings tends to diminish. a small stock range
would be a large farm, a small farm would be a large
orchard, vineyard, nursery, or vegetable garden, and a
patch of land which would be small even for these purposes
would make a very large city property. thus,
the growth of population, which puts land to higher or
intenser uses, tends naturally to reduce the size of holdings,
by a process very marked in new countries; but
with this may go on a tendency to the concentration of
land ownership, which, though not revealed by tables
which show the average size of holdings, is just as clearly
seen. average holdings of one acre in a city may show a
much greater concentration of land ownership than average
holdings of  acres in a newly settled township. i
refer to this to show the fallacy in the deductions drawn
from the tables which are frequently paraded in the
united states to show that land monopoly is an evil that
will cure itself. on the contrary, it is obvious that the
proportion of land owners to the whole population is
constantly decreasing.
and that there is in the united states, as there is in
great britain, a strong tendency to the concentration of
land ownership in agriculture is clearly seen. as, in
england and ireland, small farms are being thrown into
larger ones, so in new england, according to the reports
of the massachusetts bureau of labor statistics, is the
size of farms increasing. this tendency is even more
clearly noticeable in the newer states and territories.
only a few years ago a farm of  acres would, under
the system of agriculture prevailing in the northern
parts of the union, have anywhere been a large one,
probably as much as one man could cultivate to advantage.
in california now there are farms (not cattle
ranges) of five, ten, twenty, forty and sixty thousand
acres, while the model farm of dakota embraces ,
acres. the reason is obvious. it is the application of
machinery to agriculture and the general tendency to
production on a large scale. the same tendency which
substitutes the factory, with its army of operatives, for
many independent hand-loom weavers, is beginning to
exhibit itself in agriculture.
now, the existence of this tendency shows two things:
first, that any measures which merely permit or facilitate
the greater subdivision of land would be inoperative;
and, second, that any measures which would compel it
would have a tendency to check production. if land in
large bodies can be cultivated more cheaply than land in
small bodies, to restrict ownership to small bodies will
reduce the aggregate production of wealth, and, in so
far as such restrictions are imposed and take effect, will
they tend to diminish the general productiveness of labor
and capital.
the effort, therefore, to secure a fairer division of
wealth by such restrictions is liable to the drawback of
lessening the amount to be divided. the device is like
that of the monkey, who, dividing the cheese between
the cats, equalized matters by taking a bite off the biggest
piece.
but there is not merely this objection, which weighs
against every proposition to restrict the ownership of
land, with a force that increases with the efficiency of
the proposed measure. there is the further and fatal
objection that restriction will not secure the end which
is alone worth aiming at—a fair division of the produce.
it will not reduce rent, and therefore cannot increase
wages. it may make the comfortable classes larger, but
will not improve the condition of those in the lowest
class.
if what is known as the ulster tenant right were extended
to the whole of great britain, it would be but to
carve out of the estate of the landlord an estate for the
tenant. the condition of the laborer would not be a
whit improved. if landlords were prohibited from asking
an increase of rent from their tenants and from
ejecting a tenant so long as the fixed rent was paid, the
body of the producers would gain nothing. economic
rent would still increase, and would still steadily lessen
the proportion of the produce going to labor and capital.
the only difference would be that the tenants of the first
landlords, who would become landlords in their turn,
would profit by the increase.
if by a restriction upon the amount of land any one
individual might hold, by the regulation of devises and
successions, or by cumulative taxation, the few thousand
land holders of great britain should be increased by two
or three million, these two or three million people would
be gainers. but the rest of the population would gain
nothing. they would have no more share in the advantages
of land ownership than before. and if, what
is manifestly impossible, a fair distribution of the land
were made among the whole population, giving to each
his equal share, and laws enacted which would interpose
a barrier to the tendency to concentration by forbidding
the holding by any one of more than the fixed amount,
what would become of the increase of population?
just what may be accomplished by the greater division
of land may be seen in those districts of france and
belgium where minute division prevails. that such a
division of land is on the whole much better, and that it
gives a far more stable basis to the state than that which
prevails in england, there can be no doubt. but that it
does not make wages any higher or improve the condition
of the class who have only their labor, is equally
clear. these french and belgian peasants practice a
rigid economy unknown to any of the english-speaking
peoples. and if such striking symptoms of the poverty
and distress of the lowest class are not apparent as on
the other side of the channel, it must, i think, be attributed,
not only to this fact, but to another fact, which
accounts for the continuance of the minute division of
the land—that material progress has not been so rapid.
neither has population increased with the same rapidity
(on the contrary it has been nearly stationary), nor
have improvements in the modes of production been so
great. nevertheless, m. de laveleye, all of whose prepossessions
are in favor of small holdings, and whose
testimony will therefore carry more weight than that of
english observers, who may be supposed to harbor a
prejudice for the system of their own country, states in
his paper on the land systems of belgium and holland,
printed by the cobden club, that the condition of the
laborer is worse under this system of the minute division
of land than it is in england; while the tenant farmers—for
tenancy largely prevails even where the morcellment
is greatest—are rack-rented with a mercilessness
unknown in england, and even in ireland, and the
franchise “so far from raising them in the social scale,
is but a source of mortification and humiliation to them,
for they are forced to vote according to the dictates of
the landlord instead of following the dictates of their
own inclination and convictions.”
but while the subdivision of land can thus do nothing
to cure the evils of land monopoly, while it can have no
effect in raising wages or in improving the condition of
the lowest classes, its tendency is to prevent the adoption
or even advocacy of more thorough-going measures,
and to strengthen the existing unjust system by interesting
a larger number in its maintenance. m. de laveleye,
in concluding the paper from which i have quoted,
urges the greater division of land as the surest means of
securing the great land owners of england from something
far more radical. although in the districts where
land is so minutely divided, the condition of the laborer
is, he states, the worst in europe and the renting
farmer is much more ground down by his landlord than
the irish tenant, yet “feelings hostile to social order,”
m. de laveleye goes on to say, “do not manifest themselves,”
because—
“the tenant, although ground down by the constant rise of rents,
lives among his equals, peasants like himself who have tenants whom
they use just as the large land holder does his. his father, his
brother, perhaps the man himself, possesses something like an acre
of land, which he lets at as high a rent as he can get. in the public
house peasant proprietors will boast of the high rents they get for
their lands, just as they might boast of having sold their pigs or potatoes
very dear. letting at as high a rent as possible comes thus to
seem to him to be quite a matter of course, and he never dreams of
finding fault with either the land owners as a class or with property
in land. his mind is not likely to dwell on the notion of a caste of
domineering landlords, of “bloodthirsty tyrants,” fattening on the
sweat of impoverished tenants and doing no work themselves; for
those who drive the hardest bargains are not the great land owners
but his own fellows. thus, the distribution of a number of small
properties among the peasantry forms a kind of rampart and safeguard
for the holders of large estates, and peasant property may
without exaggeration be called the lightning conductor that averts
from society dangers which might otherwise lead to violent catastrophes.
“the concentration of land in large estates among a small number
of families is a sort of provocation of leveling legislation. the
position of england, so enviable in many respects, seems to me to be
in this respect full of danger for the future.”
to me, for the very same reason that m. de laveleye
expresses, the position of england seems full of hope.
let us abandon all attempt to get rid of the evils of
land monopoly by restricting land ownership. an equal
distribution of land is impossible, and anything short of
that would be only a mitigation, not a cure, and a mitigation
that would prevent the adoption of a cure. nor is
any remedy worth considering that does not fall in with
the natural direction of social development, and swim,
so to speak, with the current of the times. that concentration
is the order of development there can be no
mistaking—the concentration of people in large cities,
the concentration of handicrafts in large factories, the
concentration of transportation by railroad and steamship
lines, and of agricultural operations in large fields.
the most trivial businesses are being concentrated in the
same way—errands are run and carpet sacks are carried
by corporations. all the currents of the time run to
concentration. to resist it successfully we must throttle
steam and discharge electricity from human service.
we have traced the unequal distribution of wealth
which is the curse and menace of modern civilization to
the institution of private property in land. we have
seen that so long as this institution exists no increase in
productive power can permanently benefit the masses;
but, on the contrary, must tend still further to depress
their condition. we have examined all the remedies,
short of the abolition of private property in land, which
are currently relied on or proposed for the relief of poverty
and the better distribution of wealth, and have
found them all inefficacious or impracticable.
there is but one way to remove an evil—and that is,
to remove its cause. poverty deepens as wealth increases,
and wages are forced down while productive
power grows, because land, which is the source of all
wealth and the field of all labor, is monopolized. to extirpate
poverty, to make wages what justice commands
they should be, the full earnings of the laborer, we must
therefore substitute for the individual ownership of land
a common ownership. nothing else will go to the
cause of the evil—in nothing else is there the slightest
hope.
this, then, is the remedy for the unjust and unequal
distribution of wealth apparent in modern civilization,
and for all the evils which flow from it:
we must make land common property.
we have reached this conclusion by an examination in
which every step has been proved and secured. in the
chain of reasoning no link is wanting and no link is
weak. deduction and induction have brought us to the
same truth—that the unequal ownership of land necessitates
the unequal distribution of wealth. and as in
the nature of things unequal ownership of land is inseparable
from the recognition of individual property in
land, it necessarily follows that the only remedy for the
unjust distribution of wealth is in making land common
property.
but this is a truth which, in the present state of society,
will arouse the most bitter antagonism, and must
fight its way, inch by inch. it will be necessary, therefore,
to meet the objections of those who, even when
driven to admit this truth, will declare that it cannot be
practically applied.
in doing this we shall bring our previous reasoning to
a new and crucial test. just as we try addition by subtraction
and multiplication by division, so may we, by
testing the sufficiency of the remedy, prove the correctness
of our conclusions as to the cause of the evil.
the laws of the universe are harmonious. and if the
remedy to which we have been led is the true one, it
must be consistent with justice; it must be practicable
of application; it must accord with the tendencies of
social development and must harmonize with other
reforms.
all this i propose to show. i propose to meet all
practical objections that can be raised, and to show that
this simple measure is not only easy of application; but
that it is a sufficient remedy for all the evils which, as
modern progress goes on, arise from the greater and
greater inequality in the distribution of wealth—that it
will substitute equality for inequality, plenty for want,
justice for injustice, social strength for social weakness,
and will open the way to grander and nobler advances of
civilization.
i thus propose to show that the laws of the universe do
not deny the natural aspirations of the human heart;
that the progress of society might be, and, if it is to continue,
must be, toward equality, not toward inequality;
and that the economic harmonies prove the truth perceived
by the stoic emperor—
“we are made for co-operation—like feet, like hands,
like eyelids, like the rows of the upper and lower teeth.”
justice is a relation of congruity which really subsists between
two things. this relation is always the same, whatever being considers
it, whether it be god, or an angel, or lastly a man.—montesquieu.
when it is proposed to abolish private property in land
the first question that will arise is that of justice.
though often warped by habit, superstition, and selfishness
into the most distorted forms, the sentiment of
justice is yet fundamental to the human mind, and
whatever dispute arouses the passions of men, the conflict
is sure to rage, not so much as to the question “is it
wise?” as to the question “is it right?”
this tendency of popular discussions to take an ethical
form has a cause. it springs from a law of the human
mind; it rests upon a vague and instinctive recognition
of what is probably the deepest truth we can grasp.
that alone is wise which is just; that alone is enduring
which is right. in the narrow scale of individual actions
and individual life this truth may be often obscured, but
in the wider field of national life it everywhere stands
out.
i bow to this arbitrament, and accept this test. if
our inquiry into the cause which makes low wages and
pauperism the accompaniments of material progress has
led us to a correct conclusion, it will bear translation
from terms of political economy into terms of ethics, and
as the source of social evils show a wrong. if it will not
do this, it is disproved. if it will do this, it is proved
by the final decision. if private property in land be
just, then is the remedy i propose a false one; if, on the
contrary, private property in land be unjust, then is this
remedy the true one.
what constitutes the rightful basis of property? what
is it that enables a man justly to say of a thing, “it is
mine?” from what springs the sentiment which acknowledges
his exclusive right as against all the world?
is it not, primarily, the right of a man to himself to the
use of his own powers, to the enjoyment of the fruits of
his own exertions? is it not this individual right, which
springs from and is testified to by the natural facts of individual
organization—the fact that each particular pair
of hands obey a particular brain and are related to a particular
stomach; the fact that each man is a definite,
coherent, independent whole—which alone justifies individual
ownership? as a man belongs to himself, so his
labor when put in concrete form belongs to him.
and for this reason, that which a man makes or produces
is his own, as against all the world—to enjoy or to
destroy, to use, to exchange, or to give. no one else
can rightfully claim it, and his exclusive right to it involves
no wrong to any one else. thus there is to everything
produced by human exertion a clear and indisputable
title to exclusive possession and enjoyment,
which is perfectly consistent with justice, as it descends
from the original producer, in whom it vested by natural
law. the pen with which i am writing is justly mine.
no other human being can rightfully lay claim to it, for
in me is the title of the producers who made it. it has
become mine, because transferred to me by the stationer,
to whom it was transferred by the importer, who obtained
the exclusive right to it by transfer from the manufacturer,
in whom, by the same process of purchase,
vested the rights of those who dug the material from
the ground and shaped it into a pen. thus, my exclusive
right of ownership in the pen springs from the
natural right of the individual to the use of his own
faculties.
now, this is not only the original source from which
all ideas of exclusive ownership arise—as is evident from
the natural tendency of the mind to revert to it when
the idea of exclusive ownership is questioned, and the
manner in which social relations develop—but it is necessarily
the only source. there can be to the ownership
of anything no rightful title which is not derived from
the title of the producer and does not rest upon the
natural right of the man to himself. there can be no
other rightful title, because (st) there is no other
natural right from which any other title can be derived,
and (d) because the recognition of any other title is inconsistent
with and destructive of this.
for (st) what other right exists from which the right
to the exclusive possession of anything can be derived,
save the right of a man to himself? with what other
power is man by nature clothed, save the power of exerting
his own faculties? how can he in any other way act
upon or affect material things or other men? paralyze
the motor nerves, and your man has no more external
influence or power than a log or stone. from what else,
then, can the right of possessing and controlling things
be derived? if it spring not from man himself, from
what can it spring? nature acknowledges no ownership
or control in man save as the result of exertion. in no
other way can her treasures be drawn forth, her powers
directed, or her forces utilized or controlled. she makes
no discriminations among men, but is to all absolutely
impartial. she knows no distinction between master
and slave, king and subject, saint and sinner. all men
to her stand upon an equal footing and have equal
rights. she recognizes no claim but that of labor, and
recognizes that without respect to the claimant. if a
pirate spread his sails, the wind will fill them as well as it
will fill those of a peaceful merchantman or missionary
bark; if a king and a common man be thrown overboard,
neither can keep his head above water except by swimming;
birds will not come to be shot by the proprietor of
the soil any quicker than they will come to be shot by
the poacher; fish will bite or will not bite at a hook in
utter disregard as to whether it is offered them by a good
little boy who goes to sunday-school, or a bad little boy
who plays truant; grain will grow only as the ground is
prepared and the seed is sown; it is only at the call of
labor that ore can be raised from the mine; the sun
shines and the rain falls, alike upon just and unjust.
the laws of nature are the decrees of the creator.
there is written in them no recognition of any right save
that of labor; and in them is written broadly and clearly
the equal right of all men to the use and enjoyment of
nature; to apply to her by their exertions, and to receive
and possess her reward. hence, as nature gives only to
labor, the exertion of labor in production is the only
title to exclusive possession.
d. this right of ownership that springs from labor
excludes the possibility of any other right of ownership.
if a man be rightfully entitled to the produce of his labor,
then no one can be rightfully entitled to the ownership
of anything which is not the produce of his labor, or the
labor of some one else from whom the right has passed
to him. if production give to the producer the right to
exclusive possession and enjoyment, there can rightfully
be no exclusive possession and enjoyment of anything
not the production of labor, and the recognition of private
property in land is a wrong. for the right to the
produce of labor cannot be enjoyed without the right to
the free use of the opportunities offered by nature, and
to admit the right of property in these is to deny the
right of property in the produce of labor. when non-producers
can claim as rent a portion of the wealth
created by producers, the right of the producers to the
fruits of their labor is to that extent denied.
there is no escape from this position. to affirm that
a man can rightfully claim exclusive ownership in his
own labor when embodied in material things, is to deny
that any one can rightfully claim exclusive ownership in
land. to affirm the rightfulness of property in land, is to
affirm a claim which has no warrant in nature, as against
a claim founded in the organization of man and the laws
of the material universe.
what most prevents the realization of the injustice of
private property in land is the habit of including all the
things that are made the subject of ownership in one
category, as property, or, if any distinction is made,
drawing the line, according to the unphilosophical distinction
of the lawyers, between personal property and
real estate, or things movable and things immovable.
the real and natural distinction is between things which
are the produce of labor and things which are the gratuitous
offerings of nature; or, to adopt the terms of political
economy, between wealth and land.
these two classes of things are in essence and relations
widely different, and to class them together as property
is to confuse all thought when we come to consider the
justice or the injustice, the right or the wrong of property.
a house and the lot on which it stands are alike property,
as being the subject of ownership, and are alike
classed by the lawyers as real estate. yet in nature and
relations they differ widely. the one is produced by
human labor, and belongs to the class in political economy
styled wealth. the other is a part of nature, and
belongs to the class in political economy styled land.
the essential character of the one class of things is
that they embody labor, are brought into being by
human exertion, their existence or non-existence, their
increase or diminution, depending on man. the essential
character of the other class of things is that they do not
embody labor, and exist irrespective of human exertion
and irrespective of man; they are the field or environment
in which man finds himself; the storehouse from
which his needs must be supplied, the raw material upon
which, and the forces with which alone his labor can act.
the moment this distinction is realized, that moment
is it seen that the sanction which natural justice gives to
one species of property is denied to the other; that the
rightfulness which attaches to individual property in the
produce of labor implies the wrongfulness of individual
property in land; that, whereas the recognition of the
one places all men upon equal terms, securing to each
the due reward of his labor, the recognition of the other
is the denial of the equal rights of men, permitting those
who do not labor to take the natural reward of those
who do.
whatever may be said for the institution of private
property in land, it is therefore plain that it cannot be
defended on the score of justice.
the equal right of all men to the use of land is as
clear as their equal right to breathe the air—it is a right
proclaimed by the fact of their existence. for we cannot
suppose that some men have a right to be in this world
and others no right.
if we are all here by the equal permission of the creator,
we are all here with an equal title to the enjoyment
of his bounty—with an equal right to the use of all that
nature so impartially offers. this is a right which is
natural and inalienable; it is a right which vests in every
human being as he enters the world, and which during
his continuance in the world can be limited only by the
equal rights of others. there is in nature no such thing
as a fee simple in land. there is on earth no power
which can rightfully make a grant of exclusive ownership
in land. if all existing men were to unite to grant
away their equal rights, they could not grant away the
right of those who follow them. for what are we but
tenants for a day? have we made the earth, that we
should determine the rights of those who after us shall
tenant it in their turn? the almighty, who created the
earth for man and man for the earth, has entailed it upon
all the generations of the children of men by a decree
written upon the constitution of all things—a decree
which no human action can bar and no prescription determine.
let the parchments be ever so many, or possession
ever so long, natural justice can recognize no
right in one man to the possession and enjoyment of land
that is not equally the right of all his fellows. though
his titles have been acquiesced in by generation after
generation, to the landed estates of the duke of westminster
the poorest child that is born in london to-day
has as much right as has his eldest son. though the
sovereign people of the state of new york consent to the
lauded possessions of the astors, the puniest infant that
comes wailing into the world in the squalidest room of
the most miserable tenement house, becomes at that moment
seized of an equal right with the millionaires. and
it is robbed if the right is denied.
our previous conclusions, irresistible in themselves,
thus stand approved by the highest and final test.
translated from terms of political economy into terms of
ethics they show a wrong as the source of the evils which
increase as material progress goes on.
the masses of men, who in the midst of abundance
suffer want; who, clothed with political freedom, are condemned
to the wages of slavery; to whose toil labor-saving
inventions bring no relief, but rather seem to rob them
of a privilege, instinctively feel that “there is something
wrong.” and they are right.
the wide-spreading social evils which everywhere oppress
men amid an advancing civilization spring from a
great primary wrong—the appropriation, as the exclusive
property of some men, of the land on which and from
which all must live. from this fundamental injustice
flow all the injustices which distort and endanger modern
development, which condemn the producer of wealth to
poverty and pamper the non-producer in luxury, which
rear the tenement house with the palace, plant the
brothel behind the church, and compel us to build prisons
as we open new schools.
there is nothing strange or inexplicable in the phenomena
that are now perplexing the world. it is not
that material progress is not in itself a good; it is not
that nature has called into being children for whom she
has failed to provide; it is not that the creator has left
on natural laws a taint of injustice at which even the
human mind revolts, that material progress brings such
bitter fruits. that amid our highest civilization men
faint and die with want is not due to the niggardliness of
nature, but to the injustice of man. vice and misery,
poverty and pauperism, are not the legitimate results of
increase of population and industrial development; they
only follow increase of population and industrial development
because land is treated as private property—they
are the direct and necessary results of the violation of
the supreme law of justice, involved in giving to some
men the exclusive possession of that which nature provides
for all men.
the recognition of individual proprietorship of land is
the denial of the natural rights of other individuals—it is
a wrong which must show itself in the inequitable division
of wealth. for as labor cannot produce without the
use of land, the denial of the equal right to the use of
land is necessarily the denial of the right of labor to its
own produce. if one man can command the land upon
which others must labor, he can appropriate the produce
of their labor as the price of his permission to labor.
the fundamental law of nature, that her enjoyment by
man shall be consequent upon his exertion, is thus violated.
the one receives without producing; the others
produce without receiving. the one is unjustly enriched;
the others are robbed. to this fundamental wrong we
have traced the unjust distribution of wealth which is
separating modern society into the very rich and the very
poor. it is the continuous increase of rent—the price
that labor is compelled to pay for the use of land, which
strips the many of the wealth they justly earn, to pile it
up in the hands of the few, who do nothing to earn it.
why should they who suffer from this injustice hesitate
for one moment to sweep it away? who are the land
holders that they should thus be permitted to reap
where they have not sown?
consider for a moment the utter absurdity of the titles
by which we permit to be gravely passed from john doe
to richard roe the right exclusively to possess the earth,
giving absolute dominion as against all others. in california
our land titles go back to the supreme government
of mexico, who took from the spanish king, who took
from the pope, when he by a stroke of the pen divided
lands yet to be discovered between the spanish or portuguese—or
if you please they rest upon conquest. in
the eastern states they go back to treaties with indians
and grants from english kings; in louisiana to the government
of france; in florida to the government of
spain; while in england they go back to the norman
conquerors. everywhere, not to a right which obliges,
but to a force which compels. and when a title rests
but on force, no complaint can be made when force annuls
it. whenever the people, having the power, choose
to annul those titles, no objection can be made in the
name of justice. there have existed men who had the
power to hold or to give exclusive possession of portions
of the earth’s surface, but when and where did there
exist the human being who had the right?
the right to exclusive ownership of anything of human
production is clear. no matter how many the hands
through which it has passed, there was, at the beginning
of the line, human labor—some one who, having procured
or produced it by his exertions, had to it a clear title as
against all the rest of mankind, and which could justly
pass from one to another by sale or gift. but at the end
of what string of conveyances or grants can be shown or
supposed a like title to any part of the material universe?
to improvements such an original title can be shown;
but it is a title only to the improvements, and not to the
land itself. if i clear a forest, drain a swamp, or fill a
morass, all i can justly claim is the value given by these
exertions. they give me no right to the land itself, no
claim other than to my equal share with every other
member of the community in the value which is added to
it by the growth of the community.
but it will be said: there are improvements which in
time become indistinguishable from the land itself! very
well; then the title to the improvements becomes blended
with the title to the land; the individual right is lost in
the common right. it is the greater that swallows up
the less, not the less that swallows up the greater. nature
does not proceed from man, but man from nature,
and it is into the bosom of nature that he and all his
works must return again.
yet, it will be said: as every man has a right to the
use and enjoyment of nature, the man who is using land
must be permitted the exclusive right to its use in order
that he may get the full benefit of his labor. but there
is no difficulty in determining where the individual right
ends and the common right begins. a delicate and exact
test is supplied by value, and with its aid there is no
difficulty, no matter how dense population may become,
in determining and securing the exact rights of each, the
equal rights of all. the value of land, as we have seen,
is the price of monopoly. it is not the absolute, but the
relative, capability of land that determines its value. no
matter what may be its intrinsic qualities, land that is no
better than other land which may be had for the using
can have no value. and the value of land always measures
the difference between it and the best land that may
be had for the using. thus, the value of land expresses
in exact and tangible form the right of the community in
land held by an individual; and rent expresses the exact
amount which the individual should pay to the community
to satisfy the equal rights of all other members of
the community. thus, if we concede to priority of possession
the undisturbed use of land, confiscating rent for
the benefit of the community, we reconcile the fixity of
tenure which is necessary for improvement with a full
and complete recognition of the equal rights of all to the
use of land.
as for the deduction of a complete and exclusive individual
right to land from priority of occupation, that is,
if possible, the most absurd ground on which land ownership
can be defended. priority of occupation give exclusive
and perpetual title to the surface of a globe on
which, in the order of nature, countless generations succeed
each other! had the men of the last generation
any better right to the use of this world than we of this?
or the men of a hundred years ago? or of a thousand
years ago? had the mound-builders, or the cave-dwellers,
the contemporaries of the mastodon and the three-toed
horse, or the generations still further back, who, in
dim æons that we can think of only as geologic periods,
followed each other on the earth we now tenant for our
little day?
has the first comer at a banquet the right to turn back
all the chairs and claim that none of the other guests
shall partake of the food provided, except as they make
terms with him? does the first man who presents a
ticket at the door of a theater, and passes in, acquire by
his priority the right to shut the doors and have the performance
go on for him alone? does the first passenger
who enters a railroad car obtain the right to scatter his
baggage over all the seats and compel the passengers who
come in after him to stand up?
the cases are perfectly analogous. we arrive and we
depart, guests at a banquet continually spread, spectators
and participants in an entertainment where there is
room for all who come; passengers from station to station,
on an orb that whirls through space—our rights to
take and possess cannot be exclusive; they must be
bounded everywhere by the equal rights of others. just
as the passenger in a railroad car may spread himself
and his baggage over as many seats as he pleases, until
other passengers come in, so may a settler take and use
as much land as he chooses, until it is needed by others—a
fact which is shown by the land acquiring a value—when
his right must be curtailed by the equal rights of the
others, and no priority of appropriation can give a right
which will bar these equal rights of others. if this were
not the case, then by priority of appropriation one man
could acquire and could transmit to whom he pleased,
not merely the exclusive right to  acres, or to 
acres, but to a whole township, a whole state, a whole
continent.
and to this manifest absurdity does the recognition of
individual right to land come when carried to its ultimate—that
any one human being, could he concentrate in
himself the individual rights to the land of any country,
could expel therefrom all the rest of its inhabitants; and
could he thus concentrate the individual rights to the
whole surface of the globe, he alone of all the teeming
population of the earth would have the right to live.
and what upon this supposition would occur is, upon a
smaller scale, realized in actual fact. the territorial
lords of great britain, to whom grants of land have given
the “white parasols and elephants mad with pride,” have
over and over again expelled from large districts the native
population, whose ancestors had lived on the land
from immemorial times—driven them off to emigrate, to
become paupers, or to starve. and on uncultivated
tracts of land in the new state of california may be seen the
blackened chimneys of homes from which settlers have
been driven by force of laws which ignore natural right,
and great stretches of land which might be populous are
desolate, because the recognition of exclusive ownership
has put it in the power of one human creature to forbid
his fellows from using it. the comparative handful of
proprietors who own the surface of the british islands
would be doing only what english law gives them full
power to do, and what many of them have done on a
smaller scale already, were they to exclude the millions
of british people from their native islands. and such
an exclusion, by which a few hundred thousand should
at will banish thirty million people from their native
country, while it would be more striking, would not be a
whit more repugnant to natural right than the spectacle
now presented, of the vast body of the british people being
compelled to pay such enormous sums to a few of
their number for the privilege of being permitted to live
upon and use the land which they so fondly call their
own; which is endeared to them by memories so tender
and so glorious, and for which they are held in duty
bound, if need be, to spill their blood and lay down their
lives.
i refer only to the british islands, because, land ownership
being more concentrated there, they afford a more
striking illustration of what private property in land necessarily
involves. “to whomsoever the soil at any time
belongs, to him belong the fruits of it,” is a truth that
becomes more and more apparent as population becomes
denser and invention and improvement add to productive
power; but it is everywhere a truth—as much in our
new states as in the british islands or by the banks of
the indus.
if chattel slavery be unjust, then is private property in
land unjust.
for let the circumstances be what they may—the ownership
of land will always give the ownership of men, to
a degree measured by the necessity (real or artificial) for
the use of land. this is but a statement in different
form of the law of rent.
and when that necessity is absolute—when starvation
is the alternative to the use of land, then does the ownership
of men involved in the ownership of land become
absolute.
place one hundred men on an island from which there
is no escape, and whether you make one of these men the
absolute owner of the other ninety-nine, or the absolute
owner of the soil of the island, will make no difference
either to him or to them.
in the one case, as the other, the one will be the absolute
master of the ninety-nine—his power extending even
to life and death, for simply to refuse them permission to
live upon the island would be to force them into the sea.
upon a larger scale, and through more complex relations,
the same cause must operate in the same way and
to the same end—the ultimate result, the enslavement of
laborers, becoming apparent just as the pressure increases
which compels them to live on and from land which is
treated as the exclusive property of others. take a
country in which the soil is divided among a number of
proprietors, instead of being in the hands of one, and in
which, as in modern production, the capitalist has been
specialized from the laborer, and manufactures and exchange,
in all their many branches, have been separated
from agriculture. though less direct and obvious, the
relations between the owners of the soil and the laborers
will, with increase of population and the improvement of
the arts, tend to the same absolute mastery on the one
hand and the same abject helplessness on the other, as in
the case of the island we have supposed. rent will advance,
while wages will fall. of the aggregate produce,
the land owner will get a constantly increasing, the
laborer a constantly diminishing share. just as removal
to cheaper land becomes difficult or impossible, laborers,
no matter what they produce, will be reduced to a bare
living, and the free competition among them, where land
is monopolized, will force them to a condition which,
though they may be mocked with the titles and insignia
of freedom, will be virtually that of slavery.
there is nothing strange in the fact that, in spite of
the enormous increase in productive power which this
century has witnessed, and which is still going on, the
wages of labor in the lower and wider strata of industry
should everywhere tend to the wages of slavery—just
enough to keep the laborer in working condition. for
the ownership of the land on which and from which a
man must live is virtually the ownership of the man
himself, and in acknowledging the right of some individuals
to the exclusive use and enjoyment of the earth, we
condemn other individuals to slavery as fully and as completely
as though we had formally made them chattels.
in a simpler form of society, where production chiefly
consists in the direct application of labor to the soil, the
slavery that is the necessary result of according to some
the exclusive right to the soil from which all must live,
is plainly seen in helotism, in villeinage, in serfdom.
chattel slavery originated in the capture of prisoners
in war, and, though it has existed to some extent in
every part of the globe, its area has been small, its effects
trivial, as compared with the forms of slavery which have
originated in the appropriation of land. no people as a
mass have ever been reduced to chattel slavery to men of
their own race, nor yet on any large scale has any people
ever been reduced to slavery of this kind by conquest.
the general subjection of the many to the few, which we
meet with wherever society has reached a certain development,
has resulted from the appropriation of land as individual
property. it is the ownership of the soil that
everywhere gives the ownership of the men that live
upon it. it is slavery of this kind to which the enduring
pyramids and the colossal monuments of egypt yet bear
witness, and of the institution of which we have, perhaps,
a vague tradition in the biblical story of the famine during
which the pharaoh purchased up the lands of the
people. it was slavery of this kind to which, in the
twilight of history, the conquerors of greece reduced the
original inhabitants of that peninsula, transforming them
into helots by making them pay rent for their lands. it
was the growth of the latifundia, or great landed estates,
which transmuted the population of ancient italy, from
a race of hardy husbandmen, whose robust virtues conquered
the world, into a race of cringing bondsmen; it
was the appropriation of the land as the absolute property
of their chieftains which gradually turned the descendants
of free and equal gallic, teutonic and hunnish
warriors into colonii and villains, and which changed the
independent burghers of sclavonic village communities
into the boors of russia and the serfs of poland; which
instituted the feudalism of china and japan, as well as
that of europe, and which made the high chiefs of
polynesia the all but absolute masters of their fellows.
how it came to pass that the aryan shepherds and warriors
who, as comparative philology tells us, descended from the
common birthplace of the indo-germanic race into the
lowlands of india, were turned into the suppliant and
cringing hindoo, the sanscrit verse which i have before
quoted gives us a hint. the white parasols and the elephants
mad with pride of the indian rajah are the flowers
of grants of land. and could we find the key to the
records of the long-buried civilizations that lie entombed
in the gigantic ruins of yucatan and guatemala, telling
at once of the pride of a ruling class and the unrequited
toil to which the masses were condemned, we should read,
in all human probability, of a slavery imposed upon the
great body of the people through the appropriation of
the land as the property of a few—of another illustration
of the universal truth that they who possess the land are
masters of the men who dwell upon it.
the necessary relation between labor and land, the absolute
power which the ownership of land gives over men
who cannot live but by using it, explains what is otherwise
inexplicable—the growth and persistence of institutions,
manners, and ideas so utterly repugnant to the
natural sense of liberty and equality.
when the idea of individual ownership, which so justly
and naturally attaches to things of human production, is
extended to land, all the rest is a mere matter of development.
the strongest and most cunning easily acquire a
superior share in this species of property, which is to be
had, not by production, but by appropriation, and in becoming
lords of the land they become necessarily lords of
their fellow-men. the ownership of land is the basis of
aristocracy. it was not nobility that gave land, but the
possession of land that gave nobility. all the enormous
privileges of the nobility of medieval europe flowed from
their position as the owners of the soil. the simple
principle of the ownership of the soil produced, on the
one side, the lord, on the other, the vassal—the one having
all rights, the other none. the right of the lord to
the soil acknowledged and maintained, those who lived
upon it could do so only upon his terms. the manners
and conditions of the times made those terms include
services and servitudes, as well as rents in produce or
money, but the essential thing that compelled them was
the ownership of land. this power exists wherever the
ownership of land exists, and can be brought out wherever
the competition for the use of land is great enough
to enable the landlord to make his own terms. the
english land owner of to-day has, in the law which recognizes
his exclusive right to the land, essentially all the
power which his predecessor the feudal baron had. he
might command rent in services or servitudes. he might
compel his tenants to dress themselves in a particular way,
to profess a particular religion, to send their children to a
particular school, to submit their differences to his decision,
to fall upon their knees when he spoke to them, to follow
him around dressed in his livery, or to sacrifice to him
female honor, if they would prefer these things to being
driven off his land. he could demand, in short, any terms
on which men would still consent to live on his land, and
the law could not prevent him so long as it did not qualify
his ownership, for compliance with them would assume
the form of a free contract or voluntary act. and
english landlords do exercise such of these powers as in
the manners of the times they care to. having shaken
off the obligation of providing for the defense of the
country, they no longer need the military service of their
tenants, and the possession of wealth and power being
now shown in other ways than by long trains of attendants,
they no longer care for personal service. but they
habitually control the votes of their tenants, and dictate
to them in many little ways. that “right reverend
father in god,” bishop lord plunkett, evicted a number
of his poor irish tenants because they would not send
their children to protestant sunday-schools; and to that
earl of leitrim for whom nemesis tarried so long before
she sped the bullet of an assassin, even darker crimes are
imputed; while, at the cold promptings of greed, cottage
after cottage has been pulled down and family after
family forced into the roads. the principle that permits
this is the same principle that in ruder times and a simpler
social state enthralled the great masses of the common
people and placed such a wide gulf between noble
and peasant. where the peasant was made a serf, it was
simply by forbidding him to leave the estate on which he
was born, thus artificially producing the condition we
supposed on the island. in sparsely settled countries
this is necessary to produce absolute slavery, but where
land is fully occupied, competition may produce substantially
the same conditions. between the condition of the
rack-rented irish peasant and the russian serf, the advantage
was in many things on the side of the serf. the
serf did not starve.
now, as i think i have conclusively proved, it is the
same cause which has in every age degraded and enslaved
the laboring masses that is working in the civilized
world to-day. personal liberty—that is to say, the liberty
to move about—is everywhere conceded, while of
political and legal inequality there are in the united
states no vestiges, and in the most backward civilized
countries but few. but the great cause of inequality remains,
and is manifesting itself in the unequal distribution
of wealth. the essence of slavery is that it takes
from the laborer all he produces save enough to support
an animal existence, and to this minimum the wages of
free labor, under existing conditions, unmistakably tend.
whatever be the increase of productive power, rent
steadily tends to swallow up the gain, and more than the
gain.
thus the condition of the masses in every civilized
country is, or is tending to become, that of virtual slavery
under the forms of freedom. and it is probable that
of all kinds of slavery this is the most cruel and relentless.
for the laborer is robbed of the produce of his
labor and compelled to toil for a mere subsistence; but
his taskmasters, instead of human beings, assume the
form of imperious necessities. those to whom his labor
is rendered and from whom his wages are received are
often driven in their turn—contact between the laborers
and the ultimate beneficiaries of their labor is sundered,
and individuality is lost. the direct responsibility of
master to slave, a responsibility which exercises a softening
influence upon the great majority of men, does not
arise; it is not one human being who seems to drive
another to unremitting and ill-requited toil, but “the
inevitable laws of supply and demand,” for which no one
in particular is responsible. the maxims of cato the
censor—maxims which were regarded with abhorrence
even in an age of cruelty and universal slave-holding—that
after as much work as possible is obtained from a
slave he should be turned out to die, become the common
rule; and even the selfish interest which prompts the
master to look after the comfort and well-being of the
slave is lost. labor has become a commodity, and the
laborer a machine. there are no masters and slaves, no
owners and owned, but only buyers and sellers. the
higgling of the market takes the place of every other
sentiment.
when the slaveholders of the south looked upon the
condition of the free laboring poor in the most advanced
civilized countries, it is no wonder that they easily persuaded
themselves of the divine institution of slavery.
that the field hands of the south were as a class better
fed, better lodged, better clothed; that they had less anxiety
and more of the amusements and enjoyments of life
than the agricultural laborers of england there can be
no doubt; and even in the northern cities, visiting slaveholders
might see and hear of things impossible under
what they called their organization of labor. in the
southern states, during the days of slavery, the master
who would have compelled his negroes to work and live
as large classes of free white men and women are compelled
in free countries to work and live, would have been
deemed infamous, and if public opinion had not restrained
him, his own selfish interest in the maintenance of the
health and strength of his chattels would. but in london,
new york, and boston, among people who have given,
and would give again, money and blood to free the slave,
where no one could abuse a beast in public without arrest
and punishment, barefooted and ragged children may be
seen running around the streets even in the winter time,
and in squalid garrets and noisome cellars women work
away their lives for wages that fail to keep them in proper
warmth and nourishment. is it any wonder that to the
slaveholders of the south the demand for the abolition
of slavery seemed like the cant of hypocrisy?
and now that slavery has been abolished, the planters
of the south find they have sustained no loss. their
ownership of the land upon which the freedmen must
live gives them practically as much command of labor as
before, while they are relieved of responsibility, sometimes
very expensive. the negroes as yet have the alternative
of emigrating, and a great movement of that kind seems
now about commencing, but as population increases and
land becomes dear, the planters will get a greater proportionate
share of the earnings of their laborers than they
did under the system of chattel slavery, and the laborers
a less share—for under the system of chattel slavery the
slaves always got at least enough to keep them in good
physical health, but in such countries as england there
are large classes of laborers who do not get that.
the influences which, wherever there is personal relation
between master and slave, slip in to modify chattel
slavery, and to prevent the master from exerting to its
fullest extent his power over the slave, also showed themselves
in the ruder forms of serfdom that characterized
the earlier periods of european development, and aided
by religion, and, perhaps, as in chattel slavery, by the
more enlightened but still selfish interests of the lord,
and hardening into custom, universally fixed a limit to
what the owner of the land could extort from the serf or
peasant, so that the competition of men without means
of existence bidding against each other for access to the
means of existence, was nowhere suffered to go to its full
length and exert its full power of deprivation and degradation.
the helots of greece, the métayers of italy, the
serfs of russia and poland, the peasants of feudal europe,
rendered to their landlords a fixed proportion either
of their produce or their labor, and were not generally
squeezed past that point. but the influences which thus
stepped in to modify the extortive power of land ownership,
and which may still be seen on english estates
where the landlord and his family deem it their duty to
send medicines and comforts to the sick and infirm, and
to look after the well-being of their cottagers, just as the
southern planter was accustomed to look after his
negroes, are lost in the more refined and less obvious
form which serfdom assumes in the more complicated
processes of modern production, which separates so
widely and by so many intermediate gradations the individual
whose labor is appropriated from him who appropriates
it, and makes the relations between the members
of the two classes not direct and particular, but indirect
and general. in modern society, competition has free
play to force from the laborer the very utmost he can
give, and with what terrific force it is acting may be seen
in the condition of the lowest class in the centers of
wealth and industry. that the condition of this lowest
class is not yet more general, is to be attributed to the
great extent of fertile land which has hitherto been open
on this continent, and which has not merely afforded an
escape for the increasing population of the older sections
of the union, but has greatly relieved the pressure in
europe—in one country, ireland, the emigration having
been so great as actually to reduce the population. this
avenue of relief cannot last forever. it is already fast
closing up, and as it closes, the pressure must become
harder and harder.
it is not without reason that the wise crow in the
ramayana, the crow bushanda, “who has lived in every
part of the universe and knows all events from the beginnings
of time,” declares that, though contempt of worldly
advantages is necessary to supreme felicity, yet the keenest
pain possible is inflicted by extreme poverty. the
poverty to which in advancing civilization great masses
of men are condemned, is not the freedom from distraction
and temptation which sages have sought and philosophers
have praised; it is a degrading and embruting
slavery, that cramps the higher nature, dulls the finer
feelings, and drives men by its pain to acts which the
brutes would refuse. it is into this helpless, hopeless
poverty, that crushes manhood and destroys womanhood,
that robs even childhood of its innocence and joy, that
the working classes are being driven by a force which acts
upon them like a resistless and unpitying machine. the
boston collar manufacturer who pays his girls two cents
an hour may commiserate their condition, but he, as
they, is governed by the law of competition, and cannot
pay more and carry on his business, for exchange is not
governed by sentiment. and so, through all intermediate
gradations, up to those who receive the earnings of
labor without return, in the rent of land, it is the inexorable
laws of supply and demand, a power with which
the individual can no more quarrel or dispute than with
the winds and the tides, that seem to press down the
lower classes into the slavery of want.
but in reality, the cause is that which always has and
always must result in slavery—the monopolization by
some of what nature has designed for all.
our boasted freedom necessarily involves slavery, so
long as we recognize private property in land. until
that is abolished, declarations of independence and acts
of emancipation are in vain. so long as one man can
claim the exclusive ownership of the land from which
other men must live, slavery will exist, and as material
progress goes on, must grow and deepen!
this—and in previous chapters of this book we have
traced the process, step by step—is what is going on in
the civilized world to-day. private ownership of land is
the nether millstone. material progress is the upper
millstone. between them, with an increasing pressure,
the working classes are being ground.
the truth is, and from this truth there can be no
escape, that there is and can be no just title to an exclusive
possession of the soil, and that private property
in land is a bold, bare, enormous wrong, like that of
chattel slavery.
the majority of men in civilized communities do not
recognize this, simply because the majority of men do
not think. with them whatever is, is right, until its
wrongfulness has been frequently pointed out, and in
general they are ready to crucify whoever first attempts
this.
but it is impossible for any one to study political
economy, even as at present taught, or to think at all
upon the production and distribution of wealth, without
seeing that property in land differs essentially from property
in things of human production, and that it has no
warrant in abstract justice.
this is admitted, either expressly or tacitly, in every
standard work on political economy, but in general merely
by vague admission or omission. attention is in general
called away from the truth, as a lecturer on moral philosophy
in a slave-holding community might call away attention
from too close a consideration of the natural
rights of men, and private property in land is accepted
without comment, as an existing fact, or is assumed to
be necessary to the proper use of land and the existence
of the civilized state.
the examination through which we have passed has
proved conclusively that private property in land cannot
be justified on the ground of utility—that, on the contrary,
it is the great cause to which are to be traced the
poverty, misery, and degradation, the social disease and
the political weakness which are showing themselves so
menacingly amid advancing civilization. expediency,
therefore, joins justice in demanding that we abolish it.
when expediency thus joins justice in demanding that
we abolish an institution that has no broader base or
stronger ground than a mere municipal regulation, what
reason can there be for hesitation?
the consideration that seems to cause hesitation, even
on the part of those who see clearly that land by right is
common property, is the idea that having permitted land
to be treated as private property for so long, we should in
abolishing it be doing a wrong to those who have been
suffered to base their calculations upon its permanence;
that having permitted land to be held as rightful property,
we should by the resumption of common rights be
doing injustice to those who have purchased it with what
was unquestionably their rightful property. thus, it is
held that if we abolish private property in land, justice
requires that we should fully compensate those who now
possess it, as the british government, in abolishing the
purchase and sale of military commissions, felt itself
bound to compensate those who held commissions which
they had purchased in the belief that they could sell them
again, or as in abolishing slavery in the british west
indies $,, was paid the slaveholders.
even herbert spencer, who in his “social statics” has
so clearly demonstrated the invalidity of every title by
which the exclusive possession of land is claimed, gives
countenance to this idea (though it seems to me inconsistently)
by declaring that justly to estimate and liquidate
the claims of the present landholders “who have either
by their own acts or by the acts of their ancestors given
for their estates equivalents of honestly-earned wealth,”
to be “one of the most intricate problems society will
one day have to solve.”
it is this idea that suggests the proposition, which
finds advocates in great britain, that the government
shall purchase at its market price the individual proprietorship
of the land of the country, and it was this idea
which led john stuart mill, although clearly perceiving
the essential injustice of private property in land, to
advocate, not a full resumption of the land, but only a
resumption of accruing advantages in the future. his
plan was that a fair and even liberal estimate should be
made of the market value of all the land in the kingdom,
and that future additions to that value, not due to the
improvements of the proprietor, should be taken by the
state.
to say nothing of the practical difficulties which such
cumbrous plans involve, in the extension of the functions
of government which they would require and the corruption
they would beget, their inherent and essential defect
lies in the impossibility of bridging over by any compromise
the radical difference between wrong and right.
just in proportion as the interests of the land holders are
conserved, just in that proportion must general interests
and general rights be disregarded, and if land holders are
to lose nothing of their special privileges, the people at
large can gain nothing. to buy up individual property
rights would merely be to give the land holders in another
form a claim of the same kind and amount that their
possession of land now gives them; it would be to raise
for them by taxation the same proportion of the earnings
of labor and capital that they are now enabled to appropriate
in rent. their unjust advantage would be preserved
and the unjust disadvantage of the non-landholders
would be continued. to be sure there would be a
gain to the people at large when the advance of rents had
made the amount which the land holders would take under
the present system greater than the interest upon the
purchase price of the land at present rates, but this would
be only a future gain, and in the meanwhile there would
not only be no relief, but the burden imposed upon labor
and capital for the benefit of the present land holders
would be much increased. for one of the elements in the
present market value of land is the expectation of future
increase of value, and thus, to buy up the lands at market
rates and pay interest upon the purchase money would
be to saddle producers not only with the payment of
actual rent, but with the payment in full of speculative
rent. or to put it in another way: the land would be
purchased at prices calculated upon a lower than the ordinary
rate of interest (for the prospective increase in
land values always makes the market price of land much
greater than would be the price of anything else yielding
the same present return), and interest upon the purchase
money would be paid at the ordinary rate. thus, not
only all that the land yields them now would have to be
paid the land owners, but a considerably larger amount.
it would be, virtually, the state taking a perpetual lease
from the present land holders at a considerable advance
in rent over what they now receive. for the present the
state would merely become the agent of the land holders
in the collection of their rents, and would have to pay
over to them not only what they received, but considerably
more.
mr. mill’s plan for nationalizing the future “unearned
increase in the value of land,” by fixing the present
market value of all lands and appropriating to the state
future increase in value, would not add to the injustice
of the present distribution of wealth, but it would not
remedy it. further speculative advance of rent would
cease, and in the future the people at large would gain
the difference between the increase of rent and the
amount at which that increase was estimated in fixing
the present value of land, in which, of course, prospective,
as well as present, value is an element. but it
would leave, for all the future, one class in possession of
the enormous advantage over others which they now
have. all that can be said of this plan is, that it might
be better than nothing.
such inefficient and impracticable schemes may do to
talk about, where any proposition more efficacious would
not at present be entertained, and their discussion is a
hopeful sign, as it shows the entrance of the thin end of
the wedge of truth. justice in men’s mouths is cringingly
humble when she first begins a protest against a
time-honored wrong, and we of the english-speaking
nations still wear the collar of the saxon thrall, and have
been educated to look upon the “vested rights” of land
owners with all the superstitious reverence that ancient
egyptians looked upon the crocodile. but when the
times are ripe for them, ideas grow, even though insignificant
in their first appearance. one day, the third
estate covered their heads when the king put on his hat.
a little while thereafter, and the head of a son of st.
louis rolled from the scaffold. the anti-slavery movement
in the united states commenced with talk of compensating
owners, but when four millions of slaves were
emancipated, the owners got no compensation, nor did
they clamor for any. and by the time the people of any
such country as england or the united states are sufficiently
aroused to the injustice and disadvantages of individual
ownership of land to induce them to attempt its
nationalization, they will be sufficiently aroused to nationalize
it in a much more direct and easy way than by purchase.
they will not trouble themselves about compensating
the proprietors of land.
nor is it right that there should be any concern about
the proprietors of land. that such a man as john stuart
mill should have attached so much importance to the
compensation of land owners as to have urged the confiscation
merely of the future increase in rent, is explainable
only by his acquiescence in the current doctrines that
wages are drawn from capital and that population constantly
tends to press upon subsistence. these blinded
him as to the full effects of the private appropriation of
land. he saw that “the claim of the land holder is altogether
subordinate to the general policy of the state,”
and that “when private property in land is not expedient,
it is unjust,” but, entangled in the toils of the malthusian
doctrine, he attributed, as he expressly states in
a paragraph i have previously quoted, the want and suffering
that he saw around him to “the niggardliness of
nature, not to the injustice of man,” and thus to him the
nationalization of land seemed comparatively a little
thing, that could accomplish nothing toward the eradication
of pauperism and the abolition of want—ends that
could be reached only as men learned to repress a natural
instinct. great as he was and pure as he was—warm
heart and noble mind—he yet never saw the true harmony
of economic laws, nor realized how from this one
great fundamental wrong flow want and misery, and vice
and shame. else he could never have written this sentence:
“the land of ireland, the land of every country,
belongs to the people of that country. the individuals
called land owners have no right in morality and justice
to anything but the rent, or compensation for its salable
value.”
in the name of the prophet—figs! if the land of any
country belong to the people of that country, what right,
in morality and justice, have the individuals called land
owners to the rent? if the land belong to the people,
why in the name of morality and justice should the people
pay its salable value for their own?
herbert spencer says: “had we to deal with the
parties who originally robbed the human race of its heritage,
we might make short work of the matter?” why
not make short work of the matter anyhow? for this
robbery is not like the robbery of a horse or a sum of
money, that ceases with the act. it is a fresh and continuous
robbery, that goes on every day and every hour.
it is not from the produce of the past that rent is
drawn; it is from the produce of the present. it is a
toll levied upon labor constantly and continuously.
every blow of the hammer, every stroke of the pick,
every thrust of the shuttle, every throb of the steam
engine, pay it tribute. it levies upon the earnings of
the men who, deep under ground, risk their lives, and of
those who over white surges hang to reeling masts; it
claims the just reward of the capitalist and the fruits of
the inventor’s patient effort; it takes little children from
play and from school, and compels them to work before
their bones are hard or their muscles are firm; it robs the
shivering of warmth; the hungry, of food; the sick, of
medicine; the anxious, of peace. it debases, and embrutes,
and embitters. it crowds families of eight and
ten into a single squalid room; it herds like swine agricultural
gangs of boys and girls; it fills the gin palace
and groggery with those who have no comfort in their
homes; it makes lads who might be useful men candidates
for prisons and penitentiaries; it fills brothels with
girls who might have known the pure joy of motherhood;
it sends greed and all evil passions prowling through society
as a hard winter drives the wolves to the abodes of
men; it darkens faith in the human soul, and across the
reflection of a just and merciful creator draws the veil of
a hard, and blind, and cruel fate!
it is not merely a robbery in the past; it is a robbery
in the present—a robbery that deprives of their birthright
the infants that are now coming into the world!
why should we hesitate about making short work of such
a system? because i was robbed yesterday, and the day
before, and the day before that, is it any reason that i
should suffer myself to be robbed to-day and to-morrow?
any reason that i should conclude that the robber has
acquired a vested right to rob me?
if the land belong to the people, why continue to permit
land owners to take the rent, or compensate them in
any manner for the loss of rent? consider what rent is.
it does not arise spontaneously from land; it is due to
nothing that the land owners have done. it represents
a value created by the whole community. let the land
holders have, if you please, all that the possession of the
land would give them in the absence of the rest of the
community. but rent, the creation of the whole community,
necessarily belongs to the whole community.
try the case of the land holders by the maxims of the
common law by which the rights of man and man are determined.
the common law we are told is the perfection
of reason, and certainly the land owners cannot complain
of its decision, for it has been built up by and for land
owners. now what does the law allow to the innocent
possessor when the land for which he paid his money is
adjudged rightfully to belong to another? nothing at
all. that he purchased in good faith gives him no right
or claim whatever. the law does not concern itself with
the “intricate question of compensation” to the innocent
purchaser. the law does not say, as john stuart mill
says: “the land belongs to a, therefore b who has
thought himself the owner has no right to anything but
the rent, or compensation for its salable value.” for
that would be indeed like a famous fugitive slave case
decision in which the court was said to have given the
law to the north and the nigger to the south. the law
simply says: “the land belongs to a, let the sheriff put
him in possession!” it gives the innocent purchaser of
a wrongful title no claim, it allows him no compensation.
and not only this, it takes from him all the improvements
that he has in good faith made upon the land.
you may have paid a high price for land, making every
exertion to see that the title is good; you may have held
it in undisturbed possession for years without thought or
hint of an adverse claimant; made it fruitful by your toil
or erected upon it a costly building of greater value than
the land itself, or a modest home in which you hope, surrounded
by the fig-trees you have planted and the vines
you have dressed, to pass your declining days; yet if
quirk, gammon & snap can mouse out a technical flaw
in your parchments or hunt up some forgotten heir who
never dreamed of his rights, not merely the land, but all
your improvements, may be taken away from you. and
not merely that. according to the common law, when
you have surrendered the land and given up your improvements,
you may be called upon to account for the
profits you derived from the land during the time you
had it.
now if we apply to this case of the people vs. the land
owners the same maxims of justice that have been formulated
by land owners into law, and are applied every day
in english and american courts to disputes between man
and man, we shall not only not think of giving the land
holders any compensation for the land, but shall take all
the improvements and whatever else they may have as
well.
but i do not propose, and i do not suppose that any
one else will propose, to go so far. it is sufficient if the
people resume the ownership of the land. let the land
owners retain their improvements and personal property
in secure possession.
and in this measure of justice would be no oppression,
no injury to any class. the great cause of the present
unequal distribution of wealth, with the suffering, degradation,
and waste that it entails, would be swept away.
even land holders would share in the general gain. the
gain of even the large land holders would be a real one.
the gain of the small land holders would be enormous.
for in welcoming justice, men welcome the handmaid of
love. peace and plenty follow in her train, bringing
their good gifts, not to some, but to all.
how true this is, we shall hereafter see.
if in this chapter i have spoken of justice and expediency
as if justice were one thing and expediency another,
it has been merely to meet the objections of those who so
talk. in justice is the highest and truest expediency.
what more than anything else prevents the realization
of the essential injustice of private property in land and
stands in the way of a candid consideration of any proposition
for abolishing it, is that mental habit which
makes anything that has long existed seem natural and
necessary.
we are so used to the treatment of land as individual
property, it is so thoroughly recognized in our laws, manners,
and customs, that the vast majority of people never
think of questioning it; but look upon it as necessary to
the use of land. they are unable to conceive, or at least
it does not enter their heads to conceive, of society as existing
or as possible without the reduction of land to
private possession. the first step to the cultivation or
improvement of land seems to them to get for it a particular
owner, and a man’s land is looked on by them as
fully and as equitably his, to sell, to lease, to give, or to
bequeath, as his house, his cattle, his goods, or his furniture.
the “sacredness of property” has been preached
so constantly and effectively, especially by those “conservators
of ancient barbarism,” as voltaire styled the
lawyers, that most people look upon the private ownership
of land as the very foundation of civilization, and if
the resumption of land as common property is suggested,
think of it at first blush either as a chimerical vagary,
which never has and never can be realized, or as a proposition
to overturn society from its base and bring about
a reversion to barbarism.
if it were true that land had always been treated as
private property, that would not prove the justice or
necessity of continuing so to treat it, any more than the
universal existence of slavery, which might once have
been safely affirmed, would prove the justice or necessity
of making property of human flesh and blood.
not long ago monarchy seemed all but universal, and
not only the kings but the majority of their subjects
really believed that no country could get along without a
king. yet, to say nothing of america, france now gets
along without a king; the queen of england and empress
of india has about as much to do with governing
her realms as the wooden figurehead of a ship has in
determining its course, and the other crowned heads
of europe sit, metaphorically speaking, upon barrels of
nitro-glycerine.
something over a hundred years ago, bishop butler,
author of the famous analogy, declared that “a constitution
of civil government without any religious establishment
is a chimerical project of which there is no example.”
as for there being no example, he was right. no
government at that time existed, nor would it have been
easy to name one that ever had existed, without some
sort of an established religion; yet in the united states
we have since proved by the practice of a century that it
is possible for a civil government to exist without a state
church.
but while, were it true, that land had always and
everywhere been treated as private property would not
prove that it should always be so treated, this is not true.
on the contrary, the common right to land has everywhere
been primarily recognized, and private ownership
has nowhere grown up save as the result of usurpation.
the primary and persistent perceptions of mankind are
that all have an equal right to land, and the opinion that
private property in land is necessary to society is but an
offspring of ignorance that cannot look beyond its immediate
surroundings—an idea of comparatively modern
growth, as artificial and as baseless as that of the right
divine of kings.
the observations of travelers, the researches of the
critical historians who within a recent period have done
so much to reconstruct the forgotten records of the people,
the investigations of such men as sir henry maine,
emile de laveleye, professor nasse of bonn, and others,
into the growth of institutions, prove that wherever human
society has formed, the common right of men to the
use of the earth has been recognized, and that nowhere
has unrestricted individual ownership been freely adopted.
historically, as ethically, private property in land is robbery.
it nowhere springs from contract; it can nowhere
be traced to perceptions of justice or expediency; it has
everywhere had its birth in war and conquest, and in the
selfish use which the cunning have made of superstition
and law.
wherever we can trace the early history of society,
whether in asia, in europe, in africa, in america, or in
polynesia, land has been considered, as the necessary relations
which human life has to it would lead to its consideration—as
common property, in which the rights of
all who had admitted rights were equal. that is to say,
that all members of the community, all citizens, as we
should say, had equal rights to the use and enjoyment of
the land of the community. this recognition of the
common right to land did not prevent the full recognition
of the particular and exclusive right in things which
are the result of labor, nor was it abandoned when the
development of agriculture had imposed the necessity of
recognizing exclusive possession of land in order to secure
the exclusive enjoyment of the results of the labor expended
in cultivating it. the division of land between
the industrial units, whether families, joint families, or
individuals, went only as far as was necessary for that
purpose, pasture and forest lands being retained as common,
and equality as to agricultural land being secured,
either by a periodical re-division, as among the teutonic
races, or by the prohibition of alienation, as in the law of
moses.
this primary adjustment still exists, in more or less
intact form, in the village communities of india, russia,
and the sclavonic countries yet, or until recently, subjected
to turkish rule; in the mountain cantons of switzerland;
among the kabyles in the north of africa, and
the kaffirs in the south; among the native population of
java, and the aborigines of new zealand—that is to say,
wherever extraneous influences have left intact the form
of primitive social organization. that it everywhere existed
has been within late years abundantly proved by the
researches of many independent students and observers,
and which are, to my knowledge, best summarized in the
“systems of land tenures in various countries,” published
under authority of the cobden club, and in m.
emile de laveleye’s “primitive property,” to which i
would refer the reader who desires to see this truth displayed
in detail.
“in all primitive societies,” says m. de laveleye, as
the result of an investigation which leaves no part of the
world unexplored—“in all primitive societies, the soil
was the joint property of the tribes and was subject to
periodical distribution among all the families, so that all
might live by their labor as nature has ordained. the
comfort of each was thus proportioned to his energy and
intelligence; no one, at any rate, was destitute of the
means of subsistence, and inequality increasing from
generation to generation was provided against.”
if m. de laveleye be right in this conclusion, and that
he is right there can be no doubt, how, it will be asked,
has the reduction of land to private ownership become so
general?
the causes which have operated to supplant this original
idea of the equal right to the use of land by the idea
of exclusive and unequal rights may, i think, be everywhere
vaguely but certainly traced. they are everywhere
the same which have led to the denial of equal
personal rights and to the establishment of privileged
classes.
these causes may be summarized as the concentration
of power in the hands of chieftains and the military
class, consequent on a state of warfare, which enabled
them to monopolize common lands; the effect of conquest,
in reducing the conquered to a state of predial
slavery, and dividing their lands among the conquerors,
and in disproportionate share to the chiefs; the differentiation
and influence of a sacerdotal class, and the
differentiation and influence of a class of professional
lawyers, whose interests were served by the substitution
of exclusive, in place of common, property in land—inequality
once produced always tending to greater
inequality, by the law of attraction.
it was the struggle between this idea of equal rights to
the soil and the tendency to monopolize it in individual
possession, that caused the internal conflicts of greece
and rome; it was the check given to this tendency—in
greece by such institutions as those of lycurgus and
solon, and in rome by the licinian law and subsequent
divisions of land—that gave to each their days of
strength and glory; and it was the final triumph of this
tendency that destroyed both. great estates ruined
greece, as afterward “great estates ruined italy,” and
as the soil, in spite of the warnings of great legislators
and statesmen, passed finally into the possession of a few,
population declined, art sank, the intellect became emasculate,
and the race in which humanity had attained its
most splendid development became a by-word and reproach
among men.
the idea of absolute individual property in land, which
modern civilization derived from rome, reached its full
development there in historic times. when the future
mistress of the world first looms up, each citizen had his
little homestead plot, which was inalienable, and the general
domain—“the corn-land which was of public right”—was
subject to common use, doubtless under regulations
or customs which secured equality, as in the teutonic
mark and swiss allmend. it was from this public
domain constantly extended by conquest, that the patrician
families succeeded in carving their great estates.
these great estates by the power with which the great
attracts the less, in spite of temporary checks by legal
limitation and recurring divisions, finally crushed out all
the small proprietors, adding their little patrimonies to
the latifundia of the enormously rich, while they themselves
were forced into the slave gangs, became rent-paying
colonii, or else were driven into the freshly conquered
foreign provinces, where land was given to the veterans
of the legions; or to the metropolis, to swell the ranks of
the proletariat who had nothing to sell but their votes.
cæsarism, soon passing into an unbridled despotism of
the eastern type, was the inevitable political result, and
the empire, even while it embraced the world, became in
reality a shell, kept from collapse only by the healthier
life of the frontiers, where the land had been divided
among military settlers or the primitive usages longer
survived. but the latifundia, which had devoured the
strength of italy, crept steadily outward, carving the
surface of sicily, africa, spain, and gaul into great
estates cultivated by slaves or tenants. the hardy virtues
born of personal independence died out, an exhaustive
agriculture impoverished the soil, and wild beasts
supplanted men, until at length, with a strength nurtured
in equality, the barbarians broke through; rome
perished; and of a civilization once so proud nothing was
left but ruins.
thus came to pass that marvelous thing, which at the
time of rome’s grandeur would have seemed as impossible
as it seems now to us that the comanches or flatheads
should conquer the united states, or the laplanders
should desolate europe. the fundamental cause
is to be sought in the tenure of land. on the one hand,
the denial of the common right to land had resulted in
decay; on the other, equality gave strength.
“freedom,” says m. de laveleye (“primitive property,”
p. ), “freedom, and, as a consequence, the
ownership of an undivided share of the common property,
to which the head of every family in the clan was
equally entitled, were in the german village essential
rights. this system of absolute equality impressed a remarkable
character on the individual, which explains
how small bands of barbarians made themselves masters
of the roman empire, in spite of its skillful administration,
its perfect centralization and its civil law, which
has preserved the name of written reason.”
it was, on the other hand, that the heart was eaten out
of that great empire. “rome perished,” says professor
seeley, “from the failure of the crop of men.”
in his lectures on the “history of civilization in europe,”
and more elaborately in his lectures on the “history
of civilization in france,” m. guizot has vividly described
the chaos that in europe succeeded the fall of the
roman empire—a chaos which, as he says, “carried all
things in its bosom,” and from which the structure of
modern society was slowly evolved. it is a picture which
cannot be compressed into a few lines, but suffice it to
say that the result of this infusion of rude but vigorous
life into romanized society was a disorganization of the
german, as well as the roman structure—both a blending
and an admixture of the idea of common rights in
the soil with the idea of exclusive property, substantially
as occurred in those provinces of the eastern empire subsequently
overrun by the turks. the feudal system,
which was so readily adopted and so widely spread, was
the result of such a blending; but underneath, and side
by side with the feudal system, a more primitive organization,
based on the common rights of the cultivators, took
root or revived, and has left its traces all over europe.
this primitive organization, which allots equal shares of
cultivated ground and the common use of uncultivated
ground, and which existed in ancient italy as in saxon
england, has maintained itself beneath absolutism and
serfdom in russia, beneath moslem oppression in servia,
and in india has been swept, but not entirely destroyed,
by wave after wave of conquest, and century after century
of oppression.
the feudal system, which is not peculiar to europe,
but seems to be the natural result of the conquest of a
settled country by a race among whom equality and individuality
are yet strong, clearly recognized, in theory at
least, that the land belongs to society at large, not to the
individual. rude outcome of an age in which might
stood for right as nearly as it ever can (for the idea of
right is ineradicable from the human mind, and must in
some shape show itself even in the association of pirates
and robbers), the feudal system yet admitted in no one
the uncontrolled and exclusive right to land. a fief was
essentially a trust, and to enjoyment was annexed obligation.
the sovereign, theoretically the representative of
the collective power and rights of the whole people, was
in feudal view the only absolute owner of land. and
though land was granted to individual possession, yet in
its possession were involved duties, by which the enjoyer
of its revenues was supposed to render back to the commonwealth
an equivalent for the benefits which from the
delegation of the common right he received.
in the feudal scheme the crown lands supported public
expenditures which are now included in the civil list; the
church lands defrayed the cost of public worship and instruction,
of the care of the sick and of the destitute,
and maintained a class of men who were supposed to be,
and no doubt to a great extent were, devoting their lives
to purposes of public good; while the military tenures
provided for the public defense. in the obligation under
which the military tenant lay to bring into the field such
and such a force when need should be, as well as in the
aid he had to give when the sovereign’s eldest son was
knighted, his daughter married, or the sovereign himself
made prisoner of war, was a rude and inefficient recognition,
but still unquestionably a recognition, of the fact,
obvious to the natural perceptions of all men, that land
is not individual but common property.
nor yet was the control of the possessor of land allowed
to extend beyond his own life. although the principle
of inheritance soon displaced the principle of selection,
as where power is concentrated it always must, yet feudal
law required that there should always be some representative
of a fief, capable of discharging the duties as well
as of receiving the benefits which were annexed to a
landed estate, and who this should be was not left to individual
caprice, but rigorously determined in advance.
hence wardship and other feudal incidents. the system
of primogeniture and its outgrowth, the entail, were in
their beginnings not the absurdities they afterward
became.
the basis of the feudal system was the absolute ownership
of the land, an idea which the barbarians readily
acquired in the midst of a conquered population to whom
it was familiar; but over this, feudalism threw a superior
right, and the process of infeudation consisted of bringing
individual dominion into subordination to the superior
dominion, which represented the larger community
or nation. its units were the land owners, who by virtue
of their ownership were absolute lords on their own domains,
and who there performed the office of protection
which m. taine has so graphically described, though perhaps
with too strong a coloring, in the opening chapter
of his “ancient régime.” the work of the feudal system
was to bind together these units into nations, and to
subordinate the powers and rights of the individual lords
of land to the powers and rights of collective society, as
represented by the suzerain or king.
thus the feudal system, in its rise and development,
was a triumph of the idea of the common right to land,
changing an absolute tenure into a conditional tenure,
and imposing peculiar obligations in return for the privilege
of receiving rent. and during the same time, the
power of land ownership was trenched, as it were, from
below, the tenancy at will of the cultivators of the soil
very generally hardening into tenancy by custom, and
the rent which the lord could exact from the peasant
becoming fixed and certain.
and amid the feudal system there remained, or there
grew up, communities of cultivators, more or less subject
to feudal dues, who tilled the soil as common property;
and although the lords, where and when they had the
power, claimed pretty much all they thought worth
claiming, yet the idea of common right was strong
enough to attach itself by custom to a considerable part
of the land. the commons, in feudal ages, must have
embraced a very large proportion of the area of most european
countries. for in france (although the appropriations
of these lands by the aristocracy, occasionally
checked and rescinded by royal edict, had gone on for
some centuries prior to the revolution, and during the
revolution and first empire large distributions and sales
were made), the common or communal lands still
amount, according to m. de laveleye, to ,, hectares,
or ,, acres. the extent of the common
land of england during the feudal ages may be inferred
from the fact that though inclosures by the landed aristocracy
began during the reign of henry vii., it is stated
that no less than ,, acres of common lands were
inclosed under acts passed between  and , of
which , acres have been inclosed since ; and
it is estimated that there still remain ,, acres of
common in england, though of course the most worthless
parts of the soil.
in addition to these common lands, there existed in
france, until the revolution, and in parts of spain, until
our own day, a custom having all the force of law, by
which cultivated lands, after the harvest had been
gathered, became common for purposes of pasturage or
travel, until the time had come to use the ground again;
and in some places a custom by which any one had the
right to go upon ground which its owner neglected to cultivate,
and there to sow and reap a crop in security. and
if he chose to use manure for the first crop, he acquired
the right to sow and gather a second crop without let or
hindrance from the owner.
it is not merely the swiss allmend, the ditmarsh mark,
the servian and russian village communities; not merely
the long ridges which on english ground, now the exclusive
property of individuals, still enable the antiquarian
to trace out the great fields in ancient time devoted
to the triennial rotation of crops, and in which each villager
was annually allotted his equal plot; not merely the
documentary evidence which careful students have within
late years drawn from old records; but the very institutions
under which modern civilization has developed,
which prove the universality and long persistence of the
recognition of the common right to the use of the soil.
there still remain in our legal systems survivals that
have lost their meaning, that, like the still existing remains
of the ancient commons of england, point to this.
the doctrine of eminent domain, existing as well in mohammedan
law, which makes the sovereign theoretically
the only absolute owner of land, springs from nothing
but the recognition of the sovereign as the representative
of the collective rights of the people; primogeniture and
entail, which still exist in england, and which existed
in some of the american states a hundred years ago, are
but distorted forms of what was once an outgrowth of
the apprehension of land as common property. the very
distinction made in legal terminology between real and
personal property is but the survival of a primitive distinction
between what was originally looked upon as common
property and what from its nature was always considered
the peculiar property of the individual. and the
greater care and ceremony which are yet required for the
transfer of land is but a survival, now meaningless and
useless, of the more general and ceremonious consent once
required for the transfer of rights which were looked
upon, not as belonging to any one member, but to every
member of a family or tribe.
the general course of the development of modern
civilization since the feudal period has been to the subversion
of these natural and primary ideas of collective
ownership in the soil. paradoxical as it may appear, the
emergence of liberty from feudal bonds has been accompanied
by a tendency in the treatment of land to the form
of ownership which involves the enslavement of the working
classes, and which is now beginning to be strongly
felt all over the civilized world, in the pressure of an iron
yoke, which cannot be relieved by any extension of mere
political power or personal liberty, and which political
economists mistake for the pressure of natural laws, and
workmen for the oppressions of capital.
this is clear—that in great britain to-day the right of
the people as a whole to the soil of their native country is
much less fully acknowledged than it was in feudal
times. a much smaller proportion of the people own the
soil, and their ownership is much more absolute. the
commons, once so extensive and so largely contributing to
the independence and support of the lower classes, have,
all but a small remnant of yet worthless land, been appropriated
to individual ownership and inclosed; the
great estates of the church, which were essentially common
property devoted to a public purpose, have been diverted
from that trust to enrich individuals; the dues of
the military tenants have been shaken off, and the cost of
maintaining the military establishment and paying the
interest upon an immense debt accumulated by wars has
been saddled upon the whole people, in taxes upon the
necessaries and comforts of life. the crown lands have
mostly passed into private possession, and for the support
of the royal family and all the petty princelings who
marry into it, the british workman must pay in the
price of his mug of beer and pipe of tobacco. the english
yeoman—the sturdy breed who won crecy, and poictiers,
and agincourt—is as extinct as the mastodon. the
scottish clansman, whose right to the soil of his native
hills was then as undisputed as that of his chieftain, has
been driven out to make room for the sheep ranges or
deer parks of that chieftain’s descendant; the tribal right
of the irishman has been turned into a tenancy-at-will.
thirty thousand men have legal power to expel the
whole population from five-sixths of the british islands,
and the vast majority of the british people have no right
whatever to their native land save to walk the streets or
trudge the roads. to them may be fittingly applied the
words of a tribune of the roman people: “men of rome,”
said tiberius gracchus—“men of rome, you are called
the lords of the world, yet have no right to a square foot
of its soil! the wild beasts have their dens, but the soldiers
of italy have only water and air!”
the result has, perhaps, been more marked in england
than anywhere else, but the tendency is observable everywhere,
having gone further in england owing to circumstances
which have developed it with greater rapidity.
the reason, i take it, that with the extension of the
idea of personal freedom has gone on an extension of the
idea of private property in land, is that as in the progress
of civilization the grosser forms of supremacy connected
with land ownership were dropped, or abolished, or became
less obvious, attention was diverted from the more
insidious, but really more potential forms, and the land
owners were easily enabled to put property in land on
the same basis as other property.
the growth of national power, either in the form of
royalty or parliamentary government, stripped the great
lords of individual power and importance, and of their
jurisdiction and power over persons, and so repressed
striking abuses, as the growth of roman imperialism
repressed the more striking cruelties of slavery. the
disintegration of the large feudal estates, which, until
the tendency to concentration arising from the modern
tendency to production upon a large scale is strongly felt,
operated to increase the number of land owners, and the
abolition of the restraints by which land owners when
population was sparser endeavored to compel laborers to
remain on their estates also contributed to draw away attention
from the essential injustice involved in private
property in land; while the steady progress of legal ideas
drawn from the roman law, which has been the great
mine and storehouse of modern jurisprudence, tended to
level the natural distinction between property in land
and property in other things. thus, with the extension
of personal liberty, went on an extension of individual
proprietorship in land.
the political power of the barons was, moreover, not
broken by the revolt of the classes who could clearly feel
the injustice of land ownership. such revolts took place,
again and again; but again and again were they repressed
with terrific cruelties. what broke the power of the
barons was the growth of the artisan and trading classes,
between whose wages and rent there is not the same
obvious relation. these classes, too, developed under a
system of close guilds and corporations, which, as i have
previously explained in treating of trade combinations
and monopolies, enabled them somewhat to fence themselves
in from the operation of the general law of wages,
and which were much more easily maintained than now,
when the effect of improved methods of transportation,
and the diffusion of rudimentary education and of current
news, is steadily making population more mobile.
these classes did not see, and do not yet see, that the
tenure of land is the fundamental fact which must ultimately
determine the conditions of industrial, social, and
political life. and so the tendency has been to assimilate
the idea of property in land with that of property in
things of human production, and even steps backward
have been taken, and been hailed, as steps in advance.
the french constituent assembly, in , thought it
was sweeping away a relic of tyranny when it abolished
tithes and imposed the support of the clergy on general
taxation. the abbé sieyès stood alone when he told
them that they were simply remitting to the proprietors
a tax which was one of the conditions on which they held
their lands, and reimposing it on the labor of the nation.
but in vain. the abbé sieyès, being a priest, was looked
on as defending the interests of his order, when in truth
he was defending the rights of man. in those tithes,
the french people might have retained a large public revenue
which would not have taken one centime from the
wages of labor or the earnings of capital.
and so the abolition of the military tenures in england
by the long parliament, ratified after the accession of
charles ii., though simply an appropriation of public
revenues by the feudal land holders, who thus got rid of
the consideration on which they held the common property
of the nation, and saddled it on the people at large,
in the taxation of all consumers, has long been characterized,
and is still held up in the law books, as a triumph
of the spirit of freedom. yet here is the source of the
immense debt and heavy taxation of england. had the
form of these feudal dues been simply changed into one
better adapted to the changed times, english wars need
never have occasioned the incurring of debt to the
amount of a single pound, and the labor and capital of
england need not have been taxed a single farthing for
the maintenance of a military establishment. all this
would have come from rent, which the land holders since
that time have appropriated to themselves—from the tax
which land ownership levies on the earnings of labor and
capital. the land holders of england got their land on
terms which required them even in the sparse population
of norman days to put in the field, upon call, sixty thousand
perfectly equipped horsemen, and on the further
condition of various fines and incidents which amounted
to a considerable part of the rent. it would probably be
a low estimate to put the pecuniary value of these various
services and dues at one-half the rental value of the
land. had the land holders been kept to this contract
and no land been permitted to be inclosed except upon
similar terms, the income accruing to the nation from
english land would to-day be greater by many millions
than the entire public revenues of the united kingdom.
england to-day might have enjoyed absolute free trade.
there need not have been a customs duty, an excise,
license, or income tax, yet all the present expenditures
could be met, and a large surplus remain to be devoted
to any purpose which would conduce to the comfort or
well-being of the whole people.
turning back, wherever there is light to guide us, we
may everywhere see that in their first perceptions, all
peoples have recognized the common ownership in land,
and that private property is an usurpation, a creation of
force and fraud.
as madame de stael said, “liberty is ancient.” justice,
if we turn to the most ancient records, will always be
found to have the title of prescription.
in the earlier stages of civilization we see that land is
everywhere regarded as common property. and, turning
from the dim past to our own times, we may see that
natural perceptions are still the same, and that when
placed under circumstances in which the influence of education
and habit is weakened, men instinctively recognize
the equality of right to the bounty of nature.
the discovery of gold in california brought together
in a new country men who had been used to look on land
as the rightful subject of individual property, and of
whom probably not one in a thousand had ever dreamed
of drawing any distinction between property in land and
property in anything else. but, for the first time in the
history of the anglo-saxon race, these men were brought
into contact with land from which gold could be obtained
by the simple operation of washing it out.
had the land with which they were thus called upon to
deal been agricultural, or grazing, or forest land, of
peculiar richness; had it been land which derived peculiar
value from its situation for commercial purposes, or by
reason of the water power which it afforded; or even had
it contained rich mines of coal, iron or lead, the land
system to which they had been used would have been
applied, and it would have been reduced to private ownership
in large tracts, as even the pueblo lands of san francisco,
really the most valuable in the state, which by
spanish law had been set apart to furnish homes for the
future residents of that city, were reduced, without any
protest worth speaking of. but the novelty of the case
broke through habitual ideas, and threw men back upon
first principles, and it was by common consent declared
that this gold-bearing land should remain common property,
of which no one might take more than he could reasonably
use, or hold for a longer time than he continued
to use it. this perception of natural justice was acquiesced
in by the general government and the courts,
and while placer mining remained of importance, no attempt
was made to overrule this reversion to primitive
ideas. the title to the land remained in the government,
and no individual could acquire more than a possessory
claim. the miners in each district fixed the
amount of ground an individual could take and the
amount of work that must be done to constitute use. if
this work were not done, any one could re-locate the
ground. thus, no one was allowed to forestall or to lock
up natural resources. labor was acknowledged as the
creator of wealth, was given a free field, and secured in
its reward. the device would not have assured complete
equality of rights under the conditions that in most countries
prevail; but under the conditions that there and
then existed—a sparse population, an unexplored country,
and an occupation in its nature a lottery, it secured
substantial justice. one man might strike an enormously
rich deposit, and others might vainly prospect for months
and years, but all had an equal chance. no one was allowed
to play the dog in the manger with the bounty of
the creator. the essential idea of the mining regulations
was to prevent forestalling and monopoly. upon
the same principle are based the mining laws of mexico;
and the same principle was adopted in australia, in british
columbia, and in the diamond fields of south africa,
for it accords with natural perceptions of justice.
with the decadence of placer mining in california, the
accustomed idea of private property finally prevailed in
the passage of a law permitting the patenting of mineral
lands. the only effect is to lock up opportunities—to
give the owner of mining ground the power of saying that
no one else may use what he does not choose to use himself.
and there are many cases in which mining ground
is thus withheld from use for speculative purposes, just
as valuable building lots and agricultural land are withheld
from use. but while thus preventing use, the extension
to mineral land of the same principle of private
ownership which marks the tenure of other lands has
done nothing for the security of improvements. the
greatest expenditures of capital in opening and developing
mines—expenditures that in some cases amounted to
millions of dollars—were made upon possessory titles.
had the circumstances which beset the first english
settlers in north america been such as to call their attention
de novo to the question of land ownership, there
can be no doubt that they would have reverted to first
principles, just as they reverted to first principles in
matters of government; and individual land ownership
would have been rejected, just as aristocracy and monarchy
were rejected. but while in the country from
which they came this system had not yet fully developed
itself, nor its effects been fully felt, the fact that in the
new country an immense continent invited settlement
prevented any question of the justice and policy of
private property in land from arising. for in a new
country, equality seems sufficiently assured if no one is
permitted to take land to the exclusion of the rest. at
first no harm seems to be done by treating this land as
absolute property. there is plenty of land left for those
who choose to take it, and the slavery that in a later
stage of development necessarily springs from the individual
ownership of land is not felt.
in virginia and to the south, where the settlement
had an aristocratic character, the natural complement of
the large estates into which the land was carved was
introduced in the shape of negro slaves. but the first
settlers of new england divided the land as, twelve centuries
before, their ancestors had divided the land of
britain, giving to each head of a family his town lot and
his seed lot, while beyond lay the free common. so far
as concerned the great proprietors whom the english
kings by letters patent endeavored to create, the settlers
saw clearly enough the injustice of the attempted monopoly,
and none of these proprietors got much from their
grants; but the plentifulness of land prevented attention
from being called to the monopoly which individual land
ownership, even when the tracts are small, must involve
when land becomes scarce. and so it has come to pass
that the great republic of the modern world has adopted
at the beginning of its career an institution that ruined
the republics of antiquity; that a people who proclaim
the inalienable rights of all men to life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness have accepted without question a
principle which, in denying the equal and inalienable
right to the soil, finally denies the equal right to life and
liberty; that a people who at the cost of a bloody war
have abolished chattel slavery, yet permit slavery in a
more widespread and dangerous form to take root.
the continent has seemed so wide, the area over which
population might yet pour so vast, that familiarized by
habit with the idea of private property in land, we have
not realized its essential injustice. for not merely has
this background of unsettled land prevented the full effect
of private appropriation from being felt, even in the older
sections, but to permit a man to take more land than he
could use, that he might compel those who afterwards
needed it to pay him for the privilege of using it, has not
seemed so unjust when others in their turn might do the
same thing by going further on. and more than this,
the very fortunes that have resulted from the appropriation
of land, and that have thus really been drawn from
taxes levied upon the wages of labor, have seemed, and
have been heralded, as prizes held out to the laborer.
in all the newer states, and even to a considerable extent
in the older ones, our landed aristocracy is yet in its first
generation. those who have profited by the increase in
the value of land have been largely men who began life
without a cent. their great fortunes, many of them
running up high into the millions, seem to them, and to
many others, as the best proofs of the justice of existing
social conditions in rewarding prudence, foresight, industry,
and thrift; whereas, the truth is that these fortunes
are but the gains of monopoly, and are necessarily
made at the expense of labor. but the fact that those
thus enriched started as laborers hides this, and the
same feeling which leads every ticket holder in a lottery
to delight in imagination in the magnitude of the prizes
has prevented even the poor from quarreling with a
system which thus made many poor men rich.
in short, the american people have failed to see the
essential injustice of private property in land, because as
yet they have not felt its full effects. this public
domain—the vast extent of land yet to be reduced to
private possession, the enormous common to which the
faces of the energetic were always turned, has been the
great fact that, since the days when the first settlements
began to fringe the atlantic coast, has formed our
national character and colored our national thought. it
is not that we have eschewed a titled aristocracy and
abolished primogeniture; that we elect all our officers
from school director up to president; that our laws run
in the name of the people, instead of in the name of a
prince; that the state knows no religion, and our judges
wear no wigs—that we have been exempted from the ills
that fourth of july orators used to point to as characteristic
of the effete despotisms of the old world. the
general intelligence, the general comfort, the active invention,
the power of adaptation and assimilation, the
free, independent spirit, the energy and hopefulness that
have marked our people, are not causes, but results—they
have sprung from unfenced land. this public domain
has been the transmuting force which has turned the
thriftless, unambitious european peasant into the self-reliant
western farmer; it has given a consciousness of
freedom even to the dweller in crowded cities, and has
been a well-spring of hope even to those who have never
thought of taking refuge upon it. the child of the
people, as he grows to manhood in europe, finds all the
best seats at the banquet of life marked “taken,” and
must struggle with his fellows for the crumbs that fall,
without one chance in a thousand of forcing or sneaking
his way to a seat. in america, whatever his condition,
there has always been the consciousness that the public
domain lay behind him; and the knowledge of this fact,
acting and reacting, has penetrated our whole national
life, giving to it generosity and independence, elasticity
and ambition. all that we are proud of in the american
character; all that makes our conditions and institutions
better than those of older countries, we may trace to the
fact that land has been cheap in the united states, because
new soil has been open to the emigrant.
but our advance has reached the pacific. further
west we cannot go, and increasing population can but
expand north and south and fill up what has been passed
over. north, it is already filling up the valley of the
red river, pressing into that of the saskatchewan and
pre-empting washington territory; south, it is covering
western texas and taking up the arable valleys of new
mexico and arizona.
the republic has entered upon a new era, an era in
which the monopoly of the land will tell with accelerating
effect. the great fact which has been so potent is
ceasing to be. the public domain is almost gone—a
very few years will end its influence, already rapidly failing.
i do not mean to say that there will be no public
domain. for a long time to come there will be millions
of acres of public lands carried on the books of the land
department. but it must be remembered that the best
part of the continent for agricultural purposes is already
overrun, and that it is the poorest land that is left. it
must be remembered that what remains comprises the
great mountain ranges, the sterile deserts, the high
plains fit only for grazing. and it must be remembered
that much of this land which figures in the reports as
open to settlement is unsurveyed land, which has been
appropriated by possessory claims or locations which do
not appear until the land is returned as surveyed. california
figures on the books of the land department as
the greatest land state of the union, containing nearly
,, acres of public land—something like one-twelfth
of the whole public domain. yet so much of
this is covered by railroad grants or held in the way of
which i have spoken; so much consists of untillable
mountains or plains which require irrigation; so much is
monopolized by locations which command the water, that
as a matter of fact it is difficult to point the immigrant
to any part of the state where he can take up a farm on
which he can settle and maintain a family, and so men,
weary of the quest, end by buying land or renting it on
shares. it is not that there is any real scarcity of land
in california—for, an empire in herself, california will
some day maintain a population as large as that of france—but
appropriation has got ahead of the settler and
manages to keep just ahead of him.
some twelve or fifteen years ago the late ben wade of
ohio said, in a speech in the united states senate, that
by the close of this century every acre of ordinary agricultural
land in the united states would be worth $ in
gold. it is already clear that if he erred at all, it was in
overstating the time. in the twenty-one years that remain
of the present century, if our population keep on
increasing at the rate which it has maintained since the
institution of the government, with the exception of the
decade which included the civil war, there will be an
addition to our present population of something like
forty-five millions, an addition of some seven millions
more than the total population of the united states as
shown by the census of , and nearly half as much
again as the present population of great britain. there
is no question about the ability of the united states to
support such a population and many hundreds of millions
more, and, under proper social adjustments, to
support them in increased comfort; but in view of such
an increase of population, what becomes of the unappropriated
public domain? practically there will soon cease
to be any. it will be a very long time before it is all in
use; but it will be a very short time, as we are going, before
all that men can turn to use will have an owner.
but the evil effects of making the land of a whole people
the exclusive property of some do not wait for the
final appropriation of the public domain to show themselves.
it is not necessary to contemplate them in the
future; we may see them in the present. they have
grown with our growth, and are still increasing.
we plow new fields, we open new mines, we found
new cities; we drive back the indian and exterminate
the buffalo; we girdle the land with iron roads and lace
the air with telegraph wires; we add knowledge to
knowledge, and utilize invention after invention; we
build schools and endow colleges; yet it becomes no
easier for the masses of our people to make a living.
on the contrary, it is becoming harder. the wealthy class
is becoming more wealthy; but the poorer class is becoming
more dependent. the gulf between the employed
and the employer is growing wider; social contrasts
are becoming sharper; as liveried carriages appear,
so do barefooted children. we are becoming used to
talk of the working classes and the propertied classes;
beggars are becoming so common that where it was once
thought a crime little short of highway robbery to refuse
food to one who asked for it, the gate is now barred and
the bulldog loosed, while laws are passed against vagrants
which suggest those of henry viii.
we call ourselves the most progressive people on earth.
but what is the goal of our progress, if these are its
wayside fruits?
these are the results of private property in land—the
effects of a principle that must act with increasing and
increasing force. it is not that laborers have increased
faster than capital; it is not that population is pressing
against subsistence; it is not that machinery has made
“work scarce;” it is not that there is any real antagonism
between labor and capital—it is simply that land is becoming
more valuable; that the terms on which labor can
obtain access to the natural opportunities which alone
enable it to produce are becoming harder and harder.
the public domain is receding and narrowing. property
in land is concentrating. the proportion of our people
who have no legal right to the land on which they live is
becoming steadily larger.
says the new york world: “a non-resident proprietary,
like that of ireland, is getting to be the characteristic
of large farming districts in new england,
adding yearly to the nominal value of leasehold farms;
advancing yearly the rent demanded, and steadily degrading
the character of the tenantry.” and the
nation, alluding to the same section, says: “increased
nominal value of land, higher rents, fewer farms occupied
by owners; diminished product; lower wages; a
more ignorant population; increasing number of women
employed at hard, outdoor labor (surest sign of a declining
civilization), and a steady deterioration in the
style of farming—these are the conditions described by a
cumulative mass of evidence that is perfectly irresistible.”
the same tendency is observable in the new states,
where the large scale of cultivation recalls the latifundia
that ruined ancient italy. in california a very large
proportion of the farming land is rented from year to
year, at rates varying from a fourth to even half the
crop.
the harder times, the lower wages, the increasing
poverty perceptible in the united states are but results
of the natural laws we have traced—laws as universal and
as irresistible as that of gravitation. we did not establish
the republic when, in the face of principalities and
powers, we flung the declaration of the inalienable rights
of man; we shall never establish the republic until we
practically carry out that declaration by securing to the
poorest child born among us an equal right to his native
soil! we did not abolish slavery when we ratified the
fourteenth amendment; to abolish slavery we must
abolish private property in land! unless we come back
to first principles, unless we recognize natural perceptions
of equity, unless we acknowledge the equal right of
all to land, our free institutions will be in vain; our common
schools will be in vain; our discoveries and inventions
will but add to the force that presses the masses
down!
why hesitate? ye are full-bearded men,
with god-implanted will, and courage if
ye dare but show it. never yet was will
but found some way or means to work it out,
nor e’er did fortune frown on him who dared.
shall we in presence of this grievous wrong,
in this supremest moment of all time,
stand trembling, cowering, when with one bold stroke
these groaning millions might be ever free?—
and that one stroke so just, so greatly good,
so level with the happiness of man,
that all the angels will applaud the deed.
—e. r. taylor.
there is a delusion resulting from the tendency to
confound the accidental with the essential—a delusion
which the law writers have done their best to extend,
and political economists generally have acquiesced in,
rather than endeavored to expose—that private property
in land is necessary to the proper use of land, and that
again to make land common property would be to destroy
civilization and revert to barbarism.
this delusion may be likened to the idea which, according
to charles lamb, so long prevailed among the
chinese after the savor of roast pork had been accidentally
discovered by the burning down of ho-ti’s hut—that
to cook a pig it was necessary to set fire to a house. but,
though in lamb’s charming dissertation it was required
that a sage should arise to teach people that they might
roast pigs without burning down houses, it does not take
a sage to see that what is required for the improvement
of land is not absolute ownership of the land, but security
for the improvements. this will be obvious to whoever
will look around him. while there is no more
necessity for making a man the absolute and exclusive
owner of land, in order to induce him to improve it, than
there is of burning down a house in order to cook a pig;
while the making of land private property is as rude,
wasteful, and uncertain a device for securing improvement,
as the burning down of a house is a rude, wasteful,
and uncertain device for roasting a pig, we have not
the excuse for persisting in the one that lamb’s chinamen
had for persisting in the other. until the sage
arose who invented the rude gridiron, which according
to lamb, preceded the spit and oven, no one had known
or heard of a pig being roasted, except by a house being
burned. but, among us, nothing is more common than
for land to be improved by those who do not own it.
the greater part of the land of great britain is cultivated
by tenants, the greater part of the buildings of
london are built upon leased ground, and even in the
united states the same system prevails everywhere to a
greater or less extent. thus it is a common matter for
use to be separated from ownership.
would not all this land be cultivated and improved
just as well if the rent went to the state or municipality,
as now, when it goes to private individuals? if no
private ownership in land were acknowledged, but all
land were held in this way, the occupier or user paying
rent to the state, would not land be used and improved
as well and as securely as now? there can be but one
answer: of course it would. then would the resumption
of land as common property in nowise interfere with the
proper use and improvement of land.
what is necessary for the use of land is not its private
ownership, but the security of improvements. it is not
necessary to say to a man, “this land is yours,” in order
to induce him to cultivate or improve it. it is only necessary
to say to him, “whatever your labor or capital
produces on this land shall be yours.” give a man
security that he may reap, and he will sow; assure him of
the possession of the house he wants to build, and he
will build it. these are the natural rewards of labor. it
is for the sake of the reaping that men sow; it is for the
sake of possessing houses that men build. the ownership
of land has nothing to do with it.
it was for the sake of obtaining this security, that in
the beginning of the feudal period so many of the smaller
land holders surrendered the ownership of their lands to
a military chieftain, receiving back the use of them in
fief or trust, and kneeling bareheaded before the lord,
with their hands between his hands, swore to serve him
with life, and limb, and worldly honor. similar instances
of the giving up of ownership in land for the
sake of security in its enjoyment are to be seen in
turkey, where a peculiar exemption from taxation and
extortion attaches to vakouf, or church lands, and where
it is a common thing for a land owner to sell his land to
a mosque for a nominal price, with the understanding
that he may remain as tenant upon it at a fixed rent.
it is not the magic of property, as arthur young said,
that has turned flemish sands into fruitful fields. it is
the magic of security to labor. this can be secured in
other ways than making land private property, just as
the heat necessary to roast a pig can be secured in other
ways than by burning down houses. the mere pledge of
an irish landlord that for twenty years he would not
claim in rent any share in their cultivation induced irish
peasants to turn a barren mountain into gardens; on
the mere security of a fixed ground rent for a term of
years the most costly buildings of such cities as london
and new york are erected on leased ground. if we give
improvers such security, we may safely abolish private
property in land.
the complete recognition of common rights to land
need in no way interfere with the complete recognition
of individual right to improvements or produce. two
men may own a ship without sawing her in half. the
ownership of a railway may be divided into a hundred
thousand shares, and yet trains be run with as much
system and precision as if there were but a single owner.
in london, joint stock companies have been formed to
hold and manage real estate. everything could go on as
now, and yet the common right to land be fully recognized
by appropriating rent to the common benefit.
there is a lot in the center of san francisco to which
the common rights of the people of that city are yet
legally recognized. this lot is not cut up into infinitesimal
pieces nor yet is it an unused waste. it is covered
with fine buildings, the property of private individuals,
that stand there in perfect security. the only difference
between this lot and those around it, is that the rent of
the one goes into the common school fund, the rent of
the others into private pockets. what is to prevent the
land of a whole country being held by the people of the
country in this way?
it would be difficult to select any portion of the territory
of the united states in which the conditions commonly
taken to necessitate the reduction of land to
private ownership exist in higher degree than on the
little islets of st. peter and st. paul, in the aleutian
archipelago, acquired by the alaska purchase from
russia. these islands are the breeding places of the
fur seal, an animal so timid and wary that the slightest
fright causes it to abandon its accustomed resort, never
to return. to prevent the utter destruction of this
fishery, without which the islands are of no use to man,
it is not only necessary to avoid killing the females and
young cubs, but even such noises as the discharge of a
pistol or the barking of a dog. the men who do the
killing must be in no hurry, but quietly walk around
among the seals who line the rocky beaches, until the
timid animals, so clumsy on land but so graceful in
water, show no more sign of fear than lazily to waddle
out of the way. then those who can be killed without
diminution of future increase are carefully separated and
gently driven inland, out of sight and hearing of the
herds, where they are dispatched with clubs. to throw
such a fishery as this open to whoever chose to go and
kill—which would make it to the interest of each party
to kill as many as they could at the time without reference
to the future—would be utterly to destroy it in a
few seasons, as similar fisheries in other oceans have
been destroyed. but it is not necessary, therefore, to
make these islands private property. though for
reasons greatly less cogent, the great public domain of
the american people has been made over to private
ownership as fast as anybody could be got to take it,
these islands have been leased at a rent of $, per
year, probably not very much less than they could have
been sold for at the time of the alaska purchase. they
have already yielded two millions and a half to the
national treasury, and they are still, in unimpaired value
(for under the careful management of the alaska fur
company the seals increase rather than diminish), the
common property of the people of the united states.
so far from the recognition of private property in land
being necessary to the proper use of land, the contrary is
the case. treating land as private property stands in the
way of its proper use. were land treated as public
property it would be used and improved as soon as there
was need for its use or improvement, but being treated
as private property, the individual owner is permitted to
prevent others from using or improving what he cannot
or will not use or improve himself. when the title is in
dispute, the most valuable land lies unimproved for
years; in many parts of england improvement is stopped
because, the estates being entailed, no security to improvers
can be given; and large tracts of ground which,
were they treated as public property, would be covered
with buildings and crops, are kept idle to gratify the
caprice of the owner. in the thickly settled parts of the
united states there is enough land to maintain three or
four times our present population, lying unused, because
its owners are holding it for higher prices, and immigrants
are forced past this unused land to seek homes
where their labor will be far less productive. in every
city valuable lots may be seen lying vacant for the same
reason. if the best use of land be the test, then private
property in land is condemned, as it is condemned by
every other consideration. it is as wasteful and uncertain
a mode of securing the proper use of land as the
burning down of houses is of roasting pigs.
we have traced the want and suffering that everywhere
prevail among the working classes, the recurring
paroxysms of industrial depression, the scarcity of employment,
the stagnation of capital, the tendency of
wages to the starvation point, that exhibit themselves
more and more strongly as material progress goes on, to
the fact that the land on which and from which all must
live is made the exclusive property of some.
we have seen that there is no possible remedy for these
evils but the abolition of their cause; we have seen that
private property in land has no warrant in justice, but
stands condemned as the denial of natural right—a subversion
of the law of nature that as social development
goes on must condemn the masses of men to a slavery the
hardest and most degrading.
we have weighed every objection, and seen that neither
on the ground of equity or expediency is there anything
to deter us from making land common property by confiscating
rent.
but a question of method remains. how shall we do
it?
we should satisfy the law of justice, we should meet
all economic requirements, by at one stroke abolishing
all private titles, declaring all land public property, and
letting it out to the highest bidders in lots to suit, under
such conditions as would sacredly guard the private right
to improvements.
thus we should secure, in a more complex state of
society, the same equality of rights that in a ruder state
were secured by equal partitions of the soil, and by giving
the use of the land to whoever could procure the
most from it, we should secure the greatest production.
such a plan, instead of being a wild, impracticable
vagary, has (with the exception that he suggests compensation
to the present holders of land—undoubtedly a
careless concession which he upon reflection would reconsider)
been indorsed by no less eminent a thinker than
herbert spencer, who (“social statics,” chap. ix, sec.
) says of it:
“such a doctrine is consistent with the highest state of civilization;
may be carried out without involving a community of goods,
and need cause no very serious revolution in existing arrangements.
the change required would simply be a change of landlords. separate
ownership would merge into the joint-stock ownership of the
public. instead of being in the possession of individuals, the country
would be held by the great corporate body—society. instead of
leasing his acres from an isolated proprietor, the farmer would lease
them from the nation. instead of paying his rent to the agent of
sir john or his grace, he would pay it to an agent or deputy agent
of the community. stewards would be public officials instead of
private ones, and tenancy the only land tenure. a state of things
so ordered would be in perfect harmony with the moral law. under
it all men would be equally landlords, all men would be alike free
to become tenants. * * * clearly, therefore, on such a system,
the earth might be enclosed, occupied and cultivated, in entire subordination
to the law of equal freedom.”
but such a plan, though perfectly feasible, does not
seem to me the best. or rather i propose to accomplish
the same thing in a simpler, easier, and quieter way,
than that of formally confiscating all the land and
formally letting it out to the highest bidders.
to do that would involve a needless shock to present
customs and habits of thought—which is to be avoided.
to do that would involve a needless extension of governmental
machinery—which is to be avoided.
it is an axiom of statesmanship, which the successful
founders of tyranny have understood and acted upon—that
great changes can best be brought about under old
forms. we, who would free men, should heed the same
truth. it is the natural method. when nature would
make a higher type, she takes a lower one and develops
it. this, also, is the law of social growth. let us work
by it. with the current we may glide fast and far.
against it, it is hard pulling and slow progress.
i do not propose either to purchase or to confiscate
private property in land. the first would be unjust;
the second, needless. let the individuals who now hold
it still retain, if they want to, possession of what they
are pleased to call their land. let them continue to call
it their land. let them buy and sell, and bequeath and
devise it. we may safely leave them the shell, if we
take the kernel. it is not necessary to confiscate land; it
is only necessary to confiscate rent.
nor to take rent for public uses is it necessary that the
state should bother with the letting of lands, and assume
the chances of the favoritism, collusion, and corruption
this might involve. it is not necessary that any new
machinery should be created. the machinery already
exists. instead of extending it, all we have to do is to
simplify and reduce it. by leaving to land owners a
percentage of rent which would probably be much less
than the cost and loss involved in attempting to rent
lands through state agency, and by making use of this
existing machinery, we may, without jar or shock, assert
the common right to land by taking rent for public uses.
we already take some rent in taxation. we have only
to make some changes in our modes of taxation to take
it all.
what i, therefore, propose, as the simple yet sovereign
remedy, which will raise wages, increase the earnings of
capital, extirpate pauperism, abolish poverty, give remunerative
employment to whoever wishes it, afford free
scope to human powers, lessen crime, elevate morals,
and taste, and intelligence, purify government and carry
civilization to yet nobler heights, is—to appropriate rent
by taxation.
in this way the state may become the universal landlord
without calling herself so, and without assuming a
single new function. in form, the ownership of land
would remain just as now. no owner of land need be
dispossessed, and no restriction need be placed upon the
amount of land any one could hold. for, rent being
taken by the state in taxes, land, no matter in whose
name it stood, or in what parcels it was held, would be
really common property, and every member of the community
would participate in the advantages of its ownership.
now, insomuch as the taxation of rent, or land values,
must necessarily be increased just as we abolish other
taxes, we may put the proposition into practical form by
proposing—
to abolish all taxation save that upon land values.
as we have seen, the value of land is at the beginning
of society nothing, but as society develops by the increase
of population and the advance of the arts, it
becomes greater and greater. in every civilized country,
even the newest, the value of the land taken as a whole is
sufficient to bear the entire expenses of government. in
the better developed countries it is much more than
sufficient. hence it will not be enough merely to place
all taxes upon the value of land. it will be necessary,
where rent exceeds the present governmental revenues,
commensurately to increase the amount demanded in
taxation, and to continue this increase as society progresses
and rent advances. but this is so natural and
easy a matter, that it may be considered as involved, or
at least understood, in the proposition to put all taxes
on the value of land. that is the first step, upon which
the practical struggle must be made. when the hare is
once caught and killed, cooking him will follow as a
matter of course. when the common right to land is so
far appreciated that all taxes are abolished save those
which fall upon rent, there is no danger of much more
than is necessary to induce them to collect the public
revenues being left to individual land holders.
experience has taught me (for i have been for some
years endeavoring to popularize this proposition) that
wherever the idea of concentrating all taxation upon land
values finds lodgment sufficient to induce consideration,
it invariably makes way, but that there are few of the
classes most to be benefited by it, who at first, or even
for a long time afterward, see its full significance and
power. it is difficult for workingmen to get over the
idea that there is a real antagonism between capital and
labor. it is difficult for small farmers and homestead
owners to get over the idea that to put all taxes on the
value of land would be unduly to tax them. it is difficult
for both classes to get over the idea that to exempt
capital from taxation would be to make the rich richer,
and the poor poorer. these ideas spring from confused
thought. but behind ignorance and prejudice there is
a powerful interest, which has hitherto dominated literature,
education, and opinion. a great wrong always
dies hard, and the great wrong which in every civilized
country condemns the masses of men to poverty and
want, will not die without a bitter struggle.
i do not think the ideas of which i speak can be entertained
by the reader who has followed me thus far; but
inasmuch as any popular discussion must deal with the
concrete, rather than with the abstract, let me ask him
to follow me somewhat further, that we may try the
remedy i have proposed by the accepted canons of taxation.
in doing so, many incidental bearings may be seen
that otherwise might escape notice.
the best tax by which public revenues can be raised
is evidently that which will closest conform to the following
conditions:
. that it bear as lightly as possible upon production—so
as least to check the increase of the general fund
from which taxes must be paid and the community maintained.
. that it be easily and cheaply collected, and fall as
directly as may be upon the ultimate payers—so as to
take from the people as little as possible in addition to
what it yields the government.
. that it be certain—so as to give the least opportunity
for tyranny or corruption on the part of officials, and
the least temptation to law-breaking and evasion on the
part of the taxpayers.
. that it bear equally—so as to give no citizen an
advantage or put any at a disadvantage, as compared
with others.
let us consider what form of taxation best accords
with these conditions. whatever it be, that evidently
will be the best mode in which the public revenues can
be raised.
i.—the effect of taxes upon production.
all taxes must evidently come from the produce of
land and labor, since there is no other source of wealth
than the union of human exertion with the material and
forces of nature. but the manner in which equal
amounts of taxation may be imposed may very differently
affect the production of wealth. taxation which lessens
the reward of the producer necessarily lessens the incentive
to production; taxation which is conditioned upon
the act of production, or the use of any of the three
factors of production, necessarily discourages production.
thus taxation which diminishes the earnings of
the laborer or the returns of the capitalist tends to render
the one less industrious and intelligent, the other
less disposed to save and invest. taxation which falls
upon the processes of production interposes an artificial
obstacle to the creation of wealth. taxation which falls
upon labor as it is exerted, wealth as it is used as capital,
and as it is cultivated, will manifestly tend to discourage
production much more powerfully than taxation to the
same amount levied upon laborers, whether they work or
play, upon wealth whether used productively or unproductively,
or upon land whether cultivated or left waste.
the mode of taxation is, in fact, quite as important as
the amount. as a small burden badly placed may distress
a horse that could carry with ease a much larger
one properly adjusted, so a people may be impoverished
and their power of producing wealth destroyed by taxation,
which, if levied in another way, could be borne with
ease. a tax on date-trees, imposed by mohammed ali,
caused the egyptian fellahs to cut down their trees; but
a tax of twice the amount imposed on the land produced
no such result. the tax of ten per cent. on all sales,
imposed by the duke of alva in the netherlands, would,
had it been maintained, have all but stopped exchange
while yielding but little revenue.
but we need not go abroad for illustrations. the
production of wealth in the united states is largely
lessened by taxation which bears upon its processes.
ship-building, in which we excelled, has been all but
destroyed, so far as the foreign trade is concerned, and
many branches of production and exchange seriously
crippled, by taxes which divert industry from more to
less productive forms.
this checking of production is in greater or less degree
characteristic of most of the taxes by which the
revenues of modern governments are raised. all taxes
upon manufactures, all taxes upon commerce, all taxes
upon capital, all taxes upon improvements, are of this
kind. their tendency is the same as that of mohammed
ali’s tax on date-trees, though their effect may not be so
clearly seen.
all such taxes have a tendency to reduce the production
of wealth, and should, therefore, never be resorted
to when it is possible to raise money by taxes which do
not check production. this becomes possible as society
develops and wealth accumulates. taxes which fall
upon ostentation would simply turn into the public
treasury what otherwise would be wasted in vain show
for the sake of show; and taxes upon wills and devises of
the rich would probably have little effect in checking
the desire for accumulation, which, after it has fairly got
hold of a man, becomes a blind passion. but the great
class of taxes from which revenue may be derived without
interference with production are taxes upon monopolies—for
the profit of monopoly is in itself a tax levied
upon production, and to tax it is simply to divert into
the public coffers what production must in any event
pay.
there are among us various sorts of monopolies. for
instance, there are the temporary monopolies created by
the patent and copyright laws. these it would be extremely
unjust and unwise to tax, inasmuch as they are
but recognitions of the right of labor to its intangible
productions, and constitute a reward held out to invention
and authorship. there are also the onerous monopolies
alluded to in chapter iv of book iii, which result
from the aggregation of capital in businesses which are of
the nature of monopolies. but while it would be extremely
difficult, if not altogether impossible, to levy
taxes by general law so that they would fall exclusively
on the returns of such monopoly and not become taxes
on production or exchange, it is much better that these
monopolies should be abolished. in large part they
spring from legislative commission or omission, as, for
instance, the ultimate reason that san francisco merchants
are compelled to pay more for goods sent direct
from new york to san francisco by the isthmus route
than it costs to ship them from new york to liverpool
or southampton and thence to san francisco, is to be
found in the “protective” laws which make it so costly
to build american steamers and which forbid foreign
steamers to carry goods between american ports. the
reason that residents of nevada are compelled to pay as
much freight from the east as though their goods were
carried to san francisco and back again, is that the
authority which prevents extortion on the part of a hack
driver is not exercised in respect to a railroad company.
and it may be said generally that businesses which are in
their nature monopolies are properly part of the functions
of the state, and should be assumed by the state. there
is the same reason why government should carry telegraphic
messages as that it should carry letters; that railroads
should belong to the public as that common roads
should.
but all other monopolies are trivial in extent as compared
with the monopoly of land. and the value of land
expressing a monopoly, pure and simple, is in every respect
fitted for taxation. that is to say, while the value
of a railroad or telegraph line, the price of gas or of a
patent medicine, may express the price of monopoly, it
also expresses the exertion of labor and capital; but the
value of land, or economic rent, as we have seen, is in no
part made up from these factors, and expresses nothing
but the advantage of appropriation. taxes levied upon
the value of land cannot check production in the slightest
degree, until they exceed rent, or the value of land
taken annually, for unlike taxes upon commodities, or
exchange, or capital, or any of the tools or processes of
production, they do not bear upon production. the
value of land does not express the reward of production,
as does the value of crops, of cattle, of buildings, or any of
the things which are styled personal property and improvements.
it expresses the exchange value of monopoly.
it is not in any case the creation of the individual who
owns the land; it is created by the growth of the community.
hence the community can take it all without
in any way lessening the incentive to improvement or in
the slightest degree lessening the production of wealth.
taxes may be imposed upon the value of land until all
rent is taken by the state, without reducing the wages
of labor or the reward of capital one iota; without increasing
the price of a single commodity, or making production
in any way more difficult.
but more than this. taxes on the value of land not
only do not check production as do most other taxes, but
they tend to increase production, by destroying speculative
rent. how speculative rent checks production may
be seen not only in the valuable land withheld from use,
but in the paroxysms of industrial depression which,
originating in the speculative advance in land values,
propagate themselves over the whole civilized world,
everywhere paralyzing industry, and causing more waste
and probably more suffering than would a general war.
taxation which would take rent for public uses would
prevent all this; while if land were taxed to anything
near its rental value, no one could afford to hold land
that he was not using, and, consequently, land not in
use would be thrown open to those who would use it.
settlement would be closer, and, consequently, labor and
capital would be enabled to produce much more with the
same exertion. the dog in the manger who, in this
country especially, so wastes productive power, would be
choked off.
there is yet an even more important way by which,
through its effect upon distribution, the taking of rent
to public uses by taxation would stimulate the production
of wealth. but reference to that may be reserved.
it is sufficiently evident that with regard to production,
the tax upon the value of land is the best tax that can be
imposed. tax manufactures, and the effect is to check
manufacturing; tax improvements, and the effect is to
lessen improvement; tax commerce, and the effect is to
prevent exchange; tax capital, and the effect is to drive
it away. but the whole value of land may be taken in
taxation, and the only effect will be to stimulate industry,
to open new opportunities to capital, and to increase the
production of wealth.
ii.—as to ease and cheapness of collection.
with, perhaps, the exception of certain licenses and
stamp duties, which may be made almost to collect themselves,
but which can be relied on for only a trivial
amount of revenue, a tax upon land values can, of all
taxes, be most easily and cheaply collected. for land
cannot be hidden or carried off; its value can be readily
ascertained, and the assessment once made, nothing but
a receiver is required for collection.
and as under all fiscal systems some part of the public
revenues is collected from taxes on land, and the
machinery for that purpose already exists and could as
well be made to collect all as a part, the cost of collecting
the revenue now obtained by other taxes might be entirely
saved by substituting the tax on land values for all
other taxes. what an enormous saving might thus be
made can be inferred from the horde of officials now engaged
in collecting these taxes.
this saving would largely reduce the difference between
what taxation now costs the people and what it
yields, but the substitution of a tax on land values for
all other taxes would operate to reduce this difference in
an even more important way.
a tax on land values does not add to prices, and is thus
paid directly by the persons on whom it falls; whereas,
all taxes upon things of unfixed quantity increase prices,
and in the course of exchange are shifted from seller to
buyer, increasing as they go. if we impose a tax upon
money loaned, as has been often attempted, the lender
will charge the tax to the borrower, and the borrower
must pay it or not obtain the loan. if the borrower uses
it in his business, he in his turn must get back the tax
from his customers, or his business becomes unprofitable.
if we impose a tax upon buildings, the users of buildings
must finally pay it, for the erection of buildings will
cease until building rents become high enough to pay
the regular profit and the tax besides. if we impose a
tax upon manufactures or imported goods, the manufacturer
or importer will charge it in a higher price to the jobber,
the jobber to the retailer, and the retailer to the
consumer. now, the consumer, on whom the tax thus
ultimately falls, must not only pay the amount of the tax,
but also a profit on this amount to every one who has thus
advanced it—for profit on the capital he has advanced in
paying taxes is as much required by each dealer as profit
on the capital he has advanced in paying for goods.
manila cigars cost, when bought of the importer in san
francisco, $ a thousand, of which $ is the cost of
the cigars laid down in this port and $ is the customs
duty. but the dealer who purchases these cigars to
sell again must charge a profit, not on $, the real cost
of the cigars, but on $, the cost of the cigars plus the
duty. in this way all taxes which add to prices are
shifted from hand to hand, increasing as they go, until
they ultimately rest upon consumers, who thus pay much
more than is received by the government. now, the
way taxes raise prices is by increasing the cost of production,
and checking supply. but land is not a thing
of human production, and taxes upon rent cannot check
supply. therefore, though a tax on rent compels the
land owners to pay more, it gives them no power to
obtain more for the use of their land, as it in no way
tends to reduce the supply of land. on the contrary,
by compelling those who hold land on speculation to sell
or let for what they can get, a tax on land values tends
to increase the competition between owners, and thus to
reduce the price of land.
thus in all respects a tax upon land values is the
cheapest tax by which a large revenue can be raised—giving
to the government the largest net revenue in proportion
to the amount taken from the people.
iii.—as to certainty.
certainty is an important element in taxation, for just
as the collection of a tax depends upon the diligence and
faithfulness of the collectors and the public spirit and
honesty of those who are to pay it, will opportunities
for tyranny and corruption be opened on the one side,
and for evasions and frauds on the other.
the methods by which the bulk of our revenues are
collected are condemned on this ground, if on no other.
the gross corruptions and fraud occasioned in the
united states by the whisky and tobacco taxes are well
known; the constant undervaluations of the custom
house, the ridiculous untruthfulness of income tax returns,
and the absolute impossibility of getting anything
like a just valuation of personal property, are matters of
notoriety. the material loss which such taxes inflict—the
item of cost which this uncertainty adds to the
amount paid by the people but not received by the government—is
very great. when, in the days of the protective
system of england, her coasts were lined with an
army of men endeavoring to prevent smuggling, and another
army of men were engaged in evading them, it is
evident that the maintenance of both armies had to
come from the produce of labor and capital; that the
expenses and profits of the smugglers, as well as the pay
and bribes of the custom house officers, constituted a
tax upon the industry of the nation, in addition to what
was received by the government. and so, all douceurs
to assessors; all bribes to customs officials; all moneys
expended in electing pliable officers or in procuring acts
or decisions which avoid taxation; all the costly modes
of bringing in goods so as to evade duties, and of manufacturing
so as to evade imposts; all moieties, and expenses
of detectives and spies; all expenses of legal proceedings
and punishments, not only to the government,
but to those prosecuted, are so much which these taxes
take from the general fund of wealth, without adding to
the revenue.
yet this is the least part of the cost. taxes which
lack the element of certainty tell most fearfully upon
morals. our revenue laws as a body might well be entitled,
“acts to promote the corruption of public officials,
to suppress honesty and encourage fraud, to set a premium
upon perjury and the subornation of perjury, and
to divorce the idea of law from the idea of justice.”
this is their true character, and they succeed admirably.
a custom house oath is a by-word; our assessors regularly
swear to assess all property at its full, true, cash
value, and habitually do nothing of the kind; men who
pride themselves on their personal and commercial honor
bribe officials and make false returns; and the demoralizing
spectacle is constantly presented of the same court
trying a murderer one day and a vendor of unstamped
matches the next!
so uncertain and so demoralizing are these modes of
taxation that the new york commission, composed of
david a. wells, edwin dodge and george w. cuyler,
who investigated the subject of taxation in that state,
proposed to substitute for most of the taxes now levied,
other than that on real estate, an arbitrary tax on each
individual, estimated on the rental value of the premises
he occupied.
but there is no necessity of resorting to any arbitrary
assessment. the tax on land values, which is the least
arbitrary of taxes, possesses in the highest degree the
element of certainty. it may be assessed and collected
with a definiteness that partakes of the immovable and
unconcealable character of the land itself. taxes levied
on land may be collected to the last cent, and though
the assessment of land is now often unequal, yet the
assessment of personal property is far more unequal, and
these inequalities in the assessment of land largely arise
from the taxation of improvements with land, and from
the demoralization that, springing from the causes to
which i have referred, affects the whole scheme of taxation.
were all taxes placed upon land values, irrespective
of improvements, the scheme of taxation would be
so simple and clear, and public attention would be so
directed to it, that the valuation of taxation could and
would be made with the same certainty that a real estate
agent can determine the price a seller can get for a lot.
iv.—as to equality.
adam smith’s canon is, that “the subjects of every
state ought to contribute toward the support of the
government as nearly as possible in proportion to their
respective abilities; that is, in proportion to the revenue
which they respectively enjoy under the protection of
the state.” every tax, he goes on to say, which falls
only upon rent, or only upon wages, or only upon interest,
is necessarily unequal. in accordance with this
is the common idea which our systems of taxing everything
vainly attempt to carry out—that every one should
pay taxes in proportion to his means, or in proportion to
his income.
but, waiving all the insuperable practical difficulties in
the way of taxing every one according to his means, it is
evident that justice cannot be thus attained.
here, for instance, are two men of equal means, or
equal incomes, one having a large family, the other having
no one to support but himself. upon these two men
indirect taxes fall very unequally, as the one cannot
avoid the taxes on the food, clothing, etc., consumed by
his family, while the other need pay only upon the necessaries
consumed by himself. but, supposing taxes levied
directly, so that each pays the same amount. still there
is injustice. the income of the one is charged with the
support of six, eight, or ten persons; the income of the
other with that of but a single person. and unless the
malthusian doctrine be carried to the extent of regarding
the rearing of a new citizen as an injury to the state,
here is a gross injustice.
but it may be said that this is a difficulty which cannot
be got over; that it is nature herself that brings human
beings helpless into the world and devolves their support
upon the parents, providing in compensation therefor
her own sweet and great rewards. very well, then, let
us turn to nature, and read the mandates of justice in
her law.
nature gives to labor; and to labor alone. in a very
garden of eden a man would starve but for human exertion.
now, here are two men of equal incomes—that of
the one derived from the exertion of his labor, that
of the other from the rent of land. is it just that they
should equally contribute to the expenses of the state?
evidently not. the income of the one represents wealth
he creates and adds to the general wealth of the state;
the income of the other represents merely wealth that
he takes from the general stock, returning nothing.
the right of the one to the enjoyment of his income
rests on the warrant of nature, which returns wealth
to labor; the right of the other to the enjoyment
of his income is a mere fictitious right, the creation of
municipal regulation, which is unknown and unrecognized
by nature. the father who is told that from his
labor he must support his children must acquiesce, for
such is the natural decree; but he may justly demand
that from the income gained by his labor not one penny
shall be taken, so long as a penny remains of incomes
which are gained by a monopoly of the natural opportunities
which nature offers impartially to all, and in
which his children have as their birthright an equal
share.
adam smith speaks of incomes as “enjoyed under the
protection of the state;” and this is the ground upon
which the equal taxation of all species of property is
commonly insisted upon—that it is equally protected by
the state. the basis of this idea is evidently that the
enjoyment of property is made possible by the state—that
there is a value created and maintained by the community,
which is justly called upon to meet community
expenses. now, of what values is this true? only of
the value of land. this is a value that does not arise
until a community is formed, and that, unlike other
values, grows with the growth of the community. it
exists only as the community exists. scatter again the
largest community, and land, now so valuable, would
have no value at all. with every increase of population
the value of land rises; with every decrease it falls.
this is true of nothing else save of things which, like
the ownership of land, are in their nature monopolies.
the tax upon land values is, therefore, the most just
and equal of all taxes. it falls only upon those who receive
from society a peculiar and valuable benefit, and
upon them in proportion to the benefit they receive. it
is the taking by the community, for the use of the community,
of that value which is the creation of the community.
it is the application of the common property
to common uses. when all rent is taken by taxation for
the needs of the community, then will the equality ordained
by nature be attained. no citizen will have an
advantage over any other citizen save as is given by his
industry, skill, and intelligence; and each will obtain
what he fairly earns. then, but not till then, will labor
get its full reward, and capital its natural return.
the grounds from which we have drawn the conclusion
that the tax on land values or rent is the best
method of raising public revenues have been admitted
expressly or tacitly by all economists of standing, since
the determination of the nature and law of rent.
ricardo says (chap. x), “a tax on rent would fall
wholly on landlords, and could not be shifted to any
class of consumers,” for it “would leave unaltered the
difference between the produce obtained from the least
productive land in cultivation and that obtained from land
of every other quality. * * * a tax on rent would not
discourage the cultivation of fresh land, for such land
pays no rent and would be untaxed.”
mcculloch (note xxiv to “wealth of nations”) declares
that “in a practical point of view taxes on the rent
of land are among the most unjust and impolitic that
can be imagined,” but he makes this assertion solely on
the ground of his assumption that it is practically impossible
to distinguish in taxation between the sum paid
for the use of the soil and that paid on account of the
capital expended upon it. but, supposing that this
separation could be effected, he admits that the sum
paid to landlords for the use of the natural powers of
the soil might be entirely swept away by a tax without
their having it in their power to throw any portion of
the burden upon any one else, and without affecting the
price of produce.
john stuart mill not only admits all this, but expressly
declares the expediency and justice of a peculiar tax on
rent, asking what right the landlords have to the accession
of riches that comes to them from the general
progress of society without work, risk, or economizing
on their part, and although he expressly disapproves of
interfering with their claim to the present value of land,
he proposes to take the whole future increase as belonging
to society by natural right.
mrs. fawcett, in the little compendium of the writings
of her husband, entitled “political economy for beginners,”
says: “the land tax, whether small or great in
amount, partakes of the nature of a rent paid by the
owner of land to the state. in a great part of india the
land is owned by the government and therefore the land
tax is rent paid direct to the state. the economic
perfection of this system of tenure may be readily
perceived.”
in fact, that rent should, both on grounds of expediency
and justice, be the peculiar subject of taxation, is
involved in the accepted doctrine of rent, and may be
found in embryo in the works of all economists who have
accepted the law of ricardo. that these principles have
not been pushed to their necessary conclusions, as i have
pushed them, evidently arises from the indisposition to
endanger or offend the enormous interest involved in
private ownership in land, and from the false theories in
regard to wages and the cause of poverty which have
dominated economic thought.
but there has been a school of economists who plainly
perceived, what is clear to the natural perceptions of
men when uninfluenced by habit—that the revenues of
the common property, land, ought to be appropriated to
the common service. the french economists of the
last century, headed by quesnay and turgot, proposed
just what i have proposed, that all taxation should be
abolished save a tax upon the value of land. as i am
acquainted with the doctrines of quesnay and his disciples
only at second hand through the medium of the
english writers, i am unable to say how far his peculiar
ideas as to agriculture being the only productive avocation,
etc., are erroneous apprehensions, or mere peculiarities
of terminology. but of this i am certain from the
proposition in which his theory culminated—that he saw
the fundamental relation between land and labor which
has since been lost sight of, and that he arrived at practical
truth, though, it may be, through a course of defectively
expressed reasoning. the causes which leave
in the hands of the landlord a “produce net” were by
the physiocrats no better explained than the suction of
a pump was explained by the assumption that nature
abhors a vacuum, but the fact in its practical relations
to social economy was recognized, and the benefit which
would result from the perfect freedom given to industry
and trade by a substitution of a tax on rent for all the
impositions which hamper and distort the application of
labor was doubtless as clearly seen by them as it is by
me. one of the things most to be regretted about the
french revolution is that it overwhelmed the ideas of
the economists, just as they were gaining strength
among the thinking classes, and were apparently about to
influence fiscal legislation.
without knowing anything of quesnay or his doctrines,
i have reached the same practical conclusion by a
route which cannot be disputed, and have based it on
grounds which cannot be questioned by the accepted
political economy.
the only objection to the tax on rent or land values
which is to be met with in standard politico-economic
works is one which concedes its advantages—for it is,
that from the difficulty of separation, we might, in taxing
the rent of land, tax something else. mcculloch,
for instance, declares taxes on the rent of land to be
impolitic and unjust because the return received for the
natural and inherent powers of the soil cannot be clearly
distinguished from the return received from improvements
and meliorations, which might thus be discouraged.
macaulay somewhere says that if the admission of the
attraction of gravitation were inimical to any considerable
pecuniary interest, there would not be wanting arguments
against gravitation—a truth of which this objection
is an illustration. for admitting that it is impossible
invariably to separate the value of land from the
value of improvements, is this necessity of continuing to
tax some improvements any reason why we should continue
to tax all improvements? if it discourage production
to tax values which labor and capital have intimately
combined with that of land, how much greater discouragement
is involved in taxing not only these, but all
the clearly distinguishable values which labor and capital
create?
but, as a matter of fact, the value of land can always
be readily distinguished from the value of improvements.
in countries like the united states there is much valuable
land that has never been improved; and in many of
the states the value of the land and the value of improvements
are habitually estimated separately by the assessors,
though afterward reunited under the term real estate. nor
where ground has been occupied from immemorial times,
is there any difficulty in getting at the value of the bare
land, for frequently the land is owned by one person and
the buildings by another, and when a fire occurs and
improvements are destroyed, a clear and definite value
remains in the land. in the oldest country in the world
no difficulty whatever can attend the separation, if all
that be attempted is to separate the value of the clearly
distinguishable improvements, made within a moderate
period, from the value of the land, should they be destroyed.
this, manifestly, is all that justice or policy
requires. absolute accuracy is impossible in any system,
and to attempt to separate all that the human race has
done from what nature originally provided would be as
absurd as impracticable. a swamp drained or a hill
terraced by the romans constitutes now as much a part
of the natural advantages of the british isles as though
the work had been done by earthquake or glacier. the
fact that after a certain lapse of time the value of such
permanent improvements would be considered as having
lapsed into that of the land, and would be taxed accordingly,
could have no deterrent effect on such improvements,
for such works are frequently undertaken upon
leases for years. the fact is, that each generation builds
and improves for itself, and not for the remote future.
and the further fact is, that each generation is heir, not
only to the natural powers of the earth, but to all that
remains of the work of past generations.
an objection of a different kind may however be made.
it may be said that where political power is diffused, it
is highly desirable that taxation should fall not on one
class, such as land owners, but on all; in order that all
who exercise political power may feel a proper interest
in economical government. taxation and representation,
it will be said, cannot safely be divorced.
but however desirable it may be to combine with political
power the consciousness of public burdens, the present
system certainly does not secure it. indirect taxes
are largely raised from those who pay little or nothing
consciously. in the united states the class is rapidly
growing who not only feel no interest in taxation,
but who have no concern in good government. in our
large cities elections are in great measure determined
not by considerations of public interest, but by such influences
as determined elections in rome when the masses
had ceased to care for anything but bread and the circus.
the effect of substituting for the manifold taxes now
imposed a single tax on the value of land would hardly
lessen the number of conscious taxpayers, for the division
of land now held on speculation would much increase
the number of land holders. but it would so equalize
the distribution of wealth as to raise even the poorest
above that condition of abject poverty in which public
considerations have no weight; while it would at the
same time cut down those overgrown fortunes which
raise their possessors above concern in government. the
dangerous classes politically are the very rich and very
poor. it is not the taxes that he is conscious of paying
that gives a man a stake in the country, an interest in its
government; it is the consciousness of feeling that he is
an integral part of the community; that its prosperity is
his prosperity, and its disgrace his shame. let but the
citizen feel this; let him be surrounded by all the influences
that spring from and cluster round a comfortable
home, and the community may rely upon him, even
to limb or to life. men do not vote patriotically, any more
than they fight patriotically, because of their payment of
taxes. whatever conduces to the comfortable and independent
material condition of the masses will best foster
public spirit, will make the ultimate governing power
more intelligent and more virtuous.
but it may be asked: if the tax on land values is so
advantageous a mode of raising revenue, how is it that
so many other taxes are resorted to in preference by all
governments?
the answer is obvious: the tax on land values is the
only tax of any importance that does not distribute itself.
it falls upon the owners of land, and there is no way in
which they can shift the burden upon any one else.
hence, a large and powerful class are directly interested
in keeping down the tax on land values and substituting,
as a means for raising the required revenue, taxes on
other things, just as the land owners of england, two
hundred years ago, succeeded in establishing an excise,
which fell on all consumers, for the dues under the
feudal tenures, which fell only on them.
there is, thus, a definite and powerful interest opposed
to the taxation of land values; but to the other taxes
upon which modern governments so largely rely there is
no special opposition. the ingenuity of statesmen has
been exercised in devising schemes of taxation which
drain the wages of labor and the earnings of capital as
the vampire bat is said to suck the lifeblood of its victim.
nearly all of these taxes are ultimately paid by that indefinable
being, the consumer; and he pays them in a
way which does not call his attention to the fact that he
is paying a tax—pays them in such small amounts and in
such insidious modes that he does not notice it, and is
not likely to take the trouble to remonstrate effectually.
those who pay the money directly to the tax collector
are not only not interested in opposing a tax which they
so easily shift from their own shoulders, but are very
frequently interested in its imposition and maintenance,
as are other powerful interests which profit, or expect to
profit, by the increase of prices which such taxes bring
about.
nearly all of the manifold taxes by which the people
of the united states are now burdened have been imposed
rather with a view to private advantage than to
the raising of revenue, and the great obstacle to the
simplification of taxation is these private interests, whose
representatives cluster in the lobby whenever a reduction
of taxation is proposed, to see that the taxes by which
they profit are not reduced. the fastening of a protective
tariff upon the united states has been due to these
influences, and not to the acceptance of absurd theories
of protection upon their own merits. the large revenue
which the civil war rendered necessary was the golden
opportunity of these special interests, and taxes were
piled up on every possible thing, not so much to raise
revenue as to enable particular classes to participate
in the advantages of tax-gathering and tax-pocketing.
and, since the war, these interested parties have constituted
the great obstacle to the reduction of taxation;
those taxes which cost the people least having, for this
reason, been found easier to abolish than those taxes
which cost the people most. and, thus, even popular
governments, which have for their avowed principle the
securing of the greatest good to the greatest number,
are, in a most important function, used to secure a questionable
good to a small number, at the expense of a
great evil to the many.
license taxes are generally favored by those on whom
they are imposed, as they tend to keep others from entering
the business; imposts upon manufactures are
frequently grateful to large manufacturers for similar
reasons, as was seen in the opposition of the distillers to
the reduction of the whisky tax; duties on imports not
only tend to give certain producers special advantages,
but accrue to the benefit of importers or dealers who
have large stocks on hand; and so, in the case of all such
taxes, there are particular interests, capable of ready
organization and concerted action, which favor the imposition
of the tax, while, in the case of a tax upon the
value of land, there is a solid and sensitive interest steadily
and bitterly to oppose it.
but if once the truth which i am trying to make clear
is understood by the masses, it is easy to see how a union
of political forces strong enough to carry it into practice
becomes possible.
i cannot play upon any stringed instrument; but i can tell you
how of a little village to make a great and glorious city.—themistocles.
instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the
brier shall come up the myrtle tree.
and they shall build houses and inhabit them; and they shall plant
vineyards and eat the fruit of them. they shall not build and another
inhabit; they shall not plant and another eat.—isaiah.
the elder mirabeau, we are told, ranked the proposition
of quesnay, to substitute one single tax on rent (the
impôt unique) for all other taxes, as a discovery equal
in utility to the invention of writing or the substitution
of the use of money for barter.
to whomsoever will think over the matter, this saying
will appear an evidence of penetration rather than of extravagance.
the advantages which would be gained by
substituting for the numerous taxes by which the public
revenues are now raised, a single tax levied upon the
value of land, will appear more and more important the
more they are considered. this is the secret which
would transform the little village into the great city.
with all the burdens removed which now oppress industry
and hamper exchange, the production of wealth
would go on with a rapidity now undreamed of. this,
in its turn, would lead to an increase in the value of land—a
new surplus which society might take for general
purposes. and released from the difficulties which attend
the collection of revenue in a way that begets
corruption and renders legislation the tool of special
interests, society could assume functions which the increasing
complexity of life makes it desirable to assume,
but which the prospect of political demoralization under
the present system now leads thoughtful men to shrink
from.
consider the effect upon the production of wealth.
to abolish the taxation which, acting and reacting,
now hampers every wheel of exchange and presses upon
every form of industry, would be like removing an immense
weight from a powerful spring. imbued with
fresh energy, production would start into new life, and
trade would receive a stimulus which would be felt to
the remotest arteries. the present method of taxation
operates upon exchange like artificial deserts and mountains;
it costs more to get goods through a custom house
than it does to carry them around the world. it operates
upon energy, and industry, and skill, and thrift, like a
fine upon those qualities. if i have worked harder and
built myself a good house while you have been contented
to live in a hovel, the tax-gatherer now comes annually
to make me pay a penalty for my energy and industry,
by taxing me more than you. if i have saved while you
wasted, i am mulct, while you are exempt. if a man
build a ship we make him pay for his temerity, as though
he had done an injury to the state; if a railroad be
opened, down comes the tax-collector upon it, as though
it were a public nuisance; if a manufactory be erected
we levy upon it an annual sum which would go far toward
making a handsome profit. we say we want capital, but
if any one accumulate it, or bring it among us, we charge
him for it as though we were giving him a privilege.
we punish with a tax the man who covers barren fields
with ripening grain; we fine him who puts up machinery,
and him who drains a swamp. how heavily these taxes
burden production only those realize who have attempted
to follow our system of taxation through its ramifications,
for, as i have before said, the heaviest part of taxation
is that which falls in increased prices. but manifestly
these taxes are in their nature akin to the egyptian
pasha’s tax upon date-trees. if they do not cause the
trees to be cut down, they at least discourage the
planting.
to abolish these taxes would be to lift the whole enormous
weight of taxation from productive industry. the
needle of the seamstress and the great manufactory; the
cart-horse and the locomotive; the fishing boat and the
steamship; the farmer’s plow and the merchant’s stock,
would be alike untaxed. all would be free to make or
to save, to buy or to sell, unfined by taxes, unannoyed
by the tax-gatherer. instead of saying to the producer,
as it does now, “the more you add to the general wealth
the more shall you be taxed!” the state would say to
the producer, “be as industrious, as thrifty, as enterprising
as you choose, you shall have your full reward!
you shall not be fined for making two blades of grass
grow where one grew before; you shall not be taxed for
adding to the aggregate wealth.”
and will not the community gain by thus refusing to
kill the goose that lays the golden eggs; by thus refraining
from muzzling the ox that treadeth out the corn;
by thus leaving to industry, and thrift, and skill, their
natural reward, full and unimpaired? for there is to
the community also a natural reward. the law of society
is, each for all, as well as all for each. no one can keep
to himself the good he may do, any more than he can
keep the bad. every productive enterprise, besides its
return to those who undertake it, yields collateral advantages
to others. if a man plant a fruit-tree, his gain is
that he gathers the fruit in its time and season. but in
addition to his gain, there is a gain to the whole community.
others than the owner are benefited by the
increased supply of fruit; the birds which it shelters fly
far and wide; the rain which it helps to attract falls not
alone on his field; and, even to the eye which rests upon
it from a distance, it brings a sense of beauty. and so
with everything else. the building of a house, a factory,
a ship, or a railroad, benefits others besides those
who get the direct profits. nature laughs at a miser.
he is like the squirrel who buries his nuts and refrains
from digging them up again. lo! they sprout and grow
into trees. in fine linen, steeped in costly spices, the
mummy is laid away. thousands and thousands of years
thereafter, the bedouin cooks his food by a fire of its
encasings, it generates the steam by which the traveler
is whirled on his way, or it passes into far-off lands to
gratify the curiosity of another race. the bee fills the
hollow tree with honey, and along comes the bear or the
man.
well may the community leave to the individual producer
all that prompts him to exertion; well may it let
the laborer have the full reward of his labor, and the
capitalist the full return of his capital. for the more
that labor and capital produce, the greater grows the
common wealth in which all may share. and in the
value or rent of land is this general gain expressed in a
definite and concrete form. here is a fund which the
state may take while leaving to labor and capital their
full reward. with increased activity of production this
would commensurately increase.
and to shift the burden of taxation from production
and exchange to the value or rent of land would not
merely be to give new stimulus to the production of
wealth; it would be to open new opportunities. for
under this system no one would care to hold land unless
to use it, and land now withheld from use would everywhere
be thrown open to improvement.
the selling price of land would fall; land speculation
would receive its deathblow; land monopolization would
no longer pay. millions and millions of acres from
which settlers are now shut out by high prices would
be abandoned by their present owners or sold to settlers
upon nominal terms. and this not merely on
the frontiers, but within what are now considered well
settled districts. within a hundred miles of san francisco
would be thus thrown open land enough to support,
even with present modes of cultivation, an agricultural
population equal to that now scattered from the oregon
boundary to the mexican line—a distance of  miles.
in the same degree would this be true of most of the
western states, and in a great degree of the older eastern
states, for even in new york and pennsylvania is population
yet sparse as compared with the capacity of the land.
and even in densely populated england would such a
policy throw open to cultivation many hundreds of thousands
of acres now held as private parks, deer preserves,
and shooting grounds.
for this simple device of placing all taxes on the value
of land would be in effect putting up the land at auction
to whomsoever would pay the highest rent to the state.
the demand for land fixes its value, and hence, if taxes were
placed so as very nearly to consume that value, the man
who wished to hold land without using it would have to
pay very nearly what it would be worth to any one who
wanted to use it.
and it must be remembered that this would apply, not
merely to agricultural land, but to all land. mineral
land would be thrown open to use, just as agricultural
land; and in the heart of a city no one could afford to
keep land from its most profitable use, or on the outskirts
to demand more for it than the use to which it
could at the time be put would warrant. everywhere
that land had attained a value, taxation, instead of
operating, as now, as a fine upon improvement, would
operate to force improvement. whoever planted an
orchard, or sowed a field, or built a house, or erected a
manufactory, no matter how costly, would have no more
to pay in taxes than if he kept so much land idle. the
monopolist of agricultural land would be taxed as much
as though his land were covered with houses and barns,
with crops and with stock. the owner of a vacant city
lot would have to pay as much for the privilege of keeping
other people off of it until he wanted to use it, as
his neighbor who has a fine house upon his lot. it would
cost as much to keep a row of tumble-down shanties
upon valuable land as though it were covered with a
grand hotel or a pile of great warehouses filled with
costly goods.
thus, the bonus that wherever labor is most productive
must now be paid before labor can be exerted would
disappear. the farmer would not have to pay out half
his means, or mortgage his labor for years, in order to
obtain land to cultivate; the builder of a city homestead
would not have to lay out as much for a small lot as for
the house he puts upon it; the company that proposed to
erect a manufactory would not have to expend a great
part of their capital for a site. and what would be paid
from year to year to the state would be in lieu of all
the taxes now levied upon improvements, machinery, and
stock.
consider the effect of such a change upon the labor
market. competition would no longer be one-sided, as
now. instead of laborers competing with each other for
employment, and in their competition cutting down
wages to the point of bare subsistence, employers would
everywhere be competing for laborers, and wages would
rise to the fair earnings of labor. for into the labor
market would have entered the greatest of all competitors
for the employment of labor, a competitor whose
demand cannot be satisfied until want is satisfied—the
demand of labor itself. the employers of labor would
not have merely to bid against other employers, all feeling
the stimulus of greater trade and increased profits,
but against the ability of laborers to become their own
employers upon the natural opportunities freely opened
to them by the tax which prevented monopolization.
with natural opportunities thus free to labor; with
capital and improvements exempt from tax, and exchange
released from restrictions, the spectacle of willing men
unable to turn their labor into the things they are suffering
for would become impossible; the recurring paroxysms
which paralyze industry would cease; every wheel of
production would be set in motion; demand would keep
pace with supply, and supply with demand; trade would
increase in every direction, and wealth augment on every
hand.
but great as they thus appear, the advantages of a transference
of all public burdens to a tax upon the value of
land cannot be fully appreciated until we consider the
effect upon the distribution of wealth.
tracing out the cause of the unequal distribution of
wealth which appears in all civilized countries, with a
constant tendency to greater and greater inequality as
material progress goes on, we have found it in the fact
that, as civilization advances, the ownership of land,
now in private hands, gives a greater and greater power
of appropriating the wealth produced by labor and capital.
thus, to relieve labor and capital from all taxation,
direct and indirect, and to throw the burden upon rent,
would be, as far as it went, to counteract this tendency
to inequality, and, if it went so far as to take in taxation
the whole of rent, the cause of inequality would be totally
destroyed. rent, instead of causing inequality, as
now, would then promote equality. labor and capital
would then receive the whole produce, minus that portion
taken by the state in the taxation of land values, which,
being applied to public purposes, would be equally distributed
in public benefits.
that is to say, the wealth produced in every community
would be divided into two portions. one part would
be distributed in wages and interest between individual
producers, according to the part each had taken in the
work of production; the other part would go to the community
as a whole, to be distributed in public benefits to
all its members. in this all would share equally—the
weak with the strong, young children and decrepit old
men, the maimed, the halt, and the blind, as well as the
vigorous. and justly so—for while one part represents
the result of individual effort in production, the other
represents the increased power with which the community
as a whole aids the individual.
thus, as material progress tends to increase rent, were
rent taken by the community for common purposes the
very cause which now tends to produce inequality as
material progress goes on would then tend to produce
greater and greater equality. fully to understand this
effect, let us revert to principles previously worked out.
we have seen that wages and interest must everywhere
be fixed by the rent line or margin of cultivation—that
is to say, by the reward which labor and capital can
secure on land for which no rent is paid; that the aggregate
amount of wealth, which the aggregate of labor and
capital employed in production will receive, will be the
amount of wealth produced (or rather, when we consider
taxes, the net amount), minus what is taken as rent.
we have seen that with material progress, as it is at
present going on, there is a twofold tendency to the advance
of rent. both are to the increase of the proportion
of the wealth produced which goes as rent, and to the
decrease of the proportion which goes as wages and interest.
but the first, or natural tendency, which results
from the laws of social development, is to the increase of
rent as a quantity, without the reduction of wages and
interest as quantities, or even with their quantitative
increase. the other tendency, which results from the
unnatural appropriation of land to private ownership, is
to the increase of rent as a quantity by the reduction of
wages and interest as quantities.
now, it is evident that to take rent in taxation for
public purposes, which virtually abolishes private ownership
in land, would be to destroy the tendency to an
absolute decrease in wages and interest, by destroying
the speculative monopolization of land and the speculative
increase in rent. it would be very largely to increase
wages and interest, by throwing open natural
opportunities now monopolized and reducing the price
of land. labor and capital would thus not merely gain
what is now taken from them in taxation, but would gain
by the positive decline in rent caused by the decrease in
speculative land values. a new equilibrium would be
established, at which the common rate of wages and interest
would be much higher than now.
but this new equilibrium established, further advances
in productive power, and the tendency in this direction
would be greatly accelerated, would result in still increasing
rent, not at the expense of wages and interest,
but by new gains in production, which, as rent would be
taken by the community for public uses, would accrue to
the advantage of every member of the community.
thus, as material progress went on, the condition of the
masses would constantly improve. not merely one class
would become richer, but all would become richer; not
merely one class would have more of the necessaries,
conveniences, and elegancies of life, but all would have
more. for, the increasing power of production, which
comes with increasing population, with every new discovery
in the productive arts, with every labor-saving
invention, with every extension and facilitation of exchanges,
could be monopolized by none. that part of
the benefit which did not go directly to increase the reward
of labor and capital would go to the state—that is
to say, to the whole community. with all the enormous
advantages, material and mental, of a dense population,
would be united the freedom and equality that can now
be found only in new and sparsely settled districts.
and, then, consider how equalization in the distribution
of wealth would react upon production, everywhere
preventing waste, everywhere increasing power.
if it were possible to express in figures the direct
pecuniary loss which society suffers from the social mal-adjustments
which condemn large classes to poverty and
vice, the estimate would be appalling. england maintains
over a million paupers on official charity; the city
of new york alone spends over seven million dollars a
year in a similar way. but what is spent from public
funds, what is spent by charitable societies and what is
spent in individual charity, would, if aggregated, be but
the first and smallest item in the account. the potential
earnings of the labor thus going to waste, the cost of the
reckless, improvident and idle habits thus generated; the
pecuniary loss, to consider nothing more, suggested by
the appalling statistics of mortality, and especially infant
mortality, among the poorer classes; the waste indicated
by the gin palaces or low groggeries which increase as
poverty deepens; the damage done by the vermin of
society that are bred of poverty and destitution—the
thieves, prostitutes, beggars, and tramps; the cost of
guarding society against them, are all items in the sum
which the present unjust and unequal distribution of
wealth takes from the aggregate which, with present
means of production, society might enjoy. nor yet shall
we have completed the account. the ignorance and
vice, the recklessness and immorality engendered by the
inequality in the distribution of wealth show themselves
in the imbecility and corruption of government; and
the waste of public revenues, and the still greater waste
involved in the ignorant and corrupt abuse of public
powers and functions, are their legitimate consequences.
but the increase in wages, and the opening of new
avenues of employment which would result from the
appropriation of rent to public purposes, would not
merely stop these wastes and relieve society of these
enormous losses; new power would be added to labor.
it is but a truism that labor is most productive where its
wages are largest. poorly paid labor is inefficient labor,
the world over.
what is remarked between the efficiency of labor in
the agricultural districts of england where different
rates of wages prevail; what brassey noticed as between
the work done by his better paid english navvies and that
done by the worse paid labor of the continent; what was
evident in the united states as between slave labor and
free labor; what is seen by the astonishing number of
mechanics or servants required in india or china to get
anything done, is universally true. the efficiency of
labor always increases with the habitual wages of labor—for
high wages mean increased self-respect, intelligence,
hope, and energy. man is not a machine, that will do
so much and no more; he is not an animal, whose powers
may reach thus far and no further. it is mind, not
muscle, which is the great agent of production. the
physical power evolved in the human frame is one of
the weakest of forces, but for the human intelligence
the resistless currents of nature flow, and matter becomes
plastic to the human will. to increase the comforts,
and leisure, and independence of the masses is to
increase their intelligence; it is to bring the brain to the
aid of the hand; it is to engage in the common work of
life the faculty which measures the animalcule and traces
the orbits of the stars!
who can say to what infinite powers the wealth-producing
capacity of labor may not be raised by social
adjustments which will give to the producers of wealth
their fair proportion of its advantages and enjoyments!
with present processes the gain would be simply incalculable,
but just as wages are high, so do the invention
and utilization of improved processes and machinery go
on with greater rapidity and ease. that the wheat crops
of southern russia are still reaped with the scythe and
beaten out with the flail is simply because wages are
there so low. american invention, american aptitude
for labor-saving processes and machinery are the result
of the comparatively high wages that have prevailed in
the united states. had our producers been condemned
to the low reward of the egyptian fellah or chinese
coolie, we would be drawing water by hand and transporting
goods on the shoulders of men. the increase
in the reward of labor and capital would still further
stimulate invention and hasten the adoption of improved
processes, and these would truly appear, what in themselves
they really are—an unmixed good. the injurious
effects of labor-saving machinery upon the working
classes, that are now so often apparent, and that, in
spite of all argument, make so many people regard
machinery as an evil instead of a blessing, would disappear.
every new power engaged in the service of man
would improve the condition of all. and from the general
intelligence and mental activity springing from this
general improvement of condition would come new developments
of power of which we as yet cannot dream.
but i shall not deny, and do not wish to lose sight of
the fact, that while thus preventing waste and thus adding
to the efficiency of labor, the equalization in the distribution
of wealth that would result from the simple
plan of taxation that i propose, must lessen the intensity
with which wealth is pursued. it seems to me that in a
condition of society in which no one need fear poverty,
no one would desire great wealth—at least, no one would
take the trouble to strive and to strain for it as men do
now. for, certainly, the spectacle of men who have only
a few years to live, slaving away their time for the sake
of dying rich, is in itself so unnatural and absurd, that
in a state of society where the abolition of the fear of
want had dissipated the envious admiration with which
the masses of men now regard the possession of great
riches, whoever would toil to acquire more than he cared
to use would be looked upon as we would now look on a
man who would thatch his head with half a dozen hats,
or walk around in the hot sun with an overcoat on.
when every one is sure of being able to get enough, no
one will care to make a pack-horse of himself.
and though this incentive to production be withdrawn,
can we not spare it? whatever may have been
its office in an earlier stage of development, it is not
needed now. the dangers that menace our civilization
do not come from the weakness of the springs of production.
what it suffers from, and what, if a remedy be
not applied, it must die from, is unequal distribution!
nor would the removal of this incentive, regarded
only from the standpoint of production, be an unmixed
loss. for, that the aggregate of production is greatly
reduced by the greed with which riches are pursued, is
one of the most obtrusive facts of modern society.
while, were this insane desire to get rich at any cost
lessened, mental activities now devoted to scraping together
riches would be translated into far higher spheres
of usefulness.
when it is first proposed to put all taxes upon the
value of land, and thus confiscate rent, all land holders
are likely to take the alarm, and there will not be wanting
appeals to the fears of small farm and homestead
owners, who will be told that this is a proposition to rob
them of their hard-earned property. but a moment’s
reflection will show that this proposition should commend
itself to all whose interests as land holders do not
largely exceed their interests as laborers or capitalists,
or both. and further consideration will show that
though the large land holders may lose relatively, yet
even in their case there will be an absolute gain. for,
the increase in production will be so great that labor and
capital will gain very much more than will be lost to
private land ownership, while in these gains, and in the
greater ones involved in a more healthy social condition,
the whole community, including the land owners themselves,
will share.
in a preceding chapter i have gone over the question
of what is due to the present land holders, and have
shown that they have no claim to compensation. but
there is still another ground on which we may dismiss all
idea of compensation. they will not really be injured.
it is manifest, of course, that the change i propose
will greatly benefit all those who live by wages, whether
of hand or of head—laborers, operatives, mechanics,
clerks, professional men of all sorts. it is manifest,
also, that it will benefit all those who live partly by wages
and partly by the earnings of their capital—storekeepers,
merchants, manufacturers, employing or undertaking
producers and exchangers of all sorts—from the peddler
or drayman to the railroad or steamship owner—and it
is likewise manifest that it will increase the incomes of
those whose incomes are drawn from the earnings of
capital, or from investments other than in lands, save
perhaps the holders of government bonds or other securities
bearing fixed rates of interest, which will probably
depreciate in selling value, owing to the rise in the general
rate of interest, though the income from them will
remain the same.
take, now, the case of the homestead owner—the
mechanic, storekeeper, or professional man who has
secured himself a house and lot, where he lives, and
which he contemplates with satisfaction as a place from
which his family cannot be ejected in case of his death.
he will not be injured; on the contrary, he will be the
gainer. the selling value of his lot will diminish—theoretically
it will entirely disappear. but its usefulness
to him will not disappear. it will serve his purpose
as well as ever. while, as the value of all other lots will
diminish or disappear in the same ratio, he retains the
same security of always having a lot that he had before.
that is to say, he is a loser only as the man who has
bought himself a pair of boots may be said to be a loser
by a subsequent fall in the price of boots. his boots
will be just as useful to him, and the next pair of boots
he can get cheaper. so, to the homestead owner, his lot
will be as useful, and should he look forward to getting
a larger lot, or having his children, as they grow up,
get homesteads of their own, he will, even in the matter
of lots, be the gainer. and in the present, other things
considered, he will be much the gainer. for though he
will have more taxes to pay upon his land, he will be released
from taxes upon his house and improvements,
upon his furniture and personal property, upon all that
he and his family eat, drink, and wear, while his earnings
will be largely increased by the rise of wages, the
constant employment, and the increased briskness of
trade. his only loss will be, if he wants to sell his lot
without getting another, and this will be a small loss
compared with the great gain.
and so with the farmer. i speak not now of the
farmers who never touch the handles of a plow, who cultivate
thousands of acres and enjoy incomes like those of
the rich southern planters before the war; but of the
working farmers who constitute such a large class in the
united states—men who own small farms, which they
cultivate with the aid of their boys, and perhaps some
hired help, and who in europe would be called peasant
proprietors. paradoxical as it may appear to these men
until they understand the full bearings of the proposition,
of all classes above that of the mere laborer they
have most to gain by placing all taxes upon the value
of land. that they do not now get as good a living as
their hard work ought to give them, they generally feel,
though they may not be able to trace the cause. the
fact is that taxation, as now levied, falls on them with
peculiar severity. they are taxed on all their improvements—houses,
barns, fences, crops, stock. the personal
property which they have cannot be as readily concealed
or undervalued as can the more valuable kinds
which are concentrated in the cities. they are not only
taxed on personal property and improvements, which the
owners of unused land escape, but their land is generally
taxed at a higher rate than land held on speculation,
simply because it is improved. but further than this,
all taxes imposed on commodities, and especially the
taxes which, like our protective duties, are imposed with
a view of raising the prices of commodities, fall on the
farmer without mitigation. for in a country like the
united states, which exports agricultural produce, the
farmer cannot be protected. whoever gains, he must
lose. some years ago the free trade league of new
york published a broadside containing cuts of various
articles of necessity marked with the duties imposed by
the tariff, and which read something in this wise: “the
farmer rises in the morning and draws on his pantaloons
taxed  per cent. and his boots taxed  per cent., striking
a light with a match taxed  per cent.,” and so on,
following him through the day and through life, until,
killed by taxation, he is lowered into the grave with a
rope taxed  per cent. this is but a graphic illustration
of the manner in which such taxes ultimately fall.
the farmer would be a great gainer by the substitution
of a single tax upon the value of land for all these taxes,
for the taxation of land values would fall with greatest
weight, not upon the agricultural districts, where land
values are comparatively small, but upon the towns and
cities where land values are high; whereas taxes upon
personal property and improvements fall as heavily in
the country as in the city. and in sparsely settled districts
there would be hardly any taxes at all for the
farmer to pay. for taxes, being levied upon the value
of the bare land, would fall as heavily upon unimproved
as upon improved land. acre for acre, the improved
and cultivated farm, with its buildings, fences, orchard,
crops, and stock could be taxed no more than unused
land of equal quality. the result would be that speculative
values would be kept down, and that cultivated and
improved farms would have no taxes to pay until the
country around them had been well settled. in fact,
paradoxical as it may at first seem to them, the effect of
putting all taxation upon the value of land would be to
relieve the harder working farmers of all taxation.
but the great gain of the working farmer can be seen
only when the effect upon the distribution of population
is considered. the destruction of speculative land
values would tend to diffuse population where it is too
dense and to concentrate it where it is too sparse; to
substitute for the tenement house, homes surrounded by
gardens, and fully to settle agricultural districts before
people were driven far from neighbors to look for land.
the people of the cities would thus get more of the pure
air and sunshine of the country, the people of the country
more of the economies and social life of the city. if,
as is doubtless the case, the application of machinery
tends to large fields, agricultural population will assume
the primitive form and cluster in villages. the life of
the average farmer is now unnecessarily dreary. he is
not only compelled to work early and late, but he is cut
off by the sparseness of population from the conveniences,
the amusements, the educational facilities, and the social
and intellectual opportunities that come with the closer
contact of man with man. he would be far better off in
all these respects, and his labor would be far more productive,
if he and those around him held no more land
than they wanted to use. while his children, as they
grew up, would neither be so impelled to seek the excitement
of a city nor would they be driven so far away to
seek farms of their own. their means of living would
be in their own hands, and at home.
in short, the working farmer is both a laborer and a
capitalist, as well as a land owner, and it is by his labor
and capital that his living is made. his loss would be
nominal; his gain would be real and great.
in varying degrees is this true of all land holders.
many land holders are laborers of one sort or another.
and it would be hard to find a land owner not a laborer,
who is not also a capitalist—while the general rule is,
that the larger the land owner the greater the capitalist.
so true is this that in common thought the characters
are confounded. thus to put all taxes on the value of
land, while it would be largely to reduce all great fortunes,
would in no case leave the rich man penniless.
the duke of westminster, who owns a considerable part
of the site of london, is probably the richest land owner
in the world. to take all his ground rents by taxation
would largely reduce his enormous income, but would
still leave him his buildings and all the income from
them, and doubtless much personal property in various
other shapes. he would still have all he could by any
possibility enjoy, and a much better state of society in
which to enjoy it.
so would the astors of new york remain very rich.
and so, i think, it will be seen throughout—this measure
would make no one poorer but such as could be made a
great deal poorer without being really hurt. it would
cut down great fortunes, but it would impoverish no one.
wealth would not only be enormously increased; it
would be equally distributed. i do not mean that each
individual would get the same amount of wealth. that
would not be equal distribution, so long as different
individuals have different powers and different desires.
but i mean that wealth would be distributed in accordance
with the degree in which the industry, skill, knowledge,
or prudence of each contributed to the common
stock. the great cause which concentrates wealth in
the hands of those who do not produce, and takes it
from the hands of those who do, would be gone. the
inequalities that continued to exist would be those of nature,
not the artificial inequalities produced by the denial
of natural law. the non-producer would no longer roll
in luxury while the producer got but the barest necessities
of animal existence.
the monopoly of the land gone, there need be no fear
of large fortunes. for then the riches of any individual
must consist of wealth, properly so-called—of wealth,
which is the product of labor, and which constantly
tends to dissipation, for national debts, i imagine, would
not long survive the abolition of the system from which
they spring. all fear of great fortunes might be dismissed,
for when every one gets what he fairly earns, no
one can get more than he fairly earns. how many men
are there who fairly earn a million dollars?
we are dealing only with general principles. there
are some matters of detail—such as those arising from
the division of revenues between local and general governments—which
upon application of these principles
would come up, but these it is not necessary here to discuss.
when once principles are settled, details will be
readily adjusted.
nor without too much elaboration is it possible to
notice all the changes which would be wrought, or would
become possible, by a change which would readjust the
very foundation of society, but to some main features let
me call attention.
noticeable among these is the great simplicity which
would become possible in government. to collect taxes,
to prevent and punish evasions, to check and countercheck
revenues drawn from so many distinct sources,
now make up probably three-fourths, perhaps seven-eighths
of the business of government, outside of the
preservation of order, the maintenance of the military
arm, and the administration of justice. an immense
and complicated network of governmental machinery
would thus be dispensed with.
in the administration of justice there would be a like
saving of strain. much of the civil business of our
courts arises from disputes as to ownership of land.
these would cease when the state was virtually acknowledged
as the sole owner of land, and all occupiers became
practically rent-paying tenants. the growth of morality
consequent upon the cessation of want would tend to a
like diminution in other civil business of the courts,
which could be hastened by the adoption of the common
sense proposition of bentham to abolish all laws for the
collection of debts and the enforcement of private contracts.
the rise of wages, the opening of opportunities
for all to make an easy and comfortable living, would at
once lessen and would soon eliminate from society the
thieves, swindlers, and other classes of criminals who
spring from the unequal distribution of wealth. thus
the administration of the criminal law, with all its paraphernalia
of policemen, detectives, prisons, and penitentiaries,
would, like the administration of the civil law,
cease to make such a drain upon the vital force and attention
of society. we should get rid, not only of many
judges, bailiffs, clerks and prison keepers, but of the
great host of lawyers who are now maintained at the
expense of producers; and talent now wasted in legal
subtleties would be turned to higher pursuits.
the legislative, judicial, and executive functions of
government would in this way be vastly simplified. nor
can i think that the public debts and the standing
armies, which are historically the outgrowth of the
change from feudal to allodial tenures, would long remain
after the reversion to the old idea that the land of
a country is the common right of the people of the country.
the former could readily be paid off by a tax that
would not lessen the wages of labor nor check production,
and the latter the growth of intelligence and independence
among the masses, aided, perhaps, by the progress
of invention, which is revolutionizing the military
art, must soon cause to disappear.
society would thus approach the ideal of jeffersonian
democracy, the promised land of herbert spencer, the
abolition of government. but of government only as a
directing and repressive power. it would at the same
time, and in the same degree, become possible for it to
realize the dream of socialism. all this simplification
and abrogation of the present functions of government
would make possible the assumption of certain other
functions which are now pressing for recognition. government
could take upon itself the transmission of messages
by telegraph, as well as by mail; of building and
operating railroads, as well as of opening and maintaining
common roads. with present functions so simplified
and reduced, functions such as these could be assumed
without danger or strain, and would be under the supervision
of public attention, which is now distracted.
there would be a great and increasing surplus revenue
from the taxation of land values, for material progress,
which would go on with greatly accelerated rapidity,
would tend constantly to increase rent. this revenue
arising from the common property could be applied to
the common benefit, as were the revenues of sparta.
we might not establish public tables—they would be unnecessary;
but we could establish public baths, museums,
libraries, gardens, lecture rooms, music and dancing
halls, theaters, universities, technical schools, shooting
galleries, play grounds, gymnasiums, etc. heat, light,
and motive power, as well as water, might be conducted
through our streets at public expense; our roads be lined
with fruit trees; discoverers and inventors rewarded,
scientific investigations supported; and in a thousand
ways the public revenues made to foster efforts for the
public benefit. we should reach the ideal of the socialist,
but not through governmental repression. government
would change its character, and would become the
administration of a great co-operative society. it would
become merely the agency by which the common property
was administered for the common benefit.
does this seem impracticable? consider for a moment
the vast changes that would be wrought in social life by
a change which would assure to labor its full reward;
which would banish want and the fear of want; and give
to the humblest freedom to develop in natural symmetry.
in thinking of the possibilities of social organization,
we are apt to assume that greed is the strongest of human
motives, and that systems of administration can be safely
based only upon the idea that the fear of punishment is
necessary to keep men honest—that selfish interests are
always stronger than general interests. nothing could
be further from the truth.
from whence springs this lust for gain, to gratify
which men tread everything pure and noble under their
feet; to which they sacrifice all the higher possibilities
of life; which converts civility into a hollow pretense,
patriotism into a sham, and religion into hypocrisy;
which makes so much of civilized existence an ishmaelitish
warfare, of which the weapons are cunning and
fraud?
does it not spring from the existence of want? carlyle
somewhere says that poverty is the hell of which the
modern englishman is most afraid. and he is right.
poverty is the open-mouthed, relentless hell which yawns
beneath civilized society. and it is hell enough. the
vedas declare no truer thing than when the wise crow
bushanda tells the eagle-bearer of vishnu that the keenest
pain is in poverty. for poverty is not merely deprivation;
it means shame, degradation; the searing of
the most sensitive parts of our moral and mental nature as
with hot irons; the denial of the strongest impulses and
the sweetest affections; the wrenching of the most vital
nerves. you love your wife, you love your children;
but would it not be easier to see them die than to see
them reduced to the pinch of want in which large classes
in every highly civilized community live? the strongest
of animal passions is that with which we cling to life,
but it is an everyday occurrence in civilized societies for
men to put poison to their mouths or pistols to their
heads from fear of poverty, and for one who does this
there are probably a hundred who have the desire, but
are restrained by instinctive shrinking, by religious considerations,
or by family ties.
from this hell of poverty, it is but natural that men
should make every effort to escape. with the impulse
to self-preservation and self-gratification combine nobler
feelings, and love as well as fear urges in the struggle.
many a man does a mean thing, a dishonest thing, a
greedy and grasping and unjust thing, in the effort to
place above want, or the fear of want, mother or wife or
children.
and out of this condition of things arises a public
opinion which enlists, as an impelling power in the
struggle to grasp and to keep, one of the strongest—perhaps
with many men the very strongest—springs of
human action. the desire for approbation, the feeling
that urges us to win the respect, admiration, or sympathy
of our fellows, is instinctive and universal. distorted
sometimes into the most abnormal manifestations,
it may yet be everywhere perceived. it is potent with
the veriest savage, as with the most highly cultivated
member of the most polished society; it shows itself with
the first gleam of intelligence, and persists to the last
breath. it triumphs over the love of ease, over the sense
of pain, over the dread of death. it dictates the most
trivial and the most important actions.
the child just beginning to toddle or to talk will make
new efforts as its cunning little tricks excite attention
and laughter; the dying master of the world gathers his
robes around him, that he may pass away as becomes a
king; chinese mothers will deform their daughters’ feet
by cruel stocks, european women will sacrifice their own
comfort and the comfort of their families to similar
dictates of fashion; the polynesian, that he may excite
admiration by his beautiful tattoo, will hold himself still
while his flesh is torn by sharks’ teeth; the north american
indian, tied to the stake, will bear the most fiendish
tortures without a moan, and, that he may be respected
and admired as a great brave, will taunt his tormentors
to new cruelties. it is this that leads the forlorn hope;
it is this that trims the lamp of the pale student; it is
this that impels men to strive, to strain, to toil, and to
die. it is this that raised the pyramids and that fired
the ephesian dome.
now, men admire what they desire. how sweet to
the storm-stricken seems the safe harbor; food to the
hungry, drink to the thirsty, warmth to the shivering,
rest to the weary, power to the weak, knowledge to him
in whom the intellectual yearnings of the soul have been
aroused. and thus the sting of want and the fear of
want make men admire above all things the possession of
riches, and to become wealthy is to become respected,
and admired, and influential. get money—honestly, if
you can, but at any rate get money! this is the lesson
that society is daily and hourly dinning in the ears of its
members. men instinctively admire virtue and truth,
but the sting of want and the fear of want make them
even more strongly admire the rich and sympathize with
the fortunate. it is well to be honest and just, and men
will commend it; but he who by fraud and injustice gets
him a million dollars will have more respect, and admiration,
and influence, more eye service and lip service, if
not heart service, than he who refuses it. the one may
have his reward in the future; he may know that his
name is writ in the book of life, and that for him is the
white robe and the palm branch of the victor against
temptation; but the other has his reward in the present.
his name is writ in the list of “our substantial citizens;”
he has the courtship of men and the flattery of women;
the best pew in the church and the personal regard of
the eloquent clergyman who in the name of christ
preaches the gospel of dives, and tones down into a
meaningless flower of eastern speech the stern metaphor
of the camel and the needle’s eye. he may be a patron
of arts, a mæcenas to men of letters; may profit by the
converse of the intelligent, and be polished by the attrition
of the refined. his alms may feed the poor, and
help the struggling, and bring sunshine into desolate
places; and noble public institutions commemorate, after
he is gone, his name and his fame. it is not in the
guise of a hideous monster, with horns and tail, that
satan tempts the children of men, but as an angel of
light. his promises are not alone of the kingdoms of
the world, but of mental and moral principalities and
powers. he appeals not only to the animal appetites, but
to the cravings that stir in man because he is more than
an animal.
take the case of those miserable “men with muckrakes,”
who are to be seen in every community as plainly
as bunyan saw their type in his vision—who, long after
they have accumulated wealth enough to satisfy every
desire, go on working, scheming, striving to add riches
to riches. it was the desire “to be something;” nay, in
many cases, the desire to do noble and generous deeds,
that started them on a career of money getting. and
what compels them to it long after every possible need
is satisfied, what urges them still with unsatisfied and
ravenous greed, is not merely the force of tyrannous
habit, but the subtler gratifications which the possession
of riches gives—the sense of power and influence, the
sense of being looked up to and respected, the sense that
their wealth not merely raises them above want, but
makes them men of mark in the community in which
they live. it is this that makes the rich man so loath to
part with his money, so anxious to get more.
against temptations that thus appeal to the strongest
impulses of our nature, the sanctions of law and the precepts
of religion can effect but little; and the wonder is,
not that men are so self-seeking, but that they are not
much more so. that under present circumstances men
are not more grasping, more unfaithful, more selfish
than they are, proves the goodness and fruitfulness of
human nature, the ceaseless flow of the perennial fountains
from which its moral qualities are fed. all of us
have mothers; most of us have children, and so faith,
and purity, and unselfishness can never be utterly banished
from the world, howsoever bad be social adjustments.
but whatever is potent for evil may be made potent
for good. the change i have proposed would destroy
the conditions that distort impulses in themselves beneficent,
and would transmute the forces which now tend
to disintegrate society into forces which would tend to
unite and purify it.
give labor a free field and its full earnings; take for
the benefit of the whole community that fund which the
growth of the community creates, and want and the fear
of want would be gone. the springs of production
would be set free, and the enormous increase of wealth
would give the poorest ample comfort. men would no
more worry about finding employment than they worry
about finding air to breathe; they need have no more
care about physical necessities than do the lilies of the field.
the progress of science, the march of invention, the
diffusion of knowledge, would bring their benefits to all.
with this abolition of want and the fear of want, the
admiration of riches would decay, and men would seek
the respect and approbation of their fellows in other
modes than by the acquisition and display of wealth. in
this way there would be brought to the management of
public affairs, and the administration of common funds,
the skill, the attention, the fidelity, and integrity that
can now be secured only for private interests, and a railroad
or gas works might be operated on public account,
not only more economically and efficiently than as at
present, under joint stock management, but as economically
and efficiently as would be possible under a single
ownership. the prize of the olympian games, that
called forth the most strenuous exertions of all greece,
was but a wreath of wild olive; for a bit of ribbon men
have over and over again performed services no money
could have bought.
shortsighted is the philosophy which counts on selfishness
as the master motive of human action. it is blind
to facts of which the world is full. it sees not the
present, and reads not the past aright. if you would
move men to action, to what shall you appeal? not to
their pockets, but to their patriotism; not to selfishness,
but to sympathy. self-interest is, as it were, a mechanical
force—potent, it is true; capable of large and wide
results. but there is in human nature what may be
likened to a chemical force; which melts and fuses and
overwhelms; to which nothing seems impossible. “all
that a man hath will he give for his life”—that is self-interest.
but in loyalty to higher impulses men will give
even life.
it is not selfishness that enriches the annals of every
people with heroes and saints. it is not selfishness that
on every page of the world’s history bursts out in sudden
splendor of noble deeds or sheds the soft radiance of
benignant lives. it was not selfishness that turned
gautama’s back to his royal home or bade the maid of
orleans lift the sword from the altar; that held the
three hundred in the pass of thermopylæ, or gathered
into winkelried’s bosom the sheaf of spears; that
chained vincent de paul to the bench of the galley, or
brought little starving children, during the indian
famine, tottering to the relief stations with yet weaker
starvelings in their arms. call it religion, patriotism,
sympathy, the enthusiasm for humanity, or the love of
god—give it what name you will; there is yet a force
which overcomes and drives out selfishness; a force
which is the electricity of the moral universe; a force
beside which all others are weak. everywhere that men
have lived it has shown its power, and to-day, as ever,
the world is full of it. to be pitied is the man who has
never seen and never felt it. look around! among common
men and women, amid the care and the struggle of
daily life, in the jar of the noisy street and amid the
squalor where want hides—every here and there is the
darkness lighted with the tremulous play of its lambent
flames. he who has not seen it has walked with shut
eyes. he who looks may see, as says plutarch, that “the
soul has a principle of kindness in itself, and is born to
love, as well as to perceive, think, or remember.”
and this force of forces—that now goes to waste or
assumes perverted forms—we may use for the strengthening,
and building up, and ennobling of society, if we
but will, just as we now use physical forces that once
seemed but powers of destruction. all we have to do is
but to give it freedom and scope. the wrong that produces
inequality; the wrong that in the midst of abundance
tortures men with want or harries them with the
fear of want; that stunts them physically, degrades them
intellectually, and distorts them morally, is what alone
prevents harmonious social development. for “all that
is from the gods is full of providence. we are made for
co-operation—like feet, like hands, like eyelids, like the
rows of the upper and lower teeth.”
there are people into whose heads it never enters to
conceive of any better state of society than that which
now exists—who imagine that the idea that there could
be a state of society in which greed would be banished,
prisons stand empty, individual interests be subordinated
to general interests, and no one seek to rob or to oppress
his neighbor, is but the dream of impracticable dreamers,
for whom these practical level-headed men, who pride
themselves on recognizing facts as they are, have a
hearty contempt. but such men—though some of them
write books, and some of them occupy the chairs of universities,
and some of them stand in pulpits—do not think.
if they were accustomed to dine in such eating houses
as are to be found in the lower quarters of london and
paris, where the knives and forks are chained to the
table, they would deem it the natural, ineradicable disposition
of man to carry off the knife and fork with
which he has eaten.
take a company of well-bred men and women dining
together. there is no struggling for food, no attempt
on the part of any one to get more than his neighbor; no
attempt to gorge or to carry off. on the contrary, each
one is anxious to help his neighbor before he partakes
himself; to offer to others the best rather than pick it
out for himself; and should any one show the slightest
disposition to prefer the gratification of his own appetite
to that of the others, or in any way to act the pig or
pilferer, the swift and heavy penalty of social contempt
and ostracism would show how such conduct is reprobated
by common opinion.
all this is so common as to excite no remark, as to
seem the natural state of things. yet it is no more
natural that men should not be greedy of food than that
they should not be greedy of wealth. they are greedy
of food when they are not assured that there will be a
fair and equitable distribution which will give each
enough. but when these conditions are assured, they
cease to be greedy of food. and so in society, as at
present constituted, men are greedy of wealth because
the conditions of distribution are so unjust that instead
of each being sure of enough, many are certain to be
condemned to want. it is the “devil catch the hindmost”
of present social adjustments that causes the race
and scramble for wealth, in which all considerations of
justice, mercy, religion, and sentiment are trampled
under foot; in which men forget their own souls, and
struggle to the very verge of the grave for what they
cannot take beyond. but an equitable distribution of
wealth, that would exempt all from the fear of want,
would destroy the greed of wealth, just as in polite
society the greed of food has been destroyed.
on the crowded steamers of the early california lines
there was often a marked difference between the manners
of the steerage and the cabin, which illustrates this principle
of human nature. an abundance of food was provided
for the steerage as for the cabin, but in the former
there were no regulations which insured efficient service,
and the meals became a scramble. in the cabin, on the
contrary, where each was allotted his place and there
was no fear that every one would not get enough, there
was no such scrambling and waste as were witnessed in
the steerage. the difference was not in the character of
the people, but simply in this fact. the cabin passenger
transferred to the steerage would participate in the
greedy rush, and the steerage passenger transferred to
the cabin would at once become decorous and polite.
the same difference would show itself in society in
general were the present unjust distribution of wealth
replaced by a just distribution.
consider this existing fact of a cultivated and refined
society, in which all the coarser passions are held in
check, not by force, not by law, but by common opinion
and the mutual desire of pleasing. if this is possible
for a part of a community, it is possible for a whole community.
there are states of society in which every one
has to go armed—in which every one has to hold himself
in readiness to defend person and property with the
strong hand. if we have progressed beyond that, we may
progress still further.
but it may be said, to banish want and the fear of
want, would be to destroy the stimulus to exertion; men
would become simply idlers, and such a happy state of
general comfort and content would be the death of progress.
this is the old slaveholders’ argument, that men
can be driven to labor only with the lash. nothing is
more untrue.
want might be banished, but desire would remain.
man is the unsatisfied animal. he has but begun to explore,
and the universe lies before him. each step that
he takes opens new vistas and kindles new desires. he
is the constructive animal; he builds, he improves, he
invents, and puts together, and the greater the thing he
does, the greater the thing he wants to do. he is more
than an animal. whatever be the intelligence that
breathes through nature, it is in that likeness that man
is made. the steamship, driven by her throbbing
engines through the sea, is in kind, though not in
degree, as much a creation as the whale that swims beneath.
the telescope and the microscope, what are they
but added eyes, which man has made for himself; the
soft webs and fair colors in which our women array themselves,
do they not answer to the plumage that nature
gives the bird? man must be doing something, or fancy
that he is doing something, for in him throbs the creative
impulse; the mere basker in the sunshine is not a natural,
but an abnormal man.
as soon as a child can command its muscles, it will
begin to make mud pies or dress a doll; its play is but the
imitation of the work of its elders; its very destructiveness
arises from the desire to be doing something, from
the satisfaction of seeing itself accomplish something.
there is no such thing as the pursuit of pleasure for the
sake of pleasure. our very amusements amuse only as
they are, or simulate, the learning or the doing of something.
the moment they cease to appeal either to our
inquisitive or to our constructive powers, they cease to
amuse. it will spoil the interest of the novel reader to
be told just how the story will end; it is only the chance
and the skill involved in the game that enable the card-player
to “kill time” by shuffling bits of pasteboard.
the luxurious frivolities of versailles were possible to
human beings only because the king thought he was
governing a kingdom and the courtiers were in pursuit
of fresh honors and new pensions. people who lead
what are called lives of fashion and pleasure must have
some other object in view, or they would die of ennui;
they support it only because they imagine that they are
gaining position, making friends, or improving the
chances of their children. shut a man up, and deny
him employment, and he must either die or go mad.
it is not labor in itself that is repugnant to man; it is
not the natural necessity for exertion which is a curse.
it is only labor which produces nothing—exertion of
which he cannot see the results. to toil day after day,
and yet get but the necessaries of life, this is indeed
hard; it is like the infernal punishment of compelling
a man to pump lest he be drowned, or to trudge on a
treadmill lest he be crushed. but, released from this
necessity, men would but work the harder and the better,
for then they would work as their inclinations led
them; then would they seem to be really doing something
for themselves or for others. was humboldt’s
life an idle one? did franklin find no occupation when
he retired from the printing business with enough to live
on? is herbert spencer a laggard? did michael angelo
paint for board and clothes?
the fact is that the work which improves the condition
of mankind, the work which extends knowledge and
increases power, and enriches literature, and elevates
thought, is not done to secure a living. it is not the
work of slaves, driven to their task either by the lash of
a master or by animal necessities. it is the work of men
who perform it for its own sake, and not that they may
get more to eat or drink, or wear, or display. in a state
of society where want was abolished, work of this sort
would be enormously increased.
i am inclined to think that the result of confiscating
rent in the manner i have proposed would be to cause
the organization of labor, wherever large capitals were
used, to assume the co-operative form, since the more
equal diffusion of wealth would unite capitalist and
laborer in the same person. but whether this would be
so or not is of little moment. the hard toil of routine
labor would disappear. wages would be too high and
opportunities too great to compel any man to stint and
starve the higher qualities of his nature, and in every
avocation the brain would aid the hand. work, even of
the coarser kinds, would become a lightsome thing, and
the tendency of modern production to subdivision would
not involve monotony or the contraction of ability in the
worker; but would be relieved by short hours, by change,
by the alternation of intellectual with manual occupations.
there would result, not only the utilization of
productive forces now going to waste; not only would
our present knowledge, now so imperfectly applied, be
fully used; but from the mobility of labor and the mental
activity which would be generated, there would result
advances in the methods of production that we now
cannot imagine.
for, greatest of all the enormous wastes which the
present constitution of society involves, is that of mental
power. how infinitesimal are the forces that concur to
the advance of civilization, as compared to the forces
that lie latent! how few are the thinkers, the discoverers,
the inventors, the organizers, as compared with the
great mass of the people! yet such men are born in
plenty; it is the conditions that permit so few to
develop. there are among men infinite diversities of
aptitude and inclination, as there are such infinite diversities
in physical structure that among a million there
will not be two that cannot be told apart. but, both
from observation and reflection, i am inclined to think
that the differences of natural power are no greater than
the differences of stature or of physical strength. turn
to the lives of great men, and see how easily they might
never have been heard of. had cæsar come of a proletarian
family; had napoleon entered the world a few
years earlier; had columbus gone into the church instead
of going to sea; had shakespeare been apprenticed
to a cobbler or chimney-sweep; had sir isaac newton
been assigned by fate the education and the toil of an
agricultural laborer; had dr. adam smith been born in
the coal hews, or herbert spencer forced to get his living
as a factory operative, what would their talents have
availed? but there would have been, it will be said,
other cæsars or napoleons, columbuses or shakespeares,
newtons, smiths or spencers. this is true. and it
shows how prolific is our human nature. as the common
worker is on need transformed into queen bee, so,
when circumstances favor his development, what might
otherwise pass for a common man rises into a hero or
leader, discoverer or teacher, sage or saint. so widely
has the sower scattered the seed, so strong is the germinative
force that bids it bud and blossom. but, alas, for
the stony ground, and the birds and the tares! for one
who attains his full stature, how many are stunted and
deformed.
the will within us is the ultimate fact of consciousness.
yet how little have the best of us, in acquirements,
in position, even in character, that may be credited
entirely to ourselves; how much to the influences
that have molded us. who is there, wise, learned, discreet,
or strong, who might not, were he to trace the
inner history of his life, turn, like the stoic emperor, to
give thanks to the gods, that by this one and that one,
and here and there, good examples have been set him,
noble thoughts have reached him, and happy opportunities
opened before him. who is there, who, with his
eyes about him, has reached the meridian of life, who has
not sometimes echoed the thought of the pious englishman,
as the criminal passed to the gallows, “but for the
grace of god, there go i.” how little does heredity
count as compared with conditions. this one, we say, is
the result of a thousand years of european progress, and
that one of a thousand years of chinese petrifaction;
yet, placed an infant in the heart of china, and but for
the angle of the eye or the shade of the hair, the caucasian
would grow up as those around him, using the
same speech, thinking the same thoughts, exhibiting the
same tastes. change lady vere de vere in her cradle
with an infant of the slums, and will the blood of a hundred
earls give you a refined and cultured woman?
to remove want and the fear of want, to give to all
classes leisure, and comfort, and independence, the decencies
and refinements of life, the opportunities of mental and
moral development, would be like turning water into a
desert. the sterile waste would clothe itself with
verdure, and the barren places where life seemed banned
would ere long be dappled with the shade of trees and
musical with the song of birds. talents now hidden,
virtues unsuspected, would come forth to make human
life richer, fuller, happier, nobler. for in these round
men who are stuck into three-cornered holes, and three-cornered
men who are jammed into round holes; in these
men who are wasting their energies in the scramble to
be rich; in these who in factories are turned into machines,
or are chained by necessity to bench or plow; in
these children who are growing up in squalor, and vice,
and ignorance, are powers of the highest order, talents
the most splendid. they need but the opportunity to
bring them forth.
consider the possibilities of a state of society that gave
that opportunity to all. let imagination fill out the
picture; its colors grow too bright for words to paint.
consider the moral elevation, the intellectual activity,
the social life. consider how by a thousand actions and
interactions the members of every community are linked
together, and how in the present condition of things
even the fortunate few who stand upon the apex of the
social pyramid must suffer, though they know it not,
from the want, ignorance, and degradation that are
underneath. consider these things and then say whether
the change i propose would not be for the benefit of
every one—even the greatest land holder? would he not
be safer of the future of his children in leaving them
penniless in such a state of society than in leaving them
the largest fortune in this? did such a state of society
anywhere exist, would he not buy entrance to it cheaply
by giving up all his possessions?
i have now traced to their source social weakness and
disease. i have shown the remedy. i have covered
every point and met every objection. but the problems
that we have been considering, great as they are, pass
into problems greater yet—into the grandest problems
with which the human mind can grapple. i am about
to ask the reader who has gone with me so far, to go
with me further, into still higher fields. but i ask him
to remember that in the little space which remains of
the limits to which this book must be confined, i cannot
fully treat the questions which arise. i can but suggest
some thoughts, which may, perhaps, serve as hints for
further thought.
what in me is dark
illumine, what is low raise and support;
that to the height of this great argument
i may assert eternal providence
and justify the ways of god to men.
—milton.
if the conclusions at which we have arrived are correct,
they will fall under a larger generalization.
let us, therefore, recommence our inquiry from a
higher standpoint, whence we may survey a wider field.
what is the law of human progress?
this is a question which, were it not for what has
gone before, i should hesitate to review in the brief
space i can now devote to it, as it involves, directly or
indirectly, some of the very highest problems with which
the human mind can engage. but it is a question which
naturally comes up. are or are not the conclusions to
which we have come consistent with the great law under
which human development goes on?
what is that law? we must find the answer to our
question; for the current philosophy, though it clearly
recognizes the existence of such a law, gives no more satisfactory
account of it than the current political economy
does of the persistence of want amid advancing wealth.
let us, as far as possible, keep to the firm ground of
facts. whether man was or was not gradually developed
from an animal, it is not necessary to inquire. however
intimate may be the connection between questions which
relate to man as we know him and questions which relate
to his genesis, it is only from the former upon the latter
that light can be thrown. inference cannot proceed
from the unknown to the known. it is only from facts
of which we are cognizant that we can infer what has
preceded cognizance.
however man may have originated, all we know of
him is as man—just as he is now to be found. there is
no record or trace of him in any lower condition than
that in which savages are still to be met. by whatever
bridge he may have crossed the wide chasm which now
separates him from the brutes, there remain of it no
vestiges. between the lowest savages of whom we know
and the highest animals, there is an irreconcilable difference—a
difference not merely of degree, but of kind.
many of the characteristics, actions, and emotions of
man are exhibited by the lower animals; but man, no
matter how low in the scale of humanity, has never yet
been found destitute of one thing of which no animal
shows the slightest trace, a clearly recognizable but almost
undefinable something, which gives him the power
of improvement—which makes him the progressive
animal.
the beaver builds a dam, and the bird a nest, and the
bee a cell; but while beavers’ dams, and birds’ nests,
and bees’ cells are always constructed on the same model,
the house of the man passes from the rude hut of leaves
and branches to the magnificent mansion replete with
modern conveniences. the dog can to a certain extent
connect cause and effect, and may be taught some tricks;
but his capacity in these respects has not been a whit
increased during all the ages he has been the associate of
improving man, and the dog of civilization is not a whit
more accomplished or intelligent than the dog of the
wandering savage. we know of no animal that uses
clothes, that cooks its food, that makes itself tools or
weapons, that breeds other animals that it wishes to eat,
or that has an articulate language. but men who do
not do such things have never yet been found, or heard
of, except in fable. that is to say, man, wherever we
know him, exhibits this power—of supplementing what
nature has done for him by what he does for himself;
and, in fact, so inferior is the physical endowment of
man, that there is no part of the world, save perhaps
some of the small islands of the pacific, where without
this faculty he could maintain an existence.
man everywhere and at all times exhibits this faculty—everywhere
and at all times of which we have knowledge
he has made some use of it. but the degree
in which this has been done greatly varies. between
the rude canoe and the steamship; between the boomerang
and the repeating rifle; between the roughly carved
wooden idol and the breathing marble of grecian art;
between savage knowledge and modern science; between
the wild indian and the white settler; between
the hottentot woman and the belle of polished society,
there is an enormous difference.
the varying degrees in which this faculty is used cannot
be ascribed to differences in original capacity—the
most highly improved peoples of the present day were
savages within historic times, and we meet with the
widest differences between peoples of the same stock.
nor can they be wholly ascribed to differences in physical
environment—the cradles of learning and the arts are
now in many cases tenanted by barbarians, and within a
few years great cities rise on the hunting grounds of wild
tribes. all these differences are evidently connected with
social development. beyond perhaps the veriest rudiments,
it becomes possible for man to improve only as
he lives with his fellows. all these improvements,
therefore, in man’s powers and condition we summarize
in the term civilization. men improve as they become
civilized, or learn to co-operate in society.
what is the law of this improvement? by what common
principle can we explain the different stages of civilization
at which different communities have arrived? in
what consists essentially the progress of civilization, so
that we may say of varying social adjustments, this favors
it, and that does not; or explain why an institution or
condition which may at one time advance it may at another
time retard it?
the prevailing belief now is, that the progress of civilization
is a development or evolution, in the course of
which men’s powers are increased and his qualities improved
by the operation of causes similar to those which
are relied upon as explaining the genesis of species—viz.,
the survival of the fittest and the hereditary transmission
of acquired qualities.
that civilization is an evolution—that it is, in the
language of herbert spencer, a progress from an indefinite,
incoherent homogeneity to a definite, coherent
heterogeneity—there is no doubt; but to say this is not
to explain or identify the causes which forward or retard
it. how far the sweeping generalizations of spencer,
which seek to account for all phenomena under terms of
matter and force, may, properly understood, include all
these causes, i am unable to say; but, as scientifically
expounded, the development philosophy has either not
yet definitely met this question, or has given birth, or
rather coherency, to an opinion which does not accord
with the facts.
the vulgar explanation of progress is, i think, very
much like the view naturally taken by the money maker
of the causes of the unequal distribution of wealth. his
theory, if he has one, usually is, that there is plenty of
money to be made by those who have will and ability,
and that it is ignorance, or idleness, or extravagance,
that makes the difference between the rich and the poor.
and so the common explanation of differences of civilization
is of differences in capacity. the civilized races are
the superior races, and advance in civilization is according
to this superiority—just as english victories were, in
common english opinion, due to the natural superiority
of englishmen to frog-eating frenchmen; and popular
government, active invention, and greater average comfort
are, or were until lately, in common american opinion,
due to the greater “smartness of the yankee
nation.”
now, just as the politico-economic doctrines which in
the beginning of this inquiry we met and disproved,
harmonize with the common opinion of men who see
capitalists paying wages and competition reducing wages;
just as the malthusian theory harmonized with existing
prejudices both of the rich and the poor; so does the explanation
of progress as a gradual race improvement
harmonize with the vulgar opinion which accounts by
race differences for differences in civilization. it has
given coherence and a scientific formula to opinions
which already prevailed. its wonderful spread since the
time darwin first startled the world with his “origin of
species” has not been so much a conquest as an assimilation.
the view which now dominates the world of thought
is this: that the struggle for existence, just in proportion
as it becomes intense, impels men to new efforts and
inventions. that this improvement and capacity for
improvement is fixed by hereditary transmission, and
extended by the tendency of the best adapted individual,
or most improved individual, to survive and propagate
among individuals, and of the best adapted, or most improved
tribe, nation, or race to survive in the struggle
between social aggregates. on this theory the differences
between man and the animals, and differences in
the relative progress of men, are now explained as confidently,
and all but as generally, as a little while ago they
were explained upon the theory of special creation and
divine interposition.
the practical outcome of this theory is in a sort of
hopeful fatalism, of which current literature is full. in
this view, progress is the result of forces which work
slowly, steadily and remorselessly, for the elevation of man.
war, slavery, tyranny, superstition, famine, and pestilence,
the want and misery which fester in modern civilization,
are the impelling causes which drive man on, by
eliminating poorer types and extending the higher; and
hereditary transmission is the power by which advances
are fixed, and past advances made the footing for new
advances. the individual is the result of changes thus
impressed upon and perpetuated through a long series of
past individuals, and the social organization takes its
form from the individuals of which it is composed.
thus, while this theory is, as herbert spencer says—“radical
to a degree beyond anything which current
radicalism conceives;” inasmuch as it looks for changes
in the very nature of man; it is at the same time “conservative
to a degree beyond anything conceived by current
conservatism,” inasmuch as it holds that no change
can avail save these slow changes in men’s natures.
philosophers may teach that this does not lessen the
duty of endeavoring to reform abuses, just as the theologians
who taught predestinarianism insisted on the
duty of all to struggle for salvation; but, as generally
apprehended, the result is fatalism—“do what we may,
the mills of the gods grind on regardless either of our
aid or our hindrance.” i allude to this only to illustrate
what i take to be the opinion now rapidly spreading and
permeating common thought; not that in the search for
truth any regard for its effects should be permitted to
bias the mind. but this i take to be the current view of
civilization: that it is the result of forces, operating in
the way indicated, which slowly change the character,
and improve and elevate the powers of man; that the
difference between civilized man and savage is of a long
race education, which has become permanently fixed in
mental organization; and that this improvement tends to
go on increasingly, to a higher and higher civilization.
we have reached such a point that progress seems to
be natural with us, and we look forward confidently to
the greater achievements of the coming race—some even
holding that the progress of science will finally give men
immortality and enable them to make bodily the tour not
only of the planets, but of the fixed stars, and at length
to manufacture suns and systems for themselves.
but without soaring to the stars, the moment that
this theory of progression, which seems so natural to us
amid an advancing civilization, looks around the world,
it comes against an enormous fact—the fixed, petrified
civilizations. the majority of the human race to-day
have no idea of progress; the majority of the human race
to-day look (as until a few generations ago our own ancestors
looked) upon the past as the time of human perfection.
the difference between the savage and the
civilized man may be explained on the theory that the
former is as yet so imperfectly developed that his progress
is hardly apparent; but how, upon the theory that
human progress is the result of general and continuous
causes, shall we account for the civilizations that have
progressed so far and then stopped? it cannot be said
of the hindoo and of the chinaman, as it may be said of
the savage, that our superiority is the result of a longer
education; that we are, as it were, the grown men of
nature, while they are the children. the hindoos and
the chinese were civilized when we were savages. they
had great cities, highly organized and powerful governments,
literatures, philosophies, polished manners, considerable
division of labor, large commerce, and elaborate
arts, when our ancestors were wandering barbarians, living
in huts and skin tents, not a whit further advanced
than the american indians. while we have progressed
from this savage state to nineteenth century civilization,
they have stood still. if progress be the result of
fixed laws, inevitable and eternal, which impel men forward,
how shall we account for this?
one of the best popular expounders of the development
philosophy, walter bagehot (“physics and politics”),
admits the force of this objection, and endeavors
in this way to explain it: that the first thing necessary
to civilize man is to tame him; to induce him to live in
association with his fellows in subordination to law; and
hence a body or “cake” of laws and customs grows up,
being intensified and extended by natural selection, the
tribe or nation thus bound together having an advantage
over those who are not. that this cake of custom and
law finally becomes too thick and hard to permit further
progress, which can go on only as circumstances occur
which introduce discussion, and thus permit the freedom
and mobility necessary to improvement.
this explanation, which mr. bagehot offers, as he says,
with some misgivings, is i think at the expense of the
general theory. but it is not worth while speaking of
that, for it, manifestly, does not explain the facts.
the hardening tendency of which mr. bagehot speaks
would show itself at a very early period of development,
and his illustrations of it are nearly all drawn from
savage or semi-savage life. whereas, these arrested civilizations
had gone a long distance before they stopped.
there must have been a time when they were very
far advanced as compared with the savage state, and
were yet plastic, free, and advancing. these arrested
civilizations stopped at a point which was hardly in anything
inferior and in many respects superior to european
civilization of, say, the sixteenth or at any rate the fifteenth
century. up to that point then there must have
been discussion, the hailing of what was new, and mental
activity of all sorts. they had architects who carried
the art of building, necessarily by a series of innovations
or improvements, up to a very high point; ship-builders
who in the same way, by innovation after innovation,
finally produced as good a vessel as the war ships of
henry viii.; inventors who stopped only on the verge of
our most important improvements, and from some of
whom we can yet learn; engineers who constructed great
irrigation works and navigable canals; rival schools of
philosophy and conflicting ideas of religion. one great
religion, in many respects resembling christianity, rose
in india, displaced the old religion, passed into china,
sweeping over that country, and was displaced again in
its old seats, just as christianity was displaced in its first
seats. there was life, and active life, and the innovation
that begets improvement, long after men had
learned to live together. and, moreover, both india
and china have received the infusion of new life in conquering
races, with different customs and modes of
thought.
the most fixed and petrified of all civilizations of which
we know anything was that of egypt, where even art
finally assumed a conventional and inflexible form. but
we know that behind this must have been a time of life
and vigor—a freshly developing and expanding civilization,
such as ours is now—or the arts and sciences could
never have been carried to such a pitch. and recent
excavations have brought to light from beneath what we
before knew of egypt an earlier egypt still—in statues
and carvings which, instead of a hard and formal type,
beam with life and expression, which show art struggling,
ardent, natural, and free, the sure indication of
an active and expanding life. so it must have been once
with all now unprogressive civilizations.
but it is not merely these arrested civilizations that
the current theory of development fails to account for.
it is not merely that men have gone so far on the path
of progress and then stopped; it is that men have gone
far on the path of progress and then gone back. it is
not merely an isolated case that thus confronts the theory—it
is the universal rule. every civilization that the
world has yet seen has had its period of vigorous growth,
of arrest and stagnation; its decline and fall. of all the
civilizations that have arisen and flourished, there remain
to-day but those that have been arrested, and our
own, which is not yet as old as were the pyramids when
abraham looked upon them—while behind the pyramids
were twenty centuries of recorded history.
that our own civilization has a broader base, is of a
more advanced type, moves quicker and soars higher
than any preceding civilization is undoubtedly true; but
in these respects it is hardly more in advance of the
greco-roman civilization than that was in advance of
asiatic civilization; and if it were, that would prove
nothing as to its permanence and future advance, unless
it be shown that it is superior in those things which
caused the ultimate failure of its predecessors. the
current theory does not assume this.
in truth, nothing could be further from explaining the
facts of universal history than this theory that civilization
is the result of a course of natural selection which
operates to improve and elevate the powers of man.
that civilization has arisen at different times in different
places and has progressed at different rates, is not inconsistent
with this theory; for that might result from the
unequal balancing of impelling and resisting forces; but
that progress everywhere commencing, for even among
the lowest tribes it is held that there has been some
progress, has nowhere been continuous, but has everywhere
been brought to a stand or retrogression, is absolutely
inconsistent. for if progress operated to fix an
improvement in man’s nature and thus to produce further
progress, though there might be occasional interruption,
yet the general rule would be that progress would be
continuous—that advance would lead to advance, and
civilization develop into higher civilization.
not merely the general rule, but the universal rule, is
the reverse of this. the earth is the tomb of the dead
empires, no less than of dead men. instead of progress
fitting men for greater progress, every civilization that
was in its own time as vigorous and advancing as ours is
now, has of itself come to a stop. over and over again,
art has declined, learning sunk, power waned, population
become sparse, until the people who had built great
temples and mighty cities, turned rivers and pierced
mountains, cultivated the earth like a garden and introduced
the utmost refinement into the minute affairs of
life, remained but in a remnant of squalid barbarians,
who had lost even the memory of what their ancestors
had done, and regarded the surviving fragments of their
grandeur as the work of genii, or of the mighty race before
the flood. so true is this, that when we think of
the past, it seems like the inexorable law, from which we
can no more hope to be exempt than the young man
who “feels his life in every limb” can hope to be exempt
from the dissolution which is the common fate of all.
“even this, o rome, must one day be thy fate!” wept
scipio over the ruins of carthage, and macaulay’s picture
of the new zealander musing upon the broken arch
of london bridge appeals to the imagination of even
those who see cities rising in the wilderness and help to
lay the foundations of new empire. and so, when we
erect a public building we make a hollow in the largest
corner stone and carefully seal within it some mementos
of our day, looking forward to the time when our works
shall be ruins and ourselves forgot.
nor whether this alternate rise and fall of civilization,
this retrogression that always follows progression, be, or
be not, the rhythmic movement of an ascending line
(and i think, though i will not open the question, that
it would be much more difficult to prove the affirmative
than is generally supposed) makes no difference; for the
current theory is in either case disproved. civilizations
have died and made no sign, and hard-won progress has
been lost to the race forever, but, even if it be admitted
that each wave of progress has made possible a higher
wave and each civilization passed the torch to a greater
civilization, the theory that civilization advances by
changes wrought in the nature of man fails to explain
the facts; for in every case it is not the race that has
been educated and hereditarily modified by the old civilization
that begins the new, but a fresh race coming from
a lower level. it is the barbarians of the one epoch who
have been the civilized men of the next; to be in their
turn succeeded by fresh barbarians. for it has been
heretofore always the case that men under the influences
of civilization, though at first improving, afterward
degenerate. the civilized man of to-day is vastly the
superior of the uncivilized; but so in the time of its
vigor was the civilized man of every dead civilization.
but there are such things as the vices, the corruptions,
the enervations of civilization, which past a certain point
have always heretofore shown themselves. every civilization
that has been overwhelmed by barbarians has really
perished from internal decay.
this universal fact, the moment that it is recognized,
disposes of the theory that progress is by hereditary transmission.
looking over the history of the world, the
line of greatest advance does not coincide for any length
of time with any line of heredity. on any particular
line of heredity, retrogression seems always to follow
advance.
shall we therefore say that there is a national or race
life, as there is an individual life—that every social
aggregate has, as it were, a certain amount of energy,
the expenditure of which necessitates decay? this is an
old and widespread idea, that is yet largely held, and
that may be constantly seen cropping out incongruously
in the writings of the expounders of the development
philosophy. indeed, i do not see why it may not be
stated in terms of matter and of motion so as to bring it
clearly within the generalizations of evolution. for considering
its individuals as atoms, the growth of society is
“an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of
motion; during which the matter passes from an indefinite,
incoherent homogeneity to a definite, coherent
heterogeneity, and during which the retained motion
undergoes a parallel transformation.” and thus an
analogy may be drawn between the life of a society and
the life of a solar system upon the nebular hypothesis.
as the heat and light of the sun are produced by the
aggregation of atoms evolving motion, which finally
ceases when the atoms at length come to a state of
equilibrium or rest, and a state of immobility succeeds,
which can be broken in again only by the impact of external
forces, which reverse the process of evolution,
integrating motion and dissipating matter in the form of
gas, again to evolve motion by its condensation; so, it
may be said, does the aggregation of individuals in a
community evolve a force which produces the light and
warmth of civilization, but when this process ceases and
the individual components are brought into a state of
equilibrium, assuming their fixed places, petrifaction
ensues, and the breaking up and diffusion caused by an
incursion of barbarians is necessary to the recommencement
of the process and a new growth of civilization.
but analogies are the most dangerous modes of
thought. they may connect resemblances and yet disguise
or cover up the truth. and all such analogies are
superficial. while its members are constantly reproduced
in all the fresh vigor of childhood, a community
cannot grow old, as does a man, by the decay of its
powers. while its aggregate force must be the sum of
the forces of its individual components, a community
cannot lose vital power unless the vital powers of its
components are lessened.
yet in both the common analogy which likens the life
power of a nation to that of an individual, and in the
one i have supposed, lurks the recognition of an obvious
truth—the truth that the obstacles which finally bring
progress to a halt are raised by the course of progress;
that what has destroyed all previous civilizations has
been the conditions produced by the growth of civilization
itself.
this is a truth which in the current philosophy is
ignored; but it is a truth most pregnant. any valid
theory of human progress must account for it.
in attempting to discover the law of human progress,
the first step must be to determine the essential nature
of those differences which we describe as differences in
civilization.
that the current philosophy, which attributes social
progress to changes wrought in the nature of man, does
not accord with historical facts, we have already seen.
and we may also see, if we consider them, that the
differences between communities in different stages of
civilization cannot be ascribed to innate differences in
the individuals who compose these communities. that
there are natural differences is true, and that there is
such a thing as hereditary transmission of peculiarities is
undoubtedly true; but the great differences between
men in different states of society cannot be explained in
this way. the influence of heredity, which it is now
the fashion to rate so highly, is as nothing compared
with the influences which mold the man after he comes
into the world. what is more ingrained in habit than
language, which becomes not merely an automatic trick
of the muscles, but the medium of thought? what persists
longer, or will quicker show nationality? yet we
are not born with a predisposition to any language. our
mother tongue is our mother tongue only because we
learned it in infancy. although his ancestors have
thought and spoken in one language for countless generations,
a child who hears from the first nothing else,
will learn with equal facility any other tongue. and so
of other national or local or class peculiarities. they
seem to be matters of education and habit, not of transmission.
cases of white children captured by indians
in infancy and brought up in the wigwam show this.
they become thorough indians. and so, i believe, with
children brought up by gypsies.
that this is not so true of the children of indians or
other distinctly marked races brought up by whites is, i
think, due to the fact that they are never treated precisely
as white children. a gentleman who had taught
a colored school once told me that he thought the colored
children, up to the age of ten or twelve, were really
brighter and learned more readily than white children,
but that after that age they seemed to get dull and careless.
he thought this proof of innate race inferiority,
and so did i at the time. but i afterward heard a
highly intelligent negro gentleman (bishop hillery) incidentally
make a remark which to my mind seems a
sufficient explanation. he said: “our children, when
they are young, are fully as bright as white children, and
learn as readily. but as soon as they get old enough to
appreciate their status—to realize that they are looked
upon as belonging to an inferior race, and can never
hope to be anything more than cooks, waiters, or something
of that sort, they lose their ambition and cease to
keep up.” and to this he might have added, that being
the children of poor, uncultivated and unambitious
parents, home influences told against them. for, i believe
it is a matter of common observation that in the
primary part of education the children of ignorant
parents are quite as receptive as the children of intelligent
parents, but by and by the latter, as a general rule,
pull ahead and make the most intelligent men and
women. the reason is plain. as to the first simple
things which they learn only at school, they are on a par,
but as their studies become more complex, the child who
at home is accustomed to good english, hears intelligent
conversation, has access to books, can get questions
answered, etc., has an advantage which tells.
the same thing may be seen later in life. take a man
who has raised himself from the ranks of common labor,
and just as he is brought into contact with men of culture
and men of affairs, will he become more intelligent
and polished. take two brothers, the sons of poor
parents, brought up in the same home and in the same
way. one is put to a rude trade, and never gets beyond
the necessity of making a living by hard daily labor; the
other, commencing as an errand boy, gets a start in another
direction, and becomes finally a successful lawyer,
merchant, or politician. at forty or fifty the contrast
between them will be striking, and the unreflecting will
credit it to the greater natural ability which has enabled
the one to push himself ahead. but just as striking a
difference in manners and intelligence will be manifested
between two sisters, one of whom, married to a man who
has remained poor, has her life fretted with petty cares
and devoid of opportunities, and the other of whom has
married a man whose subsequent position brings her into
cultured society and opens to her opportunities which
refine taste and expand intelligence. and so deteriorations
may be seen. that “evil communications corrupt
good manners” is but an expression of the general law
that human character is profoundly modified by its conditions
and surroundings.
i remember once seeing, in a brazilian seaport, a negro
man dressed in what was an evident attempt at the
height of fashion, but without shoes and stockings.
one of the sailors with whom i was in company, and who
had made some runs in the slave trade, had a theory that
a negro was not a man, but a sort of monkey, and pointed
to this as evidence in proof, contending that it was not
natural for a negro to wear shoes, and that in his wild
state he would wear no clothes at all. i afterward
learned that it was not considered “the thing” there
for slaves to wear shoes, just as in england it is not considered
the thing for a faultlessly attired butler to wear
jewelry, though for that matter i have since seen white
men at liberty to dress as they pleased get themselves
up as incongruously as the brazilian slave. but a great
many of the facts adduced as showing hereditary transmission
have really no more bearing than this of our
forecastle darwinian.
that, for instance, a large number of criminals and
recipients of public relief in new york have been shown
to have descended from a pauper three or four generations
back is extensively cited as showing hereditary
transmission. but it shows nothing of the kind, inasmuch
as an adequate explanation of the facts is nearer.
paupers will raise paupers, even if the children be not
their own, just as familiar contact with criminals will
make criminals of the children of virtuous parents. to
learn to rely on charity is necessarily to lose the self-respect
and independence necessary for self-reliance
when the struggle is hard. so true is this that, as is
well known, charity has the effect of increasing the demand
for charity, and it is an open question whether
public relief and private alms do not in this way do far
more harm than good. and so of the disposition of
children to show the same feelings, tastes, prejudices, or
talents as their parents. they imbibe these dispositions
just as they imbibe from their habitual associates. and
the exceptions prove the rule, as dislikes or revulsions
may be excited.
and there is, i think, a subtler influence which often
accounts for what are looked upon as atavisms of character—the
same influence that makes the boy who reads
dime novels want to be a pirate. i once knew a gentleman
in whose veins ran the blood of indian chiefs. he
used to tell me traditions learned from his grandfather,
which illustrated what is difficult for a white man to
comprehend—the indian habit of thought, the intense
but patient blood thirst of the trail, and the fortitude of
the stake. from the way in which he dwelt on these,
i have no doubt that under certain circumstances, highly
educated, civilized man that he was, he would have
shown traits which would have been looked on as due to
his indian blood; but which in reality would have been
sufficiently explained by the broodings of his imagination
upon the deeds of his ancestors.
in any large community we may see, as between different
classes and groups, differences of the same kind as
those which exist between communities which we speak
of as differing in civilization—differences of knowledge,
belief, customs, tastes, and speech, which in their extremes
show among people of the same race, living in
the same country, differences almost as great as those
between civilized and savage communities. as all stages
of social development, from the stone age up, are yet to
be found in contemporaneously existing communities, so
in the same country and in the same city are to be
found, side by side, groups which show similar diversities.
in such countries as england and germany,
children of the same race, born and reared in the same
place, will grow up, speaking the language differently,
holding different beliefs, following different customs,
and showing different tastes; and even in such a country
as the united states differences of the same kind, though
not of the same degree, may be seen between different
circles or groups.
but these differences are certainly not innate. no
baby is born a methodist or catholic, to drop its h’s or
to sound them. all these differences which distinguish
different groups or circles are derived from association in
these circles.
the janissaries were made up of youths torn from
christian parents at an early age, but they were none
the less fanatical moslems and none the less exhibited
all the turkish traits; the jesuits and other orders show
distinct character, but it is certainly not perpetuated by
hereditary transmissions; and even such associations as
schools or regiments, where the components remain but a
short time and are constantly changing, exhibit general
characteristics, which are the result of mental impressions
perpetuated by association.
now, it is this body of traditions, beliefs, customs,
laws, habits, and associations, which arise in every community
and which surround every individual—this
“super-organic environment,” as herbert spencer calls
it, that, as i take it, is the great element in determining
national character. it is this, rather than hereditary
transmission, which makes the englishman differ from
the frenchman, the german from the italian, the
american from the chinaman, and the civilized man
from the savage man. it is in this way that national
traits are preserved, extended, or altered.
within certain limits, or, if you choose, without limits
in itself, hereditary transmission may develop or alter qualities,
but this is much more true of the physical than of the
mental part of a man, and much more true of animals than
it is even of the physical part of man. deductions from
the breeding of pigeons or cattle will not apply to man,
and the reason is clear. the life of man, even in his
rudest state, is infinitely more complex. he is constantly
acted on by an infinitely greater number of influences,
amid which the relative influence of heredity becomes
less and less. a race of men with no greater mental
activity than the animals—men who only ate, drank,
slept, and propagated—might, i doubt not, by careful
treatment and selection in breeding, be made, in course
of time, to exhibit as great diversities in bodily shape
and character as similar means have produced in the
domestic animals. but there are no such men; and in
men as they are, mental influences, acting through the
mind upon the body, would constantly interrupt the
process. you cannot fatten a man whose mind is on the
strain by cooping him up and feeding him as you would
fatten a pig. in all probability men have been upon the
earth longer than many species of animals. they have
been separated from each other under differences of
climate that produce the most marked differences in
animals, and yet the physical differences between the
different races of men are hardly greater than the difference
between white horses and black horses—they are
certainly nothing like as great as between dogs of the
same sub-species, as, for instance, the different varieties
of the terrier or spaniel. and even these physical differences
between races of men, it is held by those who
account for them by natural selection and hereditary
transmission, were brought out when man was much
nearer the animal—that is to say, when he had less mind.
and if this be true of the physical constitution of
man, in how much higher degree is it true of his mental
constitution? all our physical parts we bring with us
into the world; but the mind develops afterward.
there is a stage in the growth of every organism in
which it cannot be told, except by the environment,
whether the animal that is to be will be fish or reptile,
monkey or man. and so with the new-born infant;
whether the mind that is yet to awake to consciousness
and power is to be english or german, american or
chinese—the mind of a civilized man or the mind of a
savage—depends entirely on the social environment in
which it is placed.
take a number of infants born of the most highly
civilized parents and transport them to an uninhabited
country. suppose them in some miraculous way to be
sustained until they come of age to take care of themselves,
and what would you have? more helpless savages
than any we know of. they would have fire to discover;
the rudest tools and weapons to invent; language to construct.
they would, in short, have to stumble their way
to the simplest knowledge which the lowest races now
possess, just as a child learns to walk. that they would
in time do all these things i have not the slightest
doubt, for all these possibilities are latent in the human
mind just as the power of walking is latent in the human
frame, but i do not believe they would do them any better
or worse, any slower or quicker, than the children of
barbarian parents placed in the same conditions. given
the very highest mental powers that exceptional individuals
have ever displayed, and what could mankind
be if one generation were separated from the next by an
interval of time, as are the seventeen-year locusts? one
such interval would reduce mankind, not to savagery,
but to a condition compared with which savagery, as we
know it, would seem civilization.
and, reversely, suppose a number of savage infants
could, unknown to the mothers, for even this would be
necessary to make the experiment a fair one, be substituted
for as many children of civilization, can we suppose
that growing up they would show any difference?
i think no one who has mixed much with different peoples
and classes will think so. the great lesson that is
thus learned is that “human nature is human nature all
the world over.” and this lesson, too, may be learned
in the library. i speak not so much of the accounts of
travelers, for the accounts given of savages by the civilized
men who write books are very often just such accounts
as savages would give of us did they make flying
visits and then write books; but of those mementos of
the life and thoughts of other times and other peoples,
which, translated into our language of to-day, are like
glimpses of our own lives and gleams of our own thought.
the feeling they inspire is that of the essential similarity
of men. “this,” says emanuel deutsch—“this is the
end of all investigation into history or art. they were
even as we are.”
there is a people to be found in all parts of the
world who well illustrate what peculiarities are due
to hereditary transmission and what to transmission by
association. the jews have maintained the purity of
their blood more scrupulously and for a far longer time
than any of the european races, yet i am inclined to
think that the only characteristic that can be attributed
to this is that of physiognomy, and this is in reality far
less marked than is conventionally supposed, as any one
who will take the trouble may see on observation. although
they have constantly married among themselves,
the jews have everywhere been modified by their surroundings—the
english, russian, polish, german, and
oriental jews differing from each other in many respects
as much as do the other people of those countries. yet
they have much in common, and have everywhere preserved
their individuality. the reason is clear. it is
the hebrew religion—and certainly religion is not transmitted
by generation, but by association—which has
everywhere preserved the distinctiveness of the hebrew
race. this religion, which children derive, not as they
derive their physical characteristics, but by precept and
association, is not merely exclusive in its teachings, but
has, by engendering suspicion and dislike, produced a
powerful outside pressure which, even more than its precepts,
has everywhere constituted of the jews a community
within a community. thus has been built up and
maintained a certain peculiar environment which gives
a distinctive character. jewish intermarriage has been
the effect, not the cause of this. what persecution
which stopped short of taking jewish children from their
parents and bringing them up outside of this peculiar
environment could not accomplish, will be accomplished
by the lessening intensity of religious belief, as is already
evident in the united states, where the distinction between
jew and gentile is fast disappearing.
and it seems to me that the influence of this social
net or environment will explain what is so often taken as
proof of race differences—the difficulty which less civilized
races show in receiving higher civilization, and the
manner in which some of them melt away before it.
just as one social environment persists, so does it render
it difficult or impossible for those subject to it to accept
another.
the chinese character is fixed if that of any people is.
yet the chinese in california acquire american modes
of working, trading, the use of machinery, etc., with
such facility as to prove that they have no lack of flexibility,
or natural capacity. that they do not change in
other respects is due to the chinese environment that
still persists and still surrounds them. coming from
china, they look forward to return to china, and live
while here in a little china of their own, just as the
englishmen in india maintain a little england. it is
not merely that we naturally seek association with those
who share our peculiarities, and that thus language,
religion and custom tend to persist where individuals
are not absolutely isolated; but that these differences
provoke an external pressure, which compels such association.
these obvious principles fully account for all the
phenomena which are seen in the meeting of one stage or
body of culture with another, without resort to the
theory of ingrained differences. for instance, as comparative
philology has shown, the hindoo is of the same
race as his english conqueror, and individual instances
have abundantly shown that if he could be placed completely
and exclusively in the english environment
(which, as before stated, could be thoroughly done only
by placing infants in english families in such a way that
neither they, as they grow up, nor those around them,
would be conscious of any distinction) one generation
would be all required to thoroughly implant european
civilization. but the progress of english ideas and
habits in india must be necessarily very slow, because
they meet there the web of ideas and habits constantly
perpetuated through an immense population, and interlaced
with every act of life.
mr. bagehot (“physics and politics”) endeavors to explain
the reason why barbarians waste away before our
civilization, while they did not before that of the ancients,
by assuming that the progress of civilization
has given us tougher physical constitutions. after alluding
to the fact that there is no lament in any classical
writer for the barbarians, but that everywhere the
barbarian endured the contact with the roman and the
roman allied himself to the barbarian, he says (pp. -):
“savages in the first year of the christian era were pretty much
what they were in the eighteen hundredth; and if they stood the contact
of ancient civilized men and cannot stand ours, it follows that
our race is presumably tougher than the ancient; for we have to bear,
and do bear, the seeds of greater diseases than the ancients carried
with them. we may use, perhaps, the unvarying savage as a
meter to gauge the vigor of the constitution to whose contact he is
exposed.”
mr. bagehot does not attempt to explain how it is that
eighteen hundred years ago civilization did not give the
like relative advantage over barbarism that it does now.
but there is no use of talking about that, or of the lack
of proof that the human constitution has been a whit
improved. to any one who has seen how the contact of
our civilization affects the inferior races, a much readier
though less flattering explanation will occur.
it is not because our constitutions are naturally
tougher than those of the savage, that diseases which are
comparatively innocuous to us are certain death to him.
it is that we know and have the means of treating those
diseases, while he is destitute both of knowledge and
means. the same diseases with which the scum of civilization
that floats in its advance inoculates the savage
would prove as destructive to civilized men, if they knew
no better than to let them run, as he in his ignorance
has to let them run; and as a matter of fact they were as
destructive, until we found out how to treat them. and
not merely this, but the effect of the impingement of
civilization upon barbarism is to weaken the power of the
savage without bringing him into the conditions that
give power to the civilized man. while his habits and
customs still tend to persist, and do persist as far as they
can, the conditions to which they were adapted are forcibly
changed. he is a hunter in a land stripped of game;
a warrior deprived of his arms and called on to plead in
legal technicalities. he is not merely placed between
cultures, but, as mr. bagehot says of the european half-breeds
in india, he is placed between moralities, and
learns the vices of civilization without its virtues. he
loses his accustomed means of subsistence, he loses self-respect,
he loses morality; he deteriorates and dies away.
the miserable creatures who may be seen hanging
around frontier towns or railroad stations, ready to beg,
or steal, or solicit a viler commerce, are not fair representatives
of the indian before the white man had encroached
upon his hunting grounds. they have lost the
strength and virtues of their former state, without gaining
those of a higher. in fact, civilization, as it pushes
the red man, shows no virtues. to the anglo-saxon of
the frontier, as a rule, the aborigine has no rights which
the white man is bound to respect. he is impoverished,
misunderstood, cheated, and abused. he dies out, as,
under similar conditions, we should die out. he disappears
before civilization as the romanized britons disappeared
before saxon barbarism.
the true reason why there is no lament in any classic
writer for the barbarian, but that the roman civilization
assimilated instead of destroying, is, i take it, to be found
not only in the fact that the ancient civilization was
much nearer akin to the barbarians which it met, but in
the more important fact that it was not extended as ours
has been. it was carried forward, not by an advancing
line of colonists, but by conquest which merely reduced
the new province to general subjection, leaving the
social, and generally the political organization of the
people to a great degree unimpaired, so that, without
shattering or deterioration, the process of assimilation
went on. in a somewhat similar way the civilization of
japan seems to be now assimilating itself to european
civilization.
in america the anglo-saxon has exterminated, instead
of civilizing, the indian, simply because he has not
brought the indian into his environment, nor yet has the
contact been in such a way as to induce or permit the
indian web of habitual thought and custom to be
changed rapidly enough to meet the new conditions into
which he has been brought by the proximity of new and
powerful neighbors. that there is no innate impediment
to the reception of our civilization by these uncivilized
races has been shown over and over again in
individual cases. and it has likewise been shown, so far
as the experiments have been permitted to go, by the
jesuits in paraguay, the franciscans in california, and
the protestant missionaries on some of the pacific islands.
the assumption of physical improvement in the race
within any time of which we have knowledge is utterly
without warrant, and within the time of which mr.
bagehot speaks, it is absolutely disproved. we know
from classic statues, from the burdens carried and the
marches made by ancient soldiers, from the records of
runners and the feats of gymnasts, that neither in proportions
nor strength has the race improved within two
thousand years. but the assumption of mental improvement,
which is even more confidently and generally
made, is still more preposterous. as poets, artists,
architects, philosophers, rhetoricians, statesmen, or soldiers,
can modern civilization show individuals of greater
mental power than can the ancient? there is no use
in recalling names—every schoolboy knows them. for
our models and personifications of mental power we go
back to the ancients, and if we can for a moment
imagine the possibility of what is held by that oldest and
most widespread of all beliefs—that belief which lessing
declared on this account the most probably true,
though he accepted it on metaphysical grounds—and
suppose homer or virgil, demosthenes or cicero, alexander,
hannibal or cæsar, plato or lucretius, euclid or
aristotle, as re-entering this life again in the nineteenth
century, can we suppose that they would show any inferiority
to the men of to-day? or if we take any period
since the classic age, even the darkest, or any previous
period of which we know anything, shall we not find
men who in the conditions and degree of knowledge of
their times showed mental power of as high an order as
men show now? and among the less advanced races do
we not to-day, whenever our attention is called to them,
find men who in their conditions exhibit mental qualities
as great as civilization can show? did the invention of
the railroad, coming when it did, prove any greater inventive
power than did the invention of the wheelbarrow
when wheelbarrows were not? we of modern civilization
are raised far above those who have preceded us
and those of the less advanced races who are our contemporaries.
but it is because we stand on a pyramid, not
that we are taller. what the centuries have done for us
is not to increase our stature, but to build up a structure
on which we may plant our feet.
let me repeat: i do not mean to say that all men
possess the same capacities, or are mentally alike, any
more than i mean to say that they are physically alike.
among all the countless millions who have come and
gone on this earth, there were probably never two who
either physically or mentally were exact counterparts.
nor yet do i mean to say that there are not as clearly
marked race differences in mind as there are clearly
marked race differences in body. i do not deny the
influence of heredity in transmitting peculiarities of
mind in the same way, and possibly to the same degree,
as bodily peculiarities are transmitted. but nevertheless,
there is, it seems to me, a common standard and
natural symmetry of mind, as there is of body, toward
which all deviations tend to return. the conditions
under which we fall may produce such distortions as the
flatheads produce by compressing the heads of their
infants or the chinese by binding their daughters’ feet.
but as flathead babies continue to be born with naturally
shaped heads and chinese babies with naturally shaped
feet, so does nature seem to revert to the normal mental
type. a child no more inherits his father’s knowledge
than he inherits his father’s glass eye or artificial leg;
the child of the most ignorant parents may become a
pioneer of science or a leader of thought.
but this is the great fact with which we are concerned:
that the differences between the people of communities
in different places and at different times, which we call
differences of civilization, are not differences which inhere
in the individuals, but differences which inhere in the
society; that they are not, as herbert spencer holds,
differences resulting from differences in the units; but
that they are differences resulting from the conditions
under which these units are brought in the society. in
short, i take the explanation of the differences which distinguish
communities to be this: that each society, small
or great, necessarily weaves for itself a web of knowledge,
beliefs, customs, language, tastes, institutions, and laws.
into this web, woven by each society, or rather, into these
webs, for each community above the simplest is made up
of minor societies, which overlap and interlace each
other, the individual is received at birth and continues
until his death. this is the matrix in which mind unfolds
and from which it takes its stamp. this is the way
in which customs, and religions, and prejudices, and
tastes, and languages, grow up and are perpetuated.
this is the way that skill is transmitted and knowledge
is stored up, and the discoveries of one time made the
common stock and stepping stone of the next. though
it is this that often offers the most serious obstacles to
progress, it is this that makes progress possible. it is
this that enables any schoolboy in our time to learn in a
few hours more of the universe than ptolemy knew; that
places the most humdrum scientist far above the level
reached by the giant mind of aristotle. this is to the
race what memory is to the individual. our wonderful
arts, our far-reaching science, our marvelous inventions—they
have come through this.
human progress goes on as the advances made by one
generation are in this way secured as the common property
of the next, and made the starting point for new
advances.
what, then, is the law of human progress—the law
under which civilization advances?
it must explain clearly and definitely, and not by
vague generalities or superficial analogies, why, though
mankind started presumably with the same capacities
and at the same time, there now exist such wide differences
in social development. it must account for the
arrested civilizations and for the decayed and destroyed
civilizations; for the general facts as to the rise of civilization,
and for the petrifying or enervating force which
the progress of civilization has heretofore always evolved.
it must account for retrogression as well as for progression;
for the differences in general character between
asiatic and european civilizations; for the difference
between classical and modern civilizations; for the different
rates at which progress goes on; and for those bursts,
and starts, and halts of progress which are so marked as
minor phenomena. and, thus, it must show us what
are the essential conditions of progress, and what social
adjustments advance and what retard it.
it is not difficult to discover such a law. we have but
to look and we may see it. i do not pretend to give it
scientific precision, but merely to point it out.
the incentives to progress are the desires inherent in
human nature—the desire to gratify the wants of the
animal nature, the wants of the intellectual nature, and
the wants of the sympathetic nature; the desire to be, to
know, and to do—desires that short of infinity can never
be satisfied, as they grow by what they feed on.
mind is the instrument by which man advances, and by
which each advance is secured and made the vantage
ground for new advances. though he may not by taking
thought add a cubit to his stature, man may by
taking thought extend his knowledge of the universe
and his power over it, in what, so far as we can see, is an
infinite degree. the narrow span of human life allows
the individual to go but a short distance, but though
each generation may do but little, yet generations, succeeding
to the gain of their predecessors, may gradually
elevate the status of mankind, as coral polyps, building
one generation upon the work of the other, gradually
elevate themselves from the bottom of the sea.
mental power is, therefore, the motor of progress, and
men tend to advance in proportion to the mental power
expended in progression—the mental power which is devoted
to the extension of knowledge, the improvement
of methods, and the betterment of social conditions.
now mental power is a fixed quantity—that is to say,
there is a limit to the work a man can do with his mind, as
there is to the work he can do with his body; therefore,
the mental power which can be devoted to progress is only
what is left after what is required for non-progressive
purposes.
these non-progressive purposes in which mental power
is consumed may be classified as maintenance and conflict.
by maintenance i mean, not only the support of
existence, but the keeping up of the social condition and
the holding of advances already gained. by conflict i
mean not merely warfare and preparation for warfare,
but all expenditure of mental power in seeking the gratification
of desire at the expense of others, and in resistance
to such aggression.
to compare society to a boat. her progress through
the water will not depend upon the exertion of her crew,
but upon the exertion devoted to propelling her. this
will be lessened by any expenditure of force required for
bailing, or any expenditure of force in fighting among
themselves, or in pulling in different directions.
now, as in a separated state the whole powers of man
are required to maintain existence, and mental power is
set free for higher uses only by the association of men
in communities, which permits the division of labor and
all the economies which come with the co-operation
of increased numbers, association is the first essential of
progress. improvement becomes possible as men come
together in peaceful association, and the wider and closer
the association, the greater the possibilities of improvement.
and as the wasteful expenditure of mental power
in conflict becomes greater or less as the moral law which
accords to each an equality of rights is ignored or is
recognized, equality (or justice) is the second essential of
progress.
thus association in equality is the law of progress.
association frees mental power for expenditure in improvement,
and equality, or justice, or freedom—for the
terms here signify the same thing, the recognition of the
moral law—prevents the dissipation of this power in
fruitless struggles.
here is the law of progress, which will explain all
diversities, all advances, all halts, and retrogressions.
men tend to progress just as they come closer together,
and by co-operation with each other increase the mental
power that may be devoted to improvement, but just as
conflict is provoked, or association develops inequality
of condition and power, this tendency to progression is
lessened, checked, and finally reversed.
given the same innate capacity, and it is evident that
social development will go on faster or slower, will stop
or turn back, according to the resistances it meets. in
a general way these obstacles to improvement may, in
relation to the society itself, be classed as external and
internal—the first operating with greater force in the
earlier stages of civilization, the latter becoming more
important in the later stages.
man is social in his nature. he does not require to be
caught and tamed in order to induce him to live with
his fellows. the utter helplessness with which he enters
the world, and the long period required for the maturity
of his powers, necessitate the family relation; which, as
we may observe, is wider, and in its extensions stronger,
among the ruder than among the more cultivated peoples.
the first societies are families, expanding into
tribes, still holding a mutual blood relationship, and even
when they have become great nations claiming a common
descent.
given beings of this kind, placed on a globe of such
diversified surface and climate as this, and it is evident
that, even with equal capacity, and an equal start, social
development must be very different. the first limit or
resistance to association will come from the conditions of
physical nature, and as these greatly vary with locality,
corresponding differences in social progress must show
themselves. the net rapidity of increase, and the closeness
with which men, as they increase, can keep together,
will, in the rude state of knowledge in which reliance
for subsistence must be principally upon the spontaneous
offerings of nature, very largely depend upon climate,
soil, and physical conformation. where much animal
food and warm clothing are required; where the earth
seems poor and niggard; where the exuberant life of
tropical forests mocks barbarous man’s puny efforts to
control; where mountains, deserts, or arms of the sea
separate and isolate men; association, and the power of
improvement which it evolves, can at first go but a little
way. but on the rich plains of warm climates, where
human existence can be maintained with a smaller expenditure
of force, and from a much smaller area, men
can keep closer together, and the mental power which
can at first be devoted to improvement is much greater.
hence civilization naturally first arises in the great valleys
and table lands where we find its earliest monuments.
but these diversities in natural conditions, not merely
thus directly produce diversities in social development,
but, by producing diversities in social development, bring
out in man himself an obstacle, or rather an active counterforce,
to improvement. as families and tribes are
separated from each other, the social feeling ceases to
operate between them, and differences arise in language,
custom, tradition, religion—in short, in the whole social
web which each community, however small or large, constantly
spins. with these differences, prejudices grow,
animosities spring up, contact easily produces quarrels,
aggression begets aggression, and wrong kindles revenge.
and so between these separate social aggregates
arises the feeling of ishmael and the spirit of cain, warfare
becomes the chronic and seemingly natural relation
of societies to each other, and the powers of men are expended
in attack or defense, in mutual slaughter and
mutual destruction of wealth, or in warlike preparations.
how long this hostility persists, the protective tariffs
and the standing armies of the civilized world to-day
bear witness; how difficult it is to get over the idea that
it is not theft to steal from a foreigner, the difficulty in
procuring an international copyright act will show. can
we wonder at the perpetual hostilities of tribes and clans?
can we wonder that when each community was isolated
from the others—when each, uninfluenced by the others,
was spinning its separate web of social environment,
which no individual can escape, that war should have
been the rule and peace the exception? “they were
even as we are.”
now, warfare is the negation of association. the
separation of men into diverse tribes, by increasing warfare,
thus checks improvement; while in the localities
where a large increase in numbers is possible without
much separation, civilization gains the advantage of exemption
from tribal war, even when the community as a
whole is carrying on warfare beyond its borders. thus,
where the resistance of nature to the close association of
men is slightest, the counterforce of warfare is likely at
first to be least felt; and in the rich plains where civilization
first begins, it may rise to a great height while
scattered tribes are yet barbarous. and thus, when
small, separated communities exist in a state of chronic
warfare which forbids advance, the first step to their civilization
is the advent of some conquering tribe or nation
that unites these smaller communities into a larger one, in
which internal peace is preserved. where this power of
peaceable association is broken up, either by external
assaults or internal dissensions, the advance ceases and
retrogression begins.
but it is not conquest alone that has operated to promote
association, and, by liberating mental power from
the necessities of warfare, to promote civilization. if
the diversities of climate, soil, and configuration of the
earth’s surface operate at first to separate mankind, they
also operate to encourage exchange. and commerce,
which is in itself a form of association or co-operation,
operates to promote civilization, not only directly, but
by building up interests which are opposed to warfare,
and dispelling the ignorance which is the fertile mother
of prejudices and animosities.
and so of religion. though the forms it has assumed
and the animosities it has aroused have often sundered
men and produced warfare, yet it has at other times been
the means of promoting association. a common worship
has often, as among the greeks, mitigated war and
furnished the basis of union, while it is from the triumph
of christianity over the barbarians of europe that modern
civilization springs. had not the christian church existed
when the roman empire went to pieces, europe,
destitute of any bond of association, might have fallen to
a condition not much above that of the north american
indians or only received civilization with an asiatic impress
from the conquering scimitars of the invading
hordes which had been welded into a mighty power by a
religion which, springing up in the deserts of arabia,
had united tribes separated from time immemorial, and,
thence issuing, brought into the association of a common
faith a great part of the human race.
looking over what we know of the history of the world,
we thus see civilization everywhere springing up where
men are brought into association, and everywhere disappearing
as this association is broken up. thus the
roman civilization, spread over europe by the conquests
which insured internal peace, was overwhelmed by the
incursions of the northern nations that broke society
again into disconnected fragments; and the progress that
now goes on in our modern civilization began as the
feudal system again began to associate men in larger
communities, and the spiritual supremacy of rome to
bring these communities into a common relation, as her
legions had done before. as the feudal bonds grew into
national autonomies, and christianity worked the amelioration
of manners, brought forth the knowledge that
during the dark days she had hidden, bound the threads
of peaceful union in her all-pervading organization, and
taught association in her religious orders, a greater progress
became possible, which, as men have been brought
into closer and closer association and co-operation, has
gone on with greater and greater force.
but we shall never understand the course of civilization,
and the varied phenomena which its history presents,
without a consideration of what i may term the internal
resistances, or counter forces, which arise in the heart of
advancing society, and which can alone explain how a
civilization once fairly started should either come of itself
to a halt or be destroyed by barbarians.
the mental power, which is the motor of social progress,
is set free by association, which is, what, perhaps,
it may be more properly called, an integration. society
in this process becomes more complex; its individuals
more dependent upon each other. occupations and
functions are specialized. instead of wandering, population
becomes fixed. instead of each man attempting
to supply all of his wants, the various trades and industries
are separated—one man acquires skill in one thing,
and another in another thing. so, too, of knowledge,
the body of which constantly tends to become vaster than
one man can grasp, and is separated into different parts,
which different individuals acquire and pursue. so, too,
the performance of religious ceremonies tends to pass
into the hands of a body of men specially devoted to that
purpose, and the preservation of order, the administration
of justice, the assignment of public duties and the
distribution of awards, the conduct of war, etc., to be
made the special functions of an organized government.
in short, to use the language in which herbert spencer
has defined evolution, the development of society is, in
relation to its component individuals, the passing from
an indefinite, incoherent homogeneity to a definite,
coherent heterogeneity. the lower the stage of social
development, the more society resembles one of those
lowest of animal organisms which are without organs or
limbs, and from which a part may be cut and yet live.
the higher the stage of social development, the more
society resembles those higher organisms in which functions
and powers are specialized, and each member is
vitally dependent on the others.
now, this process of integration, of the specialization
of functions and powers, as it goes on in society, is, by
virtue of what is probably one of the deepest laws of
human nature, accompanied by a constant liability to
inequality. i do not mean that inequality is the necessary
result of social growth, but that it is the constant
tendency of social growth if unaccompanied by changes
in social adjustments, which, in the new conditions that
growth produces, will secure equality. i mean, so to
speak, that the garment of laws, customs, and political
institutions, which each society weaves for itself, is constantly
tending to become too tight as the society develops.
i mean, so to speak, that man, as he advances,
threads a labyrinth, in which, if he keeps straight ahead,
he will infallibly lose his way, and through which reason
and justice can alone keep him continuously in an ascending
path.
for, while the integration which accompanies growth
tends in itself to set free mental power to work improvement,
there is, both with increase of numbers and with
increase in complexity of the social organization, a counter
tendency set up to the production of a state of inequality,
which wastes mental power, and, as it increases,
brings improvement to a halt.
to trace to its highest expression the law which thus
operates to evolve with progress the force which stops
progress, would be, it seems to me, to go far to the solution
of a problem deeper than that of the genesis of the
material universe—the problem of the genesis of evil.
let me content myself with pointing out the manner in
which, as society develops, there arise tendencies which
check development.
there are two qualities of human nature which it will
be well, however, to first call to mind. the one is the
power of habit—the tendency to continue to do things in
the same way; the other is the possibility of mental and
moral deterioration. the effect of the first in social
development is to continue habits, customs, laws and
methods, long after they have lost their original usefulness,
and the effect of the other is to permit the growth
of institutions and modes of thought from which the
normal perceptions of men instinctively revolt.
now the growth and development of society not
merely tend to make each more and more dependent
upon all, and to lessen the influence of individuals, even
over their own conditions, as compared with the influence
of society; but the effect of association or integration is
to give rise to a collective power which is distinguishable
from the sum of individual powers. analogies, or,
perhaps, rather illustrations of the same law, may be
found in all directions. as animal organisms increase in
complexity, there arise, above the life and power of the
parts, a life and power of the integrated whole; above the
capability of involuntary movements, the capability of
voluntary movements. the actions and impulses of
bodies of men are, as has often been observed, different
from those which, under the same circumstances, would
be called forth in individuals. the fighting qualities of
a regiment may be very different from those of the individual
soldiers. but there is no need of illustrations.
in our inquiries into the nature and rise of rent, we
traced the very thing to which i allude. where population
is sparse, land has no value; just as men congregate
together, the value of land appears and rises—a clearly
distinguishable thing from the values produced by individual
effort; a value which springs from association,
which increases as association grows greater, and disappears
as association is broken up. and the same thing
is true of power in other forms than those generally
expressed in terms of wealth.
now, as society grows, the disposition to continue
previous social adjustments tends to lodge this collective
power, as it arises, in the hands of a portion of the community;
and this unequal distribution of the wealth and
power gained as society advances tends to produce
greater inequality, since aggression grows by what it
feeds on, and the idea of justice is blurred by the habitual
toleration of injustice.
in this way the patriarchal organization of society
can easily grow into hereditary monarchy, in which the
king is as a god on earth, and the masses of the people
mere slaves of his caprice. it is natural that the father
should be the directing head of the family, and that at
his death the eldest son, as the oldest and most experienced
member of the little community, should succeed to
the headship. but to continue this arrangement as the
family expands, is to lodge power in a particular line,
and the power thus lodged necessarily continues to increase,
as the common stock becomes larger and larger,
and the power of the community grows. the head of
the family passes into the hereditary king, who comes to
look upon himself and to be looked upon by others as a
being of superior rights. with the growth of the collective
power as compared with the power of the individual,
his power to reward and to punish increases, and so increase
the inducements to flatter and to fear him; until
finally, if the process be not disturbed, a nation grovels
at the foot of a throne, and a hundred thousand men toil
for fifty years to prepare a tomb for one of their own
mortal kind.
so the war-chief of a little band of savages is but one
of their number, whom they follow as their bravest and
most wary. but when large bodies come to act together,
personal selection becomes more difficult, a blinder
obedience becomes necessary and can be enforced, and
from the very necessities of warfare when conducted on
a large scale absolute power arises.
and so of the specialization of function. there is a
manifest gain in productive power when social growth
has gone so far that instead of every producer being summoned
from his work for fighting purposes, a regular
military force can be specialized; but this inevitably
tends to the concentration of power in the hands of the
military class or their chiefs. the preservation of internal
order, the administration of justice, the construction
and care of public works, and, notably, the observances
of religion, all tend in similar manner to pass into
the hands of special classes, whose disposition it is to
magnify their function and extend their power.
but the great cause of inequality is in the natural
monopoly which is given by the possession of land. the
first perceptions of men seem always to be that land is
common property; but the rude devices by which this is
at first recognized—such as annual partitions or cultivation
in common—are consistent with only a low stage of
development. the idea of property, which naturally
arises with reference to things of human production, is
easily transferred to land, and an institution which when
population is sparse merely secures to the improver and
user the due reward of his labor, finally, as population
becomes dense and rent arises, operates to strip the producer
of his wages. not merely this, but the appropriation
of rent for public purposes, which is the only way
in which, with anything like a high development, land
can be readily retained as common property, becomes,
when political and religious power passes into the hands
of a class, the ownership of the land by that class, and
the rest of the community become merely tenants. and
wars and conquests, which tend to the concentration of
political power and to the institution of slavery, naturally
result, where social growth has given land a value, in
the appropriation of the soil. a dominant class, who
concentrate power in their hands, will likewise soon concentrate
ownership of the land. to them will fall large
partitions of conquered land, which the former inhabitants
will till as tenants or serfs, and the public domain,
or common lands, which in the natural course of social
growth are left for awhile in every country, and in which
state the primitive system of village culture leaves
pasture and woodland, are readily acquired, as we see by
modern instances. and inequality once established, the
ownership of land tends to concentrate as development
goes on.
i am merely attempting to set forth the general fact
that as a social development goes on, inequality tends
to establish itself, and not to point out the particular
sequence, which must necessarily vary with different conditions.
but this main fact makes intelligible all the
phenomena of petrifaction and retrogression. the unequal
distribution of the power and wealth gained by the integration
of men in society tends to check, and finally to
counterbalance, the force by which improvements are
made and society advances. on the one side, the masses
of the community are compelled to expend their mental
powers in merely maintaining existence. on the other
side, mental power is expended in keeping up and intensifying
the system of inequality, in ostentation, luxury,
and warfare. a community divided into a class that
rules and a class that is ruled—into the very rich and the
very poor, may “build like giants and finish like jewelers;”
but it will be monuments of ruthless pride and
barren vanity, or of a religion turned from its office of
elevating man into an instrument for keeping him down.
invention may for awhile to some degree go on; but it
will be the invention of refinements in luxury, not the
inventions that relieve toil and increase power. in the
arcana of temples or in the chambers of court physicians
knowledge may still be sought; but it will be hidden as a
secret thing, or if it dares come out to elevate common
thought or brighten common life, it will be trodden
down as a dangerous innovator. for as it tends to lessen
the mental power devoted to improvement, so does inequality
tend to render men adverse to improvement.
how strong is the disposition to adhere to old methods
among the classes who are kept in ignorance by being
compelled to toil for a mere existence, is too well known
to require illustration, and on the other hand the conservatism
of the classes to whom the existing social
adjustment gives special advantages is equally apparent.
this tendency to resist innovation, even though it be
improvement, is observable in every special organization—in
religion, in law, in medicine, in science, in trade
guilds; and it becomes intense just as the organization
is close. a close corporation has always an instinctive
dislike of innovation and innovators, which is but the
expression of an instinctive fear that change may tend to
throw down the barriers which hedge it in from the common
herd, and so rob it of importance and power; and it
is always disposed to guard carefully its special knowledge
or skill.
it is in this way that petrifaction succeeds progress.
the advance of inequality necessarily brings improvement
to a halt, and as it still persists or provokes
unavailing reactions, draws even upon the mental power
necessary for maintenance, and retrogression begins.
these principles make intelligible the history of civilization.
in the localities where climate, soil, and physical conformation
tended least to separate men as they increased,
and where, accordingly, the first civilizations grew up,
the internal resistances to progress would naturally
develop in a more regular and thorough manner than
where smaller communities, which in their separation
had developed diversities, were afterward brought together
into a closer association. it is this, it seems to
me, which accounts for the general characteristics of the
earlier civilizations as compared with the later civilizations
of europe. such homogeneous communities, developing
from the first without the jar of conflict between
different customs, laws, religions, etc., would show a
much greater uniformity. the concentrating and conservative
forces would all, so to speak, pull together.
rival chieftains would not counterbalance each other,
nor diversities of belief hold the growth of priestly
influence in check. political and religious power, wealth
and knowledge, would thus tend to concentrate in the
same centers. the same causes which tended to produce
the hereditary king and hereditary priest would
tend to produce the hereditary artisan and laborer, and
to separate society into castes. the power which association
sets free for progress would thus be wasted, and
barriers to further progress be gradually raised. the surplus
energies of the masses would be devoted to the construction
of temples, palaces, and pyramids; to ministering
to the pride and pampering the luxury of their rulers;
and should any disposition to improvement arise among
the classes of leisure it would at once be checked by the
dread of innovation. society developing in this way
must at length stop in a conservatism which permits no
further progress.
how long such a state of complete petrifaction, when
once reached, will continue, seems to depend upon external
causes, for the iron bonds of the social environment
which grows up repress disintegrating forces as
well as improvement. such a community can be most
easily conquered, for the masses of the people are trained
to a passive acquiescence in a life of hopeless labor. if
the conquerors merely take the place of the ruling class,
as the hyksos did in egypt and the tartars in china,
everything will go on as before. if they ravage and destroy,
the glory of palace and temple remains but in
ruins, population becomes sparse, and knowledge and
art are lost.
european civilization differs in character from civilizations
of the egyptian type because it springs not from
the association of a homogeneous people developing
from the beginning, or at least for a long time, under
the same conditions, but from the association of peoples
who in separation had acquired distinctive social characteristics,
and whose smaller organizations longer prevented
the concentration of power and wealth in one
center. the physical conformation of the grecian peninsula
is such as to separate the people at first into a
number of small communities. as those petty republics
and nominal kingdoms ceased to waste their energies in
warfare, and the peaceable co-operation of commerce extended,
the light of civilization blazed up. but the
principle of association was never strong enough to save
greece from inter-tribal war, and when this was put an
end to by conquest, the tendency to inequality, which
had been combated with various devices by grecian sages
and statesmen, worked its result, and grecian valor,
art, and literature became things of the past. and
so in the rise and extension, the decline and fall, of
roman civilization, may be seen the working of these
two principles of association and equality, from the
combination of which springs progress.
springing from the association of the independent
husbandmen and free citizens of italy, and gaining fresh
strength from conquests which brought hostile nations
into common relations, the roman power hushed the
world in peace. but the tendency to inequality, checking
real progress from the first, increased as the roman
civilization extended. the roman civilization did not
petrify as did the homogeneous civilizations where the
strong bonds of custom and superstition that held the
people in subjection probably also protected them, or at
any rate kept the peace between rulers and ruled; it
rotted, declined and fell. long before goth or vandal
had broken through the cordon of the legions, even while
her frontiers were advancing, rome was dead at the
heart. great estates had ruined italy. inequality had
dried up the strength and destroyed the vigor of the
roman world. government became despotism, which
even assassination could not temper; patriotism became
servility; vices the most foul flouted themselves in public;
literature sank to puerilities; learning was forgotten;
fertile districts became waste without the ravages of war—everywhere
inequality produced decay, political, mental,
moral, and material. the barbarism which overwhelmed
rome came not from without, but from within.
it was the necessary product of the system which had
substituted slaves and colonii for the independent husbandmen
of italy, and carved the provinces into estates
of senatorial families.
modern civilization owes its superiority to the growth
of equality with the growth of association. two great
causes contributed to this—the splitting up of concentrated
power into innumerable little centers by the influx
of the northern nations, and the influence of christianity.
without the first there would have been the petrifaction
and slow decay of the eastern empire, where
church and state were closely married and loss of external
power brought no relief of internal tyranny. and
but for the other there would have been barbarism,
without principle of association or amelioration. the
petty chiefs and allodial lords who everywhere grasped
local sovereignty held each other in check. italian cities
recovered their ancient liberty, free towns were founded,
village communities took root, and serfs acquired
rights in the soil they tilled. the leaven of teutonic
ideas of equality worked through the disorganized and
disjointed fabric of society. and although society was
split up into an innumerable number of separated
fragments, yet the idea of closer association was always
present—it existed in the recollections of a universal
empire; it existed in the claims of a universal church.
though christianity became distorted and alloyed in
percolating through a rotting civilization; though
pagan gods were taken into her pantheon, and pagan
forms into her ritual, and pagan ideas into her creed;
yet her essential idea of the equality of men was never
wholly destroyed. and two things happened of the
utmost moment to incipient civilization—the establishment
of the papacy and the celibacy of the clergy. the
first prevented the spiritual power from concentrating in
the same lines as the temporal power; and the latter
prevented the establishment of a priestly caste, during a
time when all power tended to hereditary form.
in her efforts for the abolition of slavery; in her truce
of god; in her monastic orders; in her councils which
united nations, and her edicts which ran without regard
to political boundaries; in the low-born hands in which
she placed a sign before which the proudest knelt; in her
bishops who by consecration became the peers of the
greatest nobles; in her “servant of servants,” for so
his official title ran, who, by virtue of the ring of a simple
fisherman, claimed the right to arbitrate between nations,
and whose stirrup was held by kings; the church, in
spite of everything, was yet a promoter of association, a
witness for the natural equality of men; and by the
church herself was nurtured a spirit that, when her early
work of association and emancipation was well-nigh done—when
the ties she had knit had become strong, and the
learning she had preserved had been given to the world—broke
the chains with which she would have fettered the
human mind, and in a great part of europe rent her
organization.
the rise and growth of european civilization is too
vast and complex a subject to be thrown into proper perspective
and relation in a few paragraphs; but in all its
details, as in its main features, it illustrates the truth
that progress goes on just as society tends toward closer
association and greater equality. civilization is co-operation.
union and liberty are its factors. the great
extension of association—not alone in the growth of
larger and denser communities, but in the increase of
commerce and the manifold exchanges which knit each
community together and link them with other though
widely separated communities; the growth of international
and municipal law; the advances in security of
property and of person, in individual liberty, and towards
democratic government—advances, in short, towards the
recognition of the equal rights to life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness—it is these that make our modern
civilization so much greater, so much higher, than any
that has gone before. it is these that have set free the
mental power which has rolled back the veil of ignorance
which hid all but a small portion of the globe from men’s
knowledge; which has measured the orbits of the circling
spheres and bids us see moving, pulsing life in a drop of
water; which has opened to us the antechamber of
nature’s mysteries and read the secrets of a long-buried
past; which has harnessed in our service physical forces
beside which man’s efforts are puny; and increased productive
power by a thousand great inventions.
in that spirit of fatalism to which i have alluded as
pervading current literature, it is the fashion to speak
even of war and slavery as means of human progress.
but war, which is the opposite of association, can aid
progress only when it prevents further war or breaks
down anti-social barriers which are themselves passive
war.
as for slavery, i cannot see how it could ever have
aided in establishing freedom, and freedom, the synonym
of equality, is, from the very rudest state in which man
can be imagined, the stimulus and condition of progress.
auguste comte’s idea that the institution of slavery destroyed
cannibalism is as fanciful as elia’s humorous
notion of the way mankind acquired a taste for roast pig.
it assumes that a propensity that has never been found
developed in man save as the result of the most unnatural
conditions—the direst want or the most brutalizing
superstitions—is an original impulse, and that he,
even in his lowest state the highest of all animals, has
natural appetites which the nobler brutes do not show.
and so of the idea that slavery began civilization by
giving slave owners leisure for improvement.
slavery never did and never could aid improvement.
whether the community consist of a single master and a
single slave, or of thousands of masters and millions of
slaves, slavery necessarily involves a waste of human
power; for not only is slave labor less productive than
free labor, but the power of masters is likewise wasted in
holding and watching their slaves, and is called away
from directions in which real improvement lies. from
first to last, slavery, like every other denial of the natural
equality of men, has hampered and prevented progress.
just in proportion as slavery plays an important part in
the social organization does improvement cease. that
in the classical world slavery was so universal, is undoubtedly
the reason why the mental activity which so
polished literature and refined art never hit on any of
the great discoveries and inventions which distinguish
modern civilization. no slave-holding people ever were
an inventive people. in a slave-holding community the
upper classes may become luxurious and polished; but
never inventive. whatever degrades the laborer and
robs him of the fruits of his toil stifles the spirit of
invention and forbids the utilization of inventions and
discoveries even when made. to freedom alone is given
the spell of power which summons the genii in whose
keeping are the treasures of earth and the viewless forces
of the air.
the law of human progress, what is it but the moral
law? just as social adjustments promote justice, just as
they acknowledge the equality of right between man and
man, just as they insure to each the perfect liberty which
is bounded only by the equal liberty of every other, must
civilization advance. just as they fail in this, must
advancing civilization come to a halt and recede. political
economy and social science cannot teach any lessons
that are not embraced in the simple truths that were
taught to poor fishermen and jewish peasants by one
who eighteen hundred years ago was crucified—the simple
truths which, beneath the warpings of selfishness and
the distortions of superstition, seem to underlie every
religion that has ever striven to formulate the spiritual
yearnings of man.
the conclusion we have thus reached harmonizes completely
with our previous conclusions.
this consideration of the law of human progress not
only brings the politico-economic laws, which in this inquiry
we have worked out, within the scope of a higher
law—perhaps the very highest law our minds can grasp—but
it proves that the making of land common property
in the way i have proposed would give an enormous impetus
to civilization, while the refusal to do so must entail
retrogression. a civilization like ours must either
advance or go back; it cannot stand still. it is not like
those homogeneous civilizations, such as that of the nile
valley, which molded men for their places and put them
in it like bricks into a pyramid. it much more resembles
that civilization whose rise and fall is within historic
times, and from which it sprung.
there is just now a disposition to scoff at any implication
that we are not in all respects progressing, and
the spirit of our times is that of the edict which the flattering
premier proposed to the chinese emperor who
burned the ancient books—“that all who may dare to
speak together about the she and the shoo be put to
death; that those who make mention of the past so as
to blame the present be put to death along with their
relatives.”
yet it is evident that there have been times of decline,
just as there have been times of advance; and it is
further evident that these epochs of decline could not at
first have been generally recognized.
he would have been a rash man who, when augustus
was changing the rome of brick to the rome of marble,
when wealth was augmenting and magnificence increasing,
when victorious legions were extending the frontier,
when manners were becoming more refined, language
more polished, and literature rising to higher splendors—he
would have been a rash man who then would have
said that rome was entering her decline. yet such was
the case.
and whoever will look may see that though our civilization
is apparently advancing with greater rapidity than
ever, the same cause which turned roman progress into
retrogression is operating now.
what has destroyed every previous civilization has
been the tendency to the unequal distribution of wealth
and power. this same tendency, operating with increasing
force, is observable in our civilization to-day,
showing itself in every progressive community, and with
greater intensity the more progressive the community.
wages and interest tend constantly to fall, rent to rise,
the rich to become very much richer, the poor to become
more helpless and hopeless, and the middle class to be
swept away.
i have traced this tendency to its cause. i have shown
by what simple means this cause may be removed. i
now wish to point out how, if this is not done, progress
must turn to decadence, and modern civilization decline
to barbarism, as have all previous civilizations. it is
worth while to point out how this may occur, as many
people, being unable to see how progress may pass into
retrogression, conceive such a thing impossible. gibbon,
for instance, thought that modern civilization could
never be destroyed because there remained no barbarians
to overrun it, and it is a common idea that the invention
of printing by so multiplying books has prevented
the possibility of knowledge ever again being lost.
the conditions of social progress, as we have traced
the law, are association and equality. the general
tendency of modern development, since the time when
we can first discern the gleams of civilization in the
darkness which followed the fall of the western empire,
has been toward political and legal equality—to the
abolition of slavery; to the abrogation of status; to the
sweeping away of hereditary privileges; to the substitution
of parliamentary for arbitrary government; to the
right of private judgment in matters of religion; to the
more equal security in person and property of high and
low, weak and strong; to the greater freedom of movement
and occupation, of speech and of the press. the
history of modern civilization is the history of advances
in this direction—of the struggles and triumphs of personal,
political, and religious freedom. and the general
law is shown by the fact that just as this tendency has
asserted itself civilization has advanced, while just as it
has been repressed or forced back civilization has been
checked.
this tendency has reached its full expression in the
american republic, where political and legal rights are
absolutely equal, and, owing to the system of rotation in
office, even the growth of a bureaucracy is prevented;
where every religious belief or non-belief stands on the
same footing; where every boy may hope to be president,
every man has an equal voice in public affairs, and every
official is mediately or immediately dependent for the
short lease of his place upon a popular vote. this tendency
has yet some triumphs to win in england, in
extending the suffrage, and sweeping away the vestiges of
monarchy, aristocracy, and prelacy; while in such countries
as germany and russia, where divine right is yet a good
deal more than a legal fiction, it has a considerable distance
to go. but it is the prevailing tendency, and how
soon europe will be completely republican is only a matter
of time, or rather of accident. the united states
are therefore, in this respect, the most advanced of all
the great nations, in a direction in which all are advancing,
and in the united states we see just how much this
tendency to personal and political freedom can of itself
accomplish.
now, the first effect of the tendency to political equality
was to the more equal distribution of wealth and
power; for, while population is comparatively sparse,
inequality in the distribution of wealth is principally due
to the inequality of personal rights, and it is only as
material progress goes on that the tendency to inequality
involved in the reduction of land to private ownership
strongly appears. but it is now manifest that absolute
political equality does not in itself prevent the tendency
to inequality involved in the private ownership of land,
and it is further evident that political equality, co-existing
with an increasing tendency to the unequal distribution
of wealth, must ultimately beget either the despotism
of organized tyranny or the worse despotism of anarchy.
to turn a republican government into a despotism the
basest and most brutal, it is not necessary formally to
change its constitution or abandon popular elections. it
was centuries after cæsar before the absolute master of the
roman world pretended to rule other than by authority
of a senate that trembled before him.
but forms are nothing when substance has gone, and
the forms of popular government are those from which
the substance of freedom may most easily go. extremes
meet, and a government of universal suffrage and theoretical
equality may, under conditions which impel the
change, most readily become a despotism. for there
despotism advances in the name and with the might
of the people. the single source of power once secured,
everything is secured. there is no unfranchised class
to whom appeal may be made, no privileged orders who
in defending their own rights may defend those of
all. no bulwark remains to stay the flood, no eminence
to rise above it. they were belted barons led by a mitered
archbishop who curbed the plantagenet with magna
charta; it was the middle classes who broke the pride of
the stuarts; but a mere aristocracy of wealth will never
struggle while it can hope to bribe a tyrant.
and when the disparity of condition increases, so does
universal suffrage make it easy to seize the source of power,
for the greater is the proportion of power in the hands
of those who feel no direct interest in the conduct of
government; who, tortured by want and embruted by
poverty, are ready to sell their votes to the highest bidder
or follow the lead of the most blatant demagogue; or
who, made bitter by hardships, may even look upon profligate
and tyrannous government with the satisfaction
we may imagine the proletarians and slaves of rome to
have felt, as they saw a caligula or nero raging among
the rich patricians. given a community with republican
institutions, in which one class is too rich to be shorn of
its luxuries, no matter how public affairs are administered,
and another so poor that a few dollars on election
day will seem more than any abstract consideration; in
which the few roll in wealth and the many seethe with
discontent at a condition of things they know not how
to remedy, and power must pass into the hands of jobbers
who will buy and sell it as the prætorians sold the
roman purple, or into the hands of demagogues who
will seize and wield it for a time, only to be displaced by
worse demagogues.
where there is anything like an equal distribution of
wealth—that is to say, where there is general patriotism,
virtue, and intelligence—the more democratic the government
the better it will be; but where there is gross
inequality in the distribution of wealth, the more democratic
the government the worse it will be; for, while
rotten democracy may not in itself be worse than rotten
autocracy, its effects upon national character will be
worse. to give the suffrage to tramps, to paupers, to
men to whom the chance to labor is a boon, to men who
must beg, or steal, or starve, is to invoke destruction.
to put political power in the hands of men embittered
and degraded by poverty is to tie firebrands to foxes and
turn them loose amid the standing corn; it is to put out
the eyes of a samson and to twine his arms around the
pillars of national life.
even the accidents of hereditary succession or of selection
by lot, the plan of some of the ancient republics,
may sometimes place the wise and just in power; but in
a corrupt democracy the tendency is always to give power
to the worst. honesty and patriotism are weighted, and
unscrupulousness commands success. the best gravitate
to the bottom, the worst float to the top, and the vile will
only be ousted by the viler. while as national character
must gradually assimilate to the qualities that win power,
and consequently respect, that demoralization of opinion
goes on which in the long panorama of history we may
see over and over again transmuting races of freemen
into races of slaves.
as in england in the last century, when parliament
was but a close corporation of the aristocracy, a corrupt
oligarchy clearly fenced off from the masses may exist
without much effect on national character, because in
that case power is associated in the popular mind with
other things than corruption. but where there are no
hereditary distinctions, and men are habitually seen to
raise themselves by corrupt qualities from the lowest
places to wealth and power, tolerance of these qualities
finally becomes admiration. a corrupt democratic government
must finally corrupt the people, and when a
people become corrupt there is no resurrection. the
life is gone, only the carcass remains; and it is left but
for the plowshares of fate to bury it out of sight.
now this transformation of popular government into
despotism of the vilest and most degrading kind, which
must inevitably result from the unequal distribution of
wealth, is not a thing of the far future. it has already
begun in the united states, and is rapidly going on
under our eyes. that our legislative bodies are steadily
deteriorating in standard; that men of the highest ability
and character are compelled to eschew politics, and
the arts of the jobber count for more than the reputation
of the statesman; that voting is done more recklessly
and the power of money is increasing; that it is
harder to arouse the people to the necessity of reforms
and more difficult to carry them out; that political differences
are ceasing to be differences of principle, and
abstract ideas are losing their power; that parties are
passing into the control of what in general government
would be oligarchies and dictatorships; are all evidences
of political decline.
the type of modern growth is the great city. here
are to be found the greatest wealth and the deepest poverty.
and it is here that popular government has most
clearly broken down. in all the great american cities
there is to-day as clearly defined a ruling class as in the
most aristocratic countries of the world. its members
carry wards in their pockets, make up the slates for
nominating conventions, distribute offices as they bargain
together, and—though they toil not, neither do
they spin—wear the best of raiment and spend money
lavishly. they are men of power, whose favor the ambitious
must court and whose vengeance he must avoid.
who are these men? the wise, the good, the learned—men
who have earned the confidence of their fellow-citizens
by the purity of their lives, the splendor of their
talents, their probity in public trusts, their deep study
of the problems of government? no; they are gamblers,
saloon keepers, pugilists, or worse, who have made a
trade of controlling votes and of buying and selling
offices and official acts. they stand to the government
of these cities as the prætorian guards did to that of
declining rome. he who would wear the purple, fill
the curule chair, or have the fasces carried before him,
must go or send his messengers to their camps, give them
donatives and make them promises. it is through these
men that the rich corporations and powerful pecuniary
interests can pack the senate and the bench with their
creatures. it is these men who make school directors,
supervisors, assessors, members of the legislature, congressmen.
why, there are many election districts in
the united states in which a george washington, a benjamin
franklin or a thomas jefferson could no more go
to the lower house of a state legislature than under the
ancient régime a base-born peasant could become a
marshal of france. their very character would be an
insuperable disqualification.
in theory we are intense democrats. the proposal to
sacrifice swine in the temple would hardly have excited
greater horror and indignation in jerusalem of old than
would among us that of conferring a distinction of rank
upon our most eminent citizen. but is there not growing
up among us a class who have all the power without
any of the virtues of aristocracy? we have simple citizens
who control thousands of miles of railroad, millions
of acres of land, the means of livelihood of great numbers
of men; who name the governors of sovereign states as
they name their clerks, choose senators as they choose
attorneys, and whose will is as supreme with legislatures
as that of a french king sitting in bed of justice. the
undercurrents of the times seem to sweep us back again
to the old conditions from which we dreamed we had
escaped. the development of the artisan and commercial
classes gradually broke down feudalism after it had
become so complete that men thought of heaven as
organized on a feudal basis, and ranked the first and
second persons of the trinity as suzerain and tenant-in-chief.
but now the development of manufactures and
exchange, acting in a social organization in which land
is made private property, threatens to compel every
worker to seek a master, as the insecurity which followed
the final break-up of the roman empire compelled every
freeman to seek a lord. nothing seems exempt from
this tendency. industry everywhere tends to assume a
form in which one is master and many serve. and when
one is master and the others serve, the one will control
the others, even in such matters as votes. just as the
english landlord votes his tenants, so does the new
england mill owner vote his operatives.
there is no mistaking it—the very foundations of
society are being sapped before our eyes, while we ask,
how is it possible that such a civilization as this, with its
railroads, and daily newspapers, and electric telegraphs,
should ever be destroyed? while literature breathes but
the belief that we have been, are, and for the future
must be, leaving the savage state further and further
behind us, there are indications that we are actually
turning back again toward barbarism. let me illustrate:
one of the characteristics of barbarism is the low
regard for the rights of person and of property. that
the laws of our anglo-saxon ancestors imposed as penalty
for murder a fine proportioned to the rank of the victim,
while our law knows no distinction of rank, and protects
the lowest from the highest, the poorest from the richest,
by the uniform penalty of death, is looked upon as evidence
of their barbarism and our civilization. and so,
that piracy, and robbery, and slave-trading, and blackmailing,
were once regarded as legitimate occupations,
is conclusive proof of the rude state of development from
which we have so far progressed.
but it is a matter of fact that, in spite of our laws, any
one who has money enough and wants to kill another
may go into any one of our great centers of population
and business, and gratify his desire, and then surrender
himself to justice, with the chances as a hundred to one
that he will suffer no greater penalty than a temporary
imprisonment and the loss of a sum proportioned partly
to his own wealth and partly to the wealth and standing
of the man he kills. his money will be paid, not to the
family of the murdered man, who have lost their protector;
not to the state, which has lost a citizen; but to
lawyers who understand how to secure delays, to find
witnesses, and get juries to disagree.
and so, if a man steal enough, he may be sure that his
punishment will practically amount but to the loss of a
part of the proceeds of his theft; and if he steal enough
to get off with a fortune, he will be greeted by his acquaintances
as a viking might have been greeted after a
successful cruise. even though he robbed those who
trusted him; even though he robbed the widow and the
fatherless; he has only to get enough, and he may safely
flaunt his wealth in the eyes of day.
now, the tendency in this direction is an increasing
one. it is shown in greatest force where the inequalities
in the distribution of wealth are greatest, and it shows
itself as they increase. if it be not a return to barbarism,
what is it? the failures of justice to which i have
alluded are only illustrative of the increasing debility
of our legal machinery in every department. it is
becoming common to hear men say that it would be
better to revert to first principles and abolish law, for
then in self-defense the people would form vigilance
committees and take justice into their own hands. is
this indicative of advance or retrogression?
all this is matter of common observation. though
we may not speak it openly, the general faith in republican
institutions is, where they have reached their fullest
development, narrowing and weakening. it is no longer
that confident belief in republicanism as the source of
national blessings that it once was. thoughtful men
are beginning to see its dangers, without seeing how to
escape them; are beginning to accept the view of macaulay
and distrust that of jefferson. and the people at
large are becoming used to the growing corruption. the
most ominous political sign in the united states to-day
is the growth of a sentiment which either doubts the
existence of an honest man in public office or looks on
him as a fool for not seizing his opportunities. that is
to say, the people themselves are becoming corrupted.
thus in the united states to-day is republican government
running the course it must inevitably follow under
conditions which cause the unequal distribution of
wealth.
where that course leads is clear to whoever will think.
as corruption becomes chronic; as public spirit is lost;
as traditions of honor, virtue, and patriotism are weakened;
as law is brought into contempt and reforms
become hopeless; then in the festering mass will be generated
volcanic forces, which shatter and rend when
seeming accident gives them vent. strong, unscrupulous
men, rising up upon occasion, will become the exponents
of blind popular desires or fierce popular passions, and
dash aside forms that have lost their vitality. the sword
will again be mightier than the pen, and in carnivals of
destruction brute force and wild frenzy will alternate
with the lethargy of a declining civilization.
i speak of the united states only because the united
states is the most advanced of all the great nations.
what shall we say of europe, where dams of ancient law
and custom pen up the swelling waters and standing
armies weigh down the safety valves, though year by
year the fires grow hotter underneath? europe tends to
republicanism under conditions that will not admit of
true republicanism—under conditions that substitute for
the calm and august figure of liberty the petroleuse and
the guillotine!
whence shall come the new barbarians? go through
the squalid quarters of great cities, and you may see,
even now, their gathering hordes! how shall learning
perish? men will cease to read, and books will kindle
fires and be turned into cartridges!
it is startling to think how slight the traces that would
be left of our civilization did it pass through the throes
which have accompanied the decline of every previous
civilization. paper will not last like parchment, nor are
our most massive buildings and monuments to be compared
in solidity with the rock-hewn temples and titanic
edifices of the old civilizations. and invention has
given us, not merely the steam engine and the printing
press, but petroleum, nitro-glycerine, and dynamite.
yet to hint, to-day, that our civilization may possibly
be tending to decline, seems like the wildness of pessimism.
the special tendencies to which i have alluded are
obvious to thinking men, but with the majority of thinking
men, as with the great masses, the belief in substantial
progress is yet deep and strong—a fundamental belief
which admits not the shadow of a doubt.
but any one who will think over the matter will see
that this must necessarily be the case where advance
gradually passes into retrogression. for in social development,
as in everything else, motion tends to persist in
straight lines, and therefore, where there has been a
previous advance, it is extremely difficult to recognize
decline, even when it has fully commenced; there is an
almost irresistible tendency to believe that the forward
movement which has been advance, and is still going on,
is still advance. the web of beliefs, customs, laws,
institutions, and habits of thought, which each community
is constantly spinning, and which produces in the
individual environed by it all the differences of national
character, is never unraveled. that is to say, in the decline
of civilization, communities do not go down by the
same paths that they came up. for instance, the decline
of civilization as manifested in government would not
take us back from republicanism to constitutional monarchy,
and thence to the feudal system; it would take us
to imperatorship and anarchy. as manifested in religion,
it would not take us back into the faiths of our forefathers,
into protestantism or catholicity, but into new
forms of superstition, of which possibly mormonism and
other even grosser “isms” may give some vague idea.
as manifested in knowledge, it would not take us toward
bacon, but toward the literati of china.
and how the retrogression of civilization, following a
period of advance, may be so gradual as to attract no
attention at the time; nay, how that decline must necessarily,
by the great majority of men, be mistaken for
advance, is easily seen. for instance, there is an enormous
difference between grecian art of the classic period
and that of the lower empire; yet the change was accompanied,
or rather caused, by a change of taste. the
artists who most quickly followed this change of taste
were in their day regarded as the superior artists. and
so of literature. as it became more vapid, puerile, and
stilted, it would be in obedience to an altered taste,
which would regard its increasing weakness as increasing
strength and beauty. the really good writer would not
find readers; he would be regarded as rude, dry, or dull.
and so would the drama decline; not because there was
a lack of good plays, but because the prevailing taste became
more and more that of a less cultured class, who,
of course, regard that which they most admire as the
best of its kind. and so, too, of religion; the superstitions
which a superstitious people will add to it will be
regarded by them as improvements. while, as the decline
