the dinner set and extra dishes and utensils, as well as the
linen and some staple food supplies. a refrigerator is
desirable for such foods as butter, eggs, meat, etc.[]
a class cupboard
individual table stoves
(a) a gas stove
(b) an electric stove
(c) a blue-flame kerosene stove
(d) an ordinary kerosene stove
the stoves provided will depend on the fuel that is
available in the neighbourhood. wood is still in use in
some rural sections, while coal is the ordinary fuel in
small towns and villages. where either of these fuels is
commonly used, there should be two ranges. one should
be for coal or wood, to teach the use of the home fuel, and
the other an oil, gas, or electric stove, to demonstrate the
time and labour saved the housekeeper by the use of one
of these. if possible, the stoves should have high ovens,
to obviate the necessity of stooping. a section of glass in[]
the oven door is a great convenience, as it allows the contents
of the oven to be easily watched.
for individual work small table stoves are required.
these may be supplied with oil, alcohol, gas, or electricity,
as may be most readily obtained. these stoves may be
arranged so that they can be swung from the table when
not in use. in this way more room is provided for work,
and the table is more easily cleaned. the tops of the
stoves should be wide and flat, so that cooking dishes will
not easily upset.
a fireless cooker, though not really necessary, is most
helpful. where funds are lacking, one may be made by the
pupils at small expense. a barrel, wooden box, or large
pail may be filled with hay or excelsior, and small, covered,
granite pails may be used to contain the food.
the black-boards should be of slate or glass, and as
large as the size of the room allows. the windows and
doors should be so placed that there will be unbroken
stretches of wall for this purpose. part of the black-board
should be provided with a sliding board which, when required,
can be drawn to conceal what is written. a
separate black-board for current prices of common food
materials is an excellent idea. the responsibility of keeping
these prices correct should be given to the pupils.
a cabinet, or display case, for illustrative material, is
of great educational value and, to the pupils, is one of the
most attractive features of the room. the following list
of specimens is suggestive for this:[]
a display cabinet—canned fruit
. standard china, such as crown derby, wedgewood,
limoges, dresden, beleek, etc.
. standard carpet, such as axminster, wilton, brussels,
tapestry
. woods used for furniture and building
. food materials in various stages of preparation, such
as sugar, spices, cereals, tea, coffee, cocoa
. fruit canned by the pupils
. designs for wall-paper, linoleum, dishes, etc., made by
the pupils.[]
other illustrative material in the form of charts showing
the comparative values of the common foods, or illustrating
cuts of meat or different kinds of vegetables and
fish, will be found to aid greatly in making the teaching
effective. there are few of these to be obtained, but
home-made ones may be prepared from cuts in bulletins
and magazines. pictures illustrating the production and
manufacture of food may also be mounted and used.
book shelves should be provided, where a small
library of books bearing on the various phases of the subject
may be kept, together with the government bulletins
and some well-chosen periodicals and magazines. these
may be selected from the catalogue of books which has
been prepared by the department of education.
in regard to the selection of small articles required,
such as dishes and utensils of various kinds, the greatest
care should be exercised. this part of the equipment can
be exactly duplicated by the pupils in their homes, and
in this way may be of educational value to the community.
the cooking and serving dishes should combine quality,
utility, and beauty.
it is not economy to buy cheap utensils. as far as
possible, they should be chosen with smooth, curved surfaces,
as seams and angles allow lodging places for food
and make the cleaning difficult.
everything should be of good quality, the latest of its
kind that has been approved, and, at the same time, have
a shape and colour that is artistic.[]
it is wise to buy from stock which can be duplicated if
breakages occur, so that the equipment may be kept
uniform. for individual work the utensils should not be
too large.
coloured granite ware is best for most of the cooking
dishes. where tin is necessary, it should be of a good
quality. crockery is desirable for some bowls, jars, and
serving dishes. spoons and serving forks should be of
nevada silver, and knives of the best steel with well-made
wooden handles.
the cost of this part of the equipment and the number
of articles purchased must of course depend on the
funds available. the following list is intended to give
what is really desirable in a specially equipped room, at
prices which are a fair average.
. utensil drawer:
plates, enamel,  inch$.
" white crockery,  inch.
bowls, white crockery,  inch.
" " " -/ inch.
enamel bowls,  inch.
popover cups.
bakers, crockery (oval).
platters, " (small).
sieves (wire bowl).
spoons, wooden.
spatulas, wire handle.
knives, paring.
[]forks, nevada silver.
spoons, table, nevada silver.
spoons, tea, " ".
cups, measuring, tin.
. supply drawer:
boxes (for flour), tin.
" (for sugar), ".
cheese jars (for salt).
shakers, glass.
bread tins.
biscuit cutters.
safety match-box holders.
. supply cupboard:
double boilers.
stew pans, tin cover, wooden knob.
frying-pans.
saucepans.
knife-boards.
meat boards.
scrub basins.
dish pans.
rinsing pans.
draining pans.
tea-kettles.
scrub-brushes.
vegetable brushes.
soap dishes.
garbage crocks.
asbestos mats.
garbage pail, galvanized iron.
waste-paper basket, willow (large).
soap dish.
brush, hand.
brush, scrub.
[]basins, hand, enamel.
basins, scrub, enamel.
dish pan.
crock for washing soda.
towel racks.
clock.
tablets for housekeeping rules.
kettles, granite.
tea-kettle, granite.
saucepan.
saucepan.
covers, tin.
pie pan.
coffee-pot.
saucepans,  qt. size, white enamel.
double boiler.
covers, tin.
soup ladle, enamel.
pudding dishes, white enamel.
strainers and mashers.
kneading pan.
steamers.
graters.
vegetable baskets.
potato mashers.
muffin pans.
patty-pans.
dover egg beaters.
spice box.
japanned tray.
wire toasters.
egg spade.
scale.
freezer.
cast-iron frying-pan.
dripping pan.
[]roasting pans.
quart measure, granite.
pint measure,".
funnel, tin.
baking sheets " × ".
cups and saucers.
tumblers.
platters.
plates.
pitchers, -/ pt..
brown bowls,  qt..
brown bowls.
nest of mixing bowls.
glass measuring cups.
glass lemon reamers.
tea-pots (pint).
covered crock.
doz.  qt. fruit jars.
"  qt."".
"  pt."".
meat chopper.
bread knife.
bread board.
knives, french.
spoons, granite.
fork, large wooden handle.
can openers.
corkscrew.
bunch skewers.
brush, pastry.
knife sharpener.
graters, nutmeg.
box toothpicks.
pad tissue paper.
scissors.
doz. jelly glasses.
[]cream and sugar.
rolling-pins.
butter spade.
file and catch.
doz. test-tubes.
"thermometers (dairy).
lamp chimneys.
bell.
yards towelling ( doz. dish towels).
" " ( doz. wash cloths).
" check towelling ( doz. dish cloths).
" towelling.
" " ( meat cloths).
-/" flannelette (oven cloths).
" cheesecloth.
-/" denim (stove apron).
" flannelette (for polishing silver).
chamois.
stove apron.
stove brush.
dauber.
whisk brooms.
dust-pan.
pair stove mitts.
broom.
pony wash-boards.
doz. clothes-pins.
clothes-line.
. china and glass:
flower vase.
dinner set, limoges china.
doz. water glasses.
glass fruit set.
. silver and steel:
doz. teaspoons.
"dessert spoons.
/"tablespoons.
"dessert knives.
"dessert forks.
"dinner knives.
"dinner forks.
carving set.
butter pick.
. linen, etc.:
silence cloth.
 yd. table-cloth.
doz. napkins.
centre-piece.
doylies.
tray cloths.
"first aid" cabinet.
fire blanket.
in some schools it is impossible to set aside a special
room for household management work, and the ordinary
class-room is all that is available. in such cases the equipment
must be a movable one, and gas stoves and plumbing[]
are impossible. table tops may be placed on trestles
or laid across the ordinary desks, and oil or alcohol lamps
must be used. these and the necessary utensils may be
kept in a cupboard in the room.
with certain restrictions, the department of education
assists in equipping special rooms in villages and rural
districts and also in maintaining instruction in this
subject.
modified equipment for rural schools
the classes in these schools are usually smaller, so that
an outfit suitable for individual work with a class of
twelve will generally suffice. the following, suggested by
the macdonald institute, guelph, is a good basis and may
be modified as desired:
bowls, brown$.
bread tins.
tea cups and saucers.
tin measuring cups.
egg beaters.
forks.
case knives.
paring knives.
plates.
saucepans.
tablespoons.
[]teaspoons.
wooden spoons.
stew pans.
strainers.
trays.
bowl, yellow.
scissors.
trestle tables.
frying-pans.
tea strainers.
match-box stands.
emery knife.
soap dishes.
pepper shakers.
salt shakers.
bell.
lemon reamers.
stoves, kerosene.
plates, dinner.
plates, soup.
jugs.
jug.
butcher knife.
french knife.
spatulas.
teaspoons.
tablespoons.
brushes.
stove mitts.
asbestos mats.
corkscrew.
egg beaters.
wash basins.
draining pans.
dish pans.
broilers.
cake tins.
graters.
strainers.
patty pans.
tin dippers.
fibre pails.
colander.
pail, enamel.
pan, enamel.
tea-kettles.
saucepan.
saucepan.
saucepan.
saucepan.
double boiler.
kettle, covered.
[a]stove to burn coal or wood.
total$.
[a] the above may be replaced by a twenty-dollar wood stove
or a ten-dollar, two burner, coal-oil stove.
when even the expense of the modified equipment is
too great, the ingenuity of the teacher and the pupils may
be used to provide a "packing-box" equipment suitable
for six pupils. the outlay for this will vary according to[]
what is provided, but it can in no case be large. the following
equipment used by the department of domestic
science, teachers' college, columbia university, will be
suggestive:
packing-box equipment
bread boards$.
rolling-pin.
baking-powder can tops, for cookie cutters..
flour sifter.
large frying-pan.
double boiler.
quart kettle.
tea-kettle.
broiler.
garbage can.
pitchers.
apple corers.
chopping knife.
chopping bowl.
muffin tins.
layer-cake tins.
dish pans.
rinsing pans.
strainer.
china plates.
mixing bowls.
sauce dishes.
cups and saucers.
coffee-pot.
tea-pot.
bread pans.
quart jars.
wooden pails with covers.
[]dish towels.
dish cloths.
hand towels.
broom.
dust-pan.
scrubbing-brush.
scrubbing pail.
dover egg beater.
pepper shaker.
salt shaker.
baking dish.
bread knife.
corkscrew.
total$.
packing-box table.
packing-box cupboard.
large blue-flame oil stove$.
white bowl,  qt.$.
measuring cup.
granite plate.
saucepan.
tin cover.
steel fork.
steel knife.
tablespoon.
teaspoons.
total.
oil stove.
asbestos mat.
in no subject is careful planning of the details of the
lesson more important than in household management.
the definite length of the period allowed in the school
programme for this work makes economy of time absolutely
necessary. the cooking processes cannot be hurried, and
unless there is in the teacher's mind a well-arranged plan
for the use of the time, a part of the lesson is apt to be
hastily and carelessly done. then, too, in the limited
space of one room, a number of people cannot work without
confusion unless there is system.
the pupils enjoy a well-regulated lesson and their co-operation
is gained, while, through the poor results of a
lesson indifferently planned, they lose self-confidence and
the sense of responsibility.
as a household management class is one that calls for
individual supervision, the number should not exceed
twenty-four, and a smaller class ensures more thorough
supervision on the part of the teacher. neatness, thoroughness,
and accuracy are important factors in the work of
each lesson, and the number of pupils should not be so
large that a lack of these will pass unnoticed.
the uniform consists of a large, plain, white apron
with a bib large enough to protect the dress, a pair of
sleevelets, a holder, a small towel for personal use, and a[]
white muslin cap to confine the hair. (see frontispiece.)
each pupil will also require a note-book and pencil for
class, and a note-book to be used at home for re-copying
the class work in ink. these books should be neatly
written and kept for reference, and should be regularly
examined and marked by the teacher for correction by
the pupils.
the pupils should be encouraged to be clean and neat
in appearance. they should be expected to have tidy hair,
clean hands and nails, and neat uniforms. it is a good
plan for each pupil to have two sets of uniforms, so that
when one is in the wash the other will be ready to use. it
may be wise to make a rule that the pupils without
uniforms will not be allowed to work, but such a rule must
be judiciously enforced, as in some cases it might result in
much loss of time. there should be lockers or other proper
provision provided at the school for keeping each uniform
separately. pasteboard boxes may be used for this purpose,
when no such provision is made.
the pupils should be trained to enter and leave the
room in the same order as in their other classes. each
pupil should have a definite working place and should not
be allowed to "visit" others during the class.
while at work, it is wise to allow the pupils as much
freedom in talking and movement as possible, so as to
portray the home life. they should be taught, however,
that when their conduct interferes with the order of the
room or the comforts and rights of others, they must
suppress their inclinations. during the time of teaching
there must be perfect quiet and attention. marks are
sometimes given to secure punctuality and good work,[]
but the best way to have both is to try to make each member
of the class interested and happy in her work.
the time given to a practical lesson is usually one and
a half hours. this must include both the theoretical and
the practical work. in dividing the period, it is difficult
to say how much time should be given to each of these, but,
broadly speaking, the theoretical part may occupy one third
of the time. the time for dish washing and cleaning will
be included in the time allowance for practical work.
these duties should require less time as the class advances
in the work.
notes should be copied at the most convenient time,
usually while the food is cooking. sitting to write notes
will afford an opportunity for resting after any practical
work. if printed cards are used, much of the note-taking
is obviated. a sample card is given below.
 c. veg. water tbsp. butter
 tbsp. flourpepper/ tsp. salt
. put the vegetable water over a gentle heat.
. mix the flour with a little cold water until smooth and
thick as cream.
. when the vegetable water is steaming hot, gradually stir
the flour paste into it and keep stirring until it thickens and
boils.
. add the butter, salt, and pepper.
. pour the sauce over the hot vegetable.[]
for practical work there are two plans in general use—individual
and group work. in individual work, each
pupil performs all the processes, handling small quantities
of material. in group work, the pupils work in groups on
one dish, each sharing the duties.
by the first method, the pupil has no chance to deal
with quantities large enough for family purposes, and the
small amount does not give adequate practice in manipulation,
though it does give individual responsibility in every
detail. by the second method, normal quantities are used,
but a pupil never has entire responsibility throughout the
processes.
the cost of supplies is often accountable for group
work, but lack of utensils or oven room may make it a
necessity. in some lessons, individual work with normal
quantities may be obtained by allowing the pupils to bring
the main ingredients from home; for example, fruit for a
canning lesson. the finished product is then the property
of the pupil who has made it.
the cleaning which always follows the use of the
equipment is preferably done in groups. for instance, if
there are groups of fours, number one can, during a lesson,
wash all dishes used by the four, number two can wipe
the dishes, number three can clean the table used by the
group, and number four can clean the sink. during the
next lesson number two is dish washer, and number three
dish wiper, and so on, until, in four lessons, each pupil
has had practice in four kinds of household work and has
also been given an idea of the inter-dependence of family
life and interests. the same numbers should be kept
during the term, as this affords an easy way of definitely
designating the pupils for certain duties.[]
the supplies for a lesson may be put on a centre table,
or smaller amounts may be placed on the working tables
in front of the groups. if the class is large, the latter
plan is better, especially where measurements are necessary,
as it saves time and confusion. standard food supplies,
such as salt, pepper, sugar, and flour may be kept in a
drawer of the work-table of each pupil. (see page .)
every member of the class should be familiar with the
contents of the class pantry, cupboards, and drawers, so
that she can get or put away utensils and materials without
the help of the teacher.
if breakages occur through carelessness, the utensils
should be replaced at the expense of the offender. this is
not only a deserved punishment, but it always ensures a
full equipment.
as a lesson in household management comes but once
a week, much is gained by having the work reviewed by
practice at home. to encourage this, in some schools a
"practice sheet" is posted, on which the work done by
each pupil, between lessons, is recorded. there is a
danger of the younger pupils attempting work that is too
difficult, which will end in poor results and discouragement.
to avoid this, with pupils in the third form, it
may be wise to limit their practice in cookery to a review
of the work done in class.
the home practice work may be taken at the beginning
of a lesson or during the time the food is cooking. it may
be quickly ascertained by the pupils rising in order and
stating simply the name of the duty they have done or
the dish they have made unless they have had poor results,[]
when the nature of these should be told. if there have been
failures, the pupils should, if possible, give reasons for
these and suggest means of avoiding them in future.
. the teacher should endeavour to plan lessons which
will be definitely related to the home lives of the pupils.
what is useful for one class may not be useful for another.
the connection between the lessons and the home should
be very real. it is also important to have a sequence in
the lessons.
. great care should be exercised in criticising any of
the home methods that are suggested by the pupils. a
girl's faith in her mother should not be lessened.
. the work should be taken up in a very simple manner;
scientific presentation should be left for the high
school.
. economy should be emphasized in all home duties;
time, labour, and money should be used to give the best
possible returns. wholesome substitutes for expensive
foods and attractive preparation and serving of left-over
foods should be encouraged.
. too much vigilance cannot be exercised during the
first year of practical work, when habits are being formed.
it is much easier to form habits than to break away from
them.
. while nothing less than the best work should be
accepted from the pupils, it requires much discernment to
know when fault should be found, in order to avoid saying
or doing anything that would discourage them.
. as household management is a manual subject, the
teacher is advised, as far as possible, not to spend time[]
in talking about the work, but to have the class spend their
time in doing the work.
in schools where the ordinary class-room must be used
for all subjects, there are unusual difficulties in teaching
household management. for such schools, two modified
equipments are outlined.
since such class-rooms require special arrangement for
practical lessons in this subject, it would be well to take
this work in the afternoon, so that part of the noon hour
may be taken for preparation. pupils who have earned the
right to responsibility may be appointed in turn to assist
in this duty.
in rural schools, the afternoon recess might be taken
from . to . and, during this time, tables, stoves, and
supplies may be placed, so as to be ready for the lesson to
follow in the remaining hour and a half.
for pupils who are not in the household management
class, definite work should be planned. they may occupy
themselves with manual training, sewing, art work, map-drawing,
composition, etc. in summer, school gardening
may be done.
since the end of the week, in many schools, is chosen
for a break in the usual routine, friday afternoon seems
a suitable time for household management lessons.
under such limited conditions, it will be necessary to
group the larger pupils into one class for practical work,
and it may be necessary for the pupils to take turns in
working. in some cases, the teacher must demonstrate
what the class may practise at home.[]
it will be impossible, in such schools, to cover the prescribed
work. from the topics suggested in the course of
study each teacher may arrange a programme by selecting
what is most useful to the pupils and what is possible in
the school.
even in schools which have no equipment, much of the
theory of household management can be taught and some
experiments may be performed. on friday afternoons a
regular period may be devoted to this subject, when the
ingenious teacher will find ways and means of teaching
many useful lessons.
the following will be suggestive as suitable for lessons
under such conditions:
. any of the lessons prescribed in the course of study
for form iii, junior.
. measuring.—table of measures used in cookery,
methods of measuring, equivalent measures and
weights of standard foods.
. cleaning.—principles, methods, agents.
. water.—uses in the home, appearance under heat,
highest temperature, ways of using cooking water.
. cooking.—reasons for cooking, kinds of heat used,
common methods of conducting heat to food, comparison
of methods of cooking as to time required
and effect of heat on food.
note.—an alcohol stove, saucepan, and thermometer are
necessary for this lesson.
. the kitchen fire.—experiments to show necessities of
a fire, construction of a practical cooking stove.
. food.—uses, kinds, common sources.[]
. preservation of food.—cause of decay, methods of
preservation, application of methods to well-known
foods.
. yeast.—description, necessary conditions, sources,
use.
note.—a few test-tubes and a saucepan are necessary for
this lesson.
. the table.—laying a table, serving at table, table
manners.
. care of a bed-room.—making the bed, ventilating,
sweeping, and dusting the room.
. sanitation.—necessity for sanitation, household
methods.
. laundry work.—necessary materials, processes.
. home-nursing.—the ideal sick-room, care of the
patient's bed, and diet.[]
the pupils of form iii, junior, are generally too small
to use the tables and stoves provided for the other classes
and too young to be intrusted with fires, hot water, etc.;
but they may be taught the simpler facts of household
management by the special teacher of the subject, or by
the regular teacher in correlation with the other subjects.
in either case a special room is not necessary.
if the latter plan be adopted, the following correlations
are suggested:
arithmetic.—. bills of household supplies, such as
furniture, fuel, meat, groceries, bed and table linen,
material for clothing. this will teach the current prices
as well as the usual quantities purchased.
. making out the daily, weekly, or monthly supply
and cost of any one item of food, being given the number
in the family and the amount used by each per day.
example: one loaf costs c. and cuts into  slices.
find the cost of bread for two days for a family of six, if
each person uses -/ slices at one meal.
. making out the total weekly or monthly expenses
of a household, given the items of meat, groceries, fuel,
gas, etc. this brings up the question of the cost of living.
. making out the total cost of a cake, a loaf of bread,
a jar of fruit, or a number of sandwiches, given the cost[]
of the main materials and fuel used. compare the home
cost with the cost at a store. this may be used to teach
economy.
geography.—. the sources of our water supply.
. the geographical sources of our ordinary household
materials, their shipping centres, the routes by which they
reach us, and the means of transportation.
examples: fuels, common minerals used in building
and furnishing; timber for floors and furniture; manufactured
goods, such as cotton, linen, carpets, china;
domestic and foreign fruits; common groceries, such as
salt, sugar, tea, coffee, cocoa, spices, rice, cereals, and flour.
. the preparation of our common household commodities.
examples: cotton, linen, china, paper, sugar, tea,
coffee, cereals, flour.
. the household products that are exported.
nature study.—. the parts of plants used as food.
. the natural sources of our common foods, such as
cornstarch, flour, breakfast cereals, tea, coffee, cocoa, sugar,
salt, cheese, butter.
. the sources of common household substances, such
as coal-oil, gasolene, paraffin, turpentine, washing soda,
whiting, bathbrick, soap.
. the forms of water, as ice, steam.
. the composition and impurities of the air.
. the ordinary woods used in house building and
furnishing.[]
hygiene.—the necessity for the following:
. fresh air in the home at all times—in living rooms
and sleeping rooms
. good food and plenty of sleep
. cleanliness of the body
. cleanliness in preparing food
. cleanliness in the home and surroundings.
physical training.—. the value of exercise gained by
performing household duties.
. the importance of correct positions in performing
home duties, such as dish washing, sewing, etc.
. the value of conveniences to save steps.
composition.—topics selected from household materials
and activities.
examples: food materials, cleansing agents, planning
a convenient kitchen or bath-room, sweeping day, baking
day, arrangement of a kitchen cupboard or clothes closet,
etc.
spelling.—names of household articles and duties as
follows:
furniture of a special room, such as kitchen or sitting-room,
kitchen utensils, contents of a kitchen cupboard,
dishes and food used at a particular meal, etc.
manual training.—construction of household furnishings
and utensils for a doll's house from raffia, paper, and
plasticine.
art.—designing and colouring carpets, curtains, wall-papers,
book covers, dishes, tiles, ribbons, and dress
materials.[]
sewing.—making the uniform for household management
work.
if the household management teacher takes the work
with this class, she should follow the outline of work
given in the course of study. this outline will make the
pupils familiar with the common household materials as
to their sources, preparation, and cost, and when, in the
next class, they deal with these materials, they will do so
with more interest and intelligence. it will also draw
attention to the importance of economy in time and
energy. the convenience of a kitchen and the use of
proper utensils to facilitate labour will impress this fact.
the lessons should be taught simply as information
lessons and should be of the same length as the other
studies—from thirty to forty minutes. if the usual hour
and a half period be set aside for this class, the remainder
of the time may be devoted to sewing.[]
scope of household management
in introducing the practical side of household management
to a class, it is an advantage to let them have a
general idea of what the subject includes. they will then
work with more intelligence and usually with more interest.
then, too, the prevalent idea that the subject
means only cooking will be corrected from the first.
throughout the introduction, the teacher should not
forget that she is dealing with immature minds and that
the ideas must be very simply expressed. she might ask
what the pupils expect to learn in this class, have them
name other subjects they study in school, and in each case
lead up to the one thing of which a particular subject
treats; for example, arithmetic treats of numbers;
geography, of the world; history, of past events. she
should lead the class to see that the one thing of which
household management treats is the home; and that the
two great requirements for a home are the house, and the
people who live in it, or the occupants.
to get the details relating to each of these two divisions,
let the pupils imagine they are boarding in some locality
where they decide to make a home for themselves. the
first thing to be done is to choose a building lot. then
they must decide upon the kind of house they want and the
plan of the house. after the house is built, it must be
furnished. when the house is ready, it must be cleaned[]
and kept clean. as soon as the family move in, new considerations
arise—they must have food, which must be
bought, prepared, and served; each member of the family
must be clothed and educated; they must receive proper
care when sick. only a few minutes should be spent on
this introductory talk.
while the class is naturally led to think of and name
these details, they should be written on the black-board in
the order of development, somewhat as follows:
. household management teaches us about the home.
. a home includes two main ideas:
() a house, () a family.
. in connection with a house we must consider:
() the lot, () the plan, () the furnishing,
() the cleaning.
. in connection with a family we must consider:
() food (buying, cooking, serving), () clothing
(buying, sewing, mending), () education,
() home nursing.
tell the pupils that a housekeeper should be informed
on all of these points, but little girls can expect to study
only a few of them, such as questions of food, clothing, and
cleaning.
survey of equipment, uniform, etc.
equipment.—most of the time of the first lesson should
be used in making the pupils acquainted with their surroundings
and individual necessities, so that they will be
ready for work the next day.
give each member of the class a definite working
place, and let her examine the contents of the cupboard[]
and drawers which belong to her place. explain that the
particular places which the pupils are given will be kept
throughout the year, and that, while they have the privilege
of using and enjoying them, they are responsible for
their cleanliness and order.
point out the remainder of the equipment—hot and
cold water-taps, towel racks, class cupboard with its contents,
refrigerator, large and individual stoves.
teach each pupil how to light her stove and regulate
its heat.
uniforms, etc.—tell the pupils that you have shown
them what has been provided for them, but you want them
also to provide some things for themselves. it will be necessary
for them to bring a large, plain, white apron, having
a bib large enough to protect the dress; a pair of sleevelets;
a holder; a small towel for personal use; and a white
muslin cap to confine the hair while working. they will
also need a note-book and pencil for class, and a note-book
to be used at home for re-copying the class work in ink.
the latter book is to be very neatly written and kept for
reference after it has been examined by the teacher.
use of equipment
the little girls who make up the classes are not so
far removed from their "playhouse" days that a survey
of the dishes, stoves, and tables will not give them an
eager desire to begin using them. this desire should be
gratified, but as the use always necessitates the cleaning
as well, it may be advisable at first to make use of the
equipment only for the purpose of showing proper methods
of cleaning.[]
a short lesson on cleaning may be given in a few
minutes, and the rest of the period spent in putting it into
practice. the teacher may proceed somewhat as follows
in the development of a lesson on cleaning:
development of a lesson on cleaning
take two dishes—plates or saucers—exactly alike.
have one clean and the other soiled with butter or some
well-known substance. ask the class the difference between
them. one is clean and one dirty. what substance
is on one that hinders your saying it is clean? butter.
what else could be on it? jam. what else? dust.
what else? gravy. now instead of telling the name of
the particular substance in each case, let us try to find one
name that will apply to all of the substances which, as
you say, make the dish dirty. let us give these substances
a name which will show that they do not belong to the
plate. we may call each of them a foreign substance.
and if i take the substance off the plate what am i doing
to the plate? cleaning it. then what is cleaning? cleaning
is removing a foreign substance.
. scraping or rubbing away the foreign substance:
what would you use to remove the butter from the
plate? a piece of paper or a knife. what are you doing
with the knife or paper? scraping or rubbing off the
foreign substance. then how was it removed? it was
removed by scraping or rubbing.
suppose some one has sharpened a pencil and let the
pieces fall on the floor, what would you take to remove
the foreign substance from the floor? a broom. what[]
would you say you are doing with the broom? sweeping.
how does the movement of the broom over the floor compare
with the movement of the knife over the plate? it
is similar. what would you take to remove the dust from
the window-sill? a duster. what would you say you are
doing? dusting. how does the movement of the duster
compare with the movement of the knife and the broom?
it is similar. in all of these cases of dish, floor, and sill,
how did we remove the foreign substance? we scraped or
rubbed it off. name one way of removing a foreign substance.
scraping or rubbing it away.
. dissolving the foreign substance and then scraping it
away:
show a much soiled towel and ask what is usually done
to clean it. it is washed. ask the pupils to tell just
what they mean by that. the towel is put in water
and soap used on it. what effect will the soap and water
have on the foreign substance? they will soften or dissolve
it. then what must be done next? the towel must
be rubbed on a board or with the hands. what effect has
this operation on the foreign substance? it scrapes or
rubs the foreign substance away. then we have another
way of cleaning: by first dissolving the foreign substance,
and then scraping or rubbing it away.
a number of well-known cleaning operations may then
be given, and the pupils asked in each case to decide the
method used—such as, whisking a coat, scrubbing a table,
cleaning the teeth, or washing dishes.
next, get lists of the common cleansing agents found
in an ordinary home, and arrange them in order of coarseness.[]
the black-board scheme, as the lesson develops, will
appear as follows:
. meaning of cleaning:
cleaning is removing any foreign substance.
. methods of cleaning:
() scraping or rubbing away the foreign substance.
() dissolving the foreign substance and then
scraping or rubbing it away.
. household cleansing agents used in the first method:
() duster() whiting
() brush() bathbrick
() broom() coarse salt
() washboard() sand
() knife() ashes.
. household cleansing agents used in the second method:
() water() washing soda
() hot water() coal-oil
() soap() gasolene
() lux() acids
() ammonia() lye.
() borax
. combination cleansing agents:
() bon ami,() dutch cleanser,() sapolio.
when the class have these ideas, they are ready to put
them into practice, and the remainder of the lesson should
be spent in practical work.[]
if the pupils have soiled no dishes, it may be wise to
drill them first in table washing or towel washing, so as to
get them ready for the next lesson when tables and towels
will be used.
gradually, in connection with the making of simple
dishes, the pupils should be taught special methods of dish
washing, sink cleaning, and dusting. each day as they
are appointed to different duties in cleaning, these methods
should be strictly followed until they become well known.
while they are still new to the class, it will be a great
help to have outlines of the kinds of cleaning which are
necessary in every lesson posted conveniently in different
parts of the room for reference.
these outlines may be as follows:
preparation for washing:
. put away the food.
. scrape and pile the dishes.
. put the dishes that need it to soak.
. place soap, pans, brushes, and towels.
. put water in the pans.
() fill the dish pan about half full of warm
water, then soap it.
() fill the rinsing pan nearly full of hot water.
order of washing:
. glass. granite ware
. silver. tins
. china. pots
. crockery. steel knives and forks.
finishing after washing:
. soap a dish cloth and wash the sides and bottom of the
dish pan, before emptying it.
. empty the dish pan, rinse at the sink, and half fill with
clear, warm water, to rinse the towels.
. wash the towels in the rinsing pan, rinse them in the
dish pan, shake them straight, fold, and hang.
. soap the dish cloth, wash the inside of the rinsing pan,
empty, rinse, and wipe with the dish cloth.
. wash and wipe the soap dish.
. empty the dish pan and wipe with the dish cloth.
. pile the pans, place the brushes and soap, and set away.
. fold the dish cloth and hang it to dry.
. if necessary, scrape or brush off the table stoves.
. get a scrub cloth, a wash-basin of warm water, and a
scrub-brush.
. wash the part of the table used by your group, doing
the part not occupied by the dish washing first; then
get the dish washers to move along, so that you can
finish it, proceeding as follows:
() wet the table all over.
() rub the soap cake over it.
() scrub with the wet brush with the grain of
the wood.
() rinse the soap off with the clear water.
() wipe with the cloth wrung dry.
. get clear water. rinse the brush and put it away.
rinse the scrub cloth and wring it dry.
. take the basin and cloth to the sink. empty, rinse the
basin, and dry it with the cloth. rinse the cloth
under the tap and wring it dry.[]
. fold and hang the cloth to dry. bring back a dry
cloth and thoroughly dry the aluminium strip.
. put away the dry cloth and basin.
. let the other housekeepers get the water they need.
. get a sink pan, a scrub cloth, and a brush. put warm
water in the pan.
. scrub the drain board if there be one, as follows:
() wet the board all over.
() rub the soap cake over it.
() scrub with a wet brush with the grain of wood.
() rinse the soap off with clear water.
() wipe with the cloth wrung dry.
. wash the nickel part of the sink (tap and stand) with
soap. wipe with the cloth wrung dry.
. wash the outside of the basin of the sink.
. when the other housekeepers have emptied their water,
wash the inside of the sink basin and wipe with the
cloth wrung dry.
. wash the scrub cloth and pan, rinse the brush, and put
all away.
. polish the nickel with a dry duster.
. get a cheesecloth duster.
. dust the chairs and put them in place.
. dust the table legs and drawer handles.
. dust the cupboard and refrigerator.
. dust the wood-work, window-sills, ledges, etc.
. wash the duster and hang it up to dry.[]
another preliminary part of the work will be teaching
the pupils to measure and follow a recipe.
the measures used in kitchen work are teaspoon, tablespoon,
pint, quart, and gallon, of which a table should be
developed as follows:
teaspoonfuls (tsp.) tablespoonful (tbsp.)
tbsp. cup
cups pint (pt.)
pt. quart (qt.)
qt. gallon (gal.)
in connection with this table the following points
should be brought out:
. that all measurements are made level.
. that in measuring liquids, the measure should be set
on a level surface.
. that to halve the contents of a spoon, the division
should be made lengthwise.
. that to quarter the contents of a spoon, the half
should be divided crosswise.
. that in measuring flour, it should not be shaken down
to level it.
. that in using one measure for both dry and liquid ingredients,
the dry should be measured first.
. that in measuring a cupful of dry ingredients, the cup
should be filled by using a spoon or scoop.[]
(a) dividing the contents of a spoon
(b) dividing a spoonful in halves
(c) filling a cup
(d) levelling a cupful
a table of equivalent measures and weights of some
staple foods will also be useful and may be given to the
class:
 cups butter (packed solidly)pound
 c. granulated sugar"
 c. rice(about) "
 c. finely chopped meat"
 / c. brown sugar"
 / c. powdered sugar"
 / c. oatmeal"
 / c. cornmeal"
 c. white flour"
one and one-half hours to be divided approximately
as follows—one-half hour for teaching the theory, one-half
hour for the practical application of the theory, and
one-half hour for housekeeping (washing of dishes, tables,
sinks, etc., and putting the kitchen in order).
. place a set of measures at hand.
. place a large bowl of flour on the teacher's table.
. place flour and sugar in the boxes of the supply
drawers.
. place cans of cocoa and jugs of milk on the centre
table.
. introduction.—what do we take for a guide when
cooking? how can we be sure that we use the exact[]
quantities the recipes require? name some measures
that you have learned in arithmetic. in this lesson
we are going to learn the measures we require in
cooking, also the proper ways of using them.
. names of measures.—show and name the measures,
beginning at the smallest: teaspoon, tablespoon, cup,
pint, quart, gallon. as the measures are named,
place them on the table in order of size.
. methods of using measures.—ask two or three pupils,
in turn, to measure a teaspoonful of flour from the
bowl on the teacher's table. they will not agree in
their measurements, and the necessity for levelling
will be shown. what can we use for levelling
measures? how can we level liquids?
if we need less than a spoonful, how can we
measure it? which part of the spoon is deeper?
how shall we divide the spoonful to make both
halves equal? how must we divide a spoonful into
quarters? into eighths? examine and explain the
divisions of the cup. to use one measure for both
liquid and dry ingredients, which should be measured
first? (as these points are obtained, they should be
written on the black-board.)
. table of measures.—in the tables of measures which
you have learned, you state the number of times one
measure is contained in the next higher. we shall
form a table of the measures learned to-day. by
measuring flour from their boxes, let each pupil find
how many teaspoonfuls fill a tablespoon. how many
tablespoonfuls fill a cup, a half cup, a quarter of a
cup. they will state the remainder of the table from
memory. write the table on the black-board and
teach the abbreviations.[]
note.—after the lesson on measuring is developed, the
class should be given individual work which will put these
ideas into practice. a simple recipe may be dictated by the
teacher, step by step. cocoa makes a good recipe for this
lesson, as it affords practice in measuring liquids as well as
dry ingredients, both powdered and granular. if each girl
makes half a cupful of cocoa, it will give practice in dividing
the contents of a spoon.
have each pupil make half a cupful of cocoa by carrying
out each step as it is dictated by the teacher, as follows:
. numbers one put two cups of water in the tea kettle;
numbers two light a fire and put the water to boil;
numbers three get cocoa from the centre table;
numbers four get milk.
. set out sugar boxes and open them.
. each take a small saucepan, a measuring cup, a teaspoon,
a paring-knife, and a small cup.
. measure half a teaspoonful of sugar into the saucepan.
. measure half a teaspoonful of cocoa into the saucepan.
. mix the sugar and cocoa by shaking the saucepan.
. measure half of a third of a cupful of boiling water
and stir it into the sugar and cocoa.
. set the mixture over a gentle fire and stir until it
bubbles. cook for three minutes.
. measure half of a third of a cupful of milk.
. stir the milk into the mixture and heat it until it is
steaming hot, but do not boil it.
. serve the cocoa in the small cups.
. turn out the fires and put the saucepans to soak.[]
each pupil puts her table in order by moving all
cooking utensils to the metal part of the table and wiping
off any soiled spots on the wooden part; she then sits to
drink the cocoa she has made.
notes are copied from the black-board in pencil in the
ordinary class note-books. the desk boards under the
table tops are pulled out for this purpose. in this lesson
the notes consist of:
. table of measures, with abbreviations
. points in measuring
. recipe for cocoa (if there are recipe cards, these should
be distributed).
this will be done in groups of fours, according to their
previous lessons in cleaning. if necessary, some special
cleaning, as dish washing or sink cleaning, may be taught
at this point of the lesson:
. number one will wash dishes for her group.
. number two will wipe dishes for her group.
. number three will clean the entire table belonging to
her group.
. number four will do work outside of her group as
appointed, such as dusting, cleaning a sink or the
centre table.[]
 tsp. sugar/ c. boiling water
 tsp. cocoa/ c. milk.
. mix the sugar and cocoa in a saucepan.
. stir the boiling water into the mixture, then set it over
a gentle heat.
. keep stirring until the mixture bubbles, then boil
gently for about three minutes.
. stir in the milk and heat it until it steams, but do
not boil it.
. serve the cocoa hot or ice-cold.
in connection with a recipe, the pupils should be
taught to look for three parts:
. the name
. the list and amount of ingredients
. the method.
in carrying out a recipe, they should, from the first,
be taught to work in the following systematic order:
. to attend to the fire if necessary
. to collect the necessary utensils
. to collect the necessary ingredients
. to obey the method.[]
for this lesson, some simple recipe which will review
measuring should be clearly written on the black-board—the
recipe for apple sauce or cranberry sauce would be
suitable. while the pupils are learning obedience in
following a recipe, it is better to keep them together in
carrying out their work. the method should be written
in definite, numbered steps, which may be checked off as
each step is accomplished.
when the class has had instruction in cleaning, measuring,
and recipes, they are ready for a series of lessons
involving the use of simple recipes which will put into
practice the ideas they have learned. for this practice,
such recipes as the following are suggested:
boiled potatoes, mashed potatoes; boiled parsnips;
boiled celery; boiled carrots, asparagus, green peas; cranberry
sauce; rhubarb sauce; preparing and combining ingredients
for salads (fruit salad, potato salad, cabbage and
nut salad, waldorf salad)—the dressing being supplied;
stuffed eggs; sandwiches.
the carrying out of these lessons will develop in the
pupils accuracy and obedience, and make them familiar
with the use and care of their utensils, as well as give
opportunity for the cleaning of these and other parts of
the equipment.
during these first lessons, careful supervision should
be given each pupil, so that only correct habits may be
formed in regard to neatness, thoroughness, quietness, and
natural use of muscles.
the pupils should be encouraged to begin a book of
recipes to contain neatly written copies of all they have
used in school. the art teacher might correlate the work
here by assisting them to design a suitable cover for this
book.[]
form iii: senior grade (continued)
after a number of practice lessons have developed in
the pupils a certain ability and self-confidence in working,
formal cookery may be introduced, and the following ideas
should be brought out:
. the meaning of cooking:
cooking is the application of sufficient heat to
make a change in the food.
. reasons for cooking food:
() to make some food digestible.
() to change flavours and make some food more appetizing.
() to preserve food.
() to kill harmful germs in food.
. kinds of heat used:
() dry heat—heat, only, is conveyed to the food.
() moist heat—heat and moisture are conveyed to the food.
. different ways of applying dry heat:
toasting, broiling, pan-broiling, sautéing, frying,
baking.
. different ways of applying moist heat:
boiling, simmering, steaming, steeping.
note.—if the class cannot name these methods, the teacher
may name and write them with only a word of comment
regarding each, or they may not be given until the methods
are studied.[]
as the moist heat methods are simpler and better
known, they should be studied first. the class should be
led to see that some liquid must be used to supply the
moisture and should account for the common use of water
for this purpose. experiments should then be performed
in heating water, and its appearance and temperature
should be noted.
note.—a preliminary lesson on the use of the thermometer
may be necessary to show how to read it, and to develop the
idea that it is an instrument for measuring heat. this may
be taught in the regular class work, previous to the household
management lesson.
. development of the idea of "measuring":
what would you use to measure the length of the
table? a foot measure. what to measure the water in
a tub? a pint, quart, or gallon measure. what to
measure the amount of gas burned? a gas-meter.
. development of the name "thermometer":
what do we call the instrument
for measuring gas? a gas-meter
for measuring electricity? an electrometer
for measuring speed of a motor? a speedometer
(speed-meter)
for measuring the distance a bicycle travels? a
cyclometer (cycle-meter).
in each case what does "meter" mean? it means an
instrument for measuring. what name may i give to an
instrument for measuring heat? you may call it a heat-meter.[]
tell the pupils that, in science, many greek words
are used, and that you will put a greek word in place of
the english word "heat", namely "thermos", as in
thermos bottle. what will the name become? thermosmeter,
or thermometer.
. practice in using thermometers:
the unit of measurement (degree) should be given,
and the scale taught from the black-board. thermometers
may then be given to the class to examine and use.
saucepans having white inner surfaces are best to use
for the experiments, as changes made by the heat are more
plainly seen.
observations of water under heat:
() at a temperature of about  degrees, very
small bubbles form at the bottom and sides
of the dish and rise slowly to the surface of
the water. these bubbles are a film of water
containing the air that was in solution, which,
when expanded, rises to the top of the water.
() at a temperature of about  degrees, a few
larger bubbles form at the bottom of the dish
and rise slowly to the surface of the water,
making a slight movement in it. in these
bubbles air is replaced by steam which is
formed from the water by the heat.
() at a temperature of  degrees, a great number
of large bubbles form and rise quickly to the
surface, making much movement in the water.
the water is then said to boil.
() the water will take no higher temperature than
 degrees.[]
() after water once boils, it requires little heat to
keep it at this point, therefore the heat may
be reduced.
() an increase of heat increases the number, size,
and rate of the bubbles and the volume of
steam, but makes the liquid no hotter.
application of these observations:
() if food be cooked in a liquid at its greatest heat,
where many bubbles are making much movement
in it, the process is called boiling.
() if cooked in a liquid heated to -, where
there is scarcely any movement in the liquid,
the process is called simmering.
() if cooked in the steam rising from a boiling
liquid, the process is called steaming.
() if boiling liquid be poured over food and no
further heat applied, the process is called
steeping.
practice should then be given in each of the moist heat
methods of cooking. the common foods, such as vegetables,
fruit, eggs, and milk should be used for this purpose.
after the class has carried out a method for the first
time, they should be led to consider the order of work
required for it. the necessary steps should be arranged
to form a set of rules for reference. the effects of the
method in each case should also be noted.
when the moist heat methods are well known, the dry
heat methods should be taught and practised. the outlines
on pages - will suggest the development under
each method.[]
plan of lesson on boiling carrots
to apply the principles of boiling, as taught in a
previous lesson, to the cooking of food.
one and one-half hours to be used approximately as
follows: twenty-five minutes for preparation for practical
work and the first part of the practical work, twenty-five
minutes for the development of ideas of boiling as a
method of cooking, fifteen minutes for the serving of
food, twenty-five minutes for housekeeping.
. review.—question the pupils as follows: what kind
of heat is used in cooking food by boiling? at
what temperature is the food cooked by this method?
name the kinds of boiling. how much hotter is
rapid boiling? how is water made to boil rapidly?
when is rapid boiling useful?
. discussion of recipe.—have the recipe written on the
black-board and read by one of the pupils, while the
others follow the reading carefully.
() have the class decide:
(a) when the fires should be lighted
(b) the dishes required for the work
(c) the kind of boiling to use.
() demonstrate the scrubbing, scraping, and dicing
of a carrot, also the draining of a food cooked
in liquid.[]
() state the quantity of ingredients each will use.
() caution the pupils as to accuracy, neatness, and
quietness while working.
have each pupil prepare the food according to the
recipe and put it on to cook within a certain time. while
the class works, carefully observe each pupil and give individual
help to those who require it.
this will be done while the carrots are cooking. the
ideas brought out from review and the class work, by
questioning, will be those which are given on boiling under
the methods of cooking.
. definition of boiling
. kinds of boiling
. uses of rapid boiling
. rules for boiling
. effects of boiling.
as these ideas are obtained from the class, they should
be written by the teacher on the black-board and by the
pupils in their note-books.
the pupils will drain, season, and serve the food.
each girl will set one place on the wooden part of the
table and serve herself. while the food is being eaten,
the table manners of each girl should be observed, and, if
necessary, corrected in a tactful manner.[]
the work of putting the kitchen in order may be done
in groups of twos or fours.
carrotssalt and pepper
boiling waterbutter.
. scrub, scrape, and rinse the carrots.
. cut them into pieces by dicing them.
. put the pieces in a saucepan, set over the fire, and pour
in boiling water until the food is covered.
. cook the carrots until the pieces are soft at the centre
when pierced with a fork.
. drain off the liquid, then season the food with salt,
pepper, and butter.
. serve in a hot vegetable dish.
plan of lesson on simmering: apples
. review:
() appearance and temperature of a boiling liquid.
() appearance and temperature of a simmering
liquid.
. state the difficulty of keeping a liquid at simmering
temperature; show the double boiler and explain its
use for this purpose.
. compare boiling and simmering as to length of time
required and difficulty.
. tell the pupils they are going to study simmering by
making coddled apples.[]
. read recipe.
. question regarding:
() kind of heat used
() whether to prepare apples or syrup first, and why
() management in measuring so as to use only one
cup
() why one quantity of syrup is sufficient for so
many apples.
. decide on the dishes required for the work.
assign work in groups of twos—numbers one and
three prepare syrup; numbers two and four prepare apples;
all attend to the cooking.
(to be dealt with while food is cooking)
. definition.—obtain this by comparing simmering with
boiling.
. effects:
() compare a raw and simmered apple to get the
idea of "soft and tender".
() tell the pupils simmering temperature will not
harden and toughen meat and eggs as much
as boiling does.
() lying longer in the liquid to cook dissolves out
more of the food substance.
() less water going off as vapour does not carry
away as much flavour.
() less motion in the liquid does not break up the
food.[]
when the apples are tender, let each girl serve herself
with what she has cooked. while the fruit is being eaten,
direct attention to the flavour of apple in the syrup.
assign the work which is necessary to put the kitchen
in order, and allow the pupils to carry it out in groups of
twos or fours.
 apple
/ c. sugar
/ c. water.
. put the sugar and water in the inside part of a double
boiler, set over the fire, and boil gently for about
five minutes.
. wash and pare the apple, cut it into halves, and remove
the core.
. put the prepared fruit into the syrup, cover the dish
closely, and set in the under part of the double
boiler.
. simmer the pieces of apple until tender, turning them
occasionally.
. lift the fruit carefully into a serving dish, then pour
the syrup over it.
. serve hot or cold.
note.—one cup of sugar will make sufficient syrup for
six or seven apples.[]
. definition:
boiling is a method of cooking in which the heat
reaches the food through a boiling liquid.
. kinds of boiling:
() gentle boiling—temperature of  degrees.
() rapid boiling—temperature of  degrees.
. uses of rapid boiling:
() to make much steam
() to break up food
() to keep small particles of food in motion.
. rules for boiling:
() put the food in a cooking dish, set over the heat,
and pour in the boiling liquid to cover the food
well.
() regulate the heat to the kind of boiling required.
() keep the food boiling during the entire cooking.
() continue the cooking until the food is tender at
the centre when it is tested, or for the time
required by the recipe.
() when the food is cooked, lift it from the liquid
or drain the liquid from the food.
. effects of boiling:
() it makes some food soft and tender—fruit, vegetables.
() it makes some food hard and tough—eggs, etc.
() it breaks up food.
() it dissolves out some of the food substance.
() it causes some loss of flavour (in the steam).
() it kills germs.[]
. definition:
simmering is a method of cooking in a liquid at a
temperature of about  degrees.
. rules for simmering:
() use a double boiler to keep the temperature
correct.
() put the food in liquid in the top dish, and proceed
as in boiling.
. effects of simmering:
() it makes some foods soft and tender—fruit and
vegetables.
() it does not make the protein of animal food
(milk, eggs, and meat) hard as boiling does.
() it dissolves out a good deal of the food substance
into the cooking liquid.
() it causes very little loss of flavour.
() it does not break up the food.
. definition:
steaming is a method of cooking in the steam from
boiling liquid.
. rules for steaming:
() have the water boiling rapidly in the under part
of the steamer.
() put the food in the upper part, cover closely, and
place over the lower part.
() keep the water boiling rapidly during the entire
cooking.[]
() if extra water be needed, only boiling water
should be added, as quickly and as gently as
possible.
() continue the cooking according to the time required
by the recipe, or test as in boiling, if
the food permits.
. effects of steaming:
() it makes vegetable food tender.
() it makes the protein of animal food harder than
simmering, but not so hard as boiling does.
() it does not break up the food.
() it does not dissolve out the food substance.
() it causes little loss of flavour if closely covered.
. definition:
steeping is a method of cooking, by pouring boiling
water over food, and letting it stand in a moderately warm
place.
. rules for steeping:
() heat the steeping dish.
() use water freshly boiled.
() put the food in the hot dish, pour water over,
cover closely, and set in a warm place.
() let the food remain in the liquid until you have
extracted what is desired.
() strain off the liquid and use as required.
. effects of steeping:
() to heat and soften the food
() to extract the flavour and, sometimes, the substance
of the food.[]
. definition:
toasting is a method of cooking in which the heat
reaches the food directly from the fire. it is used mainly
for bread.
. rules for toasting:
() have a clear, hot fire.
() cut bread in slices from one third to one half an
inch thick.
() hold the food at some distance from the fire, in
a gentle heat at first, to dry and heat the surfaces.
this drying may be done in the oven.
() then hold the dried, hot surfaces in a strong heat,
to brown and crisp them.
() serve so that the surfaces will not become steamed
from the moisture still contained in the slices.
put the toast in a toast-rack or stack it on a
hot plate. buttered toast may be piled.
. effects of toasting:
() to heat and dry the surface of the food.
() to brown and crisp the surface.
() to change the flavour.
() to change the starch of the surface into a brown
substance, which is a form of sugar, and more
digestible than starch.
. definition:
broiling is a method of cooking in which the heat
reaches the food directly. it is used mainly for meat and
fish in slices or thin portions.[]
. rules for broiling:
() have a clear, hot fire.
() grease the broiler and trim the food.
() lay the food in the broiler compactly.
() hold the broiler in a very strong heat to seal the
tubes of the food which hold the juices, and
turn frequently.
() when the surface is seared, hold in a gentler heat
to cook the food to the centre, and turn occasionally
while doing this.
() time the cooking to the thickness of the food—one
inch of thickness cooks rare in eight
minutes.
() serve at once on a hot dish, and spread with
butter, salt, and pepper.
. effects of broiling:
() to sear the surface.
() to cook to the centre while browning the surface.
() to change the flavour and develop a very delicious
one in the browned surface.
() to make the browned surface hard to digest.
. definition:
pan-broiling is an imitation of broiling and is a
method of cooking on a hissing-hot, metal surface.
. rules for pan-broiling:
() have a hot fire.
() heat the pan or metal surface until it hisses
when touched with water.
() lay the food in compactly, and turn constantly
until the entire surface is seared.[]
() place the pan in a gentle heat and cook the food
to the centre, turning occasionally.
() time the cooking to the thickness of the food—one
inch cooks rare in ten minutes.
() serve at once, as in broiling.
. effects of pan-broiling:
the same as in broiling.
. definition:
sautéing is a method of cooking in which the heat
reaches the food through a smoking-hot, greased surface.
. rules for sautéing:
() heat the pan enough to melt the fat.
() put in just enough fat to keep the food from
sticking, and let it run over the surface of the
pan, and get smoking hot.
() put in the food and let it brown on one side, then
turn it and brown the other side.
() serve on a hot dish.
. effects of sautéing:
() to sear the surface of the food.
() to brown the surface and develop a delicious
flavour, while cooking to the centre.
() to make the surface slightly fat-soaked with fat
which has been very highly heated.
() to make the surface indigestible.
. definition:
baking is a method of cooking in which the heat is
brought to the food through the confined heat of an oven.[]
. kinds of ovens:
() slow.
() moderate—white paper browns in ten minutes.
() hot—white paper browns in five minutes.
() very hot—white paper browns in one minute.
. rules for baking:
() heat the oven according to the recipe.
() put the food in the oven, usually on the lower
shelf, to get an under heat first, then toward
the last of the cooking, set it on the top shelf
to brown.
() watch carefully during the baking, but in opening
the oven door, be gentle and quick.
() if the oven gets too hot, set a pan of cold water
in it, or leave the door slightly open. if browning
too quickly, cover the surface with brown
paper.
() cook the food according to the time required by
the recipe, or until it is done, as shown by some
test.
. definition:
frying is a method of cooking in which the heat is
brought to the food by immersing it in smoking-hot fat.
. temperature for frying:
() for cooked foods which have only to brown and
warm through—about  degrees.
() for raw foods which have to cook—about 
degrees.[]
. rules for frying:
() use a deep iron, steel, or granite kettle, which
will hold the heat.
() put in sufficient fat to cover the food well, but
never fill the kettle more than two-thirds full.
() heat the fat to the desired temperature.
() have the food as dry as possible and not very
cold.
() when the fat begins to give off a small quantity
of white vapour, test it for the required heat,
as follows:
(a) for raw food, put in a small square of bread,
and allow it sixty seconds to brown.
(b) for cooked food, allow a square of bread
forty seconds to brown.
() put the food carefully into the hot fat, and only
an amount which will not cool it too much.
() when the food is nicely browned, lift it from the
fat with an open spoon or lifter and drain over
the pot until it stops dripping.
() lay the food on crumpled brown paper or blotting
paper, to absorb any fat still clinging to
the surface.
() strain the fat through cheesecloth and set it
away to cool.
. effects of frying:
() to sear the surface and prevent it from absorbing
fat.
() to cook or heat the food to the centre.
() to brown the surface of the food and make it
crisp.[]
() to develop a delicious flavour in the browned
surface.
() to make the browned surface indigestible, because
it has absorbed highly-heated fat.
note.—as frying requires the fat used to be at a very high
temperature, it is dangerous to let young children take the
responsibility in this method of cooking. for this reason, it
may be wise to defer lessons on frying until the fourth form,
or even later.
for practice in the methods of cooking, the following is
suggestive:
boiling.—cooking of any vegetable or fruit in season or
rice, macaroni, eggs, coffee
simmering.—dried fruit, such as prunes, peaches, apricots,
apples; strong-smelling vegetables, such as cabbage,
onions; porridge; stew
steaming.—potatoes, cauliflower, apples, peaches, cup-puddings,
dumplings, fish
steeping.—tea, coffee, lemon rind for sauce
toasting.—bread, rolls
broiling.—steak, fish
pan-broiling.—steak
sautéing.—sliced potatoes, potato cakes, hash cakes,
griddle-cakes (teacher prepares the batter)
baking.—apples, bananas, potatoes, scalloped potatoes,
scalloped tomatoes, cheese crackers, drop biscuits,
beef-loaf
frying.—potatoes, cod-fish balls, doughnuts (teacher prepares
the dough).[]
the lessons which give practice in the methods of
cooking will also afford excellent drills in measuring,
manipulation, and cleaning. throughout all these, the
weak points of individual members of the class should
receive careful attention. in the case of typical defects,
much time may be saved by calling the attention of the
class to these, instead of correcting them individually.
after the pupils have considered and practised the
methods of cooking, they should be able to prepare any
simple dish of one main ingredient, for which recipes
should be given. if these cannot be used at school, they
may be of service in the homes of the pupils.
economy should be emphasized by suggesting simple
ways of using left-overs, and definite recipes should be
written for these. fancy cooking should be discouraged.
the teacher should aim to show how the necessary common
foods may be prepared in a nutritious and attractive
manner.
in this first year of practical work, the main point is
the formation of correct habits of work. cleanliness, neatness,
and accuracy should be insisted on in every lesson,
and deftness should be encouraged.
. toast for garnishing stews and hash
. croutons for soup
. bread crumbs to use for croquettes and scalloped
dishes, or for stuffing meat and fish
. pudding (chocolate bread pudding, cabinet pudding,
plain bread pudding, brown betty)
. pancakes.[]
. pudding (steamed until just re-heated and served with
a sauce)
. pudding (baked in a custard mixture)
. trifle.
. meat pie or potato and meat pie
. meat loaf
. stew with dumplings
. hash
. scalloped meat
. croquettes
. meat moulded in gelatine
. salad (light meats only)
. sandwiches.
. scalloped fish
. salad.
. stuffed eggs
. hard-boiled for salad
. garnish for salad
. sandwiches.
. cheese crackers
. cheese straws
. cheese cream toast
. cheese omelet
. cheese salad
. welsh rarebit
. macaroni and cheese
. sandwiches.[]
. scalloped vegetable
. cream of vegetable soup (water in which vegetable is
cooked should be kept for this)
. sautéd vegetables
. salad.
. cup pudding or roly poly
. steamed or baked batter pudding
. pudding sauce (strain juice and thicken)
. trifle
. fruit salad
. gelatine mould.
after the moist heat methods of cooking are learned,
a special lesson on beverages may be taken, if the teacher
thinks it desirable. if the subject be not taken as a whole,
each beverage may be taught incidentally, when a recipe
requiring little time is useful. the following will suggest
an outline of facts for a formal lesson:
a beverage is a liquid suitable for drinking. water is
the natural beverage; other beverages are water with ingredients
added to supply food, flavour, stimulant, or
colour. since water is tasteless in itself and also an
excellent solvent, it is especially useful in making
beverages.[]
. refreshing.—pure cold water, all cold fruit drinks
. stimulating.—all hot drinks, tea, coffee, beef-tea,
alcoholic drinks
. nutritious.—milk, cocoa, chocolate, oatmeal and barley
water, tea and coffee with sugar and cream.
note.—as tea, coffee, and cocoa are ordinary household
beverages, they should be specially studied. their sources
and manufacture will have been learned in form iii junior,
but their use as beverages may now be discussed and practised.
it is desirable that the pupils be led to reason out
correct methods of cooking each.
. description.—the leaves contain, beside a stimulant
and flavour, an undesirable substance known as tannin,
which is injurious to the delicate lining of the
stomach. if the tea be properly made, the tannin
is not extracted.
. method of cooking.—steep the tea from three to five
minutes, then separate the leaves from the liquid
(suggest ways of doing this). boiling is not a
correct method to use for making tea, as it extracts
the tannin and causes loss of flavour in the steam.
note.—because of the stimulant, young people should not
drink tea or coffee.
. description.—the beans, or seeds, of coffee also contain
tannin as well as a stimulant and flavour. this
beverage is more expensive than tea, since a much[]
larger amount must be used for one cup of liquid.
after the beans are broken by grinding, the air
causes the flavour to deteriorate, so that the housekeeper
should grind the beans as required, or buy
in small quantities and keep in tightly covered cans.
. method of cooking.—coffee may be cooked in different
ways, according to the size of the pieces into which
the roasted beans are broken. these pieces are
much harder than the leaves of tea, hence coffee may
be given a higher temperature and a longer time
in cooking than tea. small pieces of beans are apt
to float in the liquid, making it cloudy; this may be
overcome by the use of egg-white or by careful
handling.
coarsely ground coffee must be boiled gently.
finely ground coffee may be boiled gently or steeped.
very finely ground, or powdered coffee should be
steeped or filtered with boiling water.
. description.—this contains a stimulant, but differs
from tea and coffee in being nutritious. it makes a
desirable drink for children.
. method of cooking.—cocoa contains starch and should
be simmered or gently boiled.
this substance is the same as cocoa, except that it contains
a much larger amount of fat.[]
the serving of food is incidentally a necessary part
of nearly every lesson in cookery, as the pupils usually
eat what they prepare. in regular class work the bare
work table is used, and each pupil prepares a place for
herself only. the dishes soiled during the lesson should
be placed on the section covered with metal or glass at
the back of the table, and the front, or wooden part,
cleared to be used as a dining table. the teacher should
insist on this part being clean and neatly arranged. the
few dishes used should be the most suitable selected from
the individual equipments, and they should be as carefully
placed as for a meal. from the very first, the
pupils should be trained to habits of neatness in setting
the table, and in serving the food; and, what is most
important, they should be trained to eat in a refined
manner. lack of time is sometimes given as an excuse
for neglecting this training in the usual cookery lessons;
but if the teacher insists upon neatness in work and good
table manners, the pupils will soon learn to comply without
loss of time.
laying a table may be formally taught at any stage
of the work of form iii, but it is most suitable after the
class is capable of preparing the food for a simple home
meal. the topics of the lesson may be presented as
follows:
. see that the dining-room is well aired and in order.
. see that the linen is clean and carefully laundered.
. see that the glass, silver, and steel are polished.
. decide on the number to be served.[]
. place a silence cloth of felt, woollen, or thick cotton:
() to prevent the dishes from making a noise
() to give the table a better appearance
() to preserve the table top.
. lay the cloth, placing the centre of the cloth in the
centre of the table and spreading it smoothly, having
its folds parallel with the edges of the table.
. arrange a centre-piece, using a vase or basket of
flowers, a small plant or a dish of fruit.
. put a plate at each person's place and lay the cutlery
and silver beside it about one inch from the edge of
the table, in the order of use, those used first on the
outside, or farthest from the plate. at dinner these
plates are usually placed before the one who serves.
() place the knives at the right side, with the sharp
edges toward the plate.
() place the forks at the left side, with the tines up.
() place the soup spoons at the right of the knife,
bowl up.
() place the dessert spoons in front of the plates,
the handle to the right, the bowl up.
() place the dessert forks with the other forks, or
in front of the plates with the dessert spoons.
. place the water glasses at the end of the knife blades,
top up.
. place the bread and butter plates at the left of the
forks. (these are not necessary at dinner.)
. place the napkins at the left, neatly folded; discourage
fancy folding.[]
table laid for a home dinner
. place the salt and pepper so that they are convenient
to every one.
. place the dishes that are to be served at table directly
in front of the one who is to serve them.
. place the carving set in front of the host, and the
tablespoons as on page , or where food is to be
served.
. place a chair for each person.
individual section of table laid for dinner
in form iii, the children are too young to serve at
table, so the lesson on preparing and serving meals,
page , has been reserved for the work of form iv,
junior grade. the class should, however, be carefully
trained in table manners from the first. in their usual
class work this will be incidentally taught. a regular
lesson should include the following:[]
these are based upon the accepted customs of well-bred
people, and have in view the convenience and comfort
of all who are at the table.
they may be stated as follows:
. stand behind the seat assigned you.
. wait until the hostess is seated, before taking a seat.
. sit naturally erect, without any support from the
elbows, placing the feet on the floor.
. do not begin to eat until others are served.
. eat and drink quietly, taking small mouthfuls; keep
the mouth closed while eating.
. do not drink with food in the mouth.
. do not talk with food in the mouth.
. use a fork preferably, whenever it will serve the purpose;
and never put a knife into the mouth.
. take soup from the side of the spoon.
. wipe the mouth before drinking from a glass.
. be attentive to the needs of others.
. if it be necessary to leave the table, ask the hostess to
excuse you.
. if a guest for one meal only, leave the napkin unfolded
beside the plate.
. never use a toothpick at the table, or in any company.
. wait for the hostess to rise, then stand, and replace
the chair in position.[]
at the beginning of the year's work in form iv, several
lessons should be spent in reviewing the methods of
cooking and cleaning taught in the previous year. this
may be done by reviewing former recipes and by using
new ones which require a knowledge of these methods.
as the pupils work, they should be closely observed, and,
without the teacher giving undue assistance, their weak
points should be carefully strengthened. the length of
time spent on the review will vary according to the ability
of the class. this can be plainly judged by their habits
of work. the new recipes given them should be such as
they are likely to use at home, so as to encourage home
practice. these recipes will also enlarge their collection
in their special recipe books. some of the following may
be useful: creamed potatoes, potato omelet, stuffed potatoes,
stuffed onions, corn oysters, baked tomatoes, spaghetti
with tomato sauce, macaroni and cheese, scalloped apples,
plain rice pudding, ginger pudding, sago pudding, tapioca
cream.
up to this time the pupils have been allowed to manage
their individual table stoves or a gas range. they should
now be taught to understand and to use an ordinary coal
or wood range. two lessons will be necessary for this purpose.
after each lesson has been taught, the remainder[]
of the period should be spent in some kind of practical
work which can be accomplished in the time. some
cookery which requires only a few minutes may be reviewed,
such as tea, cocoa, coffee, toast, bacon, apple sauce;
drawers and cupboards may be cleaned; silver and steel
may be polished; designs for wall-paper, dishes, curtains,
and dress materials may be drawn; household accounts may
be computed; sewing may be finished.
requirements of a kitchen fire
in introducing a lesson on the kitchen fire, ask the
pupils to imagine that they have built a new house, which
the workmen have just vacated. before they can move
in it must be cleaned. what kind of water is best for
cleaning? hot water. what is necessary to provide hot
water? a fire.
find out from the pupils and then write on the black-board
what is necessary for a fire. what is the first requisite?
something to burn. what do we call such a
substance? fuel. where shall we put the fuel? in a
stove. why is a stove necessary? to confine the fire.
using a candle as fuel and a lamp chimney as a stove,
light the candle and place it in the chimney. it burns
only a short time and then dies out. why? because the
oxygen of the air in the chimney is all exhausted. then
what is another requisite for a fire? oxygen.
imagine the room to be a stove and the chairs, books,
tables, etc., to be fuel. the air in the room also contains
much oxygen, so that in this room we have three requisites
for a fire. it is very fortunate for us that something else
is needed. we shall try to find out what it is.[]
watch while i hold these strips of paper over this
lighted gas stove high enough to be out of reach of the
flame. what happened to them? they burst into a flame.
what did the paper that i held receive that it did not get
when it was lying on the table? heat. we shall try a
match in the same way, also some thin shavings. they
also burn when they receive heat from the fire. then
what is another requisite for a fire? heat. name all of the
requisites for a kitchen fire. fuel, stove, oxygen, and heat.
note.—just here it is a good thing to impress the care
that is necessary in regard to gasolene, coal-oil, benzine, etc.,
or any substance that burns at a low temperature. bring out
the fact very clearly that it is the heat that makes fuel burn,
that a flame is not necessary.
experiments to show on what the amount of heat
required depends:
. heat together two strips of paper of the same size
but of different thicknesses and observe which burns
first.
. heat together a strip of very thin paper and a match
which is much thicker than the paper, and observe
which burns first.
. rub a match vigorously on some surface and observe
the result.
conclusions.—. the amount of heat required to make
fuel burn depends on:
() the thickness of the fuel.
() the substance composing the fuel.
. some substances burn at a very low temperature.
note.—this will explain the order of laying the fuel for a
fire and the use of a match in lighting it.[]
experiments to show the means of obtaining oxygen:
. light a candle, set the lamp chimney over it and
observe the result.
. raise the chimney by supporting it on two small
pieces of wood. note the result.
. cover the raised chimney with a piece of cardboard.
note the result.
experiments to show the necessity for oxygen
conclusions.—. a fresh supply of oxygen is constantly
required.
. two openings are required to ensure a constant
supply of oxygen, one below the fuel and one above
it.
. oxygen is obtained from the surrounding air.
. the passage of air through these openings creates a
draught.[]
it will be necessary next to lead the class to see that
the supply of oxygen can be controlled:
. by the relation of the openings:
() openings directly opposite each other cause a
rapid circulation of air or a "direct
draught".
() indirect openings cause a slower circulation of
air or an "indirect draught".
. by a cross current of air which tends to check the
draught.
a discussion of the fuels may next be taken. with
pupils of form iv it will not be wise to go into too many
details regarding these. besides the classification of the
commonest ones, they may be compared from the standpoints
of cost, and of the time and labour required in their
use.
classes of fuels:
liquid—coal-oil, gasolene, alcohol
solid—coal (coke), wood (charcoal)
gaseous—natural gas, coal gas.
note.—electricity is a means of producing heat, but cannot
be called a fuel.
in developing the construction of a practical coal or
wood range, it is a good idea to use the black-board and
make a rough drawing to illustrate the details, as they are[]
given by the pupils. these details should be evolved from
the knowledge gained in the preceding lessons, and the
drawing should not be an illustration of any particular
stove.
after the best practical stove, according to the pupils'
ideas, has been thought out and represented on the black-board,
they should examine and criticise the school range
and the stoves at home. they are then ready to be given
the responsibility of managing any ordinary range.
the following are the necessary details to be considered
regarding a kitchen stove:
material.—() iron, () steel
shape.—rectangular.
compartments.—() fire-box, () ash-box, () oven,
() passage for hot air, () other compartments if
desired, such as water tank, warming closet, etc.
dampers.—() front damper—below the fuel, to control
the entrance of oxygen to the fuel. () oven damper—above
the fuel at the entrance to the pipe, to control
the heat for the oven, and also to control the
draught. () check damper—at the front of the
stove above the fuel, to admit a cross current of air
to check the draught.
management of the stove.—() lighting the fire, ()
heating the oven, () arranging for over night, ()
cleaning and care.
note.—openings below the level of the fire increase the
draught, and those above the level check it.[]
a kitchen coal or wood range, showing, (a) oven damper open
a kitchen coal or wood range, showing, (b) oven damper closed
throughout the training given in household management,
the teacher should emphasize the value of labour-saving
devices and aids in the home. how to economize
time and energy should be a prominent feature of every
practical lesson. if time permit, a lesson may be taken
to consider specially such aids as are readily procurable,
together with their average cost. in this lesson the fireless
cooker is considered.
a fireless cooker
the principles of the fireless cooker are based on a
knowledge of the laws governing the conduction and radiation
of heat. for this reason, an elementary science lesson
relating to these laws should precede this lesson. such a
science lesson is part of the regular grade work of form
iv, so if a specialist teaches the household management
of that grade, she and the regular teacher should arrange
to co-ordinate their lessons.[]
. it furnishes no heat, but conserves the heat which
is in the food when it is put into the cooker.
. it conserves the heat in the food, by surrounding
it with substances which are poor conductors of heat.
. extra heat may be given the food, after it is put in
the cooker, by placing heated stone plates above and below
the dish that contains the food. the stone used for this
purpose must be a good absorbent of heat.
. it saves fuel and is therefore economical.
. it saves time, because it requires no watching.
. it conserves the flavour of the food.
. it obviates all danger of burning the food.
. it does not heat the room.
. food cooked in liquid:
in all cookers where stone plates are not used, only such
foods as are cooked in liquids can be prepared. examples
of foods cooked in this way are, meat soup, beef-tea, meat
stews, vegetables, fruit, porridge, cereal, puddings, etc.
the prepared food is put into one of the food receptacles
belonging to the cooker and is placed over a fire,
until it has boiled for a few minutes. the cover is then
tightly adjusted, and the dish quickly locked in the cooker,
to conserve the heat that the food and liquid have absorbed.
. food cooked in dry heat by the use of stone plates:
in this method the food is cold when it is placed in
the cooker, and all the heat is supplied by stone plates[]
placed above and below the utensil containing the food.
these plates are heated for about twenty minutes over a
fire, before they are used in the cooker.
examples of food cooked in this way are, roasts of
meat; baked fruit, such as apples; baked vegetables, such
as potatoes or beans; cakes, such as plain cake or fruit
cake; quick bread, such as corn-bread and biscuits.
. food cooked in liquid, aided by the heat of one stone
plate:
in cases where the original heat absorbed by the food
is not sufficient to complete the cooking as desired, a heated
stone plate may be placed in the cooker below the utensil
containing the hot food. the stone may be necessary for
one of the following reasons—
() because the amount of food put into the cooker is
too small to contain much heat. it is always better
to have the food nearly fill the dish.
() because the time required is so long that the heat of
the food and liquid becomes exhausted before the
cooking is completed.
() because it is desirable to finish the cooking in less
time.
use a large wooden box or a small trunk with a close-fitting
cover. make it as air-tight as possible by pasting
thick paper all over the inside.
pack it level with clean sawdust or excelsior (the latter
preferably), until just enough height is left to set in a
covered granite pail, which is to be used for holding the[]
food. place the pail in the centre, so that its top edge
is just about half an inch below the top of the box. then
pack in more excelsior very tightly around the pail, until
level with it. this will shape the "nest" for the pail.
a home-made fireless cooker
make a thick cushion, or mat, of excelsior to fit in the
space between the level of the excelsior and the inside of the
cover. cover the cushion with cheesecloth or denim to
keep it intact.
note.—only food cooked in a liquid can be prepared in a
home-made cooker.[]
form iv: junior grade (continued)
the pupils have been working with some of the well-known
foods in all of their recipes and should have a fair
knowledge of how to prepare them in simple ways for the
table. it is now time for them to learn what these foods
contain for the use of their bodies. much of this part
of the work can be taught in rooms without special equipment.
an earnest teacher, with a few articles from home,
can make the study interesting and valuable.
a series of lessons will be necessary for this purpose.
the amount of work to be taken at one time is suggested,
but this should be judged by the teacher. as in other
lessons on theory, the remaining time of the lesson period
should be used in practical work. suggestions for such
practical work are given under the lesson on "the kitchen
fire", page .
practice lessons, to give variety and sustain interest,
should be interspersed between these lessons as desired.
the lesson may be introduced by asking the class to
think in what way the body of a healthy baby, who is fed
regularly, will have changed at the end of six months. it
will be larger; it will have more flesh, more bone, more
hair, etc. we want to get a name that will apply to any[]
part of the body. no matter which part we examine
through a microscope we find the same fine and beautiful
texture, and to this we give a name similar to that given
to fine, thin paper. we call it tissue—hair tissue, bone
tissue, flesh tissue.
what has food done to the baby's tissues? it has
enlarged its tissues; the child has grown larger. to the
enlargement, or growth, of the tissues, we may apply the
term, build, suggested by the building of a house. then
what may we say food does for the tissues of the body?
we may say that food builds the tissues of the body.
think of some persons who have taken food every day,
and yet as long as you have known them they have not
increased in size. what has food done for their tissues?
the class must be told that the tissues of our bodies wear
out through use, and that food has furnished the material
to replace the worn-out parts. what do we say we are
doing to clothes when we replace the worn parts? we are
mending or repairing them. what does food do for our
worn-out tissues? food repairs the tissues of the body.
do not think any more about the tissues of the body.
suppose you had not been able to get any food for several
days. in what way would you be different from what you
are now? you would not be as strong. food gives
strength or energy by being burned inside the body. there
is a fire burning in our bodies all the time we are alive, the
fuel being food. what do we require from the fire in our
homes? we require heat. the fires in our bodies give us
heat also. any fire gives off both heat and energy. state
another use of food to the body. food produces heat and
energy in the body.
but food does more for the body; it contains substances
to keep our bodies in order. suppose the clock gets[]
out of order and does not keep good time, what does the
watchmaker do to it? he regulates it. that is what
certain kinds of food do for us. what then is another use
of food? food regulates the body.
name the uses of food to the body.
. it builds the tissues.
. it repairs the tissues.
. it produces heat and energy.
. it regulates the body.
how then can we judge if a substance be a food? by
deciding that it performs one of these duties in the body.
the names of the substances in food which supply the
material for the different uses of the body should be taken
next.
. for building and repairing.—() mineral matter—used
largely in hard tissues. () nitrogenous
matter, or protein—used largely for flesh. ()
water—used in all tissues.
. for fuel.—carbonaceous matter (starch, sugar, fat).
. for regulating.—mineral matter, water.
note.—the teacher should call attention to the fact that
few foods contain all these substances, some have nearly all,
some have only one, some two or more. in order to get all,
we must eat a variety of foods. the class is now ready to
consider the well-known foods, in order to find out which of
these necessary substances each food contains, and to obtain
a general idea of their comparative food values.[]
all nature supplies us with food. the three great
divisions of nature are animal, vegetable, and mineral, and
from each we obtain food, though most largely from the
animal and vegetable kingdoms.
animal food is some part of an animal's body or some
product of an animal: examples—meat or fish, milk, eggs.
vegetable food is some part of a plant: examples—vegetables,
fruit, seeds.
mineral food is some constituent of the earth's crust
used as food. this mineral food is obtained by drinking
water which in coursing through the earth has absorbed
certain minerals, by eating plants which have absorbed the
minerals from the soil, or by eating animal food which was
built from plant food.
this preliminary survey of the sources of all our food
gives the pupils a basis for classifying the foods with which
they are familiar. they may be given exercises in doing
this, and will not only find them interesting, but most useful
as nature study.
in beginning the analysis of the common foods, it must
be remembered that the pupils have no knowledge of
chemistry, and that what is found in each food must be
discovered through the senses (seeing, smelling, tasting,
feeling), or through a process of reasoning.
the pupils should also feel quite sure of what they are
setting out to do; they are going to examine some particular,
well-known food, to find which of the necessary[]
food substances it contains. the food substances for
which they are looking are water, mineral matter,
nitrogenous matter, and carbonaceous matter (sugar,
starch, fat).
it is better to provide each pupil with a sample of the
food to be studied, but where conditions make this difficult,
the one used by the teacher will suffice.
lesson i
milk is the best food to examine first, because it contains
all the food elements except starch and because these
can be easily found.
the pupils may each be asked to bring a half cup of
milk from home. it may be allowed to stand in glasses
while other work is taken.
when ready for the lesson, ask the pupils to look at
the contents of the glass, and they will observe a difference
of colour where the cream has risen. nature itself has
divided the milk into two parts. pour off the top part
and feel it. it feels greasy. butter is made from this
part. we have found fat—a carbonaceous food.
move the milk around in the glass and let the pupils
see that it is a liquid. tell them that all liquid in a
natural food is mostly water. we have, therefore, another
food substance—water, a builder and regulator.
let the pupils compare a glass of water with a glass
of skimmed milk, and they see that something is dissolved
in the water of the milk, giving it the white colour. show[]
them a glass of sour milk, where the white substance is
separate from the water. get the names curd and whey.
tell them how the cheesemaker separates sweet milk into
curd and whey. if advisable, let them do it, but in any
case show them some sweet milk separated by rennet.
examine the sweet whey. it tastes sweet, denoting the
presence of sugar—another carbonaceous food.
notice the greenish-yellow colour. recall this same
colour in water in which potatoes, cabbage, or other vegetables
have been cooked. tell the pupils that this colour
is given by mineral matter being dissolved in the water.
there is still the curd of milk to examine. the use of
the senses does not allow us to definitely decide what food
substance the curd is. tell the pupils it is protein, or find
the name by a process of reasoning, thus: recall the fact
that babies live for several months on milk alone and during
that time build all tissues of the body. milk, therefore,
must contain all tissue-building substances. review the
food substances which are necessary to build all body
tissues—mineral matter, protein, and water. we have
found the mineral matter and water in milk, but not the
protein. since curd is the only remaining part of milk,
it must be largely protein.
tell the pupils that the scum which comes on the top
of milk, when it is boiled, is another kind of protein of
which there is a small amount in solution in milk.
lead the pupils to see that if starch were present, it
would be in a raw form, and in this form is indigestible.[]
lesson ii
the analysis of milk gives a key to the food value of
milk and each of its by-products (cream, butter, butter-milk,
sour milk, skim milk, curd, whey, cheese, junket).
these may now be briefly discussed as to composition, food
value, and cost.
milk readily absorbs odours, bacteria, etc., and should
be kept in covered, sterilized dishes in a pure, cool
atmosphere.
experiments should be made to show the effect of
simmering and boiling temperatures. to save time, a
different experiment may be given to each pupil, and the
results reported.
. simmer sweet milk and note the flavour.
. boil sweet milk and note the flavour.
. simmer the curd of milk. examine its texture.
. boil the curd of milk. examine its texture and compare
it with the simmered curd.
. boil skim milk and note the scum.
. simmer skim milk and note the absence of scum.
note.—from the above experiments deduce the effect of
heat on protein.
practice lessons may now be given in preparing simple
dishes in which milk is the main ingredient, or, at least,
recipes may be given for these to be made at home. the
following would be suitable: cream sauce, cream soups,
custard, junket, cottage cheese, albuminized milk.[]
lesson i
() shell, () thick membrane, () white, () thin
membrane, () yolk.
these parts are easily seen. attention should be called
to the pores in the shell, and it should be explained that
these allow the entrance of bacteria which spoil the egg.
any means of closing these pores helps to preserve the egg.
cover the holes in the shell as follows:
. pack in salt, bran, sawdust, brine, or water-glass.
. coat the shells with fat or wax.
. wrap the eggs in paper.
testing eggs by floating:
() slightly stale, () stale, () very stale
. in the shell:
after an egg is laid, the liquid which it contains begins
to evaporate through the pores of the shell and, as
this continues, a noticeable space is left inside.[]
() shake the egg, holding it near the ear. if the
contents rattle, it is somewhat stale.
() drop the egg in cold water. if it sinks, it is fresh.
() hold the egg between your eye and the light. if
clear, it is fresh.
() a rough appearance of the shell denotes freshness.
. out of the shell:
white—this should be clear and cling to the yolk.
yolk—this should round up like a ball.
. if eggs are to be used in the near future, they
should be washed and put in a pure, cool atmosphere.
the lower shelf of the refrigerator is best, as odours rise,
and eggs readily absorb these.
. if eggs are to be preserved, they should not be
washed unless their condition compels it, as washing removes
the natural covering of the pores. they should be
stored in a clean, cool place, and packed as soon as possible.
lesson ii
it is wiser to develop the food substances in an egg by
reasoning, rather than by examining the different parts.
the shell is not used for food, so it is the contents that
should be studied. the class should be guided in the
following sequence of thought:
. an egg is designed by nature to become a chicken, so
it must contain all of the substances necessary to
build a chicken.[]
. a chicken is an animal, and all animal bodies are
made of the same substances. these we have seen
to be mineral matter, protein, and water.
. an egg therefore contains these three substances.
. an egg must also contain three weeks' food for the
chicken, therefore must have fuel food as well.
this fuel food is found in the yolk, in the form of
fat.
. the yolk therefore contains water, mineral matter,
protein, and fat.
. the white contains water, mineral matter, and
protein.
the following experiments will show the effect on both
yolk and white of the usual methods of applying heat to
eggs:
. boil an egg for three minutes and note the effect.
. boil an egg for twenty minutes and note the effect.
. put an egg in boiling water, remove from the fire,
and let it stand covered from eight to ten minutes.
. fry an egg and note the effect.
note.—the eggs may be put to boil and simmer at the
beginning of the lesson, and pupils designated to take them
from the heat at proper times. the eggs will then be ready
to examine when required.
. boiling an egg for three minutes does not allow time
for the heat to reach the yolk. the white is hard
and tough just next the shell, but soft and liquid
as it approaches the yolk.[]
. boiling an egg for twenty minutes hardens and
toughens the white, so that it all becomes hard to
dissolve or digest. it also gives the heat time to
reach the centre and hardens the yolk, but does not
toughen it or make it hard to dissolve or digest.
. allowing the egg to stand in the hot water coagulates
the white to a jelly-like consistency without toughening
it; it also cooks the yolk.
lessons iii, iv, etc.
to give practice in preparing eggs and to show their
special uses the following dishes would be suitable:
. white:
for food—poached eggs on toast, simmered eggs
for cohesive (sticky) property—potato balls, fish
balls
for clearing liquids—coffee
for holding air—foamy omelet
for decoration—hard-boiled eggs cut in fancy
shapes for garnishing, meringue on lemon pudding,
etc.
. yolk:
for food—egg-nog, scrambled eggs
for thickening liquids—custard, salad dressing,
lemon pudding
for colouring foods—tapioca cream
for decoration—hard boiled and grated over salads.[]
before beginning this part of the work, it would be
most helpful if the class had one or two nature study
lessons on the structure and organs of plants. with the
pupils in possession of some knowledge thus acquired, the
household management teacher has only to lead up to
ideas of the preparation and value of these parts as food.
these ideas should, as far as possible, follow in such a
natural order that the pupils may even anticipate the
sequence.
the outline may be as follows:
lesson i
all vegetable food is obtained from plants; it is some
part of a plant used as food.
. root—carrot, radish
. tuber—potato, artichoke
. bulb—onion
. stem—rhubarb, asparagus
. leaf—spinach, cabbage
. flower—cauliflower
. fruit—apple, orange
. seed—() of trees (nuts)—beechnut, almond
() of grasses (cereals)—wheat, corn, rice
() of vines (legumes)—peas, beans, lentils.
in asking for examples of the different parts, there will
be more interest and value if the questions correlate other[]
subjects, for instance: for what fruit is canada noted?
what fruit does she import? name a nut the squirrels
gather.
lesson ii
from the foregoing, the pupils may infer that there
are eight different foods to study. they should be led to
see that in reality there is only one, as all parts of plants
are, generally speaking, the same in structure. referring
to the animal body, they will know that a bone from the
foot is of much the same structure as one from the face;
that a piece of flesh from the leg is the same as a piece
from any other part of the body. in the same way, if we
study one part of a plant, it will be a type of all parts.
in general the structure is as follows:
. a framework, in cellular form, made of a substance
called cellulose.
. material filling the cells:
() a juice in the cells of all parts of plants except seeds
() a solid in the cells of seeds.
to show the framework, some vegetable food having
a white colour should be chosen, such as potato, parsnip,
or apple.
it must be explained that all plants are made of a
framework of numerous cells, something like a honey-comb.
the cells in plants are of many different shapes,
according to the plant, or the part of the plant, in which
they are found. they are usually so small that they cannot
be distinguished without a microscope; but occasionally[]
they are large enough to be seen without one. pass
sections of orange or lemon, where the cells are visible.
make a drawing on the black-board of the cellular formation
of a potato. lead the class to understand that, in
every case, the cell walls must be broken to get out the
cell contents. to illustrate this, they may use potatoes,
and break the cell walls by grating the potatoes. after
they have broken up the framework, the cell contents
should be strained through cheesecloth into a glass. they
have now two parts to examine—cell walls and cell contents.
cellular structure of a potato
wash the framework to free it of any cell juice and
study it first. give its name, and note its colour and
texture. compare the framework of potatoes, strawberries,
lettuce, trees, etc. tell the class that in some
cases part of the cellulose is so fibrous that it is used to
make thread, cloth, or twine; for instance, flax and hemp.[]
cellulose is most difficult to dissolve, so that practically
little of it is digested. it serves a mechanical purpose in
the digestive tract by helping to fill the organs and dilute
the real food. if fibrous, it acts as an irritant and overcomes
sluggishness of the intestines known as constipation.
the outer coats of cereals are an example of coarse
cellulose, as used in brown bread and some kinds of
porridge.
examine next the juice which was contained in the
cells of the potato. the liquid shows much water; the
colour indicates mineral matter in solution; the odour
suggests a flavour; the white sediment is starch.
water, mineral matter, flavouring matter, starch.
draw attention to the fact that the potato is the part
of the plant which acts as a storehouse. in such parts,
starch is always found as the stored form of sugar; but, in
parts which are not storehouses, sugar will be found in its
stead. in rare cases both are found, as in the parsnip.
note.—this is a good time to impress the fact that plants
are the source of starch for manufacturing purposes. in england,
potatoes are largely used; in canada, corn. it will be
interesting to state that the early settlers obtained their
starch for laundry purposes at home from potatoes, by chopping
or grinding them.
the insolubility of starch in cold liquids may be effectively
reviewed at this part of the lesson. the starch has
been lying in the water of the potato cells for several
months, yet has not dissolved. let two or three of the
class gradually heat the potato juice with its starch sediment,
stirring all the time to distribute the sediment evenly.[]
they will find that a little less than boiling temperature
dissolves the starch. this will show them that heat is
necessary for the solution of starch, and a heat much
greater than that in the body, hence raw starch is indigestible.
recall the milk lesson and the uselessness of starch
as a component of milk, unless the milk be cooked.
squeeze the juice from a sour apple or lemon, and note
the taste. explain that all fruit juices contain more or
less acid. the effects of this acid in the body are similar
to those of mineral matter.
protein is also found in plant juices; but in such small
quantities that it may be disregarded as a source of food
supply.
water; mineral matter; flavouring matter; starch or
sugar, or both; acid (in fruit juice).
lesson iii
this part of the lesson may be developed as follows:
. seeds contain the building material for new plants,
as well as their food for a short time.
. plants and animals require much the same material
to build and feed them.
. animals require water, mineral matter, protein,
sugar, starch, and fat.
. plants require the same; but the seed being a storehouse
part of the plant, it will not have sugar,
and water has to be supplied when the new plant
is to be formed.[]
. seeds contain, therefore, mineral matter, protein,
starch, and fat.
note .—seeds will grow in water until their stored food
is used: they must then be planted in soil, to get further
nourishment.
note .—the two fuel foods, starch and fat, are not found
together in abundance in seeds; one or the other will be much
in excess. for instance, in walnuts there is a great deal of
fat, while in peas and beans there is scarcely a trace of fat,
but the starch is abundant.
only a very general idea of this should be attempted.
the food value of any part of a plant can be roughly estimated
by considering the office of that particular part in
plant structure. nature study will assist in this. the
root collects the food to send it to the parts above; the stem
is a hallway through which the food is carried in a more
diluted form. the leaves serve the purpose of lungs and
will not contain much food, though they naturally have a
good deal of flavour; parsley, sage, and tea are examples
of this. the fruit is a house to protect the seeds, and is
made most attractive and delicious, so that animals will
be tempted to eat this part, and thus assist in the dispersal
of the seeds. the fruit has comparatively little food value
as building material. the seed contains the stored material
to build new plants, and therefore is the most nutritive
part of all. it is the only part of the plant which contains
an appreciable supply of building food, that is, which
can take the place of eggs or meat in the diet. baked
beans are sometimes called "nuggets of nourishment" or
"the poor man's beef".[]
lesson iv
after discussing the food value of the different parts
in this broad way, the pupils may be asked to consider the
plant foods used in their diet and to compare their nutritive
value.
the facts concerning these may be summed up as
follows:
. green vegetables:
these generally contain much water, hardly any
protein or fat, and a small amount of sugar.
they are valuable mainly for their mineral
matter and cellulose.
. root vegetables and tubers:
these are more nutritious than green vegetables,
because they contain much more sugar and
starch.
. ripe seeds (cereals, legumes, and nuts):
these are highly nutritious, because of the large
amount of protein and building mineral matter
they contain, and also the amount of fuel food.
it is important that the value of these be pointed out.
dried foods contain all of the constituents of fresh food
excepting water and a little flavour lost in evaporation,
yet they are often much cheaper. attention should be
directed to the best means of restoring the water and, if
necessary, of giving an additional flavour by the use of
cloves, cinnamon, etc.[]
canning is a better means of preserving food for
export or for use when out of season, but where the expense
prohibits this method, drying is a good substitute. in
districts where fruit and vegetables cannot be grown or in
seasons when they cannot be obtained fresh, the dried
forms are cheap and have excellent food value.
as vegetable food is eaten both raw and cooked, the
pupils should be asked to decide when cooking is necessary
and what they wish it to accomplish.
there are only two substances in vegetable food which
will require cooking, and these are:
. cellulose, if it be hard or tough
. starch, if it be present.
the pupils have found in their experiment with the
potato water, that starch cooks quickly, hence the time of
cooking will depend altogether on the texture of the cellulose.
when the cellulose is softened at the centre, the last
part which the heat reaches, the vegetable or fruit will be
cooked.
if the food is cooked in water by boiling or simmering,
much of the substance will pass into the cooking water.
as the cell walls become softened, they allow the cell contents
to partially pass out and the cooking water to pass in
to fill the space. if the food is long in cooking, the water
may have more value than the vegetable, and it should not
be thrown away. it may be used in two ways—as a basis
for a sauce or a soup.[]
note.—as the principles in the general rules have been
taught, these rules may be dictated to the class.
. wash, pare, peel, or scrape the vegetable, and cut it
into convenient sizes.
. unless green vegetables are freshly gathered, soak
them in cold water for an hour before cooking.
. soak dried vegetables at least twelve hours.
. put all vegetables on to cook in boiling water, except
dried vegetables, which should be put on in cold
water.
. strong-smelling vegetables should be cooked at simmering
point, the others may boil gently.
. for vegetables that grow above ground (including
onions), salt the water (one tsp. to a quart).
. for underground vegetables, do not salt the water.
prepare and cook the vegetables until tender, according
to the rules given above. drain off and measure the
vegetable water. for each / cup of vegetable, take / cup
of the water and make into a sauce. re-heat the vegetable
in the sauce and serve in a hot dish.
note .—for potatoes and tomatoes do not follow this
recipe.
note .—the sauce is made by thickening each cup of
vegetable water with two tablespoonfuls of flour, and seasoning
as desired with salt, pepper, and butter.
note .—another method of saving and using the valuable
vegetable water is to make it into a soup.[]
. stewed.—put the prepared fruit in a saucepan with
enough water to keep it from burning. cover
closely, and stew until tender, stirring often. add
the sugar and let the mixture boil a minute more.
. cooked in syrup.—make a syrup of one part sugar
to two or three parts water. put the prepared
fruit in the hot syrup, cover closely, and simmer
until tender.
wash the fruit thoroughly. cover with cold water
and soak twenty-four hours. put on to cook in the same
water in which it has soaked. add spices if desired.
cover closely and simmer until tender. add the sugar
and simmer ten minutes longer. take out the fruit, and,
if necessary, boil down the syrup, then pour it over the
fruit.
lessons v, vi, etc.
while studying vegetable food, practice will be given
in nearly every lesson in the preparation and cooking of
vegetables or fruit, but after the completion of this series
of lessons, these foods should be prepared and cooked with
more intelligence and interest. for this reason, there may
be, at the last, one general practical lesson devoted to
vegetables and fruit, to review and impress the facts that
have been taught. as potatoes, on account of their large
amount of starch, require special care, an extra lesson
may be given to this vegetable.[]
in the lesson on potatoes the attention of the class
should be directed to the following:
. be sure to soften the cellulose thoroughly.
. after the potatoes are cooked, get rid of all possible
moisture, that they may be white and mealy.
() if potatoes are cooked in water, drain them thoroughly,
remove the cover, and shake over the heat
to dry out the starch.
() if potatoes are baked, break the skins and allow the
moisture to escape as steam.
. when serving mashed potatoes, pile them lightly
without smoothing.
a lesson on the use of starch for thickening purposes
should be given before lessons on the making of a sauce
or a soup from the water in which vegetables have been
cooked. the necessity of separating the starch grains
should be shown by experiments.
(any powdered starch may be used)
. boil / cup of water in a small saucepan. while boiling,
stir into it / tsp. of cornstarch and let it boil
one minute. observe the result. break open a
lump and examine it.
. mix  tsp. of cornstarch with  tsp. of cold water, and
stir into / cup of boiling water. note the result.
. mix  tsp. of cornstarch with  tsp. of sugar and stir
into / cup of boiling water. note the result.[]
. mix  tsp. of cornstarch with  tsp. of melted fat in a
small saucepan and stir into it / cup of boiling
water. note the result.
. starch granules must be separated before being used
to thicken a liquid:
() by adding a double quantity of cold liquid
() by adding a double quantity of sugar
() by adding a double quantity of melted fat.
. the liquid which is being thickened must be constantly
stirred, to distribute evenly the starch grains until
they are cooked.
milkflour butter
thin cream sauce cup tbsp. tbsp.
thick cream sauce cup tbsp. tbsp.
note.—use thick cream sauce to pour over a food. use
thin cream sauce when solid food substance is mixed with
the sauce.
. tomato sauce.—use strained tomato juice instead of
milk.
. vegetable sauce.—use vegetable water in place of the
milk.
. cheese sauce.—use / to / cup of grated cheese in  cup
of thick cream sauce.[]
at least one practice lesson should be given on the
making of these soups. the value of the vegetable water
should be impressed upon the pupils, and it may be pointed
out that these soups are an excellent way of using the
cooking water and any left-over vegetable.
the difference between tomatoes and other vegetables
should be noted. tomatoes are a fruit and, as such, contain
an acid. the acid would curdle milk and must be
neutralized by the use of soda, before milk can be added.
utensils used for cream soups
. the liquid may be all milk, part vegetable water and
milk, or all vegetable water.
. the amount of flour used for thickening depends on the
vegetable. starchy vegetables need only / tbsp. to
one cup of liquid; non-starchy vegetables need  tbsp.
to a cup.
. the ingredients are combined as follows:
() the liquid is heated and thickened with flour.
() the seasonings of butter, salt, and pepper are
added.[]
() the vegetable pulp is added in any desired
quantity, usually about two tbsp. to one cup of
liquid.
a special recipe should be given for cream of tomato
soup, so that the proportion of soda may be correct.
note.—if flavours of onion, bay-leaf, parsley, etc., are
desired, these should be cooked with the vegetables, so as to
be extracted in the vegetable water.
. forms in which used:
() whole or cracked grains—rice, cracked wheat,
coarse oatmeal, etc.
() granular—corn meal, cream of wheat, fine oatmeal, etc.
() rolled or flaked grains—wheat, oats, corn,
rice, etc.
() powdered—wheat flour, rice flour, etc.
. cooking cereals for breakfast:
for  cup of water use / tsp. of salt and the following
cereal—
whole or cracked—/ cup of cereal
granular— tbsp. of cereal
rolled or flaked—/ cup of cereal.
put salt and water in the inner part of a double boiler,
and set directly over the fire. when steaming hot, gradually
stir in the dry cereal, and keep stirring until the
starch has thickened and boiled. stir carefully, so as not
to break the flakes of rolled cereals. then set the inner[]
dish inside the outer part of the double boiler, in which
there should be boiling water, and cook from two to four
hours.
note .—rice has very tender cellulose and cooks in / hr.
note .—rolled or flaked cereals have been steamed an
hour or more to soften them for rolling, so require less cooking.
note .—cereals may be cooked for breakfast the day
before, but should not be stirred while being re-heated.
. forms in which used:
() ripe seeds
() meals—pea meal, etc.
. cooking of dried legumes:
() soak in cold, soft water for twelve hours or
more, and then drain and rinse. hard
water may be softened by boiling, or by the
addition of soda (/ tsp. of soda to  pt. of
water).
() cook by simmering in softened water until
they are soft.
() after simmering, the beans may be baked.
forms in which used:
. whole or broken nuts—used as dessert or in cakes,
salads, etc.
. butters—ground and mixed with other ingredients
to make a paste.
. meals—ground and used to thicken soups.[]
the series of lessons on vegetable foods being finished,
it is a good time to take a salad lesson. all salads were
originally made from fresh young plants or salad greens,
and though any food material is now used for the purpose,
the subject seems to follow naturally the lessons on plant
food.
the pupils should derive unusual pleasure from this
work. the dishes made are most attractive and appetizing,
besides affording an opportunity for each member of the
class to display individual artistic skill. none of the principles
are new, so that the lesson will be really a review.
the outline of notes for the class will be:
. salad plants proper, such as lettuce, water-cress,
celery, cabbage
. cooked vegetables, such as peas, beans, asparagus,
carrots, beets
. meat—cold, of any kind
. fish—cold, of any kind
. eggs—hard-boiled
. fruit
. combinations of the above in great variety.
this depends on the ingredients. if salad greens only
are used, the food value is mainly the mineral matter, but
the dish will be refreshing and appetizing, and the oil,
butter, or egg used in the dressing adds nutriment.
salads are prepared with little trouble and with no
expense for fuel.[]
. have everything cold before combining.
. freshen the greens in cold water until crisp.
. meat, fish, and solid ingredients should be seasoned
some time before using, so that they may absorb the
flavours of the seasoning.
. in most cases do not combine the ingredients with
the dressing until just before serving.
() salad greens.—wash thoroughly, and put in
cold water until crisp, drain on a towel, wrap
in a damp cloth, and put in a cool place. cabbage
and lettuce may be finely shredded.
() fruit and cooked vegetables.—cut into cubes or
suitable pieces. chill and mix with the dressing,
to absorb it.
() meats.—remove the fat, skin, and gristle. cut
in cubes and chill.
() fish.—remove the bones, flake, chill, and pour
dressing over; but do not mix.
. cooked salad dressing:
 tbsp. sugar/ cup vinegar
/ tsp. mustard eggs
/ tsp. salt tbsp. butter.
() mix the first four ingredients in a saucepan and
heat until dissolved.
() beat the eggs very light in a round-bottomed bowl,
using a dover egg beater.
() beat the vinegar mixture into the eggs.[]
() set the bowl, with its contents, over a dish of boiling
water, then beat slowly and constantly until
the mixture is thickened.
() lift the bowl from the heat at once.
() beat in the butter and set away to cool.
() if desired, a half cup of whipped or plain cream
may be added just before the dressing is used.
. uncooked salad dressing:
/ tsp. salt tbsp. olive oil
/ tsp. pepper tbsp. vinegar.
() stir the salt and pepper into the oil.
() add the vinegar slowly and stir vigorously until
well blended and slightly thickened.
() serve with any salad made of salad greens.
as the study of mineral food involves a knowledge of
chemistry, little more can be done in junior classes than
to teach that certain mineral compounds are required for
the body, to point out their two main uses, and to lead
the pupils to know the foods which generally supply these.
their attention should be directed to the fact that all
mineral matter is found, in the first place, in the earth's
crust, but that, with the exception of salt, animals cannot
use it in that form. plants can use it, and they absorb
it from the soil; then we eat the plants, and in that way
obtain the mineral substance, or we may obtain it by
eating the animals which have eaten the plants. water
also, in making its way through the earth, may dissolve
certain minerals and, by drinking the water, we obtain
these.[]
it will not be necessary to teach the names of the
minerals which our food must supply, as most of these
will mean nothing to the pupils. they might be asked
to name one or two which are very familiar; for instance,
the lime in bone and the iron in blood. they may be
told that there are a few others which they will learn
when they study chemistry in the high school.
the pupils have already learned that mineral matter
serves two main functions in the body: that is, building
and regulating, and it is a good plan to classify the well-known
foods under these two headings. with a little
guidance the pupils can do most of this for themselves.
they know that milk serves all building purposes in a
child's body, and must, therefore, contain mineral matter.
eggs build animal bodies, and must contain this substance
also. meat is the animal body that has been built,
therefore meat has this substance; but we shall find in the
meat lessons that there is no mineral matter in fat and
that the cook cannot dissolve it out of bone, therefore
muscle or lean meat must be eaten to obtain it. seeds,
too, contain building material for new plants; therefore,
the building mineral matter must be stored in their cells.
hard water is known by the lime it contains, therefore
this, if drunk, assists in the formation of bone.
the class must be told that the mineral in the juices
of plants is mainly for regulating purposes; that is, to
keep our bodies in order, or as we say, healthy. when
they get out of order, we usually go to a doctor to be
regulated or made well. the medicine which he prescribes
often contains some mineral in solution, perhaps
iron. the mineral matter which is in the juices of plants,
being a more natural form than the mineral matter in
the medicine, is more easily made use of in the bodily[]
processes. this is one reason why people should eat
plenty of vegetables and fruit.
many springs also furnish water with large quantities
of mineral matter in solution, which is used mainly for
medicinal purposes. the pupils may know some places
where we find such springs, and these should be mentioned,
such as preston springs, banff, and mount
clemens, which have become health resorts through the
presence of these waters. when the springs are in a
distant country and their waters are known to contain a
certain mineral which our bodies need, the water is
bottled and shipped to us, and may be obtained from a
druggist. hunyadi janos, apenta, vichy, and apollinaris
are well-known medicinal waters shipped from european
springs.
. building mineral matter.—milk, eggs, lean meat,
seeds, hard water
. regulating mineral matter.—fruit, vegetables, mineral
waters, salt.
note.—this classification will be most useful to the pupils
in preparing well-balanced meals in their diet lessons.
after studying in this elementary way the composition
of the animal and vegetable foods, the pupils will be
ready for simple lessons on diet. the class may now be
said to have a working knowledge of the well-known foods,
and they should be given a chance to use this knowledge,
by combining and serving these foods for simple meals.[]
it will be helpful in this work, to guide the pupils in
making out a reference table of the food constituents.
this will give lists of food in which each constituent predominates,
as follows:
. water:
beverages (water, milk, tea, coffee, cocoa), fruit, vegetables.
. mineral matter:
() for building—milk, eggs (yolk and white), lean meat or fish, seeds, hard water
() for regulating—fruit, vegetables, mineral waters.
. protein:
milk (curd), eggs (yolk and white), lean meat or fish, seeds.
. sugar:
fruit (juice), non-starchy vegetables (juice),
milk (whey), commercial sugar.
. starch:
parts of plants which serve as storehouses:
tubers—potatoes, artichokes
roots—parsnip, tapioca, arrowroot
stem—sago
seeds—cereals, legumes, some nuts (peanuts, chestnuts).
. fat:
milk (cream), egg-yolk, meat or fish (fat),
fruit, as the olive (oil), most nuts (walnut,
butternut, pecan, peanut, etc.).
besides the necessary substances in food, the pupils
must be told that there are other points for the housekeeper
to consider when preparing the meals, namely:
. the amount of each food substance required daily.
. special requirements of individuals according to: ()
age, () occupation, () climate, () season.
under , above, it may be explained, that when a meal
is prepared which gives the body a correct proportion of
each food substance, it is said to be well balanced. from
numerous experiments the "dietary standard" for one
day for a grown person has been calculated to be:
water—about  pints, two of which are taken in solid
food
mineral matter— ounce
protein— to -/ ounces
fat— ounces
sugar and starch (together)— to  ounces.
although the pupils cannot be expected to follow this
table accurately, from lack of sufficient knowledge, it will
be of some assistance to them in choosing a combination
of food for the home meals.
under , above, some of the variations of food are
obvious, but some must be taught. children require
simple, nourishing food, which will contain plenty of
protein and mineral matter for tissue building as well as
much fuel food. their diet should be varied and
abundant.
in old age the diet should also be simple, because of
the lack of vigour in the digestive organs, but the amount
of building material should be decreased. the food of[]
old people should contain proportionately more carbonaceous
material.
brain workers require less food than those engaged
in active muscular work, and it should be less stimulating
and less bulky. their diet should be in a form that is
easily digested.
with the foregoing general ideas in mind, the pupils
may be asked to prepare menus for simple home meals.
these should be assigned as home work, so that plenty
of time can be given to their consideration, and then they
may be brought to the class for criticism. the best of
these should be chosen for actual practice in school work.
note.—it is intended that this part of the work shall be
presented in a very rudimentary way. the teacher should
feel satisfied if she succeeds in implanting ideas of the
importance of these food considerations, so that the pupils
will be ready for more specific instruction to be gained in
higher schools or from their own reading. cheap bulletins
on human nutrition, published by cornell university, will
be excellent reading on this subject.
before the pupils are given a meal to prepare and
serve, table setting should be reviewed, and the rules of
table service taught as follows:
. the hostess serves the soup, salad, dessert, tea, and
coffee; the host serves the meat and fish.
. vegetables and side dishes may be served by some one
at the table or passed by the waitress.
. dishes are served at the left of each person, commencing
with the chief guest.[]
. guests are served first; ladies before gentlemen.
. in each course, remove the dishes containing the food
before removing the soiled plates.
. when one course is finished, take the tray in the left
hand, stand on the left side of the person, and remove
the individual soiled dishes with the right hand,
never piling them.
. before dessert is served, if necessary, remove the
crumbs from the cloth with a brush, crumb knife, or
napkin.
. tea or coffee may be poured at table or served from a
side table by the waitress.
note.—extra cutlery and napkins should be conveniently
placed on a side table, in case of accident.
where the class consists of twelve or more pupils, it must be divided
for the preparation and serving of a meal. each section should prepare and
serve a meal for the others, until all have had experience. as breakfast and
luncheon are the simpler meals, they should be taken first in the order of
lessons. the duties of the cooking and serving should be definitely settled,
and each girl given entire responsibility for a certain part of the work.
those who are served should represent a family.
members should be chosen to act as father, mother, lady
guest, gentleman guest, and children of varying ages, so
that the duties and serving of each may be typified.[]
form iv: junior grade (continued)
the pupils of form iv junior should be urged to take
entire care of their own bed-rooms. the household
management teacher can do much to encourage them in
this. she may include such work as part of the week's
practice.
the order of work should be discussed and planned by
the pupils, the teacher guiding the class by her questioning.
in lessons of this kind, the main work of the
teacher is to ascertain what the pupil knows and to
systematize her knowledge.
a typewritten sheet of directions may be given each
pupil to hang in her room, and may serve as an incentive
to her to perform the duties outlined.
. open the window, if it has been closed during dressing.
. throw the bed-clothing over the foot of the bed, using
a chair to hold it from the floor, or place it over two
chairs near the window.
. put night clothing to air.
. put away any other clothing in drawers and closet.
. tidy and dust the top of the dressing-table.
. make the bed, after it has been aired at least half an
hour.[]
once a week the following work should be added:
. the blankets and comforter should be hung outside to
air.
. the mattress should be turned, and fresh bed-linen
placed on the bed.
. the room should be thoroughly swept and dusted.
after the pupils have had training in the care of their
bed-rooms, this experience, together with their lessons
in cleaning, should enable them to keep any of the other
rooms in the house in good order.
it should be pointed out that, in these days of sanitary
building and furnishing, there is no necessity for the
semi-annual "housecleaning" of former times. each
week the house can be thoroughly gone over, with the
exception of laundering curtains and washing wood-work,
and these duties might be taken in turn, a room at a time
every week, so that the work will not accumulate.
the class should be taught to consider the economy of
time and energy and encouraged to provide themselves
with all the latest aids they can afford.
the cleaning methods which are necessary for this
work and which have not been formally taught, should
now be definitely outlined. these are the weekly sweeping,
weekly dusting, and cleaning special metals.
. dust and put away all small articles.
. lift the small rugs, sweep them on both sides, out-of-doors
if possible, and leave them to air. rugs too
large to take out should be brushed and folded over
to allow of sweeping the under side and wiping the
floor beneath.[]
. cover the furniture with dust sheets.
. shut the doors and open a window.
. begin at the side of the room farthest from the door
and sweep toward the centre; sweep from the other
side toward the centre; gather the dust in a dust-pan
and empty it into the garbage pail or fire.
. put away the broom and dust-pan.
. leave the room shut up for a few minutes, in order
to allow the dust to settle.
. use a "dustless" mop to dust the floor.
. use a soft cotton or cheesecloth duster very slightly
dampened.
. roll up the covers that are over the furniture and carry
them outside, in order to shake off the dust.
. wipe the dust from the furniture, pictures, window-sills,
ledges, doors, and baseboard, being careful not
to scatter it in the air.
. change the duster when necessary.
. replace the small articles.
. wash and dry the dusters.
utensils made of these are heavy, but strong and
durable, and hold the heat well.
. care:
they must be kept dry and smooth. moisture
causes rust, roughens the surfaces of the[]
utensils, and makes them more difficult to
clean. if they are not to be used for some
time, the surfaces should be greased or coated
with paraffin.
. cleaning:
() wash in hot soap-suds, rinse in hot water, and
dry thoroughly.
() if food is burned on, scour with some gritty
material or boil in a solution of washing soda,
rinse in hot water, and dry thoroughly.
utensils made of this are light and inexpensive; they
are good conductors of heat, but they are also good
radiators and lose heat quickly.
. care:
as tinware is steel or iron coated with liquid
tin, the grades vary according to the "base-metal"
used and the thickness of the coating.
utensils made of this metal must be carefully
kept from scratches, since deep scratches expose
the base-metal and allow the formation of rust.
. cleaning:
() wash in hot soap-suds, rinse, and dry thoroughly.
() if food is burned on, boil in a weak solution of
washing soda, rinse in hot water, and dry
thoroughly.
note.—whiting may be used to brighten the tin, but
scouring is not recommended, as it wears off the coating.[]
utensils made of this are attractive, not heavy, and
they do not tarnish or rust.
. care:
these wares are made by coating steel or sheet-iron
with a specially prepared glassy substance
called enamel or glaze. two or three coats are
applied. the durability depends on the ingredients
used in the glaze and on the number
of coats applied.
such utensils should be heated gradually, scraped
carefully, and handled without knocking, to
avoid "chipping".
. cleaning:
() wash in hot soap-suds.
() if stained, use some scouring powder; wash and
dry.
() if food is burned on, boil in a solution of washing
soda and then scour; wash and dry.
utensils made of this are very light in weight and, as
they have no crevices, are easily cleaned. they are also
good conductors of heat.
. care:
this metal warps under a high temperature, and
should, therefore, be used with care. do not
turn the gas on full, or, if used over wood or
coal fires, be sure to leave the stove lid on.
some foods injure the metal, if they are allowed
to remain in it very long.[]
. cleaning:
() wash in hot water, with mild soap. alkalies
should not be used, as they darken the surface.
() if food is burned on, the dish should be soaked
in water and then scoured with bathbrick or
emery powder.
() whiting may be used to brighten it.
this is not used for utensils, but for table tops and
for placing under stoves, etc.
cleaning:
() use hot water and mild soap. alkalies and acids
affect zinc and should be used with care.
() if stained, rub with coal-oil or a paste made of
coal-oil and soda, and then wash in hot water.
this is used for garbage pails, ash pans, stove pipes,
etc. it is made by dipping sheet-iron into melted zinc.
cleaning:
the same as for zinc.
utensils made of these are heavy but durable and are
good conductors of heat. they are dangerous, if not
properly cleaned.
cleaning:
() wash in hot water, using a little washing soda to
remove any grease, rinse well, and dry.
() if stained or tarnished, scour with salt and
vinegar, then rinse thoroughly, and dry.[]
this is used for spoons, knives, forks, and serving
dishes, but never for cooking utensils, on account of its
cost. it is the best conductor of heat among the house
metals.
cleaning:
() wash in hot soap-suds.
() if stained or tarnished, use whiting or silver
polish, wash, and dry.
 tbsp. borax/ cup alcohol
 cup boiling waterwhiting.
. dissolve the borax in the water.
. when cold, add the alcohol and enough whiting to
make a thin cream.
. bottle, and shake when used.
note.—the care and cleaning of the metals out of which
ordinary utensils are made, such as granite ware, tin, and
steel, may be taught incidentally as the utensils are used.[]
form iv: junior grade (continued)
this work is but a continuation of the lessons on cleaning.
it is the process of removing foreign matter from
cotton, linen, woollen, or silk fabrics by the use of water
and additional cleansing agents. it also includes the
finishing of these materials by the use of blueing, starch,
and heated irons, to restore as far as possible their original
appearance.
the principles of laundry work have been taught in
the washing of dish cloths and towels, and now these
principles have only to be extended to white cotton and
linen clothes of any kind.
the pupils may be asked to bring soiled articles of
white linen or cotton from home for use at school in
exemplifying the necessary processes. in schools which
lack an equipment, these processes may be discussed in
class and then practised at home. the teacher should
choose from the following outline what is most suitable
to the class:
lesson i
materials
. water:
() use:
(a) to soften and dissolve certain foreign substances
in the clothes.[]
(b) to carry away all the foreign matter that
has been dissolved or rubbed out of the
clothes.
() kinds:
(a) hard water
(b) soft water
for laundry purposes, the water should
be soft. the quality known as hardness,
which some water has, is due to the lime
which it has dissolved in making its way
through the earth.
water is said to be temporarily or permanently
hard according to the kind of
lime it has in solution. temporarily hard
water may be softened by boiling; the lime
will be deposited, as may be seen in the
"furring" of tea-kettles. boiling has no
effect in softening permanently hard water,
so a substance known as an alkali is used for
this purpose.
() methods of softening water by alkalies.—for
each gallon of water use one of the following:
(a) one tablespoonful of borax or ammonia dissolved
in one cup of water.
(b) two tablespoonfuls of a solution made by
dissolving one pound of washing soda in
one quart of boiling water.
(c) one fourth tablespoonful of lye dissolved in
one cup of water.
. alkalies (borax, ammonia, washing soda, lye):
() use:
(a) to soften hard water
(b) to assist in dissolving greasy substances.
() kinds:
(a) borax.—this alkali is one of the mildest,
and for this reason is less harmful to the
clothing. it is useful when an alkali is
required to soften water for coloured
clothes or woollens. it also has a tendency
to keep white clothes a good colour.
(b) ammonia.—this also is a mild alkali, but is
apt to "yellow" white materials. as it
is very volatile, it should not be used
unless the washing can be done quickly.
(c) washing soda.—this is a cheap substance
and stronger than borax or ammonia. it
should be made into a solution before it
is used, for fear of too great strength.
(d) lye, or caustic soda.—this alkali is very
strong and should be employed with great
care. it must not be used except in weak
solutions, otherwise it would entirely dissolve
fabrics. it is not advisable for
home laundry work.
. soap:
() use.—to act on greasy matter.
soap-suds penetrate fabrics more completely
than water alone, and when the soap
comes in contact with fatty material, it
emulsifies it, that is, very finely divides
it into minute particles, so that it can be
easily removed. if a soap is used that[]
contains free alkali, this substance unites
with the greasy impurities to form new
soap which has cleansing value.
() kinds.—(a) neutral, (b) medium, (c) strong.
all soap is a compound of an alkali and fat,
and according as one or the other of these
substances predominates, the kind of soap
is determined.
when just enough alkali is used to completely
saponify the amount of fat, the
product is called a neutral, or mild, soap.
when an excess of alkali is present, the
soap is termed medium or strong,
according to the amount of free alkali it
contains.
a mild soap should be used when free
alkali would be injurious, as in washing
woollens or fabrics that have delicate
colours.
. soap substitutes, or adjuncts:
() use.—to act alone or with soap in exerting a
solvent action on greasy impurities, so
that the cleansing process may be
facilitated.
() kinds:
(a) alkalies.—these must be used in excess of
the amount needed for softening the water.
(b) harmless solvents, such as turpentine,
paraffin, coal-oil, gasolene.—the clothing
must be well rinsed to get rid of any
odour.[]
(c) washing powders.—these are prepared mixtures
of soap and some other solvent of
greasy matter.
. blueing:
() use.—to make clothes which have a yellow
tinge appear whiter in colour.
() kinds.—there are several kinds on the market,
but the names of these will be of no value
to the class.
note.—sufficient blueing should be used to make the
blueing water a pale sky-blue colour when a little of it is
lifted in the hand.
. starch:
() use:
(a) to stiffen fabrics and thus improve their
appearance.
(b) to give fabrics a glazed surface, so that
they will shed dust and other impurities.
() kinds.—(a) cold starch, (b) boiled starch.
raw starch does not give as durable a finish
as cooked starch, but it does give greater
stiffness. a fabric will take up more
starch in the raw form, and the heat of
the iron cooks the starch, thus producing
the stiffness. the "body", or stiffness,
produced by cooked starch is usually
preferable, though on account of its preparation,
it is not so convenient to use.
() recipes for starch—[]
(a) cold starch
 tbsp. laundry starch
/ tsp. borax
 cups cold water.
dissolve the borax in a little boiling water. add the
cold water gradually to the starch and mix thoroughly.
add the dissolved borax and stir well before using.
(b) boiled starch
 tbsp. starch/ tsp. lard, butter, or paraffin
 tbsp. cold water qt. boiling water.
mix the starch with the cold water until free from
lumps. add the lard, then gradually stir in the boiling
water, and keep stirring until thickened. cook fifteen
minutes and use hot.
note.—borax in starch gives greater gloss and increases
the stiffness. it also gives more lasting stiffness. lard,
butter, or wax is used to give a smoother finish and to prevent
the starch from sticking to the iron.
lesson ii
. sort the clothes: () table linen and clean towels
() bed and body linen
() handkerchiefs
() soiled towels and cloths.
. mend the clothes.
. remove stains.
. look after necessary materials.
steps  method
. soaking:
wet the clothes; rub the soiled parts with soap and
roll each article separately; pack in a tub, placing
the clothing most soiled at the bottom; cover with
warm soapy water and soak from one hour to over
night.
the soaking softens and loosens the fibres of fabrics,
so that the foreign matter in them can be more
easily separated. it also dissolves the soluble impurities
in the fabrics.
. rubbing:
wring the clothes out of the soaking water, and place
them in a tub of clean warm water or soap-suds;
rub the soiled parts first on one side and then on
the other, using the knuckles, a washboard, or a
washing-machine. when each piece is clean, wring
it tightly.
the rubbing scrapes or rubs out the foreign matter
which has been loosened by the soaking.
. rinsing:
shake out each piece and put it into a tub of clear
water; rub, and move about in the water to get
rid of any soiled water that the clothes may contain;
wring tightly.
. boiling:
shake out each piece and place it in a boiler of cold
water with or without soap; bring to boiling heat,
and boil briskly for twenty minutes.
the boiling kills any germs and assists in whitening
the clothes.[]
. rinsing:
lift the clothes from the boiling water by means of
a clothes stick and place them in a tub of clear,
cold water; proceed as in the first rinsing.
. blueing:
open out each piece and place one or two at a time
in a tub of blueing water for just a moment;
wring tightly, and shake out each piece.
the blueing tends to counteract any yellow tinge in
the clothes, making them appear whiter.
. starching:
dip one piece at a time into the starch mixture until
well saturated; then wring.
only certain articles or parts of articles will require
this part of the process, to give them body or stiffness
and, it may be, glossiness.
. hanging:
shake out each piece thoroughly; fasten to a clothes-line
or hang on a rack to allow the moisture to
evaporate. this should be out-of-doors in the sunlight
if possible.
foreign matter which is difficult or impossible to
remove by the ordinary washing process is called a stain.
such matter is not dissolved by the usual cleansing agents
used in laundry work, such as water and soap, but requires
some special solvent to act on it. the choice of the agent
to be used will depend on the nature of the foreign matter
to be removed. in some cases it is difficult to find[]
an agent which will not act also on the colour of the
fabric; in other cases to find one which does not injure
the fibre of the goods.
the pupils should be asked to give instances from
their own experience where special solvents were used to
remove stains, and be required to make a list of these.
if necessary, the teacher should supplement this list with
the names of other agents and the methods of using them.
the washing of woollen materials is part of the course
for the work of the senior grade of form iv, but, for the
sake of convenience, the laundry lessons of both grades of
form iv are outlined in one section of this manual.
before allowing the class any practice in this branch of
laundry work, it will be necessary for the teacher to make
certain principles very clear:
. that wool is an animal product. as such it tends to
be shrunken and hardened by () heat, () alkalies.
. that the surface of each wool fibre woven into woollen
materials is seen under the microscope to be covered
with notches, or scales. if these notches in any way
become entangled, the material is thereby drawn up,
or "shrunken".
. that these notches may be entangled by:
() wetting the woollen material and then rubbing
or twisting it. when the fibres are wet, they
expand somewhat and the projecting scales, or
notches, are loosened. if the material is rubbed
at this time, the notched edges interlock.[]
() the use of strong soaps or alkalies. these act
chemically on the fibres and soften and expand
them, causing the notched edges to become so
prominent that they catch in one another.
note.—the structure of woollen fibres may be sketched on
the black-board and compared with those of cotton and linen.
to impress the foregoing principles, a few experiments
will be found most useful.
. boil a piece of new woollen cloth for five minutes. dry,
and compare with an original piece.
. saturate a piece of new woollen cloth with a strong
solution of washing soda. dry, and compare with an
original piece.
. wash a piece of new woollen cloth in each of the following
ways:
() by rubbing soap directly on the cloth and then
sousing the goods in the water.
() by using a soap solution instead of the soap, as
in ().
() by rubbing on a wash-board.
in each case dry the cloth and compare with an original
piece.
after the results of the experiments have been discussed,
the pupils may formulate a series of "points" to
be observed in the washing of woollen fabrics.[]
cotton fibres magnified
linen fibres magnified
woollen fibres magnified
. use lukewarm, soft water.
. do not use strong soaps or alkalies.
. do not rub soap directly on the woollen material, but
use soap solutions.
. do not rub or twist woollen cloth when it is wet.
. do not boil to sterilize.
. do not dry in extreme heat.
. shake or brush the clothing to free it from dust.
. put it into lukewarm, soapy water to soak for a few
minutes.
. wash on both sides by squeezing and sousing in the
water.
. rinse in clear, lukewarm water; use several waters,
if necessary, to remove the soap.
. pass through a loosely set wringer or squeeze the water
out by hand.
. shake, in order to raise the woolly fibres.
. dry in a moderate temperature, in a wind, if possible.[]
the senior fourth class is the preparatory class for
entrance into the high school, and for many girls it is the
final school year. for this reason the course of this year
should cover as many of the remaining household operations
as possible.
the training of the previous years should have formed
good habits of work and have given experience in ordinary
cleaning, and in the cooking and serving of the simple
food materials. through this training the pupils should
also have been impressed with the value of food, and should
have learned the sources of food and of all well-known
household materials.
the training of this last year, while continuing the
junior work, should also emphasize the household processes
that require greater mental development to understand
and greater practical skill to carry out. it is the
border year between the public school and the high school,
and must necessarily anticipate the elementary science of
the latter. in this year more responsibility should be
given to the pupils and more originality should be expected
of them. where they have hitherto followed recipes and
been given rules, they should now follow principles and
deduce rules.
of the several topics outlined in the course for form
iv senior, it is advisable to start with the preservation of
food. fruit and vegetables are most plentiful when the[]
school year opens, and september is the most opportune
month to preserve these for winter use. facts concerning
food preservation may have been taken incidentally in
previous lessons, but now the subject should be systematically
taught, so that canning, preserving, and pickling may
be intelligently practised.
the lesson may be introduced by referring to the unusual
attention given to fruit at the time of ripening.
the economical housekeeper takes certain foods when they
are most plentiful and preserves them for use when they
are not in season. some foods require special care to keep
them from decaying. the decay is caused by the action
of microscopic plants called "bacteria", which get into the
food.
it is difficult for any one to get a correct conception of
bacteria; especially is it so for children. the teacher should
be most careful not to attempt to give the class unimportant
details, but the few necessary facts should be made
very clear and real. the following points should be impressed:
. bacteria are plants. (this fact should be kept clearly
in mind.)
. they are microscopic in size and hence the more difficult
to deal with.
. they are found everywhere that there is life—in the
air, in water, in the soil.[]
. they multiply very rapidly under favourable conditions.
. some bacteria are useful to the housekeeper; many
kinds are her enemies.
. some of these enemies get into food and, growing there,
cause a change in it—then we say the food is
spoiled.
all plants have the same requirements. any well-known
plant may be put before the class to help them to think
of these. they must be told that microscopic plants differ
from other plants in one respect; they do not need light.
hence bacterial requirements are as follows: () water,
() food, () air (oxygen), () heat.
the class should be led to see that if any one of these
conditions is removed, the remaining ones are insufficient
for the plant's activity.
to the housekeeper, preserving food means overcoming
bacteria. there are only two ways of doing this, either of
which may be chosen:
. kill the bacteria in the food and exclude others.
. subject the food to conditions which are unfavourable
for bacterial growth.
in the first way, extreme heat is used to kill the bacteria
in the food, and then while hot, the food is sealed to
keep out other bacteria: example, canning.[]
in the second way, conditions are made unfavourable
to the bacteria in the food, as follows:
. the bacteria are deprived of water; the food is dried.
. the bacteria are deprived of sufficient heat to be active;
cold storage is used.
. large quantities of certain substances which are detrimental
to the growth of bacteria are put into the food,
and the bacteria become inactive. examples: salt,
sugar, spices, vinegar, smoke, or certain chemicals.
when the lesson is finished, the class is ready to practise
the principles it involves. the lessons on the special
preservation of fruit may follow at once.
utensils used in canning
as canning is the method of preservation most commonly
used, practice should be given in this method. in
rural schools with a limited equipment, it may be that only
one jar can be prepared. in other schools, it may be impossible
to provide each pupil with material for work, on
account of the expense. in the latter case, the materials[]
may all be brought from home, or each pupil may bring
her own jar and fruit, and the school supply the sugar.
instruction on the care of jars and the preparation of
fruit and syrup must precede the practical work.
. see that the jars are air-tight; partly fill the jar with
water; place rubbers, covers, and rims; screw tightly,
and invert. if any water oozes out, the jar is not air-tight.
often an extra rubber will correct the trouble.
. wash the jars thoroughly with the aid of a small brush.
. sterilize the jars in every part; dip them in boiling
water, or place them on a rest (folded paper or
wooden slats) in a kettle, to prevent the jars from
touching the bottom. fill and surround them with
tepid water, then place them over heat until the water
boils. keep them in the boiling water until ready
to fill with fruit. dip the rubber bands in boiling
water, but do not allow them to remain in it. use
new rubbers each season.
. when filling the jars, place them on a folded cloth
wrung out of warm water, then seal, and invert until
cool.
use fresh, sound fruit, not too ripe.
. berries.—pick over, wash in a strainer, and hull.
. currants, gooseberries.—pick over, wash, remove ends
and stems.
. cherries.—pick over, wash, remove stones and stems.
. plums.—pick over, wash, remove stems, and prick three
or four times with a silver fork, in order to prevent
the steam bursting the skin.[]
. pears, apples.—pick over, wash, pare, and, to prevent
discoloration, keep in cold water until used.
. peaches.—pick over, plunge into boiling water a few
seconds (using a wire basket), then into cold water;
peel; drop into cold water to prevent discoloration.
use about  cup of water for each pint can.
no.  syrup.—equal parts of sugar and water, or 
cup of water and  cup of sugar.
no.  syrup.—-/ cups of water and  cup of sugar.
. use no.  syrup for watery fruits and acid fruits.
. use no.  syrup for pears, peaches, sweet plums, sweet
cherries, etc.
. fruit cooked in a steamer:
fill the sterilized jars with prepared fruit, with or
without syrup. place the covers, but do not fasten
them down. stand the jars in a steamer over cold
water. cover the steamer and heat to the boiling
point. steam at least fifteen minutes, or until the
fruit is tender. remove from the steamer, fill to
overflowing with boiling syrup, and seal at once.
invert.
. fruit cooked in a boiler:
put a false bottom in the boiler, to prevent the jars
from being broken. fill the jars with fruit, and
add syrup if desired. cover and place the jars in
the boiler without touching one another. pour in
tepid water to within an inch of the top of the jars
and bring gradually to boiling heat. cook and
finish as directed in , above.[]
. fruit cooked in an oven:
fill sterilized, hot jars with prepared raw fruit and
cover with hot syrup. place the jars in a moderate
oven, in a baking dish containing about an inch or
two of hot water. cook and finish as in , above.
. fruit cooked in a kettle:
make a syrup in a fairly deep kettle. put the prepared
fruit into it and cook gently until tender.
when the fruit is cooked, lift carefully into hot,
sterilized jars, and fill to overflowing with boiling
syrup. seal at once and invert.
note.—by methods , , and  the fruit is kept more perfect
in shape and loses less flavour than by method . methods
 and  are best to choose for class practice.
after the lesson in canning, it may not be wise to take
the school time for further practice in the preservation of
fruit. when such is the case, the theory of jam and jelly
making may be discussed in class for home practice. the
notes of these lessons may appear as follows:
. in this method sugar is the preservative, therefore the
amount used must be large.
. the quantity of sugar used is from three quarters to
one pound of sugar to each pound of fruit. little or
no water is used.
. the natural shape and appearance of the fruit is not
kept.
. the flavour of the fruit is not so natural, on account
of the excessive sweetness.
. the jar need not be sealed, but merely covered.[]
. jelly is made from certain fruit juices and sugar.
. the fruit juice must contain a certain amount of pectin,
or jellying principle, and also a certain amount of
acid.
() skin, () core, () pits and seeds.
utensils used in making jelly
. currants
. crab-apples, apples
. quinces
. cranberries, blackberries, raspberries
. grapes, if rather green.[]
. cut up the prepared fruit if necessary, and add barely
enough water for cooking.
. set over the heat and simmer gently until the cellulose
is very soft.
. turn into a jelly-bag, and drain for a number of hours
or over night, in order to get rid of the cellulose.
. measure the drained juice and take the same quantity
of sugar.
. heat the sugar in the oven.
. boil the juice gently and steadily for twenty minutes,
skimming when required.
. add the hot sugar and boil very gently from three to
five minutes, or until the mixture will jelly when
tested.
. empty at once into hot glasses and set to cool.
. when cold and firm, cover and set in a cool, dark place.
. melt paraffin and pour a layer on each glass, cover with
a tin cover or paper pasted with egg-white.
. cut clean, white paper to fit the glass, and lay on the
jelly when it is firm and cold. place the cover or
paper as in , above.
where the teacher finds it desirable, a lesson should
now be given on pickling, with or without class practice.
at least one or two good recipes may be given for home
use.
there are no new principles to teach. the use of
vinegar, salt, and spices as preservatives should be reviewed.[]
form iv: senor grade (continued)
the first work in cookery, for this form, should consist
of practice lessons, which will test the ability of the
class in cooking the simple animal and vegetable foods.
the recipes used for these should be such as to attract the
interest of the pupils, and each may be a combination of
several food materials. cream soups, custards, scalloped
dishes, and shepherd's pie, would be useful for this
purpose.
it is desirable that this test shall be made in as few
lessons as possible, because nearly all the time in cookery
for this year will be required for the new work, namely, a
series of lessons on flour mixtures.
flour is a food substance ground into a powder.
. sources of flour:
() certain cereals—wheat, rye, barley, buckwheat,
rice
() potatoes.
. kinds of flour made from wheat:
() graham flour—the entire wheat seed is ground.
() whole wheat flour—the first outer coat of
cellulose with its valuable mineral contents is
removed before the seed is ground.[]
() white flour—only the central white part of the
seed is ground.
note.—the pupils should be given specimens of fall wheat
to examine, so as to compare the outer coat of cellulose with
the central white part of the grain.
. composition of white flour:
() starch—a fine, granular, white substance
() gluten—a sticky, yellowish, elastic substance (a
protein food).
to find the substances in white flour, each pupil should
mix half a cup of bread flour with enough cold water to
make a dough. she must then be taught to knead it. this
knowledge will be of use later in the bread lessons. after
it is thoroughly kneaded until it is smooth and well
blended, the dough should be washed in several waters.
the first washing water should be poured into a glass and
allowed to settle, to show the starch. after all the starch
is washed away, the gluten will remain.
the gluten may then be put into a greased pan and
baked, to demonstrate that it admits of distention, and
also to show that it may be stiffened permanently by heat
into any distended shape. the baked gluten should be
reserved to be used as a specimen in succeeding lessons.
. kinds of wheat flour:
() bread flour—contains much gluten.
() pastry flour—contains little gluten.
note.—macaroni is a paste made from wheat flour which
contains much gluten.
. tests for bread flour:
() the colour is a deeper cream than pastry flour,
on account of the larger amount of gluten
which it contains.[]
() when squeezed, it will not hold the impress of
the hand.
() when the flour is made into a dough and washed,
about one fourth of the original quantity remains
as gluten.
. meaning of flour mixtures:
a lightened mixture of flour and liquid, with or
without other ingredients, is called a flour
mixture.
. kinds of flour mixtures:
() batters.—(a) pour batters—pancakes, popovers
(b) drop batters—cake
() doughs.— (a) soft dough—cookies, baking-powder biscuits, doughnuts
(b) stiff dough—pastry.
. methods of mixing flour mixtures:
() stirring.—a roundabout movement which simply
mixes the ingredients.
() beating.—an upright, circular movement, which
incorporates air into the ingredients while being
mixed.
() folding.—a slow, careful beating, which blends
the ingredients without loss of the air they
contain.
() kneading.—a movement of the hands to blend
the ingredients and also to incorporate air.
() cutting.—a hacking movement of a knife to
mix fat through flour.[]
. framework of flour mixtures:
() gluten
() gluten and egg-white.
to show the framework, the gluten baked in the flour
lessons should be used. it should be pointed out as the
skeleton of the mixture which upholds the entire structure
and on which the other ingredients depend. to have light
mixtures, this framework must admit of being expanded
and also of being stiffened permanently into the stretched
shape. since egg-white has both of these necessary qualities,
it may be used for a framework either alone or in
combination with gluten.
it should also be observed that a mixture of ingredients
light in weight does not prevent the framework from rising
as much as heavy ones do.
the pupils will see that the framework of a mixture
must increase in size in order to make the mixture light,
but it must be made very clear that, while heat stiffens any
framework, it will not distend it. some other agency is
required for this.
. lightening agents used in flour mixtures:
() air.—incorporated by beating, kneading, and
sifting.
() steam.—incorporated in the form of a liquid
which, when heated, changes to steam.
() carbonic acid gas.—formed in the mixture by
the chemical union of soda with some acid.
examples: soda and sour milk; soda, cream of
tartar and water; soda and molasses.[]
the lightening agents, air and steam, may be taught
from the samples of baked gluten. experiments will show
how to produce the carbonic acid gas.
experiments:
. put into a thick glass / tsp. of soda and / tsp. of
cream of tartar. mix, and note the result. stir
in / cup of cold water, and note the result.
. in no. , use hot water in place of cold, and note
the result.
. put / cup of sour milk in a glass. stir into the
milk / tsp. of soda, and note the result.
. put  tbsp. of molasses in a glass. stir into the
molasses a pinch of soda, and note the result.
baking-powder:
it may now be explained that, for the sake of convenience,
soda and cream of tartar may be obtained already
mixed, in accurate proportions of two parts of acid to one
of the soda. this mixture is known as baking-powder.
as very little moisture is necessary to start the action of
the powder, a little cornstarch is added to it to keep it dry.
for the same reason, it should always be kept tightly
covered.
soda is made from common salt and is cheap, but the
source of cream of tartar makes it expensive, so that good
baking-powder cannot be low priced. if such be advertised,
it is usually adulterated.
as soon as the foregoing principles of flour mixtures
are understood, they should be put into practice. the
lessons on cake, bread, and pastry should follow in the
order named, with as much practical work in connection
with each as the time will allow.[]
. classes of cake:
() cakes without butter.—these mixtures contain
no heavy ingredients and have little weight
depending on the framework. they are lightened
by air and steam only. examples: sponge
cake, angel cake.
() cakes with butter.—these are mixtures having
ingredients of greater weight; and the three
lightening agents—air, steam, and carbonic
acid gas are used to raise them. examples:
pound cake, chocolate cake, nut cake, etc.
note.—practice should be given in making at least one of
each kind of cake, to demonstrate the method of mixing
employed.
. general directions for making cake:
() attend to the fire, so as to have the oven at a
proper heat.
() grease the pans thoroughly; greased paper may
be used to line the bottom of the tin, but, in the
case of fruit cake, the whole tin should be lined.
() have everything ready, so that the mixing may
be quickly done.
() use pastry flour.
() use fine granulated sugar to ensure its being
dissolved.
() blend the ingredients thoroughly, and at the
same time incorporate as large an amount of
air as possible.[]
() fill the pan about two-thirds full, pushing the
mixture well to the corners and sides, so as to
leave a depression in the centre.
() attend carefully to the baking.
. general rules for mixing cake:
() cake without butter—
(a) separate the yolks and whites of the eggs.
(b) beat the yolks until thick and lemon-coloured.
(c) add sugar to the yolks gradually and continue
beating; add the flavouring.
(d) beat the whites until stiff and dry, then
fold them into the first mixture.
(e) gradually sift and fold in the flour until
well mixed.
() cake with butter—
(a) cream the butter by working it with a
wooden spoon.
(b) add the sugar gradually by stirring it in.
(c) beat the eggs until light, and add to the
first mixture. (the eggs may be separated
and the whites added later.)
(d) add the liquid and beat until the sugar
is thoroughly dissolved.
(e) mix the flour and baking-powder in a
sifter and gradually sift and beat it into
the mixture until it is thoroughly
blended.
(liquid and flour may be added
alternately.)
(f) fold in the stiffly beaten whites, if the
eggs have been separated.[]
(g) if fruit, peel, nuts, etc., are used, they
should be floured out of the quantity
allowed for the cake and added last.
. general directions for baking cake:
() small, thin cakes should be baked in a hot oven.
examples: cookies, layer cake.
() all loaf cakes require a moderate oven.
() in baking cakes, divide the time stated in the
recipe into quarters as follows:
first quarter—mixture should begin to rise.
second quarter—mixture should continue
rising.
third quarter—mixture should begin to
brown and to stiffen into shape.
fourth quarter—mixture should finish
browning and stiffening and shrink
slightly from the sides of the pan.
() mixture is cooked when a slight pressure leaves
no dent, or when a small skewer or fine knitting-needle
put into the centre comes out clean
and dry.
to the inexperienced minds of the girls in the fourth
form, to whom the study of flour mixtures is new, the
number and variety of these seems very large. all cook
books give an almost endless collection of recipes for cakes,
cookies, muffins, etc., and to the pupils each of these seems
an entirely new mixture. in reality, many of them are
but slight variations of the same type. a certain mixture
of materials is used for a foundation, and numerous varieties
are made from this by addition, subtraction, or substitution
of ingredients. the original mixture is called[]
a basic recipe. instead of teaching isolated mixtures, it
will be found an excellent idea to give the class the basic
ingredients for a recipe and encourage them to suggest
variations, either original or from memory.
typical basic recipes for cake and biscuits are given
below:
/ cup butter / cup flour
/ cup sugar/ tsp. salt
 eggs tsp. baking-powder
/ cup milk/ tsp. vanilla.
. spice cake:
to the basic recipe add  tbsp. of spice. sift in the
spice with the flour.
. nut cake:
add / cup of chopped nuts. increase the baking-powder
by one third. put a little of the flour on
the nuts and beat them in at the last.
. fruit cake:
add / cup of currants, raisins, figs, or dates, or a
mixture of all. increase the baking-powder by
one third. flour the fruit and add it last.
. chocolate cake:
add / cup grated chocolate. increase the milk by
 tbsp. heat the chocolate in the milk just
enough to dissolve it. cool the mixture and use
in place of milk.[]
 cups flour
/ tsp. salt
 tsp. baking-powder
 tbsp. fat (butter, lard, or dripping)
about / cup milk.
. sweet biscuit:
add  tbsp. of sugar after the fat is added.
. fruit biscuit:
add  tbsp. of sugar and / cup of fruit, (currants,
raisins, peel, or a mixture of all) after the fat is
added.
. scones:
add  tbsp. of sugar, and use one egg and only / cup
of milk. beat the egg until light, add to milk,
and use this for liquid. form into round cakes
about eight inches in diameter, and cut into
quarters.
. fruit scones:
add / cup of fruit to the scone recipe.
. short cake for fruit:
same as scones, but double the amount of fat.
. dumplings for stews:
use the basic recipe, leaving out the fat.
. steamed fruit pudding:
use the basic recipe to make the dough that incases
the fruit.[]
in beginning the bread lessons, it will be found that
there are no new principles to teach. it will, however, be
necessary to explain the new means of producing gas which
is used in this particular mixture, namely, yeast.
from their lessons on the "preservation of food" and
"canning", the pupils are already acquainted with one
class of microscopic plants. the little plants, in that case,
were a source of great inconvenience to the housekeeper.
yeast may be introduced as another family of one-celled
plants, but one which is most useful. under good conditions
these tiny plants will produce a large amount of
carbon dioxide gas, provided they are given sufficient time.
if, however, the gas be required quickly, soda and acid
must be used. for this reason, plain flour mixtures, in
which the carbon dioxide is quickly made, are called quick
breads, to distinguish them from breads in which yeast is
used. examples of these are baking-powder biscuits, gems,
corn-bread, etc.
the use of yeast is the simplest and cheapest way of
obtaining carbonic acid gas, and mixtures so made remain
moist longer than those in which baking-powder is used.
throughout the introductory lesson, this fact must be
kept prominently before the class, that yeast is a plant and,
as such, requires plant conditions. the necessary conditions
will be known from the lesson on "bacteria", so that
they have only to be reviewed. the pupils may be told
that although they cannot see the plants, they can very
plainly see the bubbles of gas which the plants give off
when the latter are made active under favourable conditions.[]
. description of yeast:
yeast is a one-celled plant which can be seen only with
a microscope. under good conditions it becomes very
active and multiplies rapidly by a process called budding.
it is used by the housekeeper for the carbonic acid gas it
gives off.
yeast plants magnified
. conditions necessary for the activity of yeast:
() oxygen
() water
() food.—this must be sugar, or starch which it
will change into sugar. potato starch is more
easily used by yeast than flour starch. it uses
also some nitrogenous food and mineral
matter.
() heat.—the yeast plant thrives in a heat of about
the same temperature as our bodies. a little
extra heat will only make it grow faster; but
excessive heat will kill it.
freezing will not kill the plant, though cold
makes yeast inactive.[]
. sources of yeast:
yeast was first found as wild yeast in the air, but now
it may be obtained at grocery stores, in three forms:
() liquid yeast.—the plants are put into a starchy
liquid. this will keep only a few days, as the
starch sours.
() dry yeast.—the plants are put into a starchy
paste and the mixture is dried. this form
will keep for months, because it is perfectly
dry but, for the same reason, it takes the plants
a long time to become active when used.
() compressed yeast.—the plants are put into cakes
of a starchy mixture and left moist. they will
keep only a few days. good compressed yeast
is a pale fawn colour, smells sweet, breaks
clean, and crumbles easily.
. experiments with yeast:
make a yeast garden by using the plants obtained at
the grocery store as follows:
take half a cup of lukewarm water to give the plants
moisture, a teaspoonful of sugar for immediate food, and
the same of wheat starch (flour) for a reserve food. beat
the mixture to infold oxygen, and then put in one-quarter
cake of yeast plants.
divide the mixture among a number of test-tubes, so
that each group of four pupils has three.
() place one test-tube in warm water and heat to
boiling.
() place one test-tube in water which feels warm
to the hand.[]
() place one test-tube in cracked ice and freeze the
mixture. afterwards thaw, and place the
same test-tube in lukewarm water.
observe the results, and compare the amount of gas
formed under the different conditions.
ingredients of plain bread:
. liquid.—() it wets the mixture and causes the ingredients to adhere.
() it furnishes steam for a lightening gent.
() it allows the gluten to become sticky and elastic.
() it furnishes moisture for yeast plants.
. yeast.—it gives off carbonic acid gas, which lightens the mixture.
. salt.—() it gives a flavour.
() it retards the growth of the yeast plant.
. flour.—() it thickens the mixture.
() it supplies food for the yeast plant.
() it supplies gluten for a framework for the mixture.
amount of ingredients for one small loaf:
liquid— cup or / pt.
salt—/ tsp.
flour—about three times the amount of liquid
yeast—amount depends on the time given the bread
to rise, as follows:
 hr. to rise hr. to rise hr. to rise
/ yeast cake/ yeast cake yeast cake
note.—one cake of compressed yeast contains about the
same number of yeast plants as one cake of dry yeast or one
cup of liquid yeast.
process in making bread:
() mixing (stirring, beating, and kneading).—
(a) this mixes the ingredients.
(b) it incorporates air to aid the yeast plant
and to act as a lightening agent.
(c) it makes the gluten elastic.
() first rising.—this allows the yeast plants conditions
and time to produce carbonic acid gas,
until the dough is distended to twice its original
size.
() moulding.—(a) this distributes the gas evenly
throughout the loaf.
(b) it shapes the loaf.
() second rising.—this again allows the yeast
plants time to produce gas which will distend
the dough to twice its size.
() baking.—(a) the heat of the oven expands the
air and gas in the dough, which causes
the gluten framework to distend.
(b) the water changes to steam, which becomes
another agent in distending the
gluten.[]
(c) the starch on the outside of the loaf becomes
brown in the dry heat of the oven,
while the inside starch is made soluble in
the moist heat of the mixture.
(d) the gluten stiffens into the distended
shape.(e) the yeast plants are killed.
in this lesson, after deciding on the necessary ingredients,
the pupils may be told the amount of each to use
for their class work. they should then measure and mix
these ingredients and set the dough away for the first
rising. while the bread is rising, the kitchen may be put
in order and the other steps of the process reasoned out
and written.
other school work must be taken then, until the dough
has fully risen, when the process may be completed. after
each stage of the process has been carried out, the notes
on it may be written.
with the foregoing principles of bread-making in mind,
the class should be able to make any bread mixture. each
pupil should have entire responsibility for the process of
making one small loaf of plain bread. about half a cup
of liquid, mixed with the other necessary ingredients,
makes a good-sized loaf for practice. smaller loaves than
this give little chance for manipulation.
in household management centres, where the pupils
come from other schools for the lesson period only, the
process will have to be divided into two lessons. the first
lesson may include the first two stages—mixing and first
rising—each pupil using small quantities, say for one
eighth of a loaf of the ordinary size. at the end of the
lesson, they may carry their dough home for completion,[]
or it may be used by another class which is ready for the
later steps of the process.
the second lesson will include the last three steps—moulding,
second rising, and baking—and it will be necessary
for the teacher to have dough prepared for the moulding
stage when the class arrives.
these mixtures are but variations of plain bread. the
extra ingredients, such as milk, eggs, butter, spices, sugar,
currants, raisins, peel, etc., are added at the most convenient
stage of the process.
note.—if there is not time to have one fancy bread, such
as parker house rolls or currant bread, made in school,
recipes for these may be discussed in class and the work done
at home.
. this utensil mixes and beats the bread by means of
a large beater turned with a handle, thus avoiding
the use of the hands for this purpose.
. it does this work with less energy and in a much
shorter time than if the hands were used.
. it can be used only for the first two steps of bread-making,
namely, mixing and first rising.
. the ingredients must all be put in at once; hence,
they must be accurately measured.
. the amount of ingredients may be learned by calculation
from previous bread-making done in the
old way, or by using the book of recipes accompanying
each mixer.[]
note.—there are several good kinds of bread-mixers
which may be bought in three sizes. small size makes  to 
loaves and costs $. (about). medium size makes  to 
loaves and costs $. (about). large size makes  to 
loaves and costs $. (about).
pastry is one of the simplest flour mixtures, and one
that has the lowest food value. the intimate blending of
butter or lard with the flour envelopes the starch grains
with fat, and makes the mixture difficult to digest. the
same thing occurs in frying food and in buttering hot
toast; so the idea is not a new one to the class.
in introducing the lesson on pastry, this principle of
digestion should be reviewed, and it should be made plain
that delicate pudding and seasonable fruits are a much
better form of dessert.
there are no new principles to teach, but some old
ones to impress. the object of the housekeeper should
be to make a mixture that is light and one that will fall
to pieces easily. to ensure the latter, anything that would
toughen the gluten must be avoided.
from the bread lesson, the pupils have learned that
working the water into the gluten or much handling of
flour after it is wet, makes a mixture firm and tough. in
pastry there must be enough gluten to stick the ingredients
together, but its elastic quality is undesirable. for the
latter reason also, a small amount of water is used.
in the cake mixtures, it was found that the use of fat
in the "butter cakes" made the framework tender and
easily broken, so in pastry the same means may be
employed. fat of some kind is mixed with the flour to
act on the gluten and destroy its toughness.[]
air and steam are the only lightening agents commonly
used in pastry. since cold air occupies less room
than warm air and admits of more expansion, it is desirable
that the mixture be kept very cold. the low temperature
also prevents the fat melting; hence, the necessity
for the use of cold utensils and materials throughout the
process.
. ingredients:
() flour, () salt, () fat, () water.
. notes on flour:
() use only pastry flour, which will have a small
amount of gluten.
() after the flour is wet, handle the mixture as
little as possible, to avoid working the water
into the gluten and making it tough.
. notes on fat:
() fat is used to destroy the elasticity of the gluten,
so that it will not be tough when cooked.
() butter, lard, or dripping may be used.
() lard makes more tender pastry than butter.
() butter gives the best flavour.
() half butter and half lard makes a good mixture.
() layers of fat may be put in between layers of
pastry, to separate it into flakes.
() if two fats are used, the softer is cut into the
flour, and the harder one laid on the paste
and folded in.[]
. notes on water:
() use the water as cold as possible.
() use the least amount of water necessary to make
the ingredients adhere.
. lightening agents used in pastry:
() air.—(a) this should be as cold as possible.
(b) the air may he folded in, between
layers of pastry.
() steam.
. kinds of pastry:
() plain pastry.—in this, one quarter to one third
as much fat as flour is used, and it is all "cut
in".
() flaky pastry.—in this, the same amount of fat
is used as in plain pastry, but half of it is
"laid on" and folded in.
() puff pastry.—in this, one half as much fat as
flour, up to equal parts of each is used; one
quarter of the fat is cut in, and the remainder
is laid on and folded in.
. amount of ingredients for plain pastry for one pie:
-/ cup pastry flour; / tsp. salt; / cup fat (lard and
butter); ice water.[]
form iv: senior grade (continued)
as meat is rather a complex food the teaching of which
involves a good many lessons, and as it does not lend
itself as well as other foods to the making of dishes useful
in practice work, it seems wise to defer the study of it
until the senior form is reached; the ability and home
needs of the pupils should decide this. the season of the
year should also be considered. it is wiser to take meat
lessons in cold weather because it is then more pleasant
to handle and easier to keep. the latter consideration is
important in some rural districts, where shops are not convenient.
more preparation is needed for the first meat lesson
than for most foods. some days before, thin bones such as
leg or wing bones of fowl, or rib bones of lamb should be
soaked in diluted hydrochloric or nitric acid (one part acid
to ten of water), to dissolve the mineral substance which
gives the bone its rigidity.
any time before the lesson, a large solid bone of an old
animal, such as a knee or hip joint of beef, should be burned
for hours to get rid of the connective tissue which holds
the mineral substance in shape. this should be carefully
done, in order to retain the shape of the bone and to show
the porous formation of the mineral substance. if the
bone is not blackened by the fire, its white colour will also
indicate the lime of which it is formed.[]
on the day of the lesson it will be necessary to have a
piece of meat showing the three parts—fat, bone, and
muscle. a lower cut of the round of beef has all these
parts, and the muscle is sufficiently tough to show its connective
tissue plainly. for the study of fat, a piece of suet
is best, as it can be easily picked apart to show its formation.
in examining fat meat and lean meat it is essential
that, at least, every two pupils have a piece, as close
scrutiny is necessary. one or two samples of bone will
suffice for the class.
no definite amount of work can be laid down for any
one lesson. the interest and ability of the class must be
the guide. in rural schools, the time of each lesson must
be comparatively short, though no household management
teacher should spend more than forty minutes on purely
theoretical work without a change of some kind.
the following is an outline of the facts to be considered
in this particular study:
. names of meat:
() beef, from the ox or cow. the best meat comes
from an animal about four years old.
() veal, from the calf. it should be at least six
weeks old.
() mutton, from the sheep. spring lamb is from six
to eight weeks old; yearling is one year old.
() pork, from the pig.
() fowl, poultry—chicken, turkey, duck, goose.
() game, wild animals—deer, wild duck, partridge,
etc.[]
. parts of meat:
() fat.—(a) inside fat, around the internal organs,
usually called kidney fat, or suet.
(b) outside fat, next the skin, called caul fat.
() bone, () muscle, or lean meat.
. composition of fat:
() connective tissue, () true fat, () water.
fat should be the first part studied, because it is the
simplest tissue and the parts are most plainly seen. pick
the specimen apart, and the tissue that holds it together is
found. its name is easily developed from its use.
the water may be shown by heating pieces of fat in
a small saucepan and, when it becomes hot, covering the
dish with a cold plate. remove the plate before it gets
heated, and moisture will be condensed on its surface.
the presence of water in fat may also be reasoned out by
remembering that water enters into the composition of all
body tissues.
. composition of bone:
() mineral matter (lime), () connective tissue,
() water.
neither the mineral substance nor the connective tissue
in bone can be seen until either one or the other is eliminated.
strike the fresh bone with a steel knife, and it shows
the quality of hardness. bones are built from food, and
the only food substance that is so hard is mineral matter.
show the burned bone, with only the mineral matter left,
and let each pupil examine it. its formation indicates[]
the spaces which the part burned out of it occupied. let
it fall or crush part of it in the fingers, to show how
easily it is broken. such bones would be no use as a
framework to support the body. the bones of very old
persons get too much like this, and we are afraid to have
such people fall. the burned bone needs something to
hold it together—a connective tissue. such a tissue was
in the spaces before the bone was burned.
show the bone after it has been prepared in an acid
solution, with only the connective tissue left. explain
how it was prepared. bend it to show its pliability. to
be of use in the body it needs some substance to make it
hard and rigid—the mineral matter which was dissolved
out.
note.—this is an excellent time to show the necessity for
bone-building mineral in the diet of babies and young children.
if they do not get this mineral substance during the growth
period, they cannot have hard, rigid bones, and their bodies
are apt to become misshapen—bow legs, curved spines, etc.
this substance is also necessary for hard, sound teeth.
draw attention to the fact that the mineral matter in
milk and eggs is in solution, and therefore ready to be used
by the body. mineral matter is not in solution in bone,
and cannot be dissolved by the digestive process, therefore
it is practically of no use as food.
compare the connective tissue of bone with that of fat,
and let the pupils account for the difference in thickness.
lead them to see that connective tissue can be dissolved in
hot water, and in this way may be extracted from the
mineral part of bone. the housekeeper may do this herself,
or she may buy it already extracted, as gelatine.[]
. composition of muscle:
() connective tissue
() red part, made up of microscopic tubes holding
a red juice. the juice contains:
(a) water
(b) red colour
(c) flavour
(d) muscle albumen—a protein substance
similar to egg-white
(e) mineral matter.
muscle fibres highly magnified
bundle of fibres. tubes of one fibre. proper carving of fibres—across
the grain.
it should be made clear that the walls of such tiny
tubes can never be thick enough to be tough. attention
should be called to the real cause of toughness—the thick
connective tissue.
note.—very small pieces of meat will serve for specimens.
tough meat is better, because it shows the connective tissue
more plainly. when the muscle is being examined, it should
be carefully scraped with a knife, until a layer of connective
tissue is laid bare. the red part that is scraped off should
be explained, and a drawing should be made to illustrate it.[]
minced lean beef should he soaked in a little cold water
for at least twenty minutes, to extract the muscle juice for
examination. the juice should be strained through a
cheesecloth and poured into a glass. it shows nothing but
water and a red colour.
in order to find the other substances, pour part of the
juice into a small saucepan and heat it gradually until it
boils gently. the red colour will disappear, and the albumen
which is dissolved in the juice will coagulate and
become plainly visible. the pupils will recall that egg-white
was affected in the same way by heat, and may be
told that this coagulated substance is similar to egg-white,
and is called muscle albumen. the odour given off by
heating suggests that the flavour is also in the muscle juice,
hence the importance of conserving this juice in the cooking
process.
strain the boiled juice to get rid of the coagulated albumen
and then examine the liquid that is left. its colour
plainly denotes mineral matter in solution.
. meat experiments:
if time permit, the following experiments may be
taken. the facts which these experiments prove may,
however, be developed in a much shorter time by questioning:
() cut lean meat into small pieces, cover them with
cold water and let them stand. note the colour
of the water.
() cover a piece of lean meat with boiling water and
let it stand. note the colour of the water.
() sprinkle a piece of meat with salt. what happens?[]
() wrap a piece of meat for a few minutes in ordinary
brown wrapping-paper. what happens?
() simmer a small piece of very tough meat for
about an hour and then examine the connective
tissue.
() boil or bake a small piece of very tough meat
and then examine the connective tissue.
. selection of meat:
() all flesh should be uniform in colour, of a fine
grain, and firm and springy to the touch.
() beef should be bright red in colour, well mottled,
and surrounded with fat.
() mutton should be a dull red, and its fat white,
hard, and flaky.
() lamb is lighter in colour than mutton, and the
bone is redder.
() veal has pinkish-coloured flesh and white fat.
very pale veal is not good.
() pork should have firm flesh of a pale red colour.
the skin should be white and clear, the fat
white.
() poultry:
(a) chickens.—young chickens have thin,
sharp nails; smooth legs; soft, thin skin;
and soft cartilage at the end of the breastbone.
long hairs denote age.
(b) turkeys.—these should be plump, have
smooth, dark legs, and soft cartilage.
(c) geese.—these should be plump and have
many pin feathers; they should also have
pliable bills and soft feet.[]
. care of meat:
() remove the meat from the wrapping paper as
soon as it arrives, to prevent the loss of juices.
the butcher should use waxed paper next to
the meat.
() wipe the meat all over with a damp cloth, but do
not put it into water.
() place the meat on an earthen or enamel dish, and
set it in a cool place until required.
() frozen meat should be thawed in a warm room
before being cooked.
. general ways of preparing meat:
() extracting certain substances.—(a) soup—substances
extracted in water from lean
meat, bone, and fat.
(b) beef-tea—substances extracted in water from
lean meat.
(c) bouillon—substances extracted in water
from lean meat and flavoured with vegetable.
(d) beef juice—juices extracted from lean meat
by heat only, or by pressure.
() retaining all substances.—roasts, boiling pieces,
steaks, chops, cutlets.
() retaining part and extracting part.—stews.
. notes on tough meat:
() the toughness of meat depends on the thickness
of the connective tissue holding the muscle
tubes together.[]
cuts of beef
. neck, stews and soup. . chuck ribs, cheaper
roasts. . prime ribs, very good roasts. . loin,
best steaks or roasts (sirloin, tenderloin, porterhouse).
. rump, roasts and steak. . brisket,
stews or corned beef. . fore shank, soup.
. shoulder, stews or pot-roasts. . short ribs,
stews or cheap roasts. . navel, corned beef.
. plate, stews or corned beef. . flank, stews or
corned beef. . round, steaks. . nd cut round,
stews and soup. . hind shank, stews and soup.
. tail, soup.
bony structure
() the connective tissue is made thick and tough by
two causes.—
(a) age—in old animals the connective tissue
has grown thick.
(b) exercise—in certain parts of the body,
where muscles are much used, these
muscles must be more firmly bound
together, as in the neck and legs, etc.
() dry heat will harden connective tissue, making it
more difficult to cut and chew; therefore tough
cuts should not be cooked in dry heat.
() moist heat will soften and finally dissolve connective
tissue, making it easy to cut and chew;
therefore tough cuts should be cooked in moist
heat.
() tough meat is more abundant in an animal's
body, and is, therefore, cheaper than tender
meat.
() tough meat has richer juices than tender meat
and should be used for soup, broth, and beef-tea.
. digestibility of meat:
() the less muscle juice is coagulated by heat, the
more easily it is digested.
() because of their close texture, the liver, kidney,
and heart of animals are more difficult to
digest.
() mutton and lamb, because of their shorter fibres,
are more easily digested than beef.
() veal is difficult to digest, owing to its stringy
fibres.[]
cuts of veal
cuts of lamb
() pork has a large amount of fat intermingled with
its fibres, and is, therefore, difficult to digest.
() chicken and turkey are easily digested, but goose
and duck are indigestible, because of the fat
through the muscle fibres.
() game is easy of digestion.
the practical work, besides the experiments, in connection
with the meat lessons, should consist of at least three
preparations of this food: () the cooking of tender
meat, () the cooking of tough meat, () the making of
soup.
cuts of pork
the object of each preparation should be made plain,
so that the pupils may fully understand what they are
trying to accomplish.
. object in cooking tender meat:
() to change the flavour and appearance.
() to seal the tubes to keep in the juices.
() to cook the meat without densely coagulating
the protein of the muscle juice, so as to keep
it digestible.[]
. object in cooking tough meat:
() to change the flavour and appearance.
() to soften and partially dissolve the connective
tissue, making it easy to cut.
() to avoid making the muscle juice indigestible.
. object in making soup:
() to extract the connective tissue from the bone.
() to extract the muscle juice from the tubes.
. baking:
place the meat in a very hot oven with pieces of the
fat or some dripping in the pan. baste every
ten minutes. keep the oven very hot for a small
roast. for a large roast, check the fire after the
first fifteen minutes. bake fifteen minutes to
each pound.
. broiling:
() over the coals.—put the meat between the hot
greased wires of a broiler. place over a very hot,
clear fire. turn the broiler every ten seconds.
beef one inch thick cooks rare in eight minutes.
() pan broiling.—heat a frying-pan smoking hot.
lay the meat in flat; turn constantly until
seared, then frequently, as in broiling, but do
not pierce the muscle part with a fork. beef one
inch thick cooks rare in ten minutes.
. boiling:
cover the meat with boiling water. boil five minutes.
then simmer until done. tender meat takes
twenty minutes to the pound; tough meat takes
from three to five hours.[]
. stewing:
cut the meat in pieces of a suitable size. cover with
cold water. bring gradually to the simmering
point and simmer until tender, usually three or
four hours. keep the pot closely covered.
. beef juice:
take one pound of steak from the top of the round.
wipe the steak, remove all fat, and cut the lean
meat in small pieces. place in canning jar, and
cover; place on a rest in the kettle and surround
with cold water. allow the water to heat slowly,
care being taken not to have it reach a higher
temperature than  degrees. let stand two
hours; strain and press the meat to obtain all
the juices. salt to taste.
note.—these rules may be dictated to the class, as all of
the principles which they involve have been previously discussed.
since fish is the flesh of sea animals, there will be little
new to learn concerning it.
main points of difference between this flesh and
ordinary meat are:
. fish is less stimulating and nourishing than meat,
as it contains more water and less protein than an
equal quantity of lean meat.
. oysters, and the class called white-fish, are more
easily digested than meat, hence they should be
chosen for invalids or those having weak digestions.[]
kinds of fish:
. white-fish.—the fat is stored mostly in the liver,
making the flesh easy to digest. examples: cod,
halibut, haddock, white-fish.
. oily fish.—the fat is distributed throughout the
flesh, making it more difficult to digest. examples:
salmon, herring, mackerel.
. shell-fish.—because of their close fibres, these are
difficult to digest, with the exception of oysters.
examples: clams, scallops, and oysters.
. crustaceous.—the flesh is tough and hard to digest.
examples: lobsters, crabs.
selection of fish:
fresh fish may be recognized by the following:
. the eyes should be full and bright.
. the flesh should be firm and elastic.
. the gills should be bright red.
. there should be no unpleasant odour.
cooking of fish:
fish may be cooked in any way similar to meat. as
the flesh of fish contains food substances which are very
easily dissolved in water, boiling is not a good method
of cooking to choose for this food. steaming, baking, and
frying are more suitable.
a lesson on gelatine naturally follows the lessons on
meat and fish. the study of bone and the making of soup
have explained the source of this substance, and only a few
additional facts are necessary.[]
the gelatine practice dishes are sure to prove attractive
to the class, and the common use of this food in sickness,
and in salads and desserts, makes it important that
its food value be understood.
. source of gelatine:
gelatine is obtained from the bones, cartilage, and skin
of animals. it is the connective tissue dissolved out of
these parts.
the housekeeper may obtain it for herself or she may
buy it already extracted; both are equally good.
. commercial forms:
() sheet gelatine
() shredded gelatine
() granulated gelatine.
. properties of gelatine:
() it softens in cold water, but will not dissolve.
() it dissolves in hot water.
() it jellies when cold, if the solution be sufficiently
strong.
() good gelatine has little taste, colour, or odour,
and no sediment when dissolved.
. steps in dissolving gelatine:
() put a small amount of cold water or any cold
liquid on gelatine, and let it stand until the
liquid is absorbed.
() add a boiling liquid and stir thoroughly until
dissolved.[]
. value in the diet:
() gelatine is a nitrogenous substance, but cannot
of itself build tissues, as most protein foods do.
when eaten, it will save the tissues already
making up the body, hence is called a protein-sparer.
() it is very easily digested, and for this reason it
gives a pleasant variety to the diet of an
invalid.
() it makes an attractive dessert at the end of a
substantial meal, without adding much nutriment.
. ways of using gelatine:
() it may assist in making soup.
() any liquid may be used to dissolve this substance
to make a plain jelly. examples: coffee
jelly, tomato jelly, wine jelly.
() plain jelly may be varied as follows:
allow the plain jelly mixture to cool until it
is as thick as cream, and then beat in whipped
egg-white, or fruit, or chopped vegetables, and
set away until firm. examples: snow pudding,
orange charlotte, vegetable salad.
() strain off the juice from a can of fruit, heat
it, and use it for dissolving the gelatine. when
almost set, add the fruit, and set away to
become firm.[]
a lesson on frozen dishes may be taken at any time,
but it seems specially opportune after the gelatine lesson.
it may be impossible to make these dishes in school, but
the facts of the lesson may be discussed and recipes furnished,
after which a form iv pupil should find no difficulty
in carrying out these recipes at home.
elementary science should be correlated, to explain the
use of salt in the freezing process.
. they are cooling, refreshing, and nourishing when
properly taken; they are not good as a final course
at a meal, as cold mixtures reduce the temperature
of the stomach and thus retard digestion.
. they are appetizing in appearance and flavour.
. they are economical as regards cost of ingredients,
fuel, time, and energy.
. water ice.—fruit juice diluted with water, sweetened
and frozen; stirred about every five minutes while
freezing.
. frappé.—water ice frozen to the consistency of
mush; in freezing, equal parts of ice and salt are
used to make the mixture granular.
. sherbet.—water ice to which is added a small quantity
of dissolved gelatine or beaten egg-white;
stirred constantly while freezing.
. ice cream.—thin cream, sweetened, flavoured, and
frozen; stirred constantly while freezing.[]
. plain ice cream.—same as ice cream with custard
added.
. mousse.—thick cream, beaten until stiff, sweetened,
flavoured, placed in a mould, packed in ice and
salt (two parts ice to one part salt), and allowed
to stand three hours. a small quantity of dissolved
gelatine may be added to the mixture.
. freezing:
() scald the can and dasher and cool just before
using.
() see that all parts of the freezer are properly
adjusted.
() empty the mixture into the can; never fill the
can more than three-quarters full, to allow
for expansion when freezing.
() prepare ice by chipping finely or by crushing in
a canvas bag by means of a mallet.
() allow three measures of ice to one of coarse
rock salt and pack this mixture solidly
around the can.
() turn the crank slowly and steadily until the
mixture begins to freeze, then turn more rapidly
until frozen.
() add more ice and salt as needed, but do not
draw off the salt water except to keep it from
getting inside the can.[]
. packing:
() when the mixture is frozen, draw off the water,
remove the dasher, and pack the contents of
the can down solidly with a spoon.
() replace the cover, using a cork for the opening,
then repack in ice and salt (four parts ice to
one part salt).
() cover with newspapers, blanket, or carpet, and
let it stand for at least one hour before serving.
. moulding:
() wet the mould and pack the frozen mixture in
solidly.
() place the cover on the mould and bind strips
of greased cotton or waxed paper around all
the crevices.
() imbed the mould in ice and salt (four parts
ice to one part salt).
() wrap a cloth wrung from hot water around
the mould for an instant, before removing the
mixture.
the food work of the previous forms, from constant
reference and use, should be so well known that it may
be reviewed in one lesson, under the following heads:
. uses of food
. necessary substances in food
. composition of the common foods—milk, eggs, meat,
vegetables, fruit, seeds
. general sources of each food substance.[]
after the review, the class may be asked to prepare
menus for one day's meals, keeping in mind the following:
. daily balance of food substances
. appetizing appearance and flavour of the food
. economy of time, labour, and money in providing
the food.
the preparation of menus may be continued, even
while other work is being studied, until the teacher feels
satisfied with the ability of the class to prepare menus
intelligently.
the planning of menus should, if time permit, be
extended to actual practice in preparing and serving the
meals called for by some of the menus. in this form
there should be a limit set to the number of people served
and the cost of the food.
since breakfast and luncheon were prepared in the
junior form, a dinner should be taken in this. the
entire responsibility of the meal should be given to the
pupils, each being appointed to perform definite duties.
the teacher may advise while the class is planning the
work, but not assist while it is being carried out.
each member of the class may be asked to prepare a
menu to suit the special conditions which have been made
as to number and cost. these may be planned at home
and brought to the teacher for criticism. at the first
lesson, three or four of the best may be written on the
black-hoard for comparison and choice.
when the selection is made, members of the class
should be chosen for the following duties: () marketing,
() preparation of food, () laying the table, () serving,
() representing members of the family to eat the meal.[]
note.—to prevent any suspicion of favouritism, the duties
may be written on slips of paper and the pupils allowed to
draw these.
at the second lesson the meal will be prepared, served,
and eaten. in schools lacking an equipment, the meal may
be planned and selected in the same way as above, but
the entire responsibility of carrying it out must rest on one
pupil, as it will be necessary for each to prepare and serve
it in her own home.[]
form iv: senior grade (continued)
this subject is more suitable for older students than for
those attending the public and separate schools, but, because
of its importance and the fact that many girls never
go beyond the entrance class, it is deemed wise to present,
to the pupils of form iv, the main facts relating to the
feeding of infants. each teacher must however use her
judgment in the choice of these facts for her class and in
the method of presenting them. the instruction given
may include the following ideas:
the natural food of an infant is its mother's milk, and
too much stress cannot be placed on the necessity of nursing
by the mother.
even if the mother has but a small supply, the baby
should not be weaned; the supply should be supplemented
by modified milk. in the rare cases where a mother cannot
nurse her baby, a physician should prescribe the food.
in such a case the best substitute is cow's milk.
if cow's milk be used, it will have to be changed or
"modified" to make it as far as possible like mother's
milk. cow's milk differs in the following respects: it
has () less water and therefore more solids; () a larger
proportion of protein and mineral compounds; () less
sugar; () a different combination of fats.
cow's milk cannot be made like mother's milk, but it
is better food for a little baby if cream, milk sugar, and
barley water, are added in certain proportions, varying
according to the age of the child.[]
milk ounces
milk sugar/ ounce
cream (%) ounce, if ordinary milk be used or / ounce if jersey milk be used.
barleywaterdilute with barley water to make  ounces for the first two or three weeks, then reduce to  ounces up to about three months of age. the volume may then be reduced to  ounces, and at five or six months to  ounces.
mixed milk, and not one cow's milk, should be used,
for the reason that a better average of milk is secured
from several cows than from one. the supply should
be fresh and clean. to make sure of the latter, scrupulous
care should be given to the cleanliness of the cows' bodies
and stables, the utensils, and the clothing and hands of
the milkers. if there is any doubt of the cleanliness, the
milk should be pasteurized. the pasteurization greatly
reduces the bacterial life in the milk by a temperature
which does not change its composition and digestibility, as
is the case in sterilizing it.
sterilize bottles as for canning. nearly fill the bottles
with milk and cork them with absorbent cotton which has
been sterilized (by being baked a delicate brown). place
the bottles on a rest in a deep kettle and surround them
with cold water as high as the milk. heat the water
gradually to  degrees fahrenheit, or until tiny bubbles
show in the milk next the glass. remove the kettle and
contents to where the temperature of the milk will remain[]
the same for half an hour. then cool the milk quickly
by putting the bottles first in lukewarm water and then
in cold water. keep in a cool place and do not remove
the cotton until ready to use. pasteurized milk should not
be kept more than a couple of days.
the utmost care and cleanliness should be observed in
preparing the infant's food. all utensils which come in
contact with the food should be sterilized each time they
are used. bottles with rubber tubes should never be used,
as they cannot be thoroughly cleaned. the bottle should
be plain and graduated without a neck, and the nipple
should admit of being turned inside out.
after the nursing, the bottles should at once be rinsed
with cold water. later, the bottles and nipples should be
carefully washed in hot, soapy water, then rinsed in clear,
hot water. they should then be sterilized by boiling in
water for twenty minutes, after which they may be placed
in boric acid solution ( tsp. to  qt. water), or the
bottles may be emptied and plugged with sterilized
absorbent cotton until again required.
it saves much time to make sufficient food to last for
twenty-four hours. this may be put into a large bottle, or
what is better, into the several nursing bottles, and each
plugged with sterilized absorbent cotton. after cooling,
the bottles should be put on the ice or in some cool place
until required. where there is no refrigerator, an ice-box
made on the principle of the home-made fireless cooker will[]
do excellent service. when the food is to be used, it should
be warmed slightly above body heat by placing the bottle
in warm water.
the following table is taken from the care and feeding
of children by l. emmet holt, m.d., of new york.
ageinterval between meals by daynight feedings ( p.m. to  a.m.)number of feedings in  hoursquantity for one feedingquantity for  hours
hoursouncesounces
ndtothday--
ndandrdweeks- /-
thtothweek--
thweektomos. /--
tomonths /--
tomonths /- /-
tomonths..- /-
form iv: senior grade (continued)
as the principles of sanitation are based on a knowledge
of bacteria, the facts concerning these microscopic
plants, which were taught in the lesson on the "preservation
of food", have only to be reviewed and extended.
