and butter.
breast of veal. before
roasting it, take off the two ends to
fry and stew, if the joint be large,
or roast the whole together, and pour
butter over it. if any be left, cut it
into regular pieces, put them into a
stewpan, and pour some broth over
it. if no broth, a little water will
do: add a bunch of herbs, a blade
or two of mace, some pepper, and
an anchovy. stew till the meat be
tender, thicken with flour and butter,
and add a little ketchup. serve the
sweetbread whole upon it, which
may either be stewed or parboiled,
and then covered with crumbs, herbs,
pepper and salt, and browned in a
dutch oven. the whole breast may
be stewed in the same way, after
cutting off the two ends. a boiled
breast of veal, smothered with onion
sauce, is also an excellent dish, if
not old nor too fat.
brentford rolls. mix with
two pounds of flour, a little salt,
two ounces of sifted sugar, four
ounces of butter, and two eggs beaten
with two spoonfuls of yeast, and
about a pint of milk. knead the
dough well, and set it to rise before
the fire. make twelve rolls, butter
tin plates, and set them before the
fire to rise, till they become of a
proper size, and bake them half an
hour.
brewing. the practice of
brewing malt liquor is but seldom
adopted by private families in large
towns and cities, owing probably to
a want of conveniences for the purpose,
and an aversion to the labour
and trouble which it might occasion.
but if the disagreeable filthiness attending
the process in large public
breweries were duly considered, together
with the generally pernicious
quality of the beer offered to sale,
as well as the additional expense
incurred by this mode of procuring
it, no one who regards economy, or
the health and comfort of his family,
would be without home-brewed beer,
so long as there were any means left
of obtaining it. beer as strong of
malt and hops, when all the foreign
ingredients are extracted, may be[]
manufactured at home at less than
one third of what it could cost at
a public brewery, besides the satisfaction
of drinking, what is known
to be wholesome, and free from any
deleterious mixture. twelve shillings
for malt and hops will provide
a kilderkin of beer far superior to
one that could be purchased under
license for a pound, while the yeast
and the grains are sufficient to repay
all the labour and expense of
brewing. on every account, therefore,
it is desirable that the practice
of domestic brewing were universally
adopted. the health and comfort
of the community would be increased;
and by a larger consumption of
malt, the growth of barley would be
extended, and agriculture proportionably
benefited. in order to this
however, the enormous duty upon
malt requires to be diminished or
repealed. the farmer, unable to
make three shillings a bushel of his
barley, is suffering severely under
this grinding taxation, as well as the
consumer, who is compelled to pay
a duty of four shillings and six-pence
for every bushel that is converted
into malt.—the best seasons of the
year for brewing are march and october,
the weather in those months
being generally free from the extremes
of heat and cold, which are
alike injurious to the process of fermentation.
if this is not in all cases
practicable, means should be used to
cool the place where the liquor is
set for working in the summer, and
of warming it in the winter: otherwise
the beer will be likely to turn
sour or muddy. the beer which is
brewed in march should not be tapped
till october, nor that brewed in
october till the following march;
taking this precaution, that families
of an equal number all the year
round, will drink at least a third
more in summer than in winter.—the
most suitable water for brewing
is soft river water, which having had
the rays of the sun and the influence
of the air upon it, will more easily
penetrate and extract the virtues of
the malt. hard water possesses an
astringent quality, which prevents
the goodness of the malt from being
freely communicated to the liquor.
if two parcels of beer be brewed in
all respects the same, except in the
quality of the water, it will be found
that the beer brewed with soft river
water will exceed the other in
strength above five degrees, in the
course of twelve months' keeping.
where water is naturally of a hard
quality, it may in some measure be
softened by exposing it to the action
of the sun and air, and infusing in it
some pieces of soft chalk. throwing
into it a quantity of bran while it is
boiling, and before it is poured on
the malt, will likewise have a good
effect.—previous to commencing the
process of brewing, it will be necessary
to ascertain the quantity of
malt and hops, which of course will
be regulated by the demands of the
family, the convenience of cellerage,
and other circumstances. supposing
two or three sorts of liquor be
required, six bushels of malt, and
about three quarters of a pound of
hops to each bushel, will make half
a hogshead of ale, half a hogshead
of table beer, and the same of small
beer; or about nine gallons of each
to the bushel. but if in a smaller
brewing, only two sorts are required,
or the whole be blended into one,
then eighteen gallons of wholesome
beverage may be produced at something
less than three farthings a pint.—having
thus adjusted the proportion
of malt and hops to the quantity
of beer to be brewed, the next
thing will be to heat water sufficient
for the purpose. meanwhile see
that the brewing utensils be properly
cleaned and scalded, and the pen-staff
in the mash tub well fixed.
then put a quantity of boiling water
into the mash-tub, in which it must
stand till the greater part of the
steam is gone off, or you can see[]
your own shadow in it. it will then
be necessary that one person should
pour the malt gently in, while another
is carefully stirring it. a little
malt should be reserved to strew
over the mash in order to prevent
evaporation, and then the tub may
be covered over with sacks. if it
be not sufficient to contain the whole
at once, the mashing must be repeated,
observing that the larger the
quantity that is mashed at once, the
longer it will require to stand before
it is drawn off. the mash of ale
must be allowed to steep three hours,
table beer one hour, and small beer
half an hour afterwards. by this
mode of proceeding, the boilings
will regularly succeed each other,
which will greatly expedite the business.
in the course of mashing, be
careful to stir it thoroughly from the
bottom, especially round the basket,
that there may be no adhesion, in
any part of the mash. previous to
running it off, be prepared with a
pail to catch the first flush, as that
is generally thick, and return it to
the mash two or three times, till it
run clear and fine. by this time the
copper should be boiling, and a convenient
tub placed close to the mash-tub.
put into it half the quantity
of boiling water intended for drawing
off the best wort; after which
the copper must be filled up again,
and proper attention paid to the fire.
meanwhile, keep slopping and wetting
the mash with the hot water out
of the tub, in moderate quantities,
every eight or ten minutes, till all
the water is added to the mash.
then let off the remaining quantity,
which will be boiling hot, and this
will finish the process for strong
beer. boil up the copper as quick
as possible for the second mash,
whether intended for strong or small
beer. empty the boiling water into
the tub by the side of the mash, as
in the former instance, and renew
the process. great care is required
in boiling the wort after it is drawn
off, and the hops must be put in
with the first boiling. in filling the
copper with the wort, leave sufficient
room for boiling, that there may
be no waste in boiling over, and
make a good fire under it. quick
boiling is a part of the business that
requires particular attention, and
great caution must be observed when
the liquor begins to swell in waves
in the copper. the furnace door
must be opened, and the fire damped
or regulated to suit the boiling of
the wort. in order to ascertain the
proper time for boiling the liquor,
lade out some of it; and if a working
be discovered, and the hops are
sinking, the wort is boiled enough.
long and slow boiling injures and
wastes the liquor. as soon as it is
sufficiently boiled, run the liquor
through a cloth or fine sieve into
some coolers, to free it from the
hops, and to get a proper quantity
cooled immediately to set it to work.
if the brewhouse be not sufficiently
airy to cool a quantity soon, the liquor
must be emptied into shallow
tubs, and placed in a passage where
there is a thorough draught of air,
but where it is not exposed to rain
or wet. the remainder in the copper
may then be let into the first
cooler, taking care to attend to the
hops, and to make a clear passage
through the strainer. the hops
must be returned into the copper,
after having run off four or five pailfuls
of the liquor for the first cooling,
and then it must be set to work
in the following manner. take four
quarts of yeast, and divide half of
it into small wooden bowls or basons,
adding to it an equal quantity of
wort nearly cold. as soon as it ferments
to the top of the basons, put
it into two pails; and when that
works to the top, distribute it into
two wide open tubs. fill them half
full with cool wort, and cover them
over, till it comes to a fine white
head. this will be accomplished in
about three hours, and then both[]
quantities may be put together into
the working tub, with the addition
of as much wort as is sufficiently
cooled. if the weather be mild and
open, it cannot be worked too cold.
if the brewing be performed in frosty
weather, the brewhouse must be
kept warm; but hot wort must never
be added to keep the liquor to a
blood heat. attention also must be
paid to the quality of the yeast, or it
may spoil all the beer. if it has
been taken from foxed beer, or such
as has been heated by ill management
in the working, it will be likely
to communicate the same bad quality.
if the yeast be flat, and that
which is fresh and lively cannot be
procured, put to it a pint of warm
sweetwort of the first letting off,
when it is about half the degree of
milk-warm. shake the vessel that
contains it, and it will soon gather
strength, and be fit for use.—tunning
is the last and most simple operation
in the business of brewing.
the casks being well prepared, perfectly
sweet and dry, and placed on
the stand ready to receive the liquor,
first skim off the top yeast, then fill
the casks quite full, bung them down,
and leave an aperture for the yeast
to work through. if the casks stand
on one end, the better way is to
make a hole with a tap-borer near
the summit of the stave, at the same
distance from the top as the lower
tap-hole is from the bottom. this
prevents the slovenliness of working
the beer over the head of the barrel;
and the opening being much smaller
than the bung-hole, the beer by being
confined will sooner set itself
into a convulsive motion, and work
itself fine, provided proper attention
be paid to filling up the casks
five or six times a day.——another
method of brewing, rather more
simple but not more excellent than
the above, may be adopted by those
whose conveniences are more limited.
for table beer, allow three
bushels of malt to thirty-nine gallons
of water, and a pound and a
half of hops. pour a third part of
the hot water upon the malt, cover
it up warm half an hour, then
stir up the mash, and let it stand
two hours and a half more. set it
to drain off gently; when dry, add
half the remaining water, mash, and
let it stand half an hour. run that
into another tub, and pour the rest
of the water on the malt; stir it well,
cover it up, and let it infuse a full
hour. run that off and mix all together.
put the hops into a little
hot water to open the pores, then
put the hops and water into the tub,
run the wort upon them, and boil
them together for an hour. strain
the liquor through a coarse sieve,
and set it to cool. if the whole be
not cool enough that day to add to it
the yeast, a pail or two of wort may
be prepared, and a quart of yeast
added to it over night. before tunning,
all the wort should be put together,
and thoroughly mixed. when
it has done working, paste a piece
of paper on the bung-hole, and after
three days it may be fastened close.
in less than a month the beer will
be fit for use. see ale, malt,
beer.
brewing utensils. the
most desirable object in the process
of brewing is the fixing of the copper,
so as to make the fire come directly
under the bottom of it. many
coppers are injured, and rendered
unserviceable, for want of proper
attention to this particular. the
method adopted by the most experienced
bricklayers is to divide the
heat of the fire by a stop; and if
the door and the draft be in a direct
line, the stop must be erected from
the middle of each outline of the grating,
and parallel with the centre sides
of the copper. the stop is nothing
more than a thin wall in the centre
of the right and left sides of the copper,
ascending half way to the top
of it; on the top of which must be
left a small cavity, four or five inches[]
square, for a draft of that half part
of the fire which is next to the copper
door, to pass through, and then
the building must close all round to
the finishing at the top. by this
method of fixing the copper, the heat
will communicate from the outward
part of the fire round the outward
half of the copper through the cavity;
as also will the furthest part
of the fire, which contracts a conjunction
of the whole, and causes the
flame to slide gently and equally all
round the bottom of the copper.
considerable advantages result from
this position of the copper. if the
draught under it were suffered at
once to ascend, without being thus
divided, the hops would be scorched
in the boiling, and liable to stick to
the sides, which would considerably
injure the flavour of the liquor, unless
kept continually stirring. it
will also save the consumption of
fuel, and preserve the copper much
longer than any other method, as
there will be no difficulty in boiling
half a copper full at a time without
doing it any injury.—the next article
of consideration in this case is
the mash-tub. this should be proportioned
to the size of the copper,
and the quantity of beer intended to
be brewed. the grains should not
be kept in the tub any longer than
the day after brewing, as in hot weather
especially the grains begin to
turn sour as soon as they are cold;
and if there be any sour scent in the
brewhouse at the time the liquor is
tunned, it will be apt to injure the
flavour of the beer.—tubs and coolers
require to be kept perfectly sweet
and clean, and should not be used
for any other purpose. in small
houses, where many vessels are cumbersome
and inconvenient, it is too
common to use the same tubs for
both washing and brewing; but this
ought not to be done where it can be
avoided; and where it is unavoidable,
the utmost care is necessary to
give them a double washing, scouring,
and scalding. coolers also require
considerable care, or by the
slightest taint they will soon contract
a disagreeable flavour. this
often proceeds from wet having infused
itself into the wood, it being
apt to lodge in the crevices of old
vessels, and even infect them to such
a degree, that it cannot be removed,
even after several washings and
scaldings. one cause incidental to
this evil is, using the brewhouse for
the purposes of washing, which
ought never to be permitted, where
any other convenience can be had;
for nothing can be more injurious
than the remains of dirty suds, left
in vessels intended for brewing only.
nor should water be suffered to
stand too long in the coolers, as it
will soak into them, and soon turn
putrid, when the stench will enter
the wood, and render them almost
incurable. more beer is spoiled for
want of attention to these niceties
than can well be imagined, and the
real cause is seldom known or suspected;
but in some families, after
all the care that is taken in the manufacture
of the article, the beer is
never palatable or wholesome.—barrels
should be well cleaned with
boiling water; and if the bung-hole
will admit, they should be scrubbed
inside with a hard brush. if they
have acquired a musty scent, take
out the heads, and let them be well
scrubbed with sand and fuller's earth.
then put in the head again, and
scald it well; throw in a piece of
unslaked lime, and close up the bung.
when the cask has stood some time,
rinse it well with cold water, and it
will then be fit for use. new casks
likewise require attention, for they
are apt to give the liquor a bad
taste, if they be not well scalded and
seasoned several days successively
before they are used; and old casks
are apt to grow musty, if they stand
any time out of use. to prevent
this, a cork should be put into every
one of them as soon as the cock or[]
fosset is taken out; the vent and the
bung-hole must also be well closed.
the best way to season new casks
is to boil two pecks of bran or malt
dust in a copper of water, and pour
it in hot; then stop it up close, and
let it stand two days. when the
cask is washed and dried, it will be
fit for use.
brewing machine. where
a family usually consume ten gallons
of beer, or upwards, in a week,
there is a brewing machine lately
invented, which will be found singularly
convenient and advantageous,
and comparatively of little expense.
the use of it in brewing curtails the
labour, shortens the time in which
the operation may be performed,
greatly diminishes the quantity of
fuel, and may be placed within very
narrow limits, in the house of any
tradesman in the most crowded city.
eighteen gallons of good beer may
be brewed with this machine in the
course of six hours, or a larger quantity
with a machine of proportionate
dimensions, in the same space of
time. the process is so simple,
that it may be comprehended by
any person of ordinary capacity,
and once seeing the operation performed
will be sufficient. in the
common mode of brewing, the principal
difficulty consists in ascertaining
the degrees of heat necessary to
the production of good beer, without
the use of a thermometer; but
in the use of this machine, this difficulty
is completely obviated.—the
machine complete is represented by
figure a; and b, c, d, e, f, represent
its several parts. b is the
bottom, made of strong sheet-iron,
standing upon three legs. the hollow
part of it contains the fire, put
in at a door, the latch of which appears
in front. the tube which
projects upwards, is a stove pipe to
carry off the smoke; and the circular
pan that is seen between the
legs, is a receptacle for the ashes or
cinders that fall down through the
grate above. c is a sheet-iron vessel,
tinned on the inside, the bottom
of which fits into the top of b; and
the cock in c is to let off the wort,
as will be seen hereafter. d is the
lid of this vessel. e is made of
sheet-iron, tinned inside and out,
and full of holes to act as a strainer.
it is to hold the malt first, and the
hops afterwards; it goes into c, as
may be seen in figure a. in the
middle of e is a round space, f,
made of the same metal, and rising
up from the bottom, having itself
no bottom. it has holes in it all
the way up, like the outer surface of
e.—in preparing for brewing, the
machine is put together as in a, except
placing on the lid. the first
thing is to put the malt, coarsely
ground, into e, and no part into f,
or into the circular space between
c and e; otherwise e cannot act as
a strainer, when the liquor is drawn
off; and in this consists its principal
use. having put in the malt,
then add the water which of course
flows into any part of the vessel c.
stir the malt well with a stick, or
with something that will separate it
completely, so that no adhesion may
be formed by the flour of the malt.
this is very apt to be the case in
the common mode of brewing, when
water is poured hot upon the malt;
but here the water is applied in a cold
state, so that there is little trouble
in separating the malt completely in
the water. if the small machine be
used, which is adapted to a bushel
of malt, and the beer is to be fully
equal in strength to london porter,
then eighteen gallons to the bushel
may be considered as the general
estimate; and for this purpose the
first mash is to receive twelve gallons
of cold soft water, which will
produce nine gallons of wort. having
stirred the malt very carefully,
light the fire under it, and get the
liquor quickly to  or  degrees
of heat. this may be ascertained
by lifting off the lid, and dipping[]
the thermometer from time to time
into the centre f, and keeping it
there a minute to give the quicksilver
time to rise. while the mash is
coming to this heat, stir the malt
well three or four times. when the
liquor has acquired its proper heat,
put out the fire, and cover the whole
of the machine with sacks, or something
that will exclude the external
air. in this state the mash remains
for two hours: the cock is then
turned, and nine gallons of wort will
be drained off. put the wort into
a tub of some sort, and keep it warm.
then put into the machine twelve
gallons more of water, rekindle the
fire, and bring the heat to  degrees
as soon as possible; when
this is done, extinguish the fire, and
let the mash now stand an hour.
draw off the second wort; and if
only one sort of beer is wanted, add
it to the first quantity. now take
out the grains, lift out e, clean it
well, and also the inside of c. replace
e, put the hops into it, and
the whole of the wort into the machine.
cover it with the lid, light
the fire a third time, and bring the
liquor to a boil as soon as possible.
let it boil a full hour with the lid
off, and boil briskly all the time.
the use of the centre f will now
appear; for the machine being nearly
full to the brim, the bubbling
takes place in the centre f only,
where there are no hops. there is a
great boiling over in this centre, but
the liquor sent up falls into e, and
so there is no boiling over of c.
when the full hour of brisk boiling
has expired, put out the fire, draw
off the liquor, leaving the hops of
course in e. the liquor is now to
go into shallow coolers; and when
the heat is reduced to  degrees,
take out about a gallon of the liquor,
and mix it with half a pint of good
yeast. distribute it equally among
the different parcels of wort, afterwards
mix the whole together, and
leave the liquor till it comes down to
about sixty degrees of heat. the
next removal is into the tun-tub, in
which capacity c, without the addition
of e, will serve very well.
while the liquor is cooling, remove
the spent hops from e, the stove
pipe from b, the ash-receiver from
the bottom. the machine remaining
now as a tun-tub, draw off the
liquor as soon as it is down to 
degrees; or take it out of the coolers,
pour it into the tun-tub, and put
on the lid. if the weather be very
cold, or the tun-tub be in a cold
place, cover it with something to
keep it warm. here the fermentation
takes place, sometimes sooner
and sometimes later; but it generally
shows itself by a head beginning
to rise in about eight or ten
hours; and at the end of eight and
forty hours the head assumes a
brownish appearance, and is covered
with yeast instead of froth. the
beer is then to be tunned into well-seasoned
casks, sweet and sound, or
all the expense and labour will be
lost. the cask being fixed on the
stand in the cellar, and the beer
ready, skim off the yeast, and keep
it in a deep earthen vessel. draw
off the beer into a pail, and with the
help of a wooden funnel fill the cask
quite full. the beer will now begin to
ferment again, and must be allowed
to discharge itself from the bung-hole.
when the working has ceased,
the cask is again filled up with
the surplus beer; and a handful of
fresh hops being added, the bung is
finally closed down. if the whole
process has been properly attended
to, such a cask of beer will be clear
in a week; and as soon as clear it
may be tapped. small beer may
be tapped in less time. on a larger
scale, or with casks of a smaller
size, two sorts may be made, ale
and small beer, taking the first wort
for the former, and the second for
the latter.—the advantages attending[]
the patent machine are very
obvious; for though the process
appears to be minute, it is easily
conducted, and but little time is
required for the purpose. in the
common method of brewing, the
water must be carried from the copper
to the mash-tub, while the machine
serves for both purposes at
once. with the common utensils
the process is necessarily much
slower, and the fuel consumed is
nearly ten times as much; but the
great convenience of all is the little
room required and the place of
brewing. in the common way there
is wanted a copper fixed in brick-work,
and for a family of any considerable
size a brewhouse is indispensable.
on the contrary, the
machine is set up opposite any fire
place, and the pipe enters the chimney,
or is put into the fire place.
there is no boiling over, no slopping
about; and the operation may be
performed upon a boarded floor, as
well as upon a brick or stone floor.
if there be no fire place in the room,
the pipe can be projected through
an opening in the window, or through
the outside of any sort of building,
not liable to suffer from the heat of
the pipe. even a garden walk, a
court, or open field will answer the
purpose, provided there be no rain,
and the mash-tub be kept sufficiently
warm. when the brewing is
finished, the machine should be well
scalded, rubbed dry, and kept in a
dry place. the two coolers, g g,
placed on different casks, have no
necessary connection with the machine.
they are made of wood or
cast-iron, of a size to fit one within
another to save room. the patent
machine is sold by messrs. needham
and co. , piccadilly, london.
the price of one for brewing a
bushel of malt is £, for two bushels
£, for three £, for four £,
for five £, and for six £. if
the article be thought expensive, a
few neighbouring families might
unite in the purchase, and the money
would very soon be more than
saved in the economy of brewing.
bride cake. mix together a
pound of dried flour, two drams of
powdered mace, and a quarter of a
pound of powdered loaf sugar. add
a quarter of a pint of cream, and
half a pound of melted butter; a
quarter of a pint of yeast, five eggs,
with half of the whites beaten up
with the yolks, and a gill of rose
water. having warmed the butter
and cream, mix them together, and
set the whole to rise before the fire.
pick and clean half a pound of currants,
put them in warm and well
dried.
bright bars of polished stoves,
may be restored to their proper lustre,
by rubbing them well with some
of the following mixture on a piece
of broad-cloth. boil slowly one
pound of soft soap in two quarts of
water, till reduced to one. of this
jelly take three or four spoonfuls,
and mix it to a consistence with the
addition of emery. when the black
is removed, wipe them clean, and
polish with glass, not sand-paper.
brisket of beef, if intended
to be stewed, should have that part
of it put into a stewpot which has
the hard fat upon it, with a small
quantity of water. let it boil up,
and skim it well; then add carrots,
turnips, onions, celery, and a few
pepper corns. stew it till it is quite
tender; then take out the fat bones,
and remove all the fat from the soup.
either serve that and the meat in
a tureen, or the soup alone, and the
meat on a dish, garnished with vegetables.
the following sauce with
the beef, will be found to be very
excellent.—take half a pint of the
soup, and mix it with a spoonful of
ketchup, a glass of port wine, a tea-spoonful
of made mustard, a little
flour and salt, and a bit of butter.
boil all together a few minutes, and[]
pour it round the meat. chop capers,
walnuts, red cabbage, pickled
cucumbers, and chives or parsley,
small, and place them in separate
heaps over it.
broad beans. boil them tender,
with a bunch of parsley, which
must afterwards be chopped and
put into melted butter, to serve with
them. bacon or pickled pork is
usually boiled with the beans, but
the meat will be of a better colour, if
boiled separately.
brocoli. to dress brocoli,
cut the heads with short stalks, and
pare off the tough skin. tie the
small shoots into bunches, and boil
them a shorter time than the heads.
a little salt should be put into the
water. serve them up with or without
toast.
broiling. cleanliness is extremely
necessary in this mode of
cookery; and for this purpose the
gridiron, which is too frequently
neglected, ought to be carefully attended
to, keeping it perfectly clean
between the bars, and bright on the
top. when hot, wipe it well with a
linen cloth; and before using it, rub
the bars with mutton suet, to prevent
the meat being marked by the
gridiron. the bars should be made
with a small gutter in them to carry
off the gravy into a trough in front,
to prevent the fat from dropping into
the fire and making a smoke, which
will spoil the flavour of the meat.
upright gridirons are therefore the
best, as they can be set before the
fire, without fear of smoke, and the
gravy is preserved in the trough under
them. a brisk and clear fire is
also indispensable, that the bars of
the gridiron may all be hot through
before any thing be laid upon them,
yet not so as to burn the meat, but
to give it that colour and flavour
which constitute the perfection of
this mode of cooking. never hasten
any thing that is broiling, lest it be
smoked and spoiled; but the moment
it is done, send it up as hot as
possible.
broiled cod. cut the fish in
thick slices, dry and flour it well;
rub the gridiron with chalk, set it on
a clear fire, and lay on the slices of
cod. keep them high from the fire,
turn them often, till they are quite
done, and of a fine brown. take
them up carefully without breaking,
and serve with lobster or shrimp
sauce.
broiled eels. skin and clean
a large eel, cut it in pieces and broil
it slowly over a good fire. dust it
well with dried parsley, and serve
it up with melted butter.
broiled fowl. cut a large
fowl into four quarters, put them on
a bird-spit, and tie that on another
spit, and half roast. or half roast
the whole fowl, and finish it on the
gridiron, which will make it less dry
than if wholly broiled. another
way is to split the fowl down the
back, pepper, salt, and broil it, and
serve with mushroom sauce.
broiled herrings. flour
them first, broil them of a good colour,
and serve with plain butter for
sauce.
broiled pigeons. after
cleaning, split the backs, pepper
and salt them, and broil them very
nicely. pour over them either stewed
or pickled mushrooms in melted
butter, and serve them up as hot as
possible.
broiled salmon. cut slices
an inch thick, and season with pepper
and salt. lay each slice in half
a sheet of white paper, well buttered;
twist the ends of the paper, and
broil the slices over a slow fire six
or eight minutes. serve them in the
paper, with anchovy sauce.
broken china. to repair
any article of this description, beat
some lime into the finest powder,
and sift it through muslin. tie some
of it into a thin muslin, put on the
edges of the broken china some[]
white of an egg, and dust on a little
lime as quickly as possible; but be
careful to unite the broken parts
very exactly.
broth. a very nourishing kind
of broth for weakly persons may be
made as follows. boil two pounds
of loin of mutton, with a large handful
of chervil, in two quarts of water,
till reduced to one. any other herb
or roots may be added. remove
part of the fat, and take half a pint
three or four times a day. if a broth
is wanted to be made quickly, take
a bone or two of a neck or loin of
mutton, pare off the fat and the skin,
set it on the fire in a small tin saucepan
that has a cover, with three
quarters of a pint of water, the meat
being first beaten, and cut in thin
bits. put in a bit of thyme and
parsley, and if approved, a slice of
onion. let it boil very quick, skim
it nicely; take off the cover, if likely
to be too weak; otherwise keep it
covered. half an hour is sufficient
for the whole process.
brown gravy. cover the
bottom of a stewpan with lean veal
an inch thick, overlay it with slices
of undressed gammon, two or three
onions, two or three bay leaves, some
sweet herbs, two blades of mace,
and three cloves. cover the stewpan,
and set it over a slow fire; but
when the juices come out, let the
fire be a little quicker. when the
meat is of a fine brown, fill the pan
with good beef-broth, boil and skim
it, then simmer it an hour. add a
little water, thickened with flour;
boil it half an hour, and strain it.
gravy thus made will keep a week.
brown bread ice. grate
some brown bread as fine as possible,
soak a small proportion in cream
two or three hours, sweeten and ice
it.
half a pound of stale brown bread
grated, half a pound of currants,
ditto of shred suet, sugar and nutmeg.
mix it up with four eggs, a
spoonful of brandy, and twice as
much cream. boil it in a cloth or
bason of proper size three or four
hours.
browning. powder four ounces
of double-refined sugar, put it
into a very nice iron fryingpan, with
one ounce of fresh butter. mix it
well over a clear fire; and when it
begins to froth, hold it up higher:
when of a very fine dark brown,
pour in a small quantity of a pint of
port, and the whole by very slow
degrees, stirring it all the time. put
to the above half an ounce of jamaica,
and the same of black pepper,
six cloves of shalots peeled, three
blades of mace bruised, three spoonfuls
of mushroom and the same of
walnut ketchup, some salt, and the
finely-pared rind of a lemon. boil
gently fifteen minutes, pour it into
a bason till cold, take off the scum,
and bottle it for use. this article
is intended to colour and flavour
made-up dishes.
bruises. when the contusion
is slight, fomentations of warm vinegar
and water, frequently applied,
will generally relieve it. cataplasms
of fresh cow-dung applied to bruises,
occasioned by violent blows or falls,
will seldom fail to have a good effect.
nothing however is more certainly
efficacious than a porter plaster
immediately applied to the part
affected. boil some porter in an
earthen vessel over a slow fire till
it be well thickened; and when cold
spread it on a piece of leather to
form the intended plaster.
bubble and squeak. boil,
chop and fry some cabbage, with a
little butter, pepper and salt. lay
on it slices of underdone beef, lightly
fried.
bugs. dip a sponge or brush
into a strong solution of vitriol, and
rub it on the bedstead, or in the
places where these vermin harbour,
and it will destroy both them and[]
their nits. if the bugs appear after
once using it, the application
must be repeated, and some of the
liquid poured into the joints and
holes of the bedstead and headboard.
beds that have much woodwork
require to be taken down and
well examined, before they can be
thoroughly cleared of these vermin,
and the mixture should be rubbed
into all the joints and crevices with
a painter's brush. it should also
be applied to the walls of the room
to insure success; and if mixed with
a little lime, it will produce a lively
yellow. the boiling of any kind of
woodwork or household furniture in
an iron cauldron, with a solution of
vitriol, will prevent the breeding of
bugs, and preserve it from rottenness
and decay. sulphur made into
a paste, or arsenic dissolved in water,
and applied in the same manner,
will also be found an effectual
remedy for the bugs. but if these
do not completely succeed, take half
a pint of the highest rectified spirits
of wine, and half a pint of spirits of
turpentine; dissolve in this mixture
half an ounce of camphor, and
shake them well together. dust the
bed or the furniture, dip a sponge
or brush into the mixture, wet them
all over, and pour some of the liquid
into the holes and crevices. if any
should afterwards appear, wet the
lacings of the bed, the foldings of
the curtains near the rings, and other
parts where it is at all likely the
bugs may nestle and breed, and it
will not fail to destroy them. the
smell of this mixture is not unwholesome,
and may be applied to the
finest damask bed without any fear
of soiling it. it should be well shaked
together, but never used by candle-light,
for fear of its taking fire.
bullace cheese. to every
quart of full ripe bullace, add a
quarter of a pound of loaf sugar
finely powdered. put them into a
pot, and bake them in a moderate
oven till they are soft. rub them
through a hair sieve; to every pound
of pulp add half a pound of loaf sugar
powdered, and in the meantime
keep it stirring. pour the pulp into
preserving pots, tie brandy paper
over; and keep them in a dry place.
when it has stood a few months, it
will cut out very bright and fine.
buns. to make a good plain
bun, that may be eaten with or without
toasting and butter, rub four
ounces of butter into two pounds of
flour, four ounces of sugar, a nutmeg,
a few jamaica peppers, and a
dessert-spoonful of caraways. put
a spoonful or two of cream into a
cup of yeast, and as much good milk
as will make the above into a light
paste. set it to rise by the fire till
the oven be ready, and bake the buns
quickly on tins.—to make some of
a richer sort, mix one pound and a
half of dried flour with half a pound
of sugar. melt eighteen ounces of
butter in a little warm water, add
six spoonfuls of rose-water, and
knead the above into a light dough,
with half a pint of yeast. then mix
in five ounces of caraway comfits,
and put some on them.
burns. in slight cases, the
juice of onions, a little ink or brandy
rubbed immediately on the part affected,
will prevent blisters. the
juice of burdock, mixed with an
equal quantity of olive oil, will make
a good ointment for the purpose,
and the fresh leaves of that plant
may also be applied as a kind of
plaster. houseleek used by itself,
or mixed with cream, will afford
quick relief in external inflammations.
a little spirit of turpentine,
or linseed oil, mixed with lime water,
if kept constantly to the part
will remove the pain. but warm
vinegar and water, frequently applied
with a woollen cloth, is most
to be depended on in these cases.
burnt cream. boil a pint
of cream with a stick of cinnamon,
and some lemon peel. take it off
the fire, and pour it very slowly into[]
the yolks of four eggs, stirring it till
half cold. sweeten it, take out the
spice, and pour it into a dish. when
cold, strew over it some white
pounded sugar, and brown it with
a salamander. or, make a rich custard
without sugar, and boil in it
some lemon peel. when cold, sift
over it plenty of white sugar, and
brown the top with a salamander.
butter. no one article of
family consumption is of greater
consequence than butter of a superior
quality, and no one requires
more care and management. it
possesses various degrees of goodness,
according to the food on which
the cows are pastured, and the manner
in which the dairy is conducted; but
its sweetness is not affected by
the cream being turned, of which it
is made. when cows are in turnips,
or eat cabbages, the taste is strong
and disagreeable; and to remedy
this, the following methods have
been tried with advantage. when
the milk is strained into the pans,
put to every six gallons one gallon
of boiling water. or dissolve one
ounce of nitre in a pint of spring
water, and put a quarter of a pint
to every fifteen gallons of milk. or,
in churning, keep back a quarter of
a pint of sour cream, and put it into
a well-scalded pot, into which the
next cream is to be gathered. stir
that well, and do so with every fresh
addition.—to make butter, skim
the milk in the summer, when the
sun has not heated the dairy. at
that season it should stand for butter
twenty-four hours without skimming,
and forty-eight in winter.
deposit the cream-pot in a very cold
cellar, unless the dairy itself is sufficiently
cold. if you cannot churn
daily, shift the cream into scalded
fresh pots; but never omit churning
twice a week. if possible, place
the churn in a thorough air; and if
not a barrel one, set it in a tub of
water two feet deep, which will give
firmness to the butter. when the
butter is come, pour off the buttermilk,
and put the butter into a fresh
scalded pan, or tubs, which have
afterwards been in cold water. pour
water on it, and let it lie to acquire
some hardness before it is worked;
then change the water, and beat it
with flat boards so perfectly, that
not the least taste of buttermilk remain,
and that the water which
must be often changed, shall be
quite clear. then work some salt
into it, weigh, and make it into
forms; throw them into cold water,
in an earthen pan with a cover.
nice cool butter will then be had in
the hottest weather. it requires
more working in hot than in cold
weather; but care should be taken
at all times not to leave a particle of
buttermilk, or a sour taste, as is too
often done.—to preserve butter,
take two parts of the best
common salt, one part of fine loaf-sugar,
and one of saltpetre; beat
them well together. to sixteen
ounces of butter, thoroughly cleansed
from the milk, add one ounce of
this mixture: work it well, and pot
down the butter when it becomes
firm and cold. butter thus preserved
is the better for keeping, and
should not be used under a month.
this article should be kept from the
air, and is best in pots of well-glazed
ware, that will hold from ten to fourteen
pounds each. put some salt
on the top; and when that is turned
to brine, if not enough to cover the
butter entirely, add some strong salt
and water. it then requires only to
be covered from the dust, and will
be good for winter use.—in purchasing
butter at market, recollect
that if fresh, it ought to smell
like a nosegay, and be of an equal
colour throughout. if sour in smell,
it has not been sufficiently washed: if
veiny and open, it is probably
mixed with stale butter, or some of
an inferior quality. to ascertain
the quality of salt butter, put a knife
into it, and smell it when drawn out:[]
if there is any thing rancid or unpleasant,
the butter is bad. salt
butter being made at different times,
the layers in casks will greatly vary;
and it is not easy to ascertain its
quality, except by unhooping the
cask, and trying it between the
staves.
butter dish. roll butter in
different forms, like a cake or a pine,
and mark it with a tea-spoon. or
roll it in crimping rollers, work it
through a cullender, or scoop it with
a tea-spoon; mix it with grated
beef, tongue, or anchovies. garnish
with a wreath of curled parsley,
and it will serve as a little dish.
buttermilk, if made of sweet
cream, is a delicious and very wholesome
article of food. those who
can relish sour buttermilk, will find
it still more light, and it is reckoned
very beneficial in consumptive cases.
if not very sour, it is also as good
as cream to eat with fruit; but it
should be sweetened with white sugar,
and mixed with a very little
milk. it does equally well for cakes
and rice puddings, and of course it
is economical to churn before the
cream is too stale for any thing but
to feed pigs.—the celebrated dr.
boerhaäve recommended the frequent
use of sweet buttermilk in all
consumptive cases, and that it should
form the whole of the patient's drink,
while biscuits and rusks, with ripe
and dried fruits of various kinds,
should chiefly be depended on as
articles of food. for this purpose
take the milk from the cow into a
small churn; in about ten minutes
begin churning, and continue till
the flakes of butter swim about pretty
thick, and the milk is discharged
of all the oily particles, and appears
thin and blue. strain it through a
sieve, and let the patient drink it as
frequently as possible.
warm three quarts of new milk, turn
it with a quart of buttermilk, and
drain the curd through a sieve.
when dry pound in a marble mortar,
with nearly half a pound of sugar,
a lemon boiled tender, the
crumb of a roll grated, a nutmeg
grated, six bitter almonds, four ounces
of warm butter, a tea-cupful of
good cream, the yolks of five and
whites of three eggs, a glass of sweet
wine and a glass of brandy. when
well incorporated, bake in small
cups or bowls well buttered. if the
bottom be not brown, use a salamander; but
serve as quick as possible,
and with pudding sauce.
buttered crabs. pick out
the inside when boiled, beat it up in
a little gravy, with wine, pepper,
salt, nutmeg, a few crumbs of bread,
a piece of butter rolled in a little
flour, and some vinegar or lemon
juice. serve it up hot.
buttered eggs. beat four
or five eggs, yolk and white together;
put a quarter of a pound of
butter in a bason, and then put that
into boiling water. stir it till melted,
then put that butter and the
eggs into a saucepan; keep a bason
in your hand, just hold the
saucepan in the other over a slow
part of the fire, shaking it one way,
as it begins to warm. pour it into
the bason and back again, then hold
it over the fire, stirring it constantly
in the saucepan, and pouring it into
the bason, more perfectly to mix the
egg and butter, until they shall be
hot without boiling. serve on toasted
bread, or in a bason, to eat with
salt fish or red herrings.
buttered loaf. take three
quarts of new milk, and add as much
rennet as is sufficient to turn it;
then break the curd, and drain off
all the whey through a clean cloth.
pound it in a stone mortar, add the
white of one and the yolks of six
eggs, a good handful of grated bread,
half as much of fine flour, and a little
salt. mix them well together
with the hand, divide the whole into
four round loaves, and place them
upon white paper. after they are[]
well buttered, varnish them all over
with a feather, dipped in the yolk of
an egg stirred up with a little beer.
set the loaves in a quick oven three
quarters of an hour; while baking,
take half a pound of new butter,
add to it four spoonfuls of water,
half a nutmeg grated, and sugar
sufficient to sweeten it. stir them
together over the fire till they boil;
when sufficiently thickened, draw
the loaves from the oven, open their
tops, pour in the butter and sugar,
and send them up with sugar strewed
over them.
buttered lobsters. pick
out the meat, cut and warm it, with
a little weak brown gravy, nutmeg,
salt, pepper, butter, and a little
flour. if done white, a little white
gravy and cream.
buttered oranges. grate
off a little of the outside rind of four
seville oranges, and cut a round hole
at the blunt end opposite the stalk,
large enough to take out the pulp
and seeds and juice. then pick the
seeds and skin from the pulp, rub
the oranges with a little salt, and
lay them in water for a short time.
the bits cut out are to be saved.
boil the fruit in fresh water till they
are tender, shifting the water to take
out the bitterness. in the meantime
make a thin syrup with fine sugar,
put the oranges into it, and boil them
up. as the quantity of syrup need
not be enough to cover them, turn
them round, that each part may partake
of the syrup, and let them remain
in it hot till they are wanted.
about half an hour before serving,
put some sugar to the pulp, and set
it over the fire; mix it well, and let
it boil. then add a spoonful of
white wine for every orange, give it
a boil, put in a bit of fresh butter,
and stir it over the fire to thicken.
fill the oranges with it, and serve
them with some of the syrup in the
dish, with the bits on the top.
mix the juice of seven seville oranges
with four spoonfuls of rose-water,
and add the yolks of eight and
the whites of four eggs well beaten.
strain the liquor on half a pound of
sugar pounded, stir it over a gentle
fire; and when it begins to thicken,
add a piece of butter the size of a
small walnut. keep it over the fire
a few minutes longer, then pour it
into a flat dish, and serve it to eat
cold. if no silver saucepan for the
purpose, do it in a china bason in a
saucepan of boiling water, the top
of which will just receive the bason.
buttered prawns. take
them out of the husk; warm them
with a little good gravy, a bit of butter
and flour, a taste of nutmeg,
pepper and salt. simmer them together
a minute or two, and serve
with sippets; or with cream sauce,
instead of brown. shrimps are done
in the same manner.
buttered rice. wash and
pick some rice, drain, and set it on
the fire, with new milk sufficient to
make it swell. when tender, pour
off the milk, and add a bit of butter,
a little sugar and pounded cinnamon.
shake and keep it from burning
on the fire, and serve it up as a
sweet dish.[]
cabbage. wash and pick it carefully,
and if very large, quarter it.
put it into a saucepan with plenty
of boiling-water, and a large spoonful
of salt; if any scum rises, take
it off, and boil it till the stalk is tender.
keep the vegetable well covered
with water all the time of boiling,
and see that no smoke or dirt
arises from stirring the fire. with
careful management the cabbage
will look as beautiful when dressed,
as it did when growing. the flavour
of an old cabbage may be much improved,
by taking it up when half
done, and putting it directly into
another saucepan of fresh boiling
water. when taken up, drain it in
a cullender. it may be chopped and
warmed with a piece of butter, pepper
and salt, or sent to table whole
with melted butter. savoys and
greens in general are dressed in the
same way.
cakes. in making and baking
cakes the following particulars should
be attended to. the currants should
be nicely picked and washed, dried
in a cloth, and set before the fire. if
damp, they will make cakes or puddings
heavy. before they are added,
a dust of dry flour should be scattered
among them, and then shaken
together, which will make the cake
or pudding lighter. eggs should be
beaten a long time, whites and yolks
apart, and always strained. sugar
should be rubbed to a powder on a
clean board, and sifted through a
fine hair or lawn sieve. lemon peel
requires to be pared very thin, and
with a little sugar beaten to a paste
in a marble mortar. it should then
be mixed with a little wine or cream,
so as to divide easily among the
other ingredients. after all the articles
are put into the pan, they
should be long and thoroughly beaten,
as the lightness of the cake depends
much on their being well incorporated.
both black and white
plumb cakes, being made with yeast,
require less butter and eggs, and
eat equally light and rich. if the
leaven be only of flour, milk and water,
and yeast, it becomes more
tough, and is less easily divided, than
if the butter be first put with those
ingredients, and the dough afterwards
set to rise by the fire. the
heat of the oven is of great importance
for cakes, especially large ones.
if not pretty quick, the batter will
not rise; and if too quick, put some
white paper over the cake to prevent
its being burnt. if not long
enough lighted to have a body of
heat, or it is become slack, the cake
will be heavy. to know when it is
soaked, take a broad-bladed knife
that is very bright, and thrust it
into the centre; draw it out instantly,
and if the paste in any degree
adheres, return the cake to the oven,
and close it up. if the heat is sufficient
to raise but not to soak the
baking, a little fresh fuel should be
introduced, after taking out the
cakes and keeping them hot, and
then returning them to the oven as
quickly as possible. particular care
however should be taken to prevent
this inconvenience, when large cakes
are to be baked.
cake trifle. bake a rice cake
in a mould; and when cold, cut it
round with a sharp knife, about two
inches from the edge, taking care
not to perforate the bottom. put in
a thick custard, and some spoonfuls
of raspberry jam; and then put on
a high whip.
calf's feet broth. boil
two feet in three quarts of water till
reduced to half the quantity; strain
it, and set it by. when to be used,
take off the fat, put a large tea-cupful
of the jelly into a saucepan, with
half a glass of sweet wine, a little
sugar and nutmeg, and heat it up[]
till it be ready to boil. then take a
little of it, and beat it by degrees to
the yolk of an egg, adding a bit of
butter the size of a nutmeg; stir it
all together, but do not let it boil.
grate a little fresh lemon peel into
it.—another way is to boil two
calves' feet with two ounces of veal,
and two of beef, the bottom of a
penny loaf, two or three blades of
mace, half a nutmeg, and a little
salt, in three quarts of water, till
reduced to half the quantity. then
strain it, and take off the fat.
calf's feet jelly. boil two
feet, well cleaned, in five pints of
water till they are broken, and the
water half wasted. strain it, take
off the fat when cold, and remove
the jelly from the sediment. put it
into a saucepan, with sugar, raisin
wine, lemon juice and lemon peel.
when the flavour is rich, add the
whites of five eggs well beaten, and
their shells broken. set the saucepan
on the fire, but do not stir the
jelly after it begins to warm. let it
boil twenty minutes after it rises to
a head, then pour it through a flannel
bag, first dipping the jelly bag
in hot water to prevent waste, and
squeezing it quite dry. run the
jelly repeatedly through the bag,
until it is quite clear, and then put
it into glasses or forms. the following
method will greatly facilitate
the clearing of the jelly. when the
mixture has boiled twenty minutes,
throw in a tea-cupful of cold water;
let it boil five minutes longer, then
take the saucepan off the fire covered
close, and keep it half an hour. it
will afterwards be so clear as to need
only once running through the bag,
and much waste will be prevented.—another
way to make jelly is to
take three calf's feet, or two cow-heels,
that have been only scalded,
and boil them in four quarts of water,
till it be half wasted. remove
the jelly from the fat and sediment,
mix with it the juice of a seville
orange and twelve lemons, the peels
of three ditto, the whites and shells
of twelve eggs, brown sugar to taste,
nearly a pint of raisin wine, one
ounce of coriander seed, a quarter
of an ounce of allspice, a bit of cinnamon,
and six cloves, all bruised
and previously mixed together. the
jelly should boil fifteen minutes without
stirring, and then be cleared
through a flannel bag. take a little
of the jelly while running, mix it
with a tea-cupful of water in which
a piece of beet root has been boiled,
and run it through the bag when all
the rest is run out. the other jelly
being cooled on a plate, this will
serve to garnish it. jelly made in
this way will have a fine high colour
and flavour. but in all cases, to
produce good jelly, the feet should
only be scalded to take off the hair.
those who sell them ready prepared
generally boil them too long, and
they become in consequence less
nutricious. if scalded only, the liquor
will require greater care in removing
the fat; but the jelly will be
far stronger, and of course allow
more water. jelly is equally good
if made of cow-heels nicely cleaned,
and will be much stronger than what
is made from calf's feet.
calf's feet pudding. boil
four feet quite tender, pick off the
meat, and chop it fine. add some
grated bread, a pound of chopped
suet, half a pint of milk, six eggs, a
pound of currants, four ounces of citron,
two ounces of candied peel, a
grated nutmeg, and a glass of brandy.
butter the cloth and flour it,
tie it close, and boil it three hours.
calf's head boiled. clean
it carefully and soak it in water, that
it may look very nice, and take out
the brains for sauce. wash them
well, tie them up in a cloth, with
a little sage and parsley; put them
into the pot at the same time with
the head, and scum the water while
boiling. a large head will take two
hours, and when the part which
joined the neck becomes tender it is[]
done. take up the brains and chop
them with the sage and parsley, and
an egg boiled hard. put them into
a saucepan with a bit of butter, pepper
and salt, and warm them up.
peel the tongue, lay it in the middle
of the dish, with the brain sauce
round it. strew over the head some
grated bread and chopped parsley,
and brown it by the fire in a separate
dish, adding bacon, pickled
pork, and greens.
scald the skin off a fine head, clean
it nicely, and take out the brains.
boil it tender enough to remove the
bones, and season it high with mace,
nutmeg, salt, and white pepper.
put a layer of chopped parsley, then
a quantity of thick slices of fine ham,
or a beautiful coloured tongue skinned,
and then the yolks of six nice
yellow eggs stuck here and there
about. roll the head quite close,
and tie it up tight, placing a cloth
under the tape, as for other collars.
boil it, and then lay a weight upon
it.
clean and half-boil part of a head;
cut the meat into small bits, and put
it into a tosser, with a little gravy
made of the bones, some of the water
it was boiled in, a bunch of sweet
herbs, an onion, and a blade of
mace. the cockscombs of young
cockrels may be boiled tender, and
then blanched, or a sweetbread will
do as well. season the gravy with
a little pepper, nutmeg, and salt.
rub down some flour and butter,
and give all a boil together. then
take out herbs and onion, and add
a small cup of cream, but do not
boil it in. serve with small bits of
bacon rolled up and forcemeat balls.
calf's head hashed. when
half boiled, cut off the meat in slices,
half an inch thick, and two or three
inches long. brown some butter,
flour, and sliced onion; and throw
in the slices with some good gravy,
truffles and morels. give it one boil,
skim it well and set it in a moderate
heat to simmer till very tender.
season at first with pepper, salt,
and cayenne; and ten minutes before
serving, throw in some shred
parsley, and a very small bit of taragon
and knotted marjoram cut as
fine as possible. send it up with
forcemeat balls, and bits of bacon
rolled round, adding the squeeze of
a lemon.—another way is to boil
the head almost enough, and take
the meat of the best side neatly off
the bone with a sharp knife. lay
this into a small dish, wash it over
with the yolks of two eggs, and cover
it with crumbs, a few herbs nicely
shred, a little pepper, salt, and
grated nutmeg all mixed together
first. set the dish before the fire,
and turn it now and then, that all
parts of the head may be equally
brown. in the mean time slice the
remainder of the head, peel the
tongue and slice it. put a pint of
good gravy into a pan with an onion,
and a small bunch of herbs, consisting
of parsley, basil, savoury, taragon,
knotted marjoram, and a little
thyme. add a small quantity of
salt and cayenne, a few truffles and
morels, and two spoonfuls of ketchup.
then beat up half the brains,
put it to the rest with a little butter
and flour, and simmer the whole together.
beat the other part of the
brains with shred lemon peel, a little
nutmeg and mace, some shred
parsley and an egg. then fry it in
small cakes of a beautiful yellow
brown. dip some oysters into the
yolk of an egg, and do the same;
and also some relishing forcemeat
balls, made as for mock turtle. garnish
with these, and small bits of
bacon just made hot before the fire.
calf's head pie. stew a
knuckle of veal till fit for eating,
with two onions, a few isinglass
shavings, a bunch of herbs, a blade
of mace, and a few peppercorns, in
three pints of water. keep the
broth for the pie. take off a bit of[]
the meat for the balls, and let the
other be eaten; but simmer the bones
in the broth till it is very good. half
boil the head, and cut it into square
bits; put a layer of ham at the bottom,
then some head, first fat and
then lean, with balls and hard eggs
cut in half, and so on till the dish
be full; but great care must be taken
not to place the pieces close, or
the pie will be too solid, and there
will be no space for the jelly. the
meat must be first seasoned pretty
well with pepper and salt, and a
scrape or two of nutmeg. put a
little water and gravy into the dish,
cover it with a tolerably thick crust,
and bake it in a slow oven. when
done, fill it up with gravy, and
do not cut it till quite cold. use a
very sharp knife for this purpose,
first cutting out a large piece, and
going down to the bottom of the
dish: thinner slices may afterwards
be cut. the different colours, and
the clear jelly, will have a beautiful
marbled appearance. a small pie
may be made to eat hot, and will
have a good appearance, if seasoned
high with oysters, mushrooms, truffles
and morels. the cold pie will
keep several days, and slices of it
will make a handsome side-dish. if
the isinglass jelly be not found stiff
enough, a calf's foot or a cow heel
may be used instead. to vary the
colour, pickled tongue may be cut
in, instead of ham.
calf's head roasted. wash
the head perfectly clean, stew it with
oysters, tie it together and spit it,
baste it well with butter and flour
rubbed smooth. stew together some
of the oyster liquor, gravy, butter
and salt, with a few sprigs of marjoram
and savoury, adding a little
claret, and pour the sauce over the
dish.
calf's head soup. after the
head has been thoroughly cleaned,
put it into a stewpan with a proper
quantity of water, an onion, some
sweet herbs, mace and cloves, and
a little pearl barley. boil it quite
tender, put in some stewed celery,
and season it with pepper. pour
the soup into a dish, place the head
in the middle, and send it hot to
table.
calf's head stewed. wash
and soak it for an hour, bone it, take
out the brains, the tongue and the
eyes. make a forcemeat with two
pounds of beef suet, as much lean
veal, two anchovies boned and washed,
the peel of a lemon, some grated
nutmeg, and a little thyme. chop
them up together with some grated
bread, and mix in the yolks of four
eggs. make part of this forcemeat
into fifteen or twenty balls; boil five
eggs hard, some oysters washed
clean, and half a pint of fresh mushrooms,
and mix with the rest of the
forcemeat. stuff that part of the
head where the bones were taken out,
tie it up carefully with packthread,
put it into two quarts of gravy or
good broth, with a blade of mace,
cover it close, and stew it very slowly
for two hours. while the head is
doing, beat up the brains with some
lemon-thyme and parsley chopped
very fine, some grated nutmeg, and
the yolk of an egg mixed with it.
fry half the brains in dripping, in
little cakes, and fry the balls. when
the head is done, keep it warm with
the brain-cakes and balls; strain
off the liquor in which the head was
stewed, add to it some stewed truffles
and morels, and a few pickled
mushrooms. put in the other half
of the brains chopped, boil them up
together, and let them simmer a few
minutes. lay the head into a hot
dish, pour the liquor over it, and
place the balls and the brain-cakes
round it. for a small family, half
the head will be sufficient. a lamb's
head may be done in the same way.
calf's heart. chop fine
some suet, parsley, sweet marjoram
and a boiled egg. add some grated
bread, lemon peel, pepper, salt and
mustard. mix them together in a[]
paste, and stuff the heart with it,
after it has been well washed and
cleaned. if done carefully, it is
better baked than roasted. serve
it up quite hot, with gravy and melted
butter.
calf's kidney. chop veal
kidney, and some of the fat; likewise
a little leek or onion, pepper,
and salt. roll the kidney up with
an egg into balls, and fry it.—a
calf's heart should be stuffed and
roasted as a beef's heart; or sliced
and made into a pudding, the same
as for a steak or kidney pudding.
calf's liver. there are several
ways of making this into a
good dish. one is to broil it, after
it has been seasoned with pepper
and salt. then rub a bit of cold
butter over, and serve it up hot and
hot.—if the liver is to be roasted,
first wash and wipe it, then cut a long
hole in it, and stuff it with crumbs
of bread, chopped anchovy, herbs,
fat bacon, onion, salt, pepper, a bit
of butter, and an egg. sew up the
liver, lard or wrap it in a veal caul,
and put it to the fire. serve it with
good brown gravy, and currant jelly.—if
the liver and lights are to be
dressed together, half boil an equal
quantity of each; then cut them in
a middling-sized mince, add a spoonful
or two of the water that boiled it,
a bit of butter, flour, salt and pepper.
simmer them together ten minutes,
and serve the dish up hot.
calf's sweetbreads. these
should be half boiled, and then stewed
in white gravy. add cream,
flour, butter, nutmeg, salt, and white
pepper. or do them in brown sauce
seasoned. or parboil, and then cover
them with crumbs, herbs, and
seasoning, and brown them in a
dutch oven. serve with butter, and
mushroom ketchup, or gravy.
calves. the general method
of rearing calves consumes so much
of the milk of the dairy, that it is
highly necessary to adopt other
means, or the calves must be sold
to the butcher while they are young.
a composition called linseed milk,
made of linseed oil-cake powdered,
and gradually mixed with skim-milk
sweetened with treacle, has been
tried with considerable effect. it
must be made nearly as warm as new
milk when taken from the cow. hay
tea mixed with linseed and boiled to
a jelly, has likewise been tried with
success. a species of water gruel,
made in the following manner, is
strongly recommended. put a handful
or two of oatmeal into some boiling
water, and after it has thickened
a little, leave it to cool till it is lukewarm;
mix with it two or three pints
of skim-milk, and give it to the calf
to drink. at first it may be necessary
to make the calf drink by presenting
the fingers to it; but it will
soon learn to drink of itself, and will
grow much faster than by any other
method. according to the old custom,
a calf intended to be reared is
allowed to suck for six or eight
weeks; and if the cow give only a
moderate quantity of milk, the value
of it will amount to the price of
the calf in half that time. by the
method now recommended, only a
little oatmeal or ground barley is
consumed, and a small quantity of
skim-milk. the calf is also more
healthy and strong, and less subject
to disease. small whisps of hay
should be placed round them on
cleft sticks, to induce the calves to
eat; and when they are weaned,
they should be turned into short
sweet grass; for if hay and water
only are used, they are liable to
swellings and the rot. the fatting
of calves being an object of great
importance, a greater variety of food
is now provided for this purpose than
formerly, and great improvements
have been made in this part of rural
economy. grains, potatoes, malt
dust, pollard, and turnips now constitute
their common aliment. but
in order to make them fine and fat,
they must be kept as clean as possible,[]
with fresh litter every day.
bleeding them twice before they are
slaughtered, improves the beauty and
whiteness of the flesh, but it may be
doubted whether the meat is equally
good and nutricious. if calves
be taken with the scouring, which
often happens in a few days after
being cast, make a medicine of powdered
chalk and wheat meal, wrought
into a ball with some gin; and it
will afford relief. the shoote is another
distemper to which they are
liable, and is attended with a violent
cholic and the loathing of food. the
general remedy in this case is milk,
well mulled with eggs; or eggs and
flour mixed with oil, melted butter,
linseed or anniseed. to prevent the
sickness which commonly attends
calves about michaelmas time, take
newly-churned butter, without salt,
and form it into a cup the size of an
egg; into this cup put three or four
cloves of bruised garlic, and fill it
up with tar. having put the cup
down the calf's throat, pour into its
nostrils half a spoonful of the spirit
of turpentine, rub a little tar upon
its nose, and keep it within doors
for an hour. calves ought to be
housed a night before this medicine
is given.
calico furniture. when
curtains or bed furniture of this description
are to be taken down for
the summer, shake off the loose dust,
and lightly brush them with a small
long-haired furniture brush. wipe
them afterwards very closely with
clean flannels, and rub them with
dry bread. if properly done, the
curtains will look nearly as well as
at first, and if the colour be not
very light, they will not require
washing for years. fold them up
in large parcels, and put them by
carefully. while the furniture remains
up, it should be preserved as
much as possible from the sun and
air, which injure delicate colours;
and the dust may be blown off with
bellows. curtains may thus be kept
clean, even to use with the linings
after they have been washed or newly
dipped.
camp vinegar. slice a large
head of garlic, and put it into a
wide-mouthed bottle, with half an
ounce of cayenne, two tea-spoonfuls
of soy, two of walnut ketchup, four
anchovies chopped, a pint of vinegar,
and enough cochineal to give it
the colour of lavender drops. let
it stand six weeks; then strain it off
quite clear, and keep it in small bottles
sealed up.
camphor julep. dissolve a
quarter of an ounce of camphor in
half a pint of brandy. it may thus
be kept fit for use; and a tea-spoonful
taken in a wine glass of cold
water will be found an agreeable
dose.—another way. to a quarter
of an ounce of camphor, add a quart
of boiling water, and a quart of cold.
let it stand six hours, and strain it
off for use.
camphor ointment. put
half an ounce of camphor into an
ounce of the oil of almonds, mixed
with an ounce of spermaceti. scrape
fine into it half an ounce of white
wax, and melt it over some hot water.
camphorated oil. beat an
ounce of camphor in a mortar, with
two ounces of florence oil, till the
camphor is entirely dissolved. this
liniment is highly useful in rheumatism,
spasms, and other cases of
extreme pain.
canaries. those who wish to
breed this species of birds, should
provide them a large cage, with two
boxes to build in. early in april
put a cock and hen together; and
whilst they are pairing, feed them
with soft meat, or a little grated
bread, scalded rapeseed and an egg
mixed together. at the same time
a small net of fine hay, wool, cotton,
and hair should be suspended
in one corner of the cage, so that
the birds may pull it out as they
want it to build with. tame canaries[]
will sometimes breed three or
four times in a year, and produce
their young about a fortnight after
they begin to sit. when hatched,
they should be left to the care of
the old ones, to nurse them up till
they can fly and feed themselves;
during which time they should be
supplied with fresh victuals every
day, accompanied now and then
with cabbage, lettuce, and chick-weed
with seeds upon it. when the
young canaries can feed themselves,
they should be taken from the old
ones, and put into another cage.
boil a little rapeseed, bruise and
mix it with as much grated bread,
mace seed, and the yolk of an egg
boiled hard; and supply them with
a small quantity every day, that it
may not become stale or sour. besides
this, give them a little scalded
rapeseed, and a little rape and canary
seed by itself. this diet may
be continued till they have done
moulting, or renewed at any time
when they appear unhealthy, and
afterwards they may be fed in the
usual manner.
cancer. it is asserted by a
french practitioner, that this cruel
disorder may be cured in three days,
by the following simple application,
without any surgical operation whatever.
knead a piece of dough about
the size of a pullet's egg, with the
same quantity of hog's lard, the older
the better; and when they are
thoroughly blended, so as to form a
kind of salve, spread it on a piece
of white leather, and apply it to the
part affected. this, if it do no good,
is perfectly harmless.—a plaster for
an eating cancer may be made as
follows. file up some old brass,
and mix a spoonful of it with mutton
suet. lay the plaster on the
cancer, and let it remain till the cure
is effected. several persons have
derived great benefit from this application,
and it has seldom been
known to fail.
candied angelica. cut
angelica into pieces three inches
long, boil it tender, peel and boil it
again till it is green; dry it in a cloth,
and add its weight in sugar. sift
some fine sugar over, and let them
remain in a pan two days; then boil
the stalks clear and green, and let
them drain in a cullender. beat
another pound of sugar and strew
over them, lay them on plates, and
dry them well in an oven.
candied fruit. take the
preserve out of the syrup, lay it into
a new sieve, and dip it suddenly
into hot water, to take off the syrup
that hangs about it. put it on a
napkin before the fire to drain, and
then do another layer in the sieve.
sift the fruit all over with double refined
sugar previously prepared, till
it is quite white. set it on the shallow
end of sieves in a lightly-warm
oven, and turn it two or three times:
it must not be cold till dry. watch
it carefully, and it will be beautiful.
candied peel. take out the
pulps of lemons or oranges, soak
the rinds six days in salt and water,
and afterwards boil them tender in
spring water. drain them on a sieve,
make a thin syrup of loaf sugar and
water, and boil the peels in it till the
syrup begins to candy about them.
then take out the peels, grate fine
sugar over them, drain them on a
sieve, and dry them before the fire.
candles. those made in cold
weather are best; and if put in a
cool place, they will improve by
keeping; but when they begin to
sweat and turn rancid, the tallow
loses its strength, and the candles
are spoiled. a stock for winter use
should be provided in autumn, and
for summer, early in the spring.
the best candle-wicks are made of
fine cotton; the coarser yarn consumes
faster, and burns less steady.
mould candles burn the clearest,
but dips afford the best light, their
wicks being proportionally larger.
caper sauce. add a table-spoonful
of capers to twice the quantity[]
of vinegar, mince one third of
the capers very fine, and divide the
others in half. put them into a
quarter of a pint of melted butter,
or good thickened gravy, and stir
them the same way as the melted
butter, to prevent their oiling. the
juice of half a seville orange or lemon
may be added. an excellent
substitute for capers may be made
of pickled green peas, nastursions,
or gherkins, chopped into a similar
size, and boiled with melted butter.
when capers are kept for use, they
should be covered with fresh scalded
vinegar, tied down close to exclude
the air, and to make them soft.
capillaire. take fourteen
pounds of good moist sugar, three
of coarse sugar, and six eggs beaten
in well with the shells, boil them together
in three quarts of water, and
skim it carefully. then add a quarter
of a pint of orange-flower water,
strain it off, and put it into bottles.
when cold, mix a spoonful or two
of this syrup in a little warm or cold
water.
carachee. mix with a pint of
vinegar, two table-spoonfuls of indian
soy, two of walnut pickle, two
cloves of garlic, one tea-spoonful of
cayenne, one of lemon pickle, and
two of sauce royal.
carmel cover. dissolve
eight ounces of double refined sugar
in three or four spoonfuls of water,
and as many drops of lemon juice.
put it into a copper skillet; when it
begins to thicken, dip the handle of
a spoon in it, and put that into a
pint bason of water. squeeze the
sugar from the spoon into it, and so
on till all the sugar is extracted.
take a bit out of the water, and if
it snaps and is brittle when cold, it
is done enough. but let it be only
three parts cold, then pour the water
from the sugar, and having a
copper form oiled well, run the sugar
on it, in the manner of a maze,
and when cold it may be put on the
dish it is intended to cover. if on
trial the sugar is not brittle, pour off
the water, return it into the skillet,
and boil it again. it should look
thick like treacle, but of a light gold
colour. this makes an elegant cover
for sweetmeats.
carp. this excellent fish will
live some time out of water, and may
therefore get wasted: it is best to
kill them as soon as caught, to prevent
this. carp should either be
boiled or stewed. scale and draw
it, and save the blood. set on water
in a stewpan, with a little chili
vinegar, salt, and horse-radish.
when it boils, put in the carp, and
boil it gently for twenty minutes,
according to the thickness of the
fish. stew the blood with half a
pint of port wine, some good gravy,
a sliced onion, a little whole pepper,
a blade of mace, and a nutmeg
grated. thicken the sauce with
butter rolled in flour, season it with
pepper and salt, essence of anchovy,
and mushroom ketchup. serve up
the fish with the sauce poured over
it, adding a little lemon juice. carp
are also very nice plain boiled, with
common fish sauce.
carpets. in order to keep them
clean, they should not frequently be
swept with a whisk brush, as it wears
them fast; not more than once a
week, and at other times with sprinkled
tea-leaves, and a hair brush.
fine carpets should be done gently
on the knees, with a soft clothes'
brush. when a carpet requires more
cleaning, take it up and beat it well,
then lay it down and brush it on
both sides with a hand-brush. turn
it the right side upwards, and scour
it clean with ox-gall and soap and
water, and dry it with linen cloths.
lay it on the grass, or hang it up to
dry thoroughly.
carraway cake. dry two
pounds of good flour, add ten spoonfuls
of yeast, and twelve of cream.
wash the salt out of a pound of
butter, and rub it into the flour;
beat up eight eggs with half the[]
whites, and mix it with the composition
already prepared. work it
into a light paste, set it before the
fire to rise, incorporate a pound of
carraway comfits, and an hour will
bake it.
carrier sauce. chop six
shalots fine, and boil them up with
a gill of gravy, a spoonful of vinegar,
some pepper and salt. this is used
for mutton, and served in a boat.
carrole of rice. wash and
pick some rice quite clean, boil it
five minutes in water, strain and put
it into a stewpan, with a bit of butter,
a good slice of ham, and an
onion. stew it over a very gentle
fire till tender; have ready a mould
lined with very thin slices of bacon,
mix the yolks of two or three eggs
with the rice, and then line the bacon
with it about half an inch thick.
put into it a ragout of chicken, rabbit,
veal, or of any thing else. fill
up the mould, and cover it close
with rice. bake it in a quick oven
an hour, turn it over, and send it to
table in a good gravy, or curry sauce.
carrots. this root requires a
good deal of boiling. when young,
wipe off the skin after they are boiled;
when old, scrape them first, and
boil them with salt meat. carrots
and parsnips should be kept in layers
of dry sand for winter use, and
not be wholly cleared from the earth.
they should be placed separately,
with their necks upward, and be
drawn out regularly as they stand,
without disturbing the middle or the
sides.
carrot pudding. boil a
large carrot tender; then bruise it
in a marble mortar, and mix with it
a spoonful of biscuit powder, or
three or four little sweet biscuits
without seeds, four yolks and two
whites of eggs, a pint of cream either
raw or scalded, a little ratifia, a large
spoonful of orange or rose-water, a
quarter of a nutmeg, and two ounces
of sugar. bake it in a shallow dish
lined with paste; turn it out, and
dust a little fine sugar over it.
carrot soup. put some beef
bones into a saucepan, with four
quarts of the liquor in which a leg
of mutton or beef has been boiled,
two large onions, a turnip, pepper
and salt, and boil them together for
three hours. have ready six large
carrots scraped and sliced; strain
the soup on them, and stew them
till soft enough to pulp through a
hair sieve or coarse cloth, with a
wooden spoon; but pulp only the
red part of the carrot, and not the
yellow. the soup should be made
the day before, and afterwards boiled
with the pulp, to the thickness
of peas-soup, with the addition of
a little cayenne.
carving. in nothing does ceremony
more frequently triumph
over comfort, than in the administration
of 'the honours of the table.'
every one is sufficiently aware that
a dinner, to be eaten in perfection,
should be taken the very moment it
is sent hot to table; yet few persons
seem to understand, that he is the
best carver who fills the plates of
the greatest numbers of guests in the
least portion of time, provided it be
done with ease and elegance. in a
mere family circle, where all cannot
and ought not to be choosers, it is
far better to fill the plates and send
them round, rather than ask each
individual what particular part they
would prefer; and if in a larger company
a similar plan were introduced,
it would be attended with many advantages.
a dexterous carver, would
help half a dozen people in less time
than is often wasted in making civil
faces to a single guest. he will also
cut fair, and observe an equitable
distribution of the dainties he is
serving out. it would save much
time, if poultry, especially large turkeys
and geese, were sent to table
ready cut up. when a lady presides,
the carving knife should be[]
light, of a middling size, and of a
fine edge. strength is less required
than address, in the manner of using,
it; and to facilitate this, the butcher
should be ordered to divide the
joints of the bones, especially of the
neck, breast, and loin of mutton,
lamb, and veal; which may then be
easily cut into thin slices attached
to the adjoining bones. if the whole
of the meat belonging to each bone
should be too thick, a small slice
may be taken off between every two
bones. the more fleshy joints, as
fillet of veal, leg or saddle of mutton
and beef, are to be helped in
thin slices, neatly cut and smooth;
observing to let the knife pass down
to the bone in the mutton and beef
joints. the dish should not be too
far off the carver, as it gives an
awkward appearance, and makes
the task more difficult. in helping
fish, take care not to break the flakes;
which in cod and very fresh salmon
are large, and contribute much to
the beauty of its appearance. a
fish knife, not being sharp, divides
it best on this account. help a part
of the roe, milt or liver, to each person.
the heads of carp, part of
those of cod and salmon, sounds of
cod, and fins of turbot, are likewise
esteemed niceties, and are to be attended
to accordingly. in cutting
up any wild fowl, duck, goose, or
turkey, for a large party, if you cut
the slices down from pinion to pinion,
without making wings, there
will be more prime pieces. but that
the reader may derive the full advantage
of these remarks, we shall
descend to particulars, and illustrate
the subject with a variety of interesting
plates, which will show at the
same time the manner in which game
and poultry should be trussed and
dished.——cod's head. fish in
general requires very little carving,
the fleshy parts being those principally
esteemed. a cod's head and
shoulders, when in season, and properly
boiled, is a very genteel and
handsome dish. when cut, it should
be done with a fish trowel, and the
parts about the backbone on the
shoulders are the firmest and the
best. take off a piece quite down
to the bone, in the direction a, b, c,
d, putting in the spoon at a, c, and
with each slice of fish give a piece
of the sound, which lies underneath
the backbone and lines it, the meat
of which is thin, and a little darker
coloured than the body of the fish
itself. this may be got by passing
a knife or spoon underneath, in the
direction of d, f. about the head
are many delicate parts, and a great
deal of the jelly kind. the jelly
part lies about the jaw, bones, and
the firm parts within the head. some
are fond of the palate, and others
the tongue, which likewise may be
got by putting a spoon into the
mouth.——edge bone of beef.
cut off a slice an inch thick all the
length from a to b, in the figure opposite,
and then help. the soft fat
which resembles marrow, lies at the
back of the bone, below c; the firm
fat must be cut in horizontal slices
at the edge of the meat d. it is
proper to ask which is preferred, as
tastes differ. the skewer that keeps
the meat properly together when
boiling is here shewn at a. this
should be drawn out before it is
served up; or, if it is necessary to
leave the skewer in, put a silver one.——sirloin
of beef may be begun
either at the end, or by cutting
into the middle. it is usual to enquire
whether the outside or the inside
is preferred. for the outside,
the slice should be cut down to the
bones; and the same with every following
helping. slice the inside
likewise, and give with each piece
some of the soft fat. the inside
done as follows eats excellently.
have ready some shalot vinegar
boiling hot: mince the meat large,
and a good deal of the fat; sprinkle[]
it with salt, and pour the shalot
vinegar and the gravy on it. help
with a spoon, as quickly as possible,
on hot plates.——round or
buttock of beef is cut in the
same way as fillet of veal, in the
next article. it should be kept even
all over. when helping the fat, observe
not to hack it, but cut it
smooth. a deep slice should be cut
off the beef before you begin to help,
as directed above for the edge-bone.——fillet
of veal. in an ox,
this part is round of beef. ask whether
the brown outside be liked,
otherwise help the next slice. the
bone is taken out, and the meat tied
close, before dressing, which makes
the fillet very solid. it should be
cut thin, and very smooth. a stuffing
is put into the flap, which completely
covers it; you must cut deep
into this, and help a thin slice, as
likewise of fat. from carelessness
in not covering the latter with paper,
it is sometimes dried up, to the great
disappointment of the carver.——breast
of veal. one part, called
the brisket, is thick and gristly; put
the knife about four inches from the
edge of this, and cut through it,
which will separate the ribs from the
brisket.——calf's head has a
great deal of meat upon it, if properly
managed. cut slices from a
to b, letting the knife go close to the
bone. in the fleshy part, at the neck
end c, there lies the throat sweetbread,
which you should help a slice
of from c to d with the other part.
many like the eye, which must be
cut out with the point of a knife,
and divided in two. if the jaw-bone
be taken off, there will be found
some fine lean. under the head is
the palate, which is reckoned a nicety;
the lady of the house should
be acquainted with all things that
are thought so, that she may distribute
them among her guests.——shoulder
of mutton. this is
a very good joint, and by many preferred
to the leg; it being very full
of gravy, if properly roasted, and
produces many nice bits. the figure
represents it as laid in the dish
with its back uppermost. when it
is first cut, it should be in the hollow
part of it, in the direction of a,
b, and the knife should be passed
deep to the bone. the prime part
of the fat lies on the outer edge, and
is to be cut out in thin slices in the
direction e. if many are at table,
and the hollow part cut in the line
a, b, is eaten, some very good and
delicate slices may be cut out on
each side the ridge of the blade-bone,
in the direction c, d. the line
between these two dotted lines, is
that in the direction of which the
edge or ridge of the blade-bone lies,
and cannot be cut across.——leg
of mutton. a leg of wether mutton,
which is the best flavoured, may
be known by a round lump of fat at
the edge of the broadest part, as at
a. the best part is in the midway,
at b, between the knuckle and further
end. begin to help there, by
cutting thin deep slices to c. if the
outside is not fat enough, help some
from the side of the broad end in
slices from e to f. this part is most
juicy; but many prefer the knuckle,
which in fine mutton will be very
tender though dry. there are very
fine slices on the back of the leg:
turn it up, and cut the broad end,
not in the direction you did the other
side, but longways. to cut out the
cramp bone, take hold of the shank
with your left hand, and cut down
to the thigh bone at d; then pass
the knife under the cramp bone in
the direction, d, g.——fore quarter
of lamb. separate the shoulder
from the scoven, which is the
breast and ribs, by passing the knife
under in the direction of a, b, c, d;
keeping it towards you horizontally,
to prevent cutting the meat too much
off the bones. if grass lamb, the
shoulder being large, put it into another
dish. squeeze the juice of half
a seville orange or lemon on the[]
other part, and sprinkle a little salt
and pepper. then separate the
gristly part from the ribs in the line
e, c; and help either from that or
from the ribs, as may be chosen.——haunch
of venison. cut down
to the bone in the line a, b, c, to let
out the gravy. then turn the broad
end of the haunch toward you, put
in the knife at b, and cut as deep as
you can to the end of the haunch d; then
help in thin slices, observing to
give some fat to each person. there
is more fat, which is a favourite
part, on the left side of c and d than
on the other: and those who help
must take care to proportion it, as
likewise the gravy, according to the
number of the company.—haunch
of mutton is the leg and part of
the loin, cut so as to resemble a
haunch of venison, and is to be helped
at table in the same manner.——saddle
of mutton. cut long
thin slices from the tail to the end,
beginning close to the back bone.
if a large joint, the slice may be divided.
cut some fat from the sides.——ham
may be cut three ways.
the common method is, to begin in
the middle, by long slices from a to
b, from the centre through the thick
fat. this brings to the prime at
first, which is likewise accomplished
by cutting a small round hole on the
top of the ham, as at c, and with a
sharp knife enlarging that by cutting
successive thin circles: this preserves
the gravy, and keeps the meat
moist. the last and most saving
way is, to begin at the hock end,
which many are most fond of, and
proceed onwards. ham that is used
for pies, &c. should be cut from the
under side, first taking off a thick
slice.——sucking pig. the cook
usually divides the body before it is
sent to table, and garnishes the dish
with the jaws and ears. the first
thing is, to separate a shoulder from
the carcase on one side, and then
the leg, according to the direction
given by the dotted line a, b, c. the
ribs are then to be divided into
about two helpings, and an ear or
jaw presented with them, and plenty
of sauce. the joints may either be
divided into two each, or pieces may
be cut from them. the ribs are
reckoned the finest part, but some
people prefer the neck end, between
the shoulders.——goose. cut off
the apron in the circular line a, b, c,
and pour into the body a glass of
port wine, and a large tea-spoonful
of mustard, first mixed at the sideboard.
turn the neck end of the
goose towards you, and cut the
whole breast in long slices from one
wing to another; but only remove
them as you help each person, unless
the company is so large as to
require the legs likewise. this way
gives more prime bits than by making
wings. take off the leg, by
putting the fork into the small end
of the bone, pressing it to the body;
and having passed the knife at d,
turn the leg back, and if a young
bird, it will easily separate. to
take off the wing, put your fork into
the small end of the pinion, and
press it close to the body; then put
in the knife at d, and divide the
joint, taking it down in the direction
d, e. nothing but practice
will enable people to hit the joint
dexterously. when the leg and
wing of one side are done, go on to
the other; but it is not often necessary
to cut up the whole goose, unless
the company be very large.
there are two side bones by the
wing, which may be cut off; as likewise
the back and lower side bones:
but the best pieces are the breast
and the thighs, after being divided
from the drum-sticks.——hare.
the best way of cutting it up is, to
put the point of the knife under the
shoulder at a, and so cut all the way
down to the rump, on one side of
the back-bone, in the line a, b. do
the same on the other side, so that
the whole hare will be divided into
three parts. cut the back into four,[]
which with the legs is the part most
esteemed. the shoulder must be
cut off in a circular line, as c, d, a.
lay the pieces neatly on the dish as
you cut them; and then help the
company, giving some pudding and
gravy to every person. this way
can only be practised when the hare
is young. if old, do not divide it
down, which will require a strong
arm: but put the knife between the
leg and back, and give it a little turn
inwards at the joint; which you
must endeavour to hit, and not to
break by force. when both legs are
taken off, there is a fine collop on
each side the back; then divide the
back into as many pieces as you
please, and take of the shoulders,
which are by many preferred, and
are called the sportman's pieces.
when every one is helped, cut off
the head; put your knife between
the upper and lower jaw, and divide
them, which will enable you to
lay the upper one flat on your plate;
then put the point of the knife into
the centre, and cut the head into
two. the ears and brains may be
helped then to those who like them.——carve
rabbits as directed the
latter way for hare; cutting the back
into two pieces, which with the legs
are the prime.——a fowl. the
legs of a boiled fowl are bent inwards,
and tucked into the belly;
but before it is served, the skewers
are to be removed. lay the fowl on
your plate; and place the joints, as
cut off, on the dish. take the wing
off in the direction of a to b, in the
annexed engraving, only dividing
the joint with your knife; and then
with your fork lift up the pinion,
and draw the wing towards the legs,
and the muscles will separate in a
more complete form than if cut.
slip the knife between the leg and
body, and cut to the bone; then
with the fork turn the leg back, and
the joint will give way if the bird is
not old. when the four quarters
are thus removed, take off the merrythought
from a, and the neck bones;
these last by putting in the knife at
c, and pressing it under the long
broad part of the bone in the line c,
b. then lift it up, and break it off
from the part that sticks to the
breast. the next thing is, to divide
the breast from the carcase, by cutting
through the tender ribs close
to the breast, quite down to the tail.
then lay the back upwards, put
your knife into the bone half-way
from the neck to the rump, and on
raising the lower end it will separate
readily. turn the rump from you,
and very neatly take off the two
sidebones, and the whole will be
done. as each part is taken off, it
should be turned neatly on the dish,
and care should be taken that what
is left goes properly from table.
the breast and wings are looked
upon as the best parts, but the legs
are most juicy in young fowls. after
all, more advantage will be gained
by observing those who carve well,
and a little practice, than by any
written directions whatever.——a
pheasant. the bird in the annexed
engraving is as trussed for the
spit, with its head under one of its
wings. when the skewers are taken
out, and the bird served, the following
is the way to carve it. fix a
fork in the centre of the breast;
slice it down in the line a, b; take
off the leg on one side in the dotted
line b, d; then cut off the wing on
the same side in the line c, d. separate
the leg and wing on the other
side, and then cut off the slices of
breast you divided before. be careful
how you take off the wings; for
if you should cut too near the neck,
as at g, you will hit on the neck-bone,
from which the wing must be
separated. cut off the merrythought
in the line f, g, by passing the knife
under it towards the neck. cut the
other parts as in a fowl. the breast,
wings, and merrythought, are the
most esteemed; but the leg has a
higher flavour.——partridge. the[]
partridge is here represented as just
taken from the spit; but before it is
served up, the skewers must be
withdrawn. it is cut up in the
same manner as a fowl. the wings
must be taken off in the line a, b,
and the merrythought in the line c,
d. the prime parts of a partridge
are the wings, breast, and merrythought;
but the bird being small,
the two latter are not often divided.
the wing is considered as the best,
and the tip of it reckoned the most
delicate morsel of the whole.——pigeons.
cut them in half, either
from top to bottom or across. the
lower part is generally thought the
best; but the fairest way is to cut
from the neck to a, rather than from
c to b, by a, which is the most fashionable.
the figure represents
the back of the pigeon; and the
direction of the knife is in the line
c, b, by a, if done the last way.
casks. new casks are apt to
give beer a bad taste, if not well
scalded and seasoned before they are
used. boil therefore two pecks of
bran or malt dust in a copper of water,
pour it hot into the cask, stop
it close, and let it stand two days.
then wash it clean, and dry it fit for
use. old casks are apt to grow
musty, if allowed to stand by neglected;
they should therefore be
closely stopped as soon as emptied.
when tainted, put in some lime, fill
up with water, and let them stand a
day or two. if this be not sufficient,
the head must be taken out, the inside
well scoured, and the head replaced.
caterpillars. these noxious
insects, sustained by leaves and fruit,
have been known in all ages and
nations for their depredations on the
vegetable world. in august and
september they destroy cabbages
and turnips in great abundance, and
commit their ravages in fields and
gardens whenever the easterly winds
prevail. various means have been
devised for their destruction, and
any of the following which may happen
to be the most convenient, may
be employed with very good effect.
mix and heat three quarts of water
and one quart of vinegar, put in a
full pound of soot, and stir it with a
whisk till the whole is incorporated.
sprinkle the plants with this preparation,
every morning and evening,
by dipping in a brush and shedding
it over them; and in a few days all
the cankers will disappear. or sow
with hemp all the borders where
cabbages are planted, so as to enclose
them, and not one of these
vermin will approach. when gooseberry
or currant bushes are attacked,
a very simple expedient will suffice.
put pieces of woollen rags in
every bush, the caterpillars will take
refuge in them during the night, and
in the morning quantities of them
may thus be taken and destroyed.
if this do not succeed, dissolve an
ounce of alum in a quart of tobacco
liquor; and as soon as the leaves of
the plants or bushes appear in the
least corroded, sprinkle on the mixture
with a brush. if any eggs be
deposited, they never come forward
after this application; and if changed
into worms they will sicken and
die, and fall off. nothing is more
effectual than to dust the leaves of
plants with sulphur put into a piece
of muslin, or thrown upon them with
a dredging box: this not only destroys
the insects, but materially
promotes the health of the plants.
when caterpillars attack fruit trees,
they may be destroyed by a strong
decoction of equal quantities of rue,
wormwood, and tobacco, sprinkled
on the leaves and branches while the
fruit is ripening. or take a chafing-dish
of burning charcoal, place it
under the branches of the bush or
tree, and throw on it a little brimstone.
the vapour of the sulphur,
and the suffocating fume arising from
the charcoal, will not only destroy
all the insects, but prevent the plants
from being infested with them any[]
more that season. black cankers,
which commit great devastation
among turnips, are best destroyed
by turning a quantity of ducks into
the field infested by them. every
fourth year these cankers become
flies, when they deposit their eggs
on the ground, and thus produce
maggots. the flies on their first
appearance settle on the trees, especially
the oak, elm, and maple:
in this state they should be shaken
down on packsheets, and destroyed.
if this were done before they begin
to deposit their eggs on the ground,
the ravages of the canker would in
a great measure be prevented.
caudle. make a fine smooth
gruel of half grits, strain it after being
well boiled, and stir it at times
till quite cold. when to be used,
add sugar, wine, lemon peel and
nutmeg. a spoonful of brandy may
be added, and a little lemon juice if
approved. another way is to boil
up half a pint of fine gruel, with a
bit of butter the size of a large nutmeg,
a spoonful of brandy, the same
of white wine, one of capillaire, a
bit of lemon peel and nutmeg.—another.
beat up the yolk of an egg
with sugar, mix it with a large spoonful
of cold water, a glass of wine,
and nutmeg. mix it by degrees with
a pint of fine gruel, not thick, but
while it is boiling hot. this caudle
is very agreeable and nourishing.
some add a glass of beer and sugar,
or a tea-spoonful of brandy.—a
caudle for the sick and lying-in is
made as follows. set three quarts
of water on the fire, mix smooth as
much oatmeal as will thicken the
whole, with a pint of cold water;
and when the water boils pour in
the thickening, and add twenty peppercorns
in fine powder. boil it up
to a tolerable thickness; then add
sugar, half a pint of good table beer,
and a glass of gin, all heated up together.
cauliflowers. choose those
that are close and white, cut off the
green leaves, and see that there be
no caterpillars about the stalk. soak
them an hour in cold water, then
boil them in milk and water, and
take care to skim the saucepan, that
not the least foulness may fall on
the flower. the vegetable should be
served very white, and not boiled too
much.—cauliflower dressed in white
sauce should be half boiled, and cut
into handsome pieces. then lay
them in a stewpan with a little broth,
a bit of mace, a little salt, and a
dust of white pepper. simmer them
together half an hour; then add a
little cream, butter, and flour. simmer
a few minutes longer, and serve
them up.—to dress a cauliflower
with parmesan, boil the vegetable,
drain it on a sieve, and cut the stalk
so that the flower will stand upright
about two inches above the dish.
put it into a stewpan with a little
white sauce, and in a few minutes it
will be done enough. then dish it
with the sauce round, put parmesan
grated over it, and brown it with a
salamander.
cauliflowers ragout. pick
and wash the cauliflowers very clean,
stew them in brown gravy till they
are tender, and season with pepper
and salt. put them in a dish, pour
gravy on them, boil some sprigs of
cauliflower white, and lay round.
cayenne. those who are fond
of this spice had better make it
themselves of english capsicums or
chillies, for there is no other way of
being sure that it is genuine. pepper
of a much finer flavour may be
obtained in this way, without half
the heat of the foreign article, which
is frequently adulterated and coloured
with red lead. capsicums and
chillies are ripe and in good condition,
during the months of september
and october. the flavour of
the chillies is superior to that of
the capsicums, and will be good in
proportion as they are dried as soon
as possible, taken care that they be
not burnt. take away the stalks,[]
put the pods into a cullender, and
set them twelve hours before the fire
to dry. then put them into a mortar,
with one fourth their weight of
salt; pound and rub them till they
are as fine as possible, and put the
powder into a well-stopped bottle.
a hundred large chillies will produce
about two ounces of cayenne.
when foreign cayenne is pounded,
it is mixed with a considerable portion
of salt, to prevent its injuring
the eyes: but english chillies may
be pounded in a deep mortar without
any danger, and afterwards
passed through a fine sieve.
celery sauce. cut small half
a dozen heads of clean white celery,
with two sliced onions. put them
into a stewpan, with a small piece
of butter, and sweat them over a
slow fire till quite tender. add two
spoonfuls of flour, half a pint of
broth, salt and pepper, and a little
cream or milk. boil it a quarter of
an hour, and pass it through a fine
hair sieve with the back of a spoon.
when celery is not in season, a quarter
of a dram of celery seed, or a
little of the essence, will impregnate
half a pint of sauce with all the flavour
of the vegetable. this sauce
is intended for boiled turkey, veal,
or fowls.
celery soup. split half a
dozen heads of celery into slips
about two inches long, wash them
well, drain them on a hair sieve, and
put them into a soup pot, with three
quarts of clear gravy. stew it very
gently by the side of the fire, about
an hour, till the celery is tender. if
any scum arise, take it off, and season
with a little salt. when celery
cannot be procured, half a dram of
the seed, pounded fine, will give a
flavour to the soup, if put in a quarter
of an hour before it is done. a
little of the essence of the celery will
answer the same purpose.
cellars. beer and ale that
have been well brewed, are often injured
or spoiled in the keeping, for
want of paying proper attention to
the state of the cellar. it is necessary
however to exclude as much as
possible all external air from these
depositaries, as the state of the surrounding
atmosphere has a most
material influence upon the liquor,
even after it has been made a considerable
time. if the cellar is liable
to damps in the winter, it will
tend to chill the liquor, and make it
turn flat; or if exposed to the heat
of summer, it will be sure to turn
sour. the great object therefore is
to have a cellar that is both cool and
dry. dorchester beer, generally in
high esteem, owes much of its fineness
to this circumstance. the soil
in that county being very chalky, of
a close texture and free from damps,
the cellars are always cool and dry,
and the liquors are found to keep in
the best possible manner. the
nottingham ale derives much of its
celebrity also from the peculiar construction
of the cellars, which are
generally excavated out of a rock of
sand-stone to a considerable depth,
of a circular or conical form, with
benches formed all round in the
same way, and on these the barrels
are placed in regular succession.
cerate. half a pound of white
wax, half a pound of calumine stone
finely powdered, and a pint and a
half of olive oil, will make an excellent
cerate. let the calumine be
rubbed smooth with some of the oil,
and added to the rest of the oil and
wax, which should be previously
melted together. stir them together
till they are quite cold.
chardoons. to dress chardoons,
cut them into pieces of six
inches long, and tie them in a bunch.
boil them tender, then flour and
fry them with a piece of butter, and
when brown serve them up. or tie
them in bundles, and serve them on
toast as boiled asparagus, with butter
poured over. another way is
to boil them, and then heat them up
in fricassee sauce. or boil in salt[]
and water, dry them, dip them into
butter, fry, and serve them up with
melted butter. or having boiled,
stew, and toss them up with white
or brown gravy. add a little cayenne,
ketchup, and salt, and thicken
with a bit of butter and flour.
charlotte. rub a baking-dish
thick with butter, and line the
bottom and sides with very thin slices
of white bread. put in layers of
apples thinly sliced, strewing sugar
between, and bits of butter, till the
dish is full. in the mean time, soak
in warm milk as many thin slices of
bread as will cover the whole; over
which lay a plate, and a weight to
keep the bread close on the apples.
to a middling sized dish use half a
pound of butter in the whole, and
bake slowly for three hours.
cheap soup. much nutricious
food might be provided for the poor
and necessitous, at a very trifling
expence, by only adopting a plan of
frugality, and gathering up the fragments,
that nothing be lost. save
the liquor in which every piece of
meat, ham, or tongue has been boiled,
however salt; for it is easy to
use only a part of it, and to add a
little fresh water. then, by the addition
of more vegetables, the bones
of meat used in the family, the pieces
of meat that come from table on the
plates, and rice, scotch barley, or
oatmeal, there will be some gallons
of useful soup saved. the bits of
meat should only be warmed in the
soup, and remain whole; the bones
and sinewy parts should be boiled
till they yield their nourishment.
if the fragments are ready to put
into the boiler as soon as the meat
is served, it will save lighting the
fire, and a second cooking. take
turnips, carrots, leeks, potatoes,
leaves of lettuce, or any sort of vegetable
that is at hand; cut them
small, and throw in with the thick
part of peas, after they have been
pulped for soup, and grits, or coarse
oatmeal, which have been used for
gruel. should the soup be poor of
meat, the long boiling of the bones,
and different vegetables, will afford
better nourishment than the laborious
poor can generally obtain; especially
as they are rarely tolerable
cooks, and have not fuel to do justice
to what they buy. in almost
every family there is some superfluity;
and if it be prepared with cleanliness
and care, the benefit will be
very great to the receiver, and the
satisfaction no less to the giver.
the cook or servant should never be
allowed to wash away as useless,
the peas or grits of which soup or
gruel have been made, broken potatoes,
the green heads of celery, the
necks and feet of fowls, and particularly
the shanks of mutton; all of
which are capable of adding flavour
and richness to the soup. the
bones, heads, and fins of fish, containing
a portion of isinglass, may
also be very usefully applied, by
stewing them in the water in which
the fish is boiled, and adding it to
the soup, with the gravy that is left
in the dish. if strained, it considerably
improves the meat soup,
particularly for the sick; and when
such are to be supplied, the milder
parts of the spare bones and meat
should be used, with very little of
the liquor of the salt meats. if a
soup be wanted for the weakly and
infirm, put two cow heels and a
breast of mutton into a large pan,
with four ounces of rice, one onion,
twenty corns of jamaica pepper,
and twenty black, a turnip, and carrot,
and four gallons of water. cover
it with white paper, and bake it
six hours.
cheese. this well-known article
of domestic consumption, is prepared
from curdled milk, cleared
from the whey. it differs very much
in quality and flavour, according to
the pasture in which the cows feed,
and the manner in which the article
itself is made. the same land rarely
produces very fine butter, and remarkably[]
fine cheese; yet with proper
management, it may give one
pretty good, where the other excels
in quality. cheese made on the same
land, from new milk, skimmed or
mixed milk, will differ greatly, not
only in richness, but also in taste.
valuable cheese may be made from
a tolerable pasture, by taking the
whole of two meals of milk, and
proportioning the thickness of the
vat to the quantity, rather than having
a wide and flat one, as the former
will produce the mellowest
cheese. the addition of a pound
of fresh-made butter of a good quality,
will cause the cheese made on
poor land to be of a very different
quality from that usually produced
by it. a few cheeses thus made, when
the weather is not extremely hot,
and when the cows are in full feed,
are well adapted to the use of the
parlour. cheese for common family
use may very well be produced by
two meals of skim, and one of new
milk; or on good land, by the skim
milk only. the principal ingredient
in making cheese is the rennet,
maw, or inner part of a calf's stomach,
which is cleaned, salted, and
hung up in paper bags to dry. the
night before it is used, it is washed
and soaked in a little water. when
the milk is ready, being put into a
large tub, warm a part of it to the
degree of new milk; but if made too
hot, the cheese will be tough. pour
in as much rennet as will curdle the
milk, and then cover it over. let it
stand till completely turned; then
strike the curd down several times
with the skimming dish, and let it
separate, still keeping it covered.
there are two modes of breaking the
curd, and there will be a difference
in the taste of the cheese, according
as either is observed. one is to gather
it with the hands very gently
towards the side of the tub, letting
the whey pass through the fingers
till it is cleared; and lading it off
as it collects. the other is, to get
the whey from it by early breaking
the curd. the last method deprives
it of many of its oily particles, and
is therefore less proper. in pursuing
the process, put the vat on a
ladder over the tub, and fill it with
curd by means of the skimmer.
press the curd close with the hand,
add more as it sinks, and finally
leave it two inches above the edge.
before the vat is filled, the cheesecloth
must be laid at the bottom;
and when full, drawn smooth over
on all sides. in salting the cheese,
two modes may be adopted; either
by mixing it in the curd while in the
tub, after the whey is out, or by
putting it in the vat, and crumbling
the curd all to pieces with it, after
the first squeezing with the hand
has dried it. these different methods
prevail in the different parts
of the country. put a board under
and over the vat, and place it in the
press: in two hours turn it out, and
put in a fresh cheesecloth. press
it again for eight or nine hours, salt
it all over, and turn it again in the
vat. let it stand in the press fourteen
or sixteen hours, observing to
put the cheeses last made undermost.
before putting them the last
time into the vat, pare the edges if
they do not look smooth. the vat
should have holes at the sides, and
at the bottom, to let all the whey
pass through. put on clean boards,
and change and scald them. when
cheese is made, care must be taken
to preserve it sound and good. for
this purpose wash it occasionally in
warm whey, wipe it once a month,
and keep it on a rack. if wanted
to ripen soon, a damp cellar will
bring it forward. when a whole
cheese is cut, the inside of the larger
quantity should be spread with butter,
and the outside wiped, to preserve
it. to keep those in daily use
moist, let a clean cloth be wrung
out from cold water, and wrapt
round them when carried from the
table. dry cheese may be used to[]
advantage to grate for serving with
macaroni or eating without; and
any thing tending to prevent waste,
is of some consequence in a system
of domestic economy. to preserve
cheeses from decay, lay them in an
airy situation, and cover them with
dried leaves of the yellow star of
bethlehem. the tender branches
of the common birch, will prevent
the ravages of mites. if cheese get
hard, and lose its flavour, pour some
sweet wine over four ounces of
pearlash, till the liquor ceases to
ferment. filter the solution, dip
into it some clean linen cloths, cover
the cheese with them, and put in a
cool dry place. turn the cheese
every day, repeat the application
for some weeks, and the cheese will
recover its former flavour and goodness.
cheesecakes. strain the whey
from the curd of two quarts of milk;
when rather dry, crumble it through
a coarse sieve. with six ounces of
fresh butter, mix one ounce of
blanched almonds pounded, a little
orange-flower water, half a glass of
raisin wine, a grated biscuit, four
ounces of currants, some nutmeg and
cinnamon in fine powder. beat
them up together with three eggs,
and half a pint of cream, till quite
light: then fill the pattipans three
parts full.—to make a plainer sort
of cheesecakes, turn three quarts of
milk to curd; break it and drain off
the whey. when quite dry, break
it in a pan, with two ounces of butter,
till perfectly smooth. add a
pint and a half of thin cream or good
milk, a little sugar, cinnamon and
nutmeg, and three ounces of currants.—another
way is to mix the
curd of three quarts of milk, a pound
of currants, twelve ounces of lisbon
sugar, a quarter of an ounce of cinnamon,
the same of nutmeg, the peel
of one lemon chopped as fine as possible,
the yolks of eight and the
whites of six eggs, a pint of scalded
cream and a glass of brandy. put
a light thin puff paste in the pattipans,
and three parts fill them.
cheese puffs. strain some
cheese curd from the whey, and beat
half a pint of it fine in a mortar,
with a spoonful and a half of flour,
three eggs, but only one white. add
a spoonful of orange-flower water, a
quarter of a nutmeg, and sugar to
make it pretty sweet. lay a little
of this paste, in small round cakes,
on a tin plate. if the oven be hot,
a quarter of an hour will bake them.
serve the puffs with pudding sauce.
cherry brandy. stone ten
pounds of black cherries, bruise the
stones in a mortar, and put them to
a gallon of the best brandy. let it
stand a month close covered, pour
it clear from the sediment, and bottle
it. morella cherries managed in
this way will make a fine rich cordial.
cherry jam. to twelve pounds
of ripe fruit, kentish or duke cherries,
weigh one pound of sugar.
break the stones of part, and blanch
them; then put them to the fruit
and sugar, and boil all gently till the
jam comes clear from the pan. pour
it into china plates to come up dry
to the table, and keep it in boxes
with white paper between.
cherry pie. this should have
a mixture of other fruit; currants
or raspberries, or both. currant
pie is also best with raspberries.
cherry wine. mash some
ripe cherries, and press them through
a hair sieve. allow three pounds of
lump sugar to two quarts of juice,
stir them together till the sugar is
dissolved, and fill a small barrel
with the liquor. add a little brandy,
close down the bung when it has
done hissing, let it stand six months
and bottle it off.
cherries in brandy. weigh
some fine morellas, cut off half the
stalk, prick them with a new needle,
and drop them into a jar or wide-mouth
bottle. pound three quarters
of the weight of sugar or white candy,[]
and strew over; fill the bottle up
with brandy, and tie a bladder over.
chervil sauce. the flavour
of this fine herb, so long a favourite
with the french cook, is a strong
concentration of the combined taste
of parsley and fennel, but more aromatic
and agreeable than either, and
makes an excellent sauce for boiled
poultry or fish. wash the chervil,
and pick it very clean; put a tea-spoonful
of salt into half a pint of
boiling water, boil the chervil about
ten minutes, drain it on a sieve, and
mince it very fine. put it into a
sauce boat, mix with it by degrees
some good melted butter, and send
it up in the boat.
cheshire cheese. in preparing
this article, the evening's
milk is not touched till the next
morning, when the cream is taken
off and warmed in a pan, heated with
boiling water; one third part of the
milk is heated in a similar manner.
the cows being milked early in the
morning, the new milk, and that of
the preceding night thus prepared,
are poured into a large tub along with
the cream. a piece of rennet kept
in lukewarm water since the preceding
evening, is put into the tub in
order to curdle the milk, and the
curd is coloured by an infusion of
marigolds or carrots being rubbed
into it. it is then stirred together,
covered up warm, and allowed to
stand about half an hour till it is
coagulated; when it is first turned
over with a bowl to separate the
whey from the curds, and broken
soon after into small pieces. when
it has stood some time, the whey is
taken out, and a weight laid at the
bottom of the tub to press out the
remainder. as soon as it becomes
more solid, it is cut into slices, and
turned over several times to extract
all the whey, and again pressed with
weights. being taken out of the
tub, it is broken very small, salted,
and put into a cheese vat. it is then
strongly pressed and weighted, and
wooden skewers are placed round the
cheese, which are frequently drawn
out. it is then shifted out of the vat
with a cloth placed at the bottom;
and being turned it is put into the vat
again. the upper part is next broken
by the hand down to the middle, salted,
pressed, weighted, and skewered
as before, till all the whey is extracted.
the cheese is then reversed into
another vat, likewise warmed with a
cloth under it, and a tin hoop put
round the upper part of the cheese.
these operations take up the greater
part of the forenoon; the pressing
of the cheese requires about eight
hours more, as it must be twice turned
in the vat, round which thin wire
skewers are passed, and shifted occasionally.
the next morning it
ought to be turned and pressed
again; and on the following day
the outside is salted, and a cloth
binder tied round it. the outsides
are sometimes rubbed with butter, in
order to give them a coat; and being
turned and cleaned every day,
they are left to dry two or three
weeks.
chickens. fowls are chiefly
considered as an article of luxury,
and are generally sold at a high
price; yet the rearing of them is
seldom productive of much pecuniary
advantage. they are liable to
innumerable accidents in their early
stages, which require incessant
watchfulness and care; and if the
grain on which they feed is to be
purchased, the labour and expence
are scarcely requited by the price
they bear in the market. the irish
peasantry are in the habit of rearing
a great number of fowls, by substituting
the offal of potatoes instead
of grain; but the flesh is neither so
firm nor so good as that of chickens
raised in england. it is much to be
desired therefore, that encouragement
could be given to the cottagers
of this country for rearing a larger
quantity of poultry, by means less
expensive than the present, in order[]
that the market might be supplied on
better terms with an article of food
so fine and delicate, and in such general
respect. various artificial
means have been used for brooding
chickens, in order to increase their
number, and to bring them forward
at an earlier season, but none of them
have been found to answer, though
in egypt immense quantities are
raised every year by the heat of
ovens, bringing the eggs to a state
of maturity. a well-fed hen is supposed
to lay about two hundred eggs
in a year; but as she does not sit
more than once or twice in that time,
it is but a small quantity of chickens
that can be hatched in the usual way,
and it would be highly desirable if
some other expedient could be devised.—the
most expeditious way of
fattening chickens is to mix a quantity
of rice flour sufficient for present
use, with milk and a little
coarse sugar, and stir it over the fire
till it comes to a thick paste. feed
the chickens with it while it is warm
by putting as much into their coops
as they can eat; and if a little beer
be given them to drink, it will fatten
them very soon. a mixture of oatmeal
and treacle made into crumbs
is also good food for chickens; and
they are so fond of it, that they will
grow and fatten much faster than
in the common way. poultry in general
should be fed in coops, and
kept very clean. their common
food is barley meal mixed with water:
this should not be put in troughs,
but laid upon a board, which should
be washed clean every time fresh
food is put upon it. the common
complaint of fowls, called the pip, is
chiefly occasioned by foul and heated
water being given them. no
water should be allowed, more than
is mixed up with their food; but
they should often be provided with
some clean gravel in their coop.—the
method of fattening poultry for
the london market, is liable to great
objection. they are put into a dark
place, and crammed with a paste
made of barley meal, mutton suet,
treacle or coarse sugar, mixed with
milk, which makes them ripe in about
a fortnight; but if kept longer, the
fever that is induced by this continual
state of repletion, renders them
red and unsaleable, and frequently
kills them. air and exercise are as
indispensable to the health of poultry
as to other animals; and without
it, the fat will be all accumulated in
the cellular membrane, instead of
being dispersed throughout the system.
a barn-door fowl is preferable
to any other, only that it cannot
be fatted in so short a time.
chicken broth. having boiled
a chicken for panada, take off
the skin and the rump, and put it
into the water it was boiled in. add
one blade of mace, a slice of onion,
and ten corns of white pepper. simmer
it till the broth be of a pleasant
flavour, adding a little water if necessary.
beat a quarter of an ounce
of sweet almonds with a tea-spoonful
of water till it is quite fine, boil
it in the broth, and strain it. when
cold, remove the fat.
chicken currie. cut up the
chicken raw, slice onions, and fry
both in butter with great care, of a
fine light brown; or if chickens that
have been dressed are used, fry only
the onions. having cut the joints
into two or three pieces each, lay
them in a stewpan, with veal or mutton
gravy, and a clove or two of
garlic. simmer till the chicken is
quite tender. half an hour before
serving it up, rub smooth a spoonful
or two of currie powder, a spoonful
of flour, and an ounce of butter;
and add this to the stew, with four
large spoonfuls of cream, and a little
salt. squeeze in a small lemon,
when the dish is going to table.—a
more easy way to make currie is
to cut up a chicken or young rabbit;
if chicken, take off the skin. roll
each piece in a mixture of a large
spoonful of flour, and half an ounce[]
of currie powder. slice two or three
onions, and fry them in butter, of a
light brown; then add the meat,
and fry all together till the meat begin
to brown. put all into a stewpan,
cover it with boiling water, and
simmer very gently two or three
hours. if too thick, add more water
half an hour before serving. if the
meat has been dressed before, a
little broth will be better than water,
but the currie is richer when made
of fresh meat. slices of underdone
veal, turkey, or rabbit, will make
excellent currie. a dish of rice
boiled dry should be served with it.
chicken panada. boil a
chicken in a quart of water, till about
three parts ready. take off the
skin, cut off the white meat when
cold, and pound it to a paste in a
marble mortar, with a little of the
liquor it was boiled in. season it
with a little salt, a grate of nutmeg,
and the least bit of lemon peel. boil
it gently for a few minutes till it be
tolerably thick, but so it may be
drank. the flesh of a chicken thus
reduced to a small compass, will be
found very nourishing.
chicken pie. cut up two
young fowls, season them with white
pepper, salt, a little mace, nutmeg,
and cayenne, all finely powdered. put
alternately in layers the chicken, slices
of ham, or fresh gammon of bacon,
forcemeat balls, and eggs boiled
hard. if baked in a dish, add a little
water, but none if in a raised crust.
prepare some veal gravy from the
knuckle or scrag, with some shank-bones
of mutton, seasoned with herbs,
onions, mace, and white pepper, to
be poured into the pie when it returns
from the oven. if it is to be
eaten hot, truffles, morels, and mushrooms
may be added; but not if it
is to be eaten cold. if baked in a
raised crust, the gravy must be nicely
strained, and then put in cold as
jelly. to make the jelly clear, give
it a boil with the whites of two eggs,
after taking away the meat, and then
run it through a fine lawn sieve.—rabbits,
if young and fleshy, will
make as good a pie. their legs
should be cut short, and their breast-bones
must not go in, but will help
to make the gravy.
chicken sauce. an anchovy
or two boned and chopped, some
parsley and onion chopped, and
mixed together, with pepper, oil, vinegar,
mustard, walnut or mushroom
ketchup, will make a good sauce for
cold chicken, veal, or partridge.
chili vinegar. slice fifty
english chilies, fresh and of a good
colour, and infuse them in a pint of
the best vinegar. in a fortnight,
this will give a much finer flavour
than can be obtained from foreign
cayenne, and impart an agreeable
relish to fish sauce.
chimney pieces. to blacken
the fronts of stone chimney-pieces,
mix oil varnish with lamp black that
has been sifted, and a little spirit of
turpentine to thin it to the consistence
of paint. wash the stone very
clean with soap and water, and
sponge it with clear water. when
perfectly dry, brush it over twice
with this colour, leaving it to dry
between the times, and it will look
extremely well.
china. broken china may be
repaired with cement, made of equal
parts of glue, the white of an egg,
and white-lead mixed together. the
juice of garlic, bruised in a stone
mortar, is also a fine cement for broken
glass or china; and if carefully
applied, will leave no mark behind
it. isinglass glue, mixed with a little
finely sifted chalk, will answer
the same purpose, if the articles be
not required to endure heat or moisture.
china chilo. mince a pint-basonful
of undressed neck or leg of
mutton, with some of the fat. put
into a stewpan closely covered, two
onions, a lettuce, a pint of green
peas, a tea-spoonful of salt, the same
quantity of pepper, four spoonfuls[]
of water, and two or three ounces
of clarified butter. simmer them
together two hours, add a little cayenne
if approved, and serve in the
middle of a dish of boiled dry rice.
chine of bacon. one that
has been salted and dried requires
to be soaked several hours in cold
water, and scraped clean. then
take a handful of beech, half as
much parsley, a few sprigs of thyme,
and a little sage, finely chopped together.
make some holes in the
chine with the point of a knife, fill
them with the herbs, skewer the
meat up in a cloth, and boil it slowly
about three hours. a dried pig's
face is cooked in the same manner,
adding a little salt, pepper, and
bread crumbs to the stuffing.
chocolate. those who use
much of this article, will find the
following mode of preparing it both
useful and economical. cut a cake
of chocolate into very small pieces,
and put a pint of water into the pot;
when it boils, put in the chocolate.
mill it off the fire till quite melted,
then on a gentle fire till it boil; pour
it into a bason, and it will keep in a
cool place eight or ten days or more.
when wanted, put a spoonful or two
into some milk; boil it with sugar,
and mill it well. if not made too
thick, this will form a very good
breakfast or supper.
chocolate cream. scrape
into one quart of thick cream, an
ounce of the best chocolate, and a
quarter of a pound of sugar. boil
and mill it: when quite smooth, take
it off the fire, and leave it to be cold.
then add the whites of nine eggs;
whisk it, and take up the froth on
sieves, as other creams are done.
serve up the froth in glasses, to rise
above some of the cream.
cholic. young children are
often afflicted with griping pains in
the bowels; and if attended with
costiveness, it will be necessary to
give them very small doses of manna
and rhubarb every half hour, till
they produce the desired effect.
when the stools are green, a few
drams of magnesia, with one or two
of rhubarb, according to the age of
the patient, may be given with advantage;
but the greatest benefit
will be derived from clysters made
of milk, oil and sugar, or a solution
of white soap and water. a poultice
of bread, milk and oil, may likewise
be applied to the lower part of the
belly, and frequently renewed with
a little warm milk to give it a proper
consistence. the cholic in adults
arises from a variety of causes, not
easily distinguished except by professional
persons; and therefore it
is absolutely necessary to abstain
from all violent remedies, or it may
be attended with fatal consequences.
nothing can be applied with safety
but emollient clysters and fomentations,
and to drink copiously of
camomile tea, or any other diluting
liquor, till the spasms be relieved,
and the nature of the disease more
clearly understood. persons who
are subject to the bilious cholic in
particular, should abstain from acrid,
watery and oily food, especially butter,
fat meat, and hot liquors: and
pursue a calm and temperate course
of life.
chopped hands. wash in
common water, and then in rose water,
a quarter of a pound of hog's
lard not salted; mix with it the
yolks of two new laid eggs, and a
large spoonful of honey. add as
much fine oatmeal, or almond paste,
as will work it into a paste; and by
frequently rubbing it on the hands,
it will keep them smooth, and prevent
their being chopped.
chopped lips. put into a new
tin saucepan, a quarter of an ounce
of benjamin, storax, and spermaceti,
two pennyworth of alkanet root, a
large juicy apple chopped, a bunch
of black grapes bruised, a quarter
of a pound of unsalted butter, and
two ounces of bees wax. simmer
them together till all be dissolved,[]
and strain it through a linen. when
cold melt it again, and pour it into
small pots or boxes, or make it into
cakes on the bottoms of tea-cups.
chump of veal. to dress
it à-la-daube, cut off the chump end
of the loin, take out the edge bone,
stuff the hollow with good forcemeat,
tie it up tight, and lay it in a stewpan
with the bone that was taken
out, a little faggot of herbs, an anchovy,
two blades of mace, a few
white peppercorns, and a pint of
good veal broth. cover the veal
with slices of fat bacon, and lay a
sheet of white paper over it. cover
the pan close, simmer it two hours,
then take out the bacon, and glaze
the veal. serve it on mushrooms,
with sorrel sauce, or any other that
may be preferred.
churning. in order to prepare
for this important operation,
the milk when drawn from the cow,
and carefully strained through a
cloth or hair sieve, should be put
into flat wooden trays about three
inches deep, and perfectly clean and
cool. the trays are then to be
placed on shelves, till the cream be
completely separated; when it is to
be nicely taken off with a skimming
dish, without lifting or stirring the
milk. the cream is then deposited
in a separate vessel, till a proper
quantity is collected for churning.
in hot weather, the milk should stand
only twenty-four hours, and be skimmed
early in the morning before the
dairy becomes warm, or in the evening
after sun-set. in winter the
milk may remain unskimmed for six
and thirty or even eight and forty
hours. the cream should be preserved
in a deep pan during the summer,
and placed in the coolest part
of the dairy, or in a cellar where
free air is admitted. the cream
which rises first to the surface is
richer in quality, and larger in quantity,
than what rises afterwards.
thick milk produces a smaller proportion
of cream than that which is
thinner, though the former is of a
richer quality: if therefore the thick
milk be diluted with water, it will
afford more cream, but its quality
will be inferior. milk carried about
in pails, and partly cooled before it
be strained and poured into the
trays, never throws up such good
and plentiful cream, as if it had been
put into proper vessels immediately
after it came from the cow. those
who have not an opportunity of
churning every other day, should
shift the cream daily into clean pans,
in order to keep it cool; but the
churning should take place regularly
twice a week in hot weather, and
in the morning before sun-rise, taking
care to fix the churn in a free
circulation of air. in the winter
time, the churn must not be set so
near the fire as to heat the wood,
as by this means the butter will acquire
a strong rancid flavour. cleanliness
being of the utmost importance,
the common plunge-churn is
preferable to any other; but if a
barrel-churn be requisite in a large
dairy, it must be kept thoroughly
clean with salt and water. if a
plunge-churn be used, it may be set
in a tub of cold water during the
time of churning, which will harden
the butter in a considerable degree.
the motion of the churn should be
regular, and performed by one person,
or the butter will in winter go
back; and if the agitation be violent
and irregular, the butter will ferment
in summer, and acquire a disagreeable
flavour. the operation of
churning may be much facilitated by
adding a table-spoonful or two of
distilled vinegar to a gallon of cream,
but not till after the latter has undergone
considerable agitation. in
many parts of england, butter is artificially
coloured in winter, though
it adds nothing to its goodness. the
juice of carrots is expressed through
a sieve, and mixed with the cream
when it enters the churn, to give it
the appearance of may butter. very[]
little salt is used in the best epping
butter; but a certain proportion of
acid, either natural or artificial,
must be used in the cream, in order
to secure a successful churning.
some keep a small quantity of the
old cream for that purpose; some
use a little rennet, and others a few
tea-spoonfuls of lemon juice. it has
been ascertained however, by a variety
of experiments, that it is more
profitable to churn the cream, than
to churn the whole milk, as is practised
in some parts of the country.
cream butter is also the richest of
the two, though it will not keep
sweet so long.
cider. particular caution is requisite
in bottling this useful beverage,
in order to its being well preserved.
to secure the bottles from
bursting, the liquor must be thoroughly
fine before it be racked off.
if one bottle break, it will be necessary
to open the remainder, and cork
them up again. weak cider is more
apt to burst the bottles, than that of
a better quality. good corks, soaked
in hot water, will be more safe and
pliant; and by laying the bottles so
that the liquor may always keep the
corks wet and swelled, will tend
much to its preservation. for this
purpose the ground is preferable to
a frame, and a layer of sawdust better
than the bare floor; but the most
proper situation would be a stream
of running water. in order to ripen
bottled liquors, they are sometimes
exposed to moderate warmth, or the
rays of the sun, which in a few days
will bring them to maturity.
cider cup. to make a cooling
drink, mix together a quart of cider,
a glass of white wine, one of brandy,
one of capillaire, the juice of a lemon,
a bit of the peel pared thin, a
sprig of borage or balm, a piece of
toasted bread, and nutmeg grated
on the top.
cinnamon cakes. whisk
together in a pan six eggs, and two
table-spoonfuls of rose water. add
a pound of fine sugar sifted, a desert-spoonful
of pounded cinnamon,
and flour sufficient to make it into
a paste. roll it out, cut it into
cakes, and bake them on writing
paper.
citron pudding. boil some
windsor beans quite soft, take off
the skins, and beat a quarter of a
pound of them into a paste. then
add as much butter, four eggs well
beaten, with some sugar and brandy.
put a puff-paste in the dish, lay some
slices of citron on it, pour in the
pudding, garnish with bits of citron
round the edge of the dish, and bake
it in a moderate oven.
clarified broth. put broth
or gravy into a clean stewpan, break
the white and shell of an egg, beat
them together and add them to
the broth. stir it with a whisk; and
when it has boiled a few minutes,
strain it through a tammis or a napkin.
clarified butter. to make
clarified butter for potted things,
put some butter into a sauceboat,
and set it over the fire in a stewpan
that has a little water in it. when
the butter is dissolved, the milky
parts will sink to the bottom, and
care must be taken not to pour them
over things to be potted.
clarified dripping. mutton
fat taken from the meat before
it is roasted, or any kind of dripping,
may be sliced and boiled a few minutes;
and when it is cold, it will
come off in a cake. this will make
good crust for any sort of meat pie,
and may be made finer by boiling it
three or four times.
clarified sugar. break in
large lumps as much loaf sugar as
is required, and dissolve it in a bowl,
allowing a pound of sugar to half a
pint of water. set it over the fire,
and add the white of an egg well
whipt. let it boil up; and when
ready to run over, pour in a little
cold water to give it a check. but
when it rises the second time, take[]
it off the fire, and set it by in a pan
a quarter of an hour. the foulness
will sink to the bottom, and leave a
black scum on the top, which must
be taken off gently with a skimmer.
then pour the syrup very quickly
from the sediment, and set it by for
sweetmeats.
clarified syrup. break two
pounds of double-refined sugar, and
put it into a stewpan that is well
tinned, with a pint of cold spring
water. when the sugar is dissolved,
set it over a moderate fire. beat up
half the white of an egg, put it to
the sugar before it gets warm, and
stir it well together. as soon as it
boils take off the scum, and keep it
boiling till it is perfectly clear. run
it through a clean napkin, put it
into a close stopped bottle, and it
will keep for months, as an elegant
article on the sideboard for sweetening.
clary wine. boil fifteen gallons
of water, with forty-five pounds
of sugar, and skim it clean. when
cool put a little to a quarter of a
pint of yeast, and so by degrees add
a little more. in the course of an
hour put the smaller to the larger
quantity, pour the liquor on clary
flowers, picked in the dry: the quantity
for the above is twelve quarts.
if there be not a sufficient quantity
ready to put in at once, more may
be added by degrees, keeping an
account of each quart. when the
liquor ceases to hiss, and the flowers
are all in, stop it up for four months.
rack it off, empty the barrel of the
dregs, and add a gallon of the best
brandy. return the liquor to the
cask, close it up for six or eight
weeks, and then bottle it off.
cleanliness. nothing is more
conducive to health than cleanliness,
and the want of it is a fault which
admits of no excuse. it is so agreeable
to our nature, that we cannot
help approving it in others, even if
we do not practise it ourselves. it
is an ornament to the highest as
well as to the lowest station, and
cannot be dispensed with in either:
it ought to be cultivated everywhere,
especially in populous towns and
cities. frequent washing not only
improves the appearance, but promotes
perspiration, by removing
every impediment on the skin, while
at the same time it braces the body,
and enlivens the spirits. washing
the feet and legs in lukewarm water,
after being exposed to cold and wet,
would prevent the ill effects which
proceed from these causes, and
greatly contribute to health. diseases
of the skin, a very numerous
class, are chiefly owing to the want
of cleanliness, as well as the various
kinds of vermin which infest the human
body; and all these might be
prevented by a due regard to our
own persons. one common cause
of putrid and malignant fevers is
the want of cleanliness. they usually
begin among the inhabitants of
close and dirty houses, who breathe
unwholesome air, take little exercise,
and wear dirty clothes. there
the infection is generally hatched,
and spreads its desolation far and
wide. if dirty people cannot be removed
as a common nuisance, they
ought at least to be avoided as infectious,
and all who regard their
own health should keep at a distance
from their habitations. infectious
diseases are often communicated by
tainted air: every thing therefore
which gives a noxious exhalation, or
tends to spread infection, should be
carefully avoided. in great towns
no filth of any kind should be suffered
to remain in the streets, and great
pains should be taken to keep every
dwelling clean both within and without.
no dunghills or filth of any
kind should be allowed to remain
near them. when an infection breaks
out, cleanliness is the most likely
means to prevent its spreading to
other places, or its returning again
afterwards. it will lodge a long time
in dirty clothes, and be liable to[]
break out again; and therefore the
bedding and clothing of the sick
ought to be carefully washed, and
fumigated with brimstone. infectious
diseases are not only prevented,
but even cured by cleanliness; while
the slightest disorders, where it is
neglected, are often changed into
the most malignant. yet it has so
happened, that the same mistaken
care which prevents the least admission
of fresh air to the sick, has introduced
the idea also of keeping
them dirty; than which nothing can
be more injurious to the afflicted, or
more repugnant to common sense.
in a room too, where cleanliness is
neglected, a person in perfect health
has a greater chance to become sick,
than a sick person has to get well.
it is also of great consequence, that
cleanliness should be strictly regarded
by those especially who are
employed in preparing food; such
as butchers, bakers, brewers, dairy
maids, and cooks; as negligence in
any of these may prove injurious to
the public health. good housekeepers
will keep a careful eye on
these things, and every person of reflection
will see the necessity of cultivating
general cleanliness as of
great importance to the wellbeing
of society.
clear broth. to make a
broth that will keep long, put the
mouse round of beef into a deep pan,
with a knuckle bone of veal, and a
few shanks of mutton. cover it close
with a dish or coarse crust, and bake
with as much water as will cover it,
till the beef is done enough for eating.
when cold, cover it close, and
keep it in a cool place. when to
be used, give it any flavour most
approved.
clear gravy. slice some
beef thin, broil a part of it over a
very clear quick fire, just enough to
give a colour to the gravy, but not
to dress it. put that and the raw
beef into a very nicely tinned stewpan,
with two onions, a clove or two,
whole black pepper, berries of allspice,
and a bunch of sweet herbs.
cover it with hot water, give it one
boil, and skim it well two or three
times. then cover it, and simmer
till it be quite strong.
clothing. those who regard
their health should be careful to
adapt their clothing to the state of
the climate, and the season of the
year. whatever be the influence of
custom, there is no reason why our
clothing should be such as would
suit an inhabitant of the torrid or
the frigid zones, but of the state of
the air around us, and of the country
in which we live. apparel may
be warm enough for one season of
the year, which is by no means sufficient
for another; we ought therefore
neither to put off our winter
garments too soon, nor wear our
summer ones too long. every change
of this sort requires to be made cautiously,
and by degrees. in general,
all clothes should be light and easy,
and in no instance ought health and
comfort to be sacrificed to pride
and vanity. in the early part of life
it is not necessary to wear many
clothes: but in the decline of life,
when many diseases proceed from a
defect of perspiration, plenty of
warm clothing is required. attention
should also be paid to the constitution,
in this as well as in other
cases. some persons can endure
either cold or heat better than others,
and may therefore be less mindful of
their clothing: the great object is
to wear just so many garments as is
sufficient to keep the body warm,
and no more. shoes in particular
should be easy to the foot, and all
tight bandages on every part of the
body carefully avoided.
clouted cream. string four
blades of mace on a thread, put
them to a gill of new milk, and six
spoonfuls of rose water. simmer a
few minutes, then by degrees strain
the liquor to the yolks of two eggs
well beaten. stir the whole into a[]
quart of rich cream, and set it over
the fire; keep it stirring till hot, but
not boiling; pour it into a deep dish,
and let it stand twenty-four hours.
serve it in a cream dish, to eat with
fruits. some prefer it without any
flavour but that of cream; in which
case use a quart of new milk and
the cream, or do it as the devonshire
scalded cream. when done
enough, a round mark will appear
on the surface of the cream, the size
of the bottom of the pan, which is
called the ring; and when that is
seen, remove the pan from the fire.
clyster. a common clyster is
made of plain gruel strained, and a
table-spoonful of oil or salt. a pint
is sufficient for a grown person.
cock chaffers. this species
of the beetle, sometimes called the
may bug, is a formidable enemy to
the husbandman, and has been found
to swarm in such numbers, as to
devour every kind of vegetable production.
the insect is first generated
in the earth, from the eggs
deposited by the fly in its perfect
state. in about three months, the
insects contained in these eggs break
the shell, and crawl forth in the
shape of a grub or maggot, which
feeds upon the roots of vegetables,
and continues in this state of secret
annoyance for more than three years,
gradually growing to the size of an
acorn. it is the thick white maggot
with a red head, so frequently found
in turning up the soil. at the end
of the fourth year, they emerge from
the earth, and may be seen in great
numbers in the mild evenings of
may. the willow seems to be their
favourite food; on this they hang in
clusters, and seldom quit it till they
have completely devoured its foliage.
the most effectual way to destroy
them, is to beat them off with
poles, and then to collect and burn
them. the smoke of burning heath,
fern, or other weeds, will prevent
their incursions in gardens, or expel
them if they have entered.
cock roaches. these insects,
consisting of various species,
penetrate into chests and drawers,
and do considerable injury to linen,
books, and other articles. they seldom
appear till night, when they infest
beds, and bite very severely,
leaving an unpleasant smell. the
best remedy is to fill an earthen dish
with small beer, sweetened with
coarse sugar, and set in the place
infested. lay a board against the
pan, to form a kind of ladder, and
the insects will ascend and fall into
the liquor.
cockle ketchup. open the
cockles, scald them in their own
liquor, and add a little water, if
there be not enough; but it is better
to have a sufficient quantity of cockles,
than to dilute it with water.
strain the liquor through a cloth,
and season it with savoury spices.
if for brown sauce, add port, anchovies,
and garlic: a bit of burnt sugar
will heighten the colouring. if
for white sauce, omit these, and put
in a glass of sherry, some lemon
juice and peel, mace, nutmeg, and
white pepper.
cod fish. in season from the
beginning of december till the end
of april. to be quite good, the
fish should be thick at the neck, the
flesh white and firm, the gills very
red, and the eyes bright and fresh.
when flabby, they are not good.
the cod is generally boiled whole;
but a large head and shoulders contain
all that is relishing, the thinner
parts being overdone and tasteless
before the thick are ready. but the
whole fish may often be purchased
more reasonably; and the lower
half, if sprinkled and hung up, will
be in high perfection one or two
days. or it may be made salter,
and served with egg sauce, potatoes,
and parsnips. small cod is usually
very cheap. if boiled fresh, it is
watery; but eats well if salted and
hung up for a day, to give it firmness.
then it should be stuffed[]
and boiled, or it is equally good
broiled.
cod's head. the head and
shoulders of the cod will eat much
finer by having a little salt rubbed
down the bone, and along the thick
part, even if eaten the same day.
tie it up, put it on the fire in cold
water sufficient to cover it, and throw
a handful of salt into it. great care
must be taken to serve it up without
the smallest speck of black, or scum.
garnish with plenty of double parsley,
lemon, horse radish, and the
milt, roe and liver, and fried smelts,
if approved. if with smelts, no water
must be suffered to hang about
the fish, or the beauty and flavour
of the smelts will be lost. serve
with plenty of oyster or shrimp
sauce, anchovy and butter.
cod pie. take a piece of the
middle of a small cod, and salt it
well one night. wash it the next
day, season with pepper and salt,
mixed with a very little nutmeg. lay
the meat in a dish, with the addition
of a little good broth of any kind,
and some bits of butter on it. cover
the dish with a crust, and bake it.
when done, make a sauce of a spoonful
of broth, a quarter of a pint of
cream, a little flour and butter, and
a dust of grated lemon and nutmeg.
give it one boil, and pour it into
the pie. oysters may be added,
but parsley will do instead. mackarel
may be done in the same way,
but must not be salted till they are
used.
cod sounds boiled. soak
them in warm water half an hour,
then scrape and clean them. if to
be dressed white, boil them in milk
and water. when tender, serve them
up in a napkin, with egg sauce. the
salt must not be much soaked out,
unless for fricassee.
cod sounds broiled. scald
them in hot water, rub well with salt,
pull off the dirty skin, and simmer
them till tender. then take them
out, flour, and broil them. while
this is doing, season a little brown
gravy with pepper, salt, a tea-spoonful
of soy, and a little mustard.
give it a boil with a little flour and
butter, and pour it over the sounds.
cod sounds ragout. having
scalded, cleaned, and rubbed
them well with salt, stew them in
white gravy seasoned. before they
are served, add a little cream, butter
and flour, gently boiling up. a
bit of lemon peel, nutmeg, and the
least pounded mace, will give it a
good flavour.
carefully wash three large
sounds, boil them in milk and water,
but not too tender. when cold, put
a forcemeat of chopped oysters,
crumbs of bread, a bit of butter,
nutmeg, pepper, salt, and the yolks
of two eggs. spread it thin over
the sounds, roll up each in the form
of a chicken, and skewer it. then
lard them as chickens, dust a little
flour over, and roast them slowly in
a tin oven. when done enough, pour
over them a fine oyster sauce, and
place them on the table as a side or
corner dish.
codlins. this fruit may be
kept for several months, if gathered
of a middling size at midsummer,
and treated in the following manner.
put them into an earthen pan, pour
boiling water over them, and cover
the pan with cabbage leaves. keep
them by the fire till ready to peel,
but do not peel them; then pour off
the water, and leave them cold.
place the codlins in a stone jar with
a smallish mouth, and pour on the
water that scalded them. cover
the pot with bladder wetted and tied
very close, and then over it coarse
paper tied again. the fruit is best
kept in small jars, such as will be
used at once when opened.
codlin cream. pare and core
twenty good codlins; beat them in
a mortar with a pint of cream, and[]
strain it into a dish. put to it sugar,
bread crumbs, and a glass of wine;
and stir it well.
codlin tart. scald the fruit,
and take off the skin. put a little
of the liquor on the bottom of a dish,
lay in the apples whole, and strew
them over with lisbon or fine sugar.
when cold, put a paste round the
edges, and over the fruit. moisten
the crust with the white of an egg,
and strew some fine sugar over it;
or cut the lid in quarters, without
touching the paste on the edge of
the dish. remove the lid when cold,
pour in a good custard, and sift it
over with sugar. another way is to
line the bottom of a shallow dish
with paste, lay in the scalded fruit,
sweeten it, and lay little twists of
paste over in bars.
coffee. put two ounces of
fresh-ground coffee, of the best
quality, into a coffee pot, and pour
eight coffee cups of boiling water
on it. let it boil six minutes, and
return it; then put in two or three
chips of isinglass, and pour on it
one large spoonful of boiling water.
boil it five minutes more, and set
the pot by the fire for ten minutes
to keep it hot: the coffee will then
be of a beautiful clearness. fine
cream should always be served with
coffee, and either pounded sugar-candy,
or fine lisbon sugar. if for
foreigners, or those who like it very
strong, make only eight dishes from
three ounces. if not fresh roasted,
lay it before the fire until perfectly
hot and dry; or put the smallest bit
of fresh butter into a preserving pan,
and when hot, throw the coffee into
it, and toss it about until it be freshened,
but let it be quite cold before
it is ground.—but as coffee possesses
a raw and astringent quality,
which often disagrees with weak
stomachs, and by being drank too
warm is as frequently rendered unwholesome,
the following is recommended
as an improved method of
preparing it. to an ounce of coffee,
add a tea-spoonful of the best flour
of mustard, to correct its acidity,
and improve its fragrance; and in
order to render it truly fine and
wholesome, it should be made the
evening before it is wanted. let
an ounce of fresh-ground coffee be
put into a clean coffee pot well tinned,
pour upon it a full pint of boiling
water, set it on the fire, and after
it has well boiled, let it stand by
to settle. next morning pour off
the clear liquor, add to it a pint of
new milk, warm it over the fire, and
sweeten it to taste. coffee made in
this way, will be found particularly
suitable to persons of a weak and
delicate habit.—a substitute for foreign
coffee may be prepared from
the acorns of the oak, by shelling
and dividing the kernels, drying and
roasting them gradually in a close
vessel, and keeping them constantly
stirring. grind it like other coffee,
and either use it alone, or mix with
it a small quantity of foreign coffee.
the seeds of the flower de luce, or
common waterflag, being roasted in
the same manner as coffee, very
much resembles it in colour and flavour.
coffee made of these seeds
is extremely wholesome, in the proportion
of an ounce to a pint of
boiling water.
coffee cakes. melt some
fresh butter in a pint of thin cream,
and work up with it four pounds of
dried flour. add a pound of sugar,
a pint of yeast, and half an ounce
of carraways. stir them all together,
set it before the fire to rise,
roll the paste out thin, cut it into
small cakes, and bake them on buttered
paper.
coffee cream. boil a calf's
foot in water till reduced to a pint
of jelly, clear of sediment and fat.
make a tea-cupful of strong fresh
coffee, clear it perfectly bright with
isinglass, and pour it to the jelly.
add a pint of very good cream,[]
sweeten it with fine lisbon sugar,
boil it up once, and pour it into the
dish. this article is much admired,
but the jelly must not be stiff, and
the coffee must be fresh.
coffee milk. boil a dessert-spoonful
of ground coffee, in nearly
a pint of milk, a quarter of an hour.
then put in a shaving or two of isinglass
to clear it; let it boil a few
minutes, and set it on the side of
the fire to grow fine. this makes a
very fine breakfast; it should be
sweetened with real lisbon sugar of
a good quality.
cold caudle. boil a quart
of spring water; when cold, add the
yolk of an egg, the juice of a small
lemon, six spoonfuls of sweet wine,
sugar to taste, and syrup of lemons
one ounce.
cold fish. soles, cod, whitings,
or smelts may be cut into bits,
and put into scallop shells, with cold
oyster, lobster, or shrimp sauce.
having added some bread crumbs,
they may be put into a dutch oven,
and browned like scalloped oysters.
cold meat. if it be a little
underdone, the best way to warm it
up is to sprinkle over a little salt,
and put it into a dutch oven at some
distance before a gentle fire, that it
may warm gradually. watch it carefully,
and keep turning it till it is
quite hot and brown, and serve it up
with gravy. this is preferable to
hashing, as it will retain more of its
original flavour. roast beef or mutton,
of course, are best for this purpose.
cold sallad. boil an egg
quite hard, put the yolk into a sallad
dish, mash it with a spoonful of water,
then add a little of the best sallad
oil or melted butter, a tea-spoonful
of ready-made mustard, and some
vinegar. cut the sallad small and
mix it together, adding celery, radishes,
or other sallad herbs with it.
onions may be served in a saucer,
rather than mixed in the bowl. an
anchovy may be washed, cut small,
and mixed with it; also a bit of beet
root, and the white of an egg. celery
may be prepared in the same way.
colds. for a bad cold take a
large tea-cupful of linseed, two pennyworth
of stick liquorice, and a
quarter of a pound of sun raisins.
put them into two quarts of water,
and let it simmer over a slow fire
till reduced one half. then add a
quarter of a pound of sugar-candy
pounded, a table-spoonful of rum,
and the same of lemon juice or vinegar.
the rum and lemon juice
are better added when the mixture
is taken, or they are apt to grow
flat. take half a pint just warm at
bed time.
collared beef. choose the
thin end of the flank of fine mellow
beef, but not too fat: lay it into a
dish with salt and saltpetre, turn
and rub it every day for a week,
and keep it cool. then take out
every bone and gristle, remove the
skin of the inside part, and cover it
thick with the following seasoning
cut small; a large handful of parsley,
the same of sage, some thyme,
marjoram and pennyroyal, pepper,
salt, and allspice. roll the meat up
as tight as possible, and bind it
round with a cloth and tape; then
boil it gently for seven or eight hours.
put the beef under a good weight
while hot, without undoing it: the
shape will then be oval. part of
a breast of veal rolled in with the
beef, looks and eats very well.
collared eel. bone a large
eel, but do not skin it. mix up pepper,
salt, mace, allspice, and a clove
or two, in the finest powder, and rub
over the whole inside: roll it tight,
and bind it with a coarse tape. boil
it in salt and water till done enough,
then add vinegar, and when cold
keep the collar in pickle. serve it
either whole or in slices. chopped
parsley, sage, a little thyme, knotted
marjoram, and savoury, mixed
with the spices, greatly improve the
taste.[]
collared mackarel. do
them the same as eels, omitting the
herbs.
collared mutton. take
out the bones and gristle of a breast
of mutton, lay the meat flat, and rub
it over with egg. mix some grated
bread, pounded cloves and mace,
pepper, salt, and lemon peel, and
strew over it. two or three anchovies,
washed and boned, may be
added. roll the meat up hard, bind
it with tape and boil it; or if skewered,
it may either be roasted or
baked.
collared pork. bone a
breast of pork, and season it with
thyme, parsley and sage. roll it
hard, tie it up in a cloth, and boil it.
press it well, take it out of the cloth
when cold, and keep it in the liquor
it was boiled in.
clean it well, take out the brains,
rub it with a handful of salt, and
two ounces of saltpetre. let it lie
a fortnight in brine, then wash it,
and boil it till the bones will easily
come out. lay it in a dish, take off
the skin carefully, take out the bones,
and peel the tongue. mix a handful
of sage, a little thyme, and four shalots
chopped fine. put the meat to
it, and chop it into pieces about an
inch square. put a thin cloth into
an earthen pot, lay in the meat, cover
the cloth over, and press it down.
set the pot in the liquor again, boil
it nearly an hour longer, then take
it out, place a weight on the cover
within side, and let it remain all
night. take it out, strip off the
cloth, and eat the collar with mustard
and vinegar.
collared salmon. split
such part of the fish as may be sufficient
to make a handsome roll,
wash and wipe it; and having mixed
salt, white pepper, pounded
mace, and jamaica pepper, in quantity
to season it very high, rub it inside
and out well. then roll it tight
and bandage it, put as much water
and one third vinegar as will cover
it, adding bay leaves, salt, and both
sorts of pepper. cover it close, and
simmer till it is done enough. drain
and boil the liquor, put it on when
cold, and serve with fennel. it is an
elegant dish, and extremely good.
collared veal. bone the
breast and beat it, rub it with egg,
and strew over it a seasoning of
pounded mace, nutmeg, pepper and
salt, minced parsley, sweet marjoram,
lemon peel, crumbs of bread,
and an anchovy. roll it up tight in
a cloth, and boil it two hours and a
half in salt and water. hang it up,
or press it: make a pickle for it of
the liquor it was boiled in, and half
the quantity of vinegar.
college puddings. grate
the crumb of a two-penny loaf, shred
eight ounces of suet, and mix with
eight ounces of currants, one of citron
mixed fine, one of orange, a
handful of sugar, half a nutmeg,
three eggs beaten, yolk and white
separately. mix and make into the
size and shape of a goose-egg. put
half a pound of butter into a fryingpan;
and when melted and quite
hot, stew them gently in it over a
stove; turn them two or three times,
till they are of a fine light brown.
mix a glass of brandy with the batter,
and serve with pudding sauce.
for a beautiful red, take fifteen
grains of cochineal in the finest
powder, and a dram and a half of
cream of tartar. boil them in half
a pint of water very slowly for half
an hour, adding a bit of alum the
size of a pea; or use beet root sliced,
and some liquor poured over. for
white, use cream; or almonds finely
powdered, with a spoonful of water.
for yellow, yolks of eggs, or
a little saffron steeped in the liquor
and squeezed. for green, spinach
or beet leaves bruised and pressed,
and the juice boiled to take off the
rawness. any of these will do to
stain jellies, ices, or cakes.[]
colouring for soups. put
four ounces of lump sugar, a gill of
water, and half an ounce of fine butter
into a small tosser, and set it
over a gentle fire. stir it with a
wooden spoon, till of a light brown.
then add half a pint of water; let
it boil and skim it well. when cold,
bottle and cork it close. add to
either soup or gravy as much of this
as will give it a proper colour.
common cake. mix three
quarters of a pound of flour with
half a pound of butter, four ounces
of sugar, four eggs, half an ounce of
carraways, and a glass of raisin
wine. beat it well, and bake it in
a quick oven.—a better sort of common
cake may be made of half a
pound of butter, rubbed into two
pounds of dried flour; then add
three spoonfuls of yeast that is not
bitter, and work it to a paste. let
it rise an hour and a half; then mix
in the yolks and whites of four eggs
beaten separately, a pound of lisbon
sugar, about a pint of milk to
make it of a proper thickness, a glass
of sweet wine, the rind of a lemon,
and a tea-spoonful of powdered ginger.
a pound of currants, or some
carraways may be added, and let
the whole be well beaten together.
common plants. the virtues
of a great number of ordinary
plants and weeds being but little
understood, they are generally deemed
useless; but they have properties
nevertheless which might be rendered
useful, if carefully and judiciously
applied. the young shoots and
leaves of chick-weed, for example,
may be boiled and eaten like spinach,
are equally wholesome, and can
scarcely be distinguished from it.
the juice expressed from the stem
and leaves of goose-grass, taken to
the amount of four ounces, night
and morning for several weeks, is
very efficacious in scorbutic complaints,
and other cutaneous eruptions.
the smell of garlic is an infallible
remedy against the vapours,
faintings, and other hysteric affections.
the common poppy is an
antidote to the stings of venomous
insects, and a remedy for inflammation
of the eyes: it also cures the
pleurisy, and spitting of blood. sage
taken in any form tends to cleanse
and enrich the blood: it makes a
good cordial, and is highly useful in
cases of nervous debility. it is often
given in fevers with a view to promote
perspiration, and with the addition
of a little lemon juice it makes
a grateful and cooling beverage.
cool tankard. put into a
quart of mild ale a glass of white
wine, one of brandy, one of capillaire,
the juice of a lemon, and a
little piece of the rind. add a sprig
of borage or balm, a bit of toasted
bread, and nutmeg grated on the top.
copper. many serious accidents
have been occasioned by the
use of copper in kitchen requisites.
the eating of fruit especially that
has been prepared in a copper stewpan,
where some of the oxide was
insensibly imbibed, has been known
to produce death; or if coffee
grounds are suffered to remain long
in a copper coffee-pot, and afterwards
mixed with fresh coffee, for
the sake of economy, the effects will
be highly injurious, if not fatal.
the best antidote in such cases,
when they unhappily occur, is to
take immediately a large spoonful of
powdered charcoal, mixed with honey,
butter, or treacle; and within
two hours afterwards, an emetic or
a cathartic to expel the poison.
coppers. in domestic economy,
the necessity of keeping copper vessels
always clean, is generally acknowledged;
but it may not perhaps
be so generally known, that fat and
oily substances, and vegetable acids,
do not attack copper while hot; and
therefore, that if no liquor were suffered
to remain and grow cold in
copper vessels, they might be used
for every culinary purpose with perfect
safety. the object is to clean[]
and dry the vessels well before they
turn cold.
copying letters. dissolve
a little sugar in the ink, and write
with it as usual. when a copy is
required, moisten a piece of unsized
paper lightly with a sponge, and
apply it to the writing; then smooth
the wet paper over with a warm iron,
such as is used in a laundry, and
the copy is immediately produced
without the use of a machine.
copying prints. moisten a
piece of paper with a solution of soap
and alum, lay it on the print or picture,
and pass it under a rolling
press. another method is to have
a small frame in the form of a basin
stand, enclosing a square of glass on
the pot, on which the print is laid
with the paper upon it; and then
placing a candle under the glass,
the print may be traced with a pencil,
or pen and ink. impressions
may also be transferred by mixing a
little vermillion with linseed oil so as
to make it fluid; then with a pen
dipped in it, trace every line of the
print accurately. turn the print
with its face downwards on a sheet
of white paper, wet the back of the
print, lay another sheet upon it, and
press it till the red lines are completely
transferred.
corks. economy in corks is
very unwise: in order to save a
mere trifle in the purchase, there is
a danger of losing some valuable
article which it is intended to preserve.
none but velvet taper corks
should be used for liquors that are
to be kept for any length of time;
and when a bottle of ketchup or of
anchovy is opened, the cork should
be thrown away, and a new one put
in that will fit it very tight. if a
cork is forced down even with the
mouth of the bottle, it is too small,
and should be drawn, that a larger
one may be put in.
cork cement. liquors and
preserves, intended to be kept a long
time, are often spoiled by the clumsy
and ineffectual manner in which they
are fastened down. bottles therefore
should be secured with the following
cement, spread upon the cork
after it is cut level with the top of
the bottle. melt in an earthen or
iron pot half a pound of black rosin,
half a pound of sealing wax, and a
quarter of a pound of bees wax.
when it froths up, and before all is
melted and likely to boil over, stir it
with a tallow candle, which will settle
the froth till all is melted and fit
for use.
corns. apply to warts and
corns, a piece of soft brown paper
moistened with saliva, and a few
dressings will remove them. a convenient
plaster may also be made of
an ounce of pitch, half an ounce of
galbanum dissolved in vinegar, one
scruple of ammoniac, and a dram
and a half of diachylon mixed together.
costiveness. from whatever
cause it may arise, frequent exercise
in the open air, and abstinence from
heating liquors, will be found very
beneficial. to those who are afflicted
with this complaint, it is particularly
recommended that they should
visit the customary retreat every
morning at a stated hour, that nature
may in this respect, by perseverance,
acquire a habit of regularity.
in obstinate cases, three drams
of carbon may be taken two or three
times a day, mixed with three ounces
of lenitive electuary, and two drams
of carbonate of soda, as circumstances
may require. half an ounce of
epsom salts, dissolved in a tumbler
or two of cold water, and drank at
intervals, will have a very salutary
effect.
cottenham cheese. though
this is so much noted for its superior
flavour and delicacy, it does not
appear to be owing to any particular
management of the dairy, but
rather to the fragrance of the herbage
on which the cows feed in that
part of the country.[]
coughs. the extract of malt
will be found an excellent remedy
for coughs or colds. pour as much
hot water over half a bushel of pale
ground malt as will just cover it;
the water must not be boiling. in
forty-eight hours drain off the liquor
entirely, but without squeezing the
grains. put the former into a large
sweetmeat pan, or saucepan, that
there may be room to boil as quick
as possible, without boiling over.
when it begins to thicken, stir it
constantly, till it becomes as thick
as treacle. take a dessert-spoonful
of it three times a day.—another
remedy for a bad cough may be prepared
as follows. mix together a
pint of simple mint water, two table-spoonfuls
of sallad oil, two tea-spoonfuls
of hartshorns, sweetened
with sugar, and take two large
spoonfuls of the mixture two or
three times a day.
court plaister. dissolve
half an ounce of isinglass in an ounce
of water, and boil it till the water is
nearly all consumed; then add gradually
a dram of friar's balsam,
and stir them well together. dip a
brush in the hot mixture, and spread
it on a piece of clean silk.
cows. in the management of
cows intended for the dairy, a warm
stable or cowhouse is of great importance.
cows kept at pasture will
require from one to two acres of
land each to keep them during the
summer months; but if housed, the
produce of one fourth part will be
sufficient. their dung, which would
otherwise be wasted on the ground
by the action of the sun and weather,
is hereby easily preserved, and given
to the soil where it is most wanted,
and in the best condition. the
treading on the grass and pasture,
which diminishes its value, is prevented;
the expence of division-fences
is avoided, and the time and
trouble of driving them about is all
saved. they are also kept more
cool, are less tormented by flies than
if pastured, acquire good coats and
full flesh, though they consume a
much smaller quantity of food.
they are in all respects more profitably
kept in the house, than out of
doors; but they must be regularly
and gradually trained to it, or they
will not thrive. cows should always
be kept clean, laid dry, and have
plenty of good water to drink. they
should never be suffered to drink at
stagnant pools, or where there are
frogs, spawn, or filth of any kind;
or from common sewers or ponds
that receive the drainings of stables,
or such kind of places; all which
are exceedingly improper. one of
the most effectual means of rendering
their milk sweet and wholesome,
as well as increasing its quantity, is
to let them drink freely of water in
which the most fragrant kind of clover
or lucern has been steeped: and
if they are curried in the same manner
as horses, they will not only receive
pleasure from it, but give their
milk more freely. in holland, where
the greatest attention is paid to all
kinds of domestic animals, the haunches
of dairy cows are washed morning
and evening with warm water
previous to milking, and after calving
are clothed with sacking. the
floors of their cowhouses are paved
with brick, with a descent in the
middle, where a gutter carries off the
drain, and the place is kept perfectly
clean with a broom and pails of
water. the filthy state in which
cows are confined in the vicinity of
london, and other large cities, and
the manner in which they are literally
crammed, not with wholesome
food, but with such things as are
calculated to produce an abundance
of milk, cannot be too severely reprobated
as injurious to the public
health. it is also notorious, that
vessels of hot and cold water are
always kept in these cowhouses for
the accommodation of mercenary retailers,
who purchase a quantity of
milk at a low price, and then mix it[]
with such a proportion of water as
they think necessary to reduce it to
a proper standard; when it is hawked
about at an exorbitant price. the
milk is not pure in its original state,
and being afterwards adulterated, it
is scarcely fit for any purpose in a
family. the first object in the article
of food, is wholesomeness; and
grass growing spontaneously on good
meadow-land is in general deemed
most proper for cows intended to
supply the dairy. the quantity of
milk produced by those which feed
on sainfoin is however nearly double
to that of any other provender: it is
also richer in quality, and will yield
a larger quantity of cream: of course
the butter will be better coloured
and flavoured than any other. turnips
and carrots form an excellent
article, and cannot be too strongly
recommended, especially as a winter
food; but they should be cleaned
and cut; and parsnips, with the tops
taken off will produce abundance of
milk, of a superior quality; and
cows will eat them freely though
they are improper for horses. of
all vegetable productions, perhaps
the cabbage is the most exuberant
for this purpose, and ought by all
means to be encouraged. the drum-headed
cabbage, and the hardy variety
of a deep green colour with
purple veins, and of the same size
with the drum-head, are particularly
useful in the feeding of cows, and
afford an increase of milk far superior
to that produced by turnips.
they are also excellent for the fattening
of cattle, which they will do
six weeks sooner than any other vegetables,
though the cabbage plant
is generally supposed to impart a
disagreeable flavour to butter and
cheese made from the milk of cows
fed upon it, yet this may easily be
prevented by putting a gallon of boiling
water to six gallons of milk,
when it is standing in the trays;
or by dissolving an ounce of saltpetre
in a quart of spring water, and
mixing about a quarter of a pint
of it with ten or twelve gallons of
milk as it comes from the cow. by
breaking off the loose leaves, and
giving only the sound part to the
cows, this disagreeable quality may
also be avoided, as other cattle will
eat the leaves without injury. when
a cow has been milked for several
years, and begins to grow old, the
most advantageous way is to make
her dry. to effect this, bruise six
ounces of white rosin, and dissolve
it in a quart of water. the cow
having been housed, should then
be bled and milked; and after the
mixture has been administered, she
should be turned into good grass.
she is no longer to be milked, but
fattened on rich vegetables. cows
intended for breeding, should be
carefully selected from those which
give plenty of milk. during three
months previously to calving, if in
the spring, they should be turned
into sweet grass; or if it happen in
the winter, they ought to be well fed
with the best hay. the day and
night after they have calved, they
should be kept in the house, and
lukewarm water only allowed for
their drink. they may be turned
out the next day, if the weather be
warm, but regularly taken in for
three or four successive nights; or
if the weather be damp and cold,
it is better to girt them round with
sacking, or keep them wholly within.
cows thus housed should be
kept in every night, till the morning
cold is dissipated, and a draught of
warm water given them previously
to their going to the field. if the
udder of a milking cow becomes hard
and painful, it should be fomented
with warm water and rubbed with a
gentle hand. or if the teats are
sore, they should be soaked in warm
water twice a day; and either be
dressed with soft ointment, or done
with spirits and water. if the former,
great cleanliness is necessary:
the milk at these times is best given[]
to the pigs. or if a cow be injured
by a blow or wound, the part affected
should be suppled several times
a day with fresh butter; or a salve
prepared of one ounce of castile
soap dissolved in a pint and a half of
fresh milk over a slow fire, stirring
it constantly, to form a complete
mixture. but if the wound should
turn to an obstinate ulcer, take castile
soap, gum ammoniac, gum galbanum,
and extract of hemlock, each
one ounce; form them into eight
boluses, and administer one of them
every morning and evening. to
prevent cows from sucking their own
milk, as some of them are apt to do,
rub the teats frequently with strong
rancid cheese, which will prove an
effectual remedy.
cow heels. these are very
nutricious, and may be variously
dressed. the common way is to
boil, and serve them in a napkin,
with melted butter, mustard, and a
large spoonful of vinegar. or broil
them very tender, and serve them as
a brown fricassee. the liquor will
do to make jelly sweet or relishing
and likewise to give richness to soups
or gravies. another way is to cut
them into four parts, to dip them
into an egg, and then dredge and fry
them. they may be garnished with
fried onions, and served with sauce
as above. or they may be baked
as for mock turtle.
cowslip mead. put thirty
pounds of honey into fifteen gallons
of water, and boil till one gallon is
wasted; skim it, and take it off the
fire. have a dozen and a half of
lemons ready quartered, pour a gallon
of the liquor boiling hot upon
them, and the remainder into a tub,
with seven pecks of cowslip pips.
let them remain there all night;
then put the liquor and the lemons
to eight spoonfuls of new yeast, and
a handful of sweet-briar. stir all
well together, and let it work for
three or four days; then strain and
tun it into a cask. let it stand six
months, and bottle it for keeping.
cowslip wine. to every gallon
of water, weigh three pounds of
lump sugar; boil them together half
an hour, and take off the scum as it
rises. when sufficiently cool, put
to it a crust of toasted bread dipped
in thick yeast, and let the liquor
ferment in the tub thirty six hours.
then put into the cask intended for
keeping it, the peel of two and the
rind of one lemon, for every gallon
of liquor; also the peel and the rind
of one seville orange, and one gallon
of cowslip pips. pour the liquor
upon them, stir it carefully every day
for a week, and for every five gallons
put in a bottle of brandy. let
the cask be close stopped, and stand
only six weeks before it be bottled off.
crabs. the heaviest are best,
and those of a middling size the
sweetest. if light they are watery:
when in perfection the joints of the
legs are stiff, and the body has a
very agreeable smell. the eyes look
dead and loose when stale. the female
crab is generally preferred:
the colour is much brighter, the
claws are shorter, and the apron in
front is much broader. to dress a
hot crab, pick out the meat, and
clear the shell from the head. put
the meat into the shell again, with a
little nutmeg, salt, pepper, a bit of
butter, crumbs of bread, and three
spoonfuls of vinegar. then set the
crab before the fire, or brown the
meat with a salamander. it should
be served on a dry toast.—to dress
a cold crab, empty the shell, mix
the flesh with a small quantity of
oil, vinegar, salt, white pepper and
cayenne. return the mixture, and
serve it up in the shell.
cracknels. mix with a quart
of flour, half a nutmeg grated, the
yolks of four eggs beaten, and four
spoonfuls of rose water. make the
whole into a stiff paste, with cold
water. then roll in a pound of butter,[]
and make the paste into the
shape of cracknels. boil them in a
kettle of water till they swim, and
then put them into cold water. when
hardened, lay them out to dry, and
bake them on tin plates.
cracknuts. mix eight ounces
of fine flour, with eight ounces of
sugar, and melt four ounces of butter
in two spoonfuls of raisin wine.
with four eggs beaten and strained,
make the whole into a paste, and
add carraway seed. roll the paste
out as thin as paper, cut it into
shapes with the top of a glass, wash
them with the white of an egg, and
dust them over with fine sugar.
cramp. persons subject to this
complaint, being generally attacked
in the night, should have a board
fixed at the bottom of the bed,
against which the foot should be
strongly pressed when the pain commences.
this will seldom fail to
afford relief. when it is more obstinate,
a brick should be heated,
wrapped in a flannel bag at the bottom
of the bed, and the foot placed
against it. the brick will continue
warm, and prevent a return of the
complaint. no remedy however is
more safe or more certain than that
of rubbing the affected part, to restore
a free circulation. if the cramp
attack the stomach or bowels, it is
attended with considerable danger:
medicine may relieve but cannot
cure. all hot and stimulating liquors
must be carefully avoided,
and a tea-cupful of lukewarm gruel
or camomile tea should be frequently
given, with ten or fifteen drops of
deliquidated salt of tartar in each.
cranberries. if for puddings
and pies, they require a good deal
of sugar. if stewed in a jar, it is
the same: but in this way they eat
well with bread, and are very wholesome.
if pressed and strained, after
being stewed, they yield a fine
juice, which makes an excellent
drink in a fever.
cranberry gruel. mash a
tea-cupful of cranberries in a cup
of water, and boil a large spoonful
of oatmeal in two quarts of water.
then put in the jam, with a little
sugar and lemon peel; boil it half
an hour, and strain it off. add a
glass of brandy or sweet wine.
cranberry jelly. make a
very strong isinglass jelly. when
cold, mix it with a double quantity
of cranberry juice, pressed and
strained. sweeten it with fine loaf
sugar, boil it up, and strain it into
a shape.—to make cranberry and
rice jelly, boil and press the fruit,
strain the juice, and by degrees mix
it into as much ground rice as will,
when boiled, thicken to a jelly. boil
it gently, keep it stirring, and sweeten
it. put it in a bason or form, and
serve it up with milk or cream.
cray fish. make a savoury
fish-jelly, and put some into the bottom
of a deep small dish. when
cold, lay the cray-fish with their
back downwards, and pour more
jelly over them. turn them out
when cold, and it will make a beautiful
dish. prawns may be done in
the same way.
cream. rich cream for tea or
coffee is prepared in the following
manner. put some new milk into
an earthen pan, heat it over the fire,
and set it by till the next day. in
order to preserve it a day or two
longer, it must be scalded, sweetened
with lump sugar, and set in a
cool place. if half a pint of fresh
cream be boiled in an earthen pot
with half a pound of sugar, and
corked up close in phials when cold,
it will keep for several weeks, and
be fit for the tea-table.
cream for pies. boil a pint
of new milk ten minutes, with a bit
of lemon peel, a laurel leaf, four
cloves, and a little sugar. mix the
yolks of six eggs and half a tea-spoonful
of flour, strain the milk to
them, and set it over a slow fire.[]
stir it to a consistence, but do not
let it curdle: when cold it may be
spread over any kind of fruit pies.
set the whey one day and night, and
skim it till a sufficient quantity is
obtained. then boil it, and pour it
into a pan or two of cold water. as
the cream rises, skim it till no more
comes, and then churn it. where
new-milk cheese is made daily, whey
butter for common and present use
may be made to advantage.
cream cheese. to make this
article, put into a pan five quarts of
strippings, that is, the last of the
milk, with two spoonfuls of rennet.
when the curd is come, strike it
down two or three times with the
skimming dish just to break it. let
it stand two hours, then spread a
cheese cloth on a sieve, lay the curd
on it, and let the whey drain. break
the curd a little with the hand, and
put it into a vat with a two-pound
weight upon it. let it stand twelve
hours, take it out, and bind a fillet
round. turn it every day till dry,
from one board to another; cover
them with nettles or clean dock-leaves,
and lay them between two
pewter plates to ripen. if the weather
be warm, the cheese will be
ready in three weeks.—another way.
prepare a kettle of boiling water,
put five quarts of new milk into a
pan, five pints of cold water, and
five of hot. when of a proper heat,
put in as much rennet as will bring
it in twenty minutes, likewise a bit
of sugar. when the curd is come,
strike the skimmer three or four
times down, and leave it on the curd.
in an hour or two lade it into the vat
without touching it; put a two-pound
weight on it when the whey
has run from it, and the vat is full.—to
make another sort of cream
cheese, put as much salt to three
pints of raw cream as will season it.
stir it well, lay a cheese cloth several
times folded at the bottom of a
sieve, and pour the curd upon it.
when it hardens, cover it with nettles
on a pewter plate.—what is
called rush cream cheese is made
as follows. to a quart of fresh
cream put a pint of new milk, warm
enough to give the cream a proper
degree of warmth; then add a little
sugar and rennet. set it near the
fire till the curd comes; fill a vat
made in the form of a brick, of wheat
straw or rushes sewed together.
have ready a square of straw or
rushes sewed flat, to rest the vat on,
and another to cover it; the vat being
open at top and bottom. next
day take it out, change it often in
order to ripen, and lay a half pound
weight upon it.—another way. take
a pint of very thick sour cream from
the top of the pan for gathering butter,
lay a napkin on two plates, and
pour half into each. let them stand
twelve hours, then put them on a
fresh wet napkin in one plate, and
cover with the same. repeat this
every twelve hours, till the cheese
begins to look dry. then ripen it
with nut leaves, and it will be ready
in ten days. fresh nettles, or two
pewter plates, will ripen cream
cheese very well.
cream pudding. slice the
crumb of a penny loaf into a quart
of cream, scald it over the fire, and
break it with a spoon. add to it
six eggs, with three of the whites
only, half a pound of fine raisins, a
quarter of a pound of sugar, a little
rose water and nutmeg. beat it all
up together, stir in a little marrow
if approved, and bake it in a dish
with paste.
creams. to make an excellent
cream, boil half a pint of cream and
half a pint of milk with two bay
leaves, a bit of lemon peel, a few
almonds beaten to paste, with a drop
of water, a little sugar, orange flower
water, and a tea-spoonful of flour
rubbed down with a little cold milk.
when the cream is cold, add a little
lemon juice, and serve it up in cups
or lemonade glasses.—for a superior[]
article, whip up three quarters of a
pint of very rich cream to a strong
froth, with some finely-scraped lemon
peel, a squeeze of the juice,
half a glass of sweet wine, and sugar
to make it pleasant, but not too
sweet. lay it on a sieve or in a form,
next day put it on a dish, and ornament
it with very light puff paste
biscuits, made in tin shapes the
length of a finger, and about two
thick. fine sugar may be sifted
over, or it may be glazed with a little
isinglass. macaroons may be
used to line the edges of the dish.
cress vinegar. dry and
pound half an ounce of the seed of
garden cresses, pour upon it a quart
of the best vinegar, and let it steep
ten days, shaking it up every day.
being strongly flavoured with the
cresses, it is suitable for salads and
cold meat. celery vinegar is made
in the same manner.
crickets. the fume of charcoal
will drive them away: or a little
white arsenic mixed with a roasted
apple, and put into the holes and
cracks where the crickets are, will
effectually destroy them. scotch
snuff dusted upon the holes where
they come out, will also have the
same effect.
crimp cod. boil a handful of
salt in a gallon of pump water, and
skim it clean. cut a fresh cod into
slices an inch thick, and boil it briskly
in the brine a few minutes; take
the slices out very carefully, and lay
them on a fish plate to drain. dry
and flour them, and lay them at a
distance upon a clear fire to broil.
serve with lobster or shrimp sauce.
crimp salmon. when the
salmon is scaled and cleaned, take
off the head and tail, and cut the
body through into large slices.
throw them into a pan of pump water,
sprinkle on a handful of bay
salt, stir it about, and then take out
the fish. set on a deep stewpan,
boil the head and tail whole, put in
some salt, but no vinegar. when
they have boiled ten minutes, skim
the water clean, and put in the slices.
when boiled enough, lay the head
and tail in the dish, and the slices
round; or either part may be dressed
separately.
crisp parsley. pick and wash
some young parsley, shake it in a
dry cloth to drain the water from it,
spread it on a sheet of white paper,
in a dutch oven before the fire, and
turn it frequently until it is quite
crisp. this is a much better way
of preparing it than by frying, which
is seldom well done; and it will
serve as a neat garnish for fish or
lamb chops.
cross buns. warm before the
fire two pounds and a half of fine
flour; add half a pound of sifted
loaf sugar, some coriander seeds,
cinnamon and mace finely pounded.
melt half a pound of butter in half
a pint of milk; after it has cooled,
stir in three table-spoonfuls of thick
yeast, and a little salt. work the
whole into a paste, make it into buns,
and cut a cross on the top. put
them on a tin to rise before the fire,
brush them over with warm milk,
and bake in a moderate oven.
crows. these birds are extremely
useful to the farmer, in devouring
multitudes of locusts, caterpillars,
and other insects, which are
highly injurious to the crops; but
at certain seasons they have become
so numerous, and committed such
depredations on the corn fields, that
an act of parliament has been passed
for their destruction. the most
successful method is to prepare a
kind of table between the branches
of a large tree, with some carrion
and other meat, till the crows are
accustomed to resort to the place
for food. afterwards the meat may
be poisoned; and the birds still
feeding on it, will be destroyed. the
drug called nux vomica is best adapted
to the purpose.
crumpets. warm before the
fire two pounds of fine flour, with a[]
little salt, and mix it with warm milk
and water till it becomes stiff. work
up three eggs with three spoonfuls
of thick yeast, and a cupful of warm
milk and water; put it to the batter,
and beat them well together in
a large bowl, with as much milk and
water as will make the batter thick.
set it before the fire to rise, and
cover it close. set on the fryingpan,
rub it over with a bit of butter
tied up in muslin, and pour in as
much batter at a time as is sufficient
for one crumpet. let it bake
slowly till it comes to a pale yellow;
and when cold, the crumpets may
be toasted and buttered.
cucumbers. the best way of
cultivating this delicious vegetable
is as follows. when the plants have
been raised on a moderate hot bed,
without forcing them too much, they
should be set in the open ground
against a south wall in the latter end
of may, and trained upon the wall
like a fruit tree. when they have
run up about five feet, they will send
forth blossoms, and the fruit will
soon appear. cucumbers of the
slender prickly sort are to be preferred,
and they should not be watered
too much while growing, as it
will injure the fruit. the flesh of
cucumbers raised in this way, will
be thicker and firmer, and the flavour
more delicious, than those
planted in the usual manner, where
the runners are suffered to trail upon
the ground. melons may also be
treated in the same manner, and the
quality of both will be greatly improved.—when
cucumbers are to
be prepared for the table, pare and
score them in several rows, that
they may appear as if slightly chopped.
add some young onions, pepper
and salt, a glass of white wine,
the juice of a lemon, and some vinegar.
or cut them in thin slices,
with pepper, salt, vinegar, and sliced
onions. or send them to table whole,
with a sliced onion in a saucer.
cucumber ketchup. pare
some large old cucumbers, cut them
in slices, and mash them; add some
salt, and let them stand till the next
day. drain off the liquor, boil it
with lemon peel, mace, cloves,
horse-radish, shalots, white pepper,
and ginger. strain it; and when
cold put it into bottles, with the
mace, cloves and peppercorns, but
not the rest. a little of this ketchup
will give an agreeable taste to almost
any kind of gravy sauce.
cucumber vinegar. pare
and slice fifteen large cucumbers,
and put them into a stone jar, with
three pints of vinegar, four large
onions sliced, two or three shalots,
a little garlic, two large spoonfuls
of salt, three tea-spoonfuls of pepper,
and half a tea-spoonful of cayenne.
keep the vinegar in small
bottles, to add to sallad, or to eat
with meat.
cullis. to make cullis for ragouts,
cut in pieces two pounds of
lean veal, and two ounces of ham.
add two cloves, a little nutmeg and
mace, some parsley roots, two carrots
sliced, some shalots, and two
bay leaves. put them into an earthen
jar on a hot hearth, or in a kettle
of boiling water. cover them
close, let them simmer for half an
hour, observing that they do not
burn; then put in beef broth, stew
it, and strain it off.
cumberland pudding. to
make what is called the duke of
cumberland's pudding, mix six ounces
of grated bread, the same quantity
of currants well cleaned and
picked, the same of beef suet finely
shred, the same of chopped apples,
and also of lump sugar. add six
eggs, half a grated nutmeg, a dust
of salt, and the rind of a lemon
minced as fine as possible; also a
large spoonful each of citron, orange,
and lemon cut thin. mix them thoroughly
together, put the whole into
a basin, cover it close with a floured[]
cloth, and boil it three hours. serve
it with pudding sauce, add the juice
of half a lemon, boiled together.
curd pudding. rub the curd
of two gallons of milk well drained
through a sieve. mix it with six
eggs, a little cream, two spoonfuls
of orange-flower water, half a nutmeg,
flour and crumbs of bread each
three spoonfuls, currants and raisins
half a pound of each. boil the pudding
an hour in a thick well-floured
cloth.
curd puffs. turn two quarts
of milk to curd, press the whey from
it, rub it through a sieve, and mix
four ounces of butter, the crumb of
a penny loaf, two spoonfuls of cream,
half a nutmeg, a little sugar, and two
spoonfuls of white wine. butter
some small cups or pattipans, and
fill them three parts. orange-flower
water is an improvement. bake the
puffs with care, and serve with sweet
sauce in a boat.
curd star. set on the fire a
quart of new milk, with two or three
blades of mace; and when ready to
boil, put to it the yolks and whites
of nine eggs well beaten, and as
much salt as will lie upon a six-pence.
let it boil till the whey is
clear; then drain it in a thin cloth,
or hair sieve. season it with sugar,
and a little cinnamon, rose water,
orange-flower water, or white wine.
put it into a star form, and let it
stand some hours before it be turned
into a dish: then pour round it some
thick cream or custard.
curds and cream. put
three or four pints of milk into a pan
a little warm, and then add rennet
or gallina. when the curd is come,
lade it with a saucer into an earthen
shape perforated, of any form you
please. fill it up as the whey drains
off, without breaking or pressing the
curd. if turned only two hours before
wanted, it is very light; but
those who like it harder may have
it so, by making it earlier, and
squeezing it. cream, milk, or a whip
of cream, sugar, wine, and lemon,
may be put into the dish, or into a
glass bowl, to serve with the curd.—another
way is to warm four
quarts of new milk, and add a pint
or more of buttermilk strained, according
to its sourness. keep the
pan covered till the curd be sufficiently
firm to cut, three or four times
across with a saucer, as the whey
leaves it. put it into a shape, and
fill up until it be solid enough to take
the form. serve with plain cream,
or mixed with sugar, wine and lemon.
curds and whey. according
to the italian method, a more
delicate and tender curd is made
without the use of common rennet.
take a number of the rough coats
that line the gizzards of turkeys and
fowls, clean them from the pebbles
they contain, rub them well with
salt, and hang them up to dry.
when to be used, break off some
bits of the skin, and pour on some
boiling water. in eight or nine hours
the liquor may be used as other
rennet.
curing butter. it is well
known, that butter as it is generally
cured, does not keep for any length
of time, without spoiling or becoming
rancid. the butter with which
london is supplied, may be seen at
every cheesemonger's in the greatest
variety of colour and quality; and
it is too often the case, that even the
worst butter is compounded with
better sorts, in order to procure a
sale. these practices ought to be
discountenanced, and no butter permitted
to be sold but such as is of
the best quality when fresh, and well
cured when salted, as there is hardly
any article more capable of exciting
disgust than bad butter. to remedy
this evil, the following process is
recommended, in preparing butter
for the firkin. reduce separately
to fine powder in a dry mortar, two[]
pounds of the whitest common salt,
one pound of saltpetre, and one
pound of lump sugar. sift these
ingredients one upon another, on
two sheets of paper joined together,
and then mix them well with the
hands, or with a spatula. preserve
the whole in a covered jar, placed
in a dry situation. when required
to be used, one ounce of this composition
is to be proportioned to
every pound of butter, and the whole
is to be well worked into the mass.
the butter may then be put into pots
or casks in the usual way. the
above method is practised in many
parts of scotland, and is found to
preserve the butter much better than
by using common salt alone. any
housekeeper can make the experiment,
by proportioning the ingredients
to the quantity of butter; and
the difference between the two will
readily be perceived. butter cured
with this mixture appears of a rich
marrowy consistency and fine colour,
and never acquires a brittle
hardness, nor tastes salt, as the
other is apt to do. it should be
allowed to stand three weeks or a
month before it is used, and will
keep for two or three years, without
sustaining the slightest injury. butter
made in vessels or troughs lined
with lead, or in glazed earthenware
pans, which glaze is principally
composed of lead, is too apt to be
contaminated by particles of that
deleterious metal. it is better therefore
to use tinned vessels for mixing
the preservative with the butter, and
to pack it either in wooden casks,
or in jars of the vauxhall ware,
which being vitrified throughout, require
no inside glazing.
curing hams. when hams
are to be cured, they should hang
a day or two; then sprinkle them
with a little salt, and drain them
another day. pound an ounce and
a half of saltpetre, the same quantity
of bay salt, half an ounce of sal-prunelle,
and a pound of the coarsest
sugar. mix these well, and rub them
into each ham every day for four
days, and turn it. if a small one,
turn it every day for three weeks:
if a large one, a week longer, but it
should not be rubbed after four
days. before it is dried, drain and
cover it with bran, and smoke it ten
days.—or choose the leg of a hog
that is fat and well fed, and hang it
up a day or two. if large, put to
it a pound of bay salt, four ounces
of saltpetre, a pound of the
coarsest sugar, and a handful of
common salt, all in fine powder,
and rub the mixture well into the
ham. lay the rind downwards, and
cover the fleshy part with the salts.
baste it frequently with the pickle,
and turn it every day for a month.
drain and throw bran over it, then
hang it in a chimney where wood is
burnt, and turn it now and then for
ten days.—another way is, to hang
up the ham, and sprinkle it with salt,
and then to rub it daily with the following
mixture. half a pound of
common salt, the same of bay salt,
two ounces of saltpetre, and two ounces
of black pepper, incorporated
with a pound and a half of treacle.
turn it twice a day in the pickle for
three weeks; then lay it into a pail
of water for one night, wipe it quite
dry, and smoke it two or three
weeks.—to give hams a high flavour,
let them hang three days, when
the weather will permit. mix an
ounce of saltpetre with a quarter of
a pound of bay salt, the same quantity
of common salt, and also of
coarse sugar, and a quart of strong
beer. boil them together, pour the
liquor immediately upon the ham,
and turn it twice a day in the pickle
for three weeks. an ounce of
black pepper, and the same quantity
of allspice, in fine powder, added to
the above will give a still higher flavour.
wipe and cover it with bran,
smoke it three or four weeks; and
if there be a strong fire, it should be
sewed up in a coarse wrapper.—to[]
give a ham a still higher flavour,
sprinkle it with salt, after it has
hung two or three days, and let it
drain. make a pickle of a quart of
strong beer, half a pound of treacle,
an ounce of coriander seed, two
ounces of juniper berries, an ounce
of pepper, the same quantity of allspice,
an ounce of saltpetre, half an
ounce of sal-prunelle, a handful of
common salt, and a head of shalot,
all pounded or cut fine. boil these
together for a few minutes, and pour
them over the ham. this quantity
is sufficient for a ham of ten pounds.
rub and turn it every day for a fortnight;
then sew it up in a thin linen
bag, and smoke it three weeks.
drain it from the pickle, and rub it
in bran, before drying. in all cases
it is best to lay on a sufficient quantity
of salt at first, than to add
more afterwards, for this will make
the ham salt and hard. when it
has lain in pickle a few days, it
would be advantageous to boil and
skim the brine, and pour it on again
when cold. bacon, pig's face, and
other articles may be treated in the
same manner.
currant cream. strip and
bruise some ripe currants, strain
them through a fine sieve, and sweeten
the juice with refined sugar. beat
up equal quantities of juice and
cream, and as the froth rises put it
into glasses.
currant fritters. thicken
half a pint of ale with flour, and add
some currants. beat it up quick,
make the lard boil in the frying-pan,
and put in a large spoonful of the
batter at a time, which is sufficient
for one fritter.
currant gruel. make a
pint of water gruel, strain and boil
it with a table-spoonful of clean currants
till they are quite plump. add
a little nutmeg and sugar, and a
glass of sweet wine. this gruel is
proper for children, or persons of a
costive habit.
currant jam. whether it be
made of black, red, or white currants,
let the fruit be very ripe. pick
it clean from the stalks, and bruise
it. to every pound put three quarters
of a pound of loaf sugar, stir it
well, and boil it half an hour.
currant jelly. strip the
fruit, whether red or black, and put
them into a stone jar, to boil on a
hot hearth, or over the fire in a
saucepan of water. strain off the
liquor, and to every pint add a pound
of loaf sugar in large lumps. put
the whole into a china or stone jar,
till nearly dissolved; then put it into
a preserving pan, and skim it while
simmering on the fire. when it will
turn to jelly on a plate, keep it in
small jars or glasses.
currant pie. put a paste
round the dish, fill it with fruit and
good moist sugar, add a little water,
and cover it with paste. place a
tea-cup in the dish, bottom upwards,
to prevent the juice from boiling
over. baked currants are better
mixed with raspberries or damsons.
currant sauce. to make
the old sauce for venison, boil an
ounce of dried currants in half a
pint of water a few minutes. then
add a small tea-cupful of bread
crumbs, six cloves, a glass of port
wine, and a bit of butter. stir it
till the whole is smooth.
currant shrub. strip some
white currants, and prepare them in
a jar as for jelly. strain the juice,
of which put two quarts to one gallon
of rum, and two pounds of lump
sugar. strain the whole through a
jelly bag.
currant wine. to every
three pints of fruit, carefully picked
and bruised, add one quart of water.
in twenty-four hours strain the
liquor, and put to every quart a
pound of good lisbon sugar. if for
white currants use lump sugar. it is
best to put the whole into a large
pan; and when in three or four days
the scum rises, take that off before
the liquor be put into the barrel.[]
those who make from their own
gardens, may not have fruit sufficient
to fill the barrel at once; but
the wine will not be hurt by being
made in the pan at different times,
in the above proportions, and added
as the fruit ripens; but it must be
gathered in dry weather, and an account
taken of what is put in each
time.—another way. put five quarts
of currants, and a pint of raspberries,
to every two gallons of water.
let them soak all night, then squeeze
and break them well. next day rub
them well on a fine wire sieve, till
all the juice is obtained, and wash
the skins again with some of the
liquor. to every gallon put four
pounds of good lisbon sugar, tun it
immediately, lay the bung lightly on,
and leave it to ferment itself. in
two or three days put a bottle of
brandy to every four gallons, bung
it close, but leave the vent peg out
a few days. keep it three years
in the cask, and it will be a fine
agreeable wine; four years would
make it still better.—black currant
wine is made as follows. to every
three quarts of juice add the same
quantity of water, and to every three
quarts of the liquor put three pounds
of good moist sugar. tun it into a
cask, reserving a little for filling up.
set the cask in a warm dry room,
and the liquor will ferment of itself.
when the fermentation is over, take
off the scum, and fill up with the
reserved liquor, allowing three bottles
of brandy to forty quarts of wine.
bung it close for nine months, then
bottle it; drain the thick part through
a jelly bag, till that also be clear and
fit for bottling. the wine should
then be kept ten or twelve months.
curries. cut fowls or rabbits
into joints; veal, lamb or sweetbreads
into small pieces. put four
ounces of butter into a stewpan;
when melted, put in the meat, and
two sliced onions. stew them to a
nice brown, add half a pint of broth,
and let it simmer twenty minutes.
mix smooth in a basin one table-spoonful
of currie powder, one of
flour, and a tea-spoonful of salt,
with a little cold water. put the
paste into the stewpan, shake it well
about till it boils, and let it simmer
twenty minutes longer. just before
it is dished up, squeeze in the juice
of half a lemon, and add a good table-spoonful
of melted butter.
currie balls. take some
bread crumbs, the yolk of an egg
boiled hard, and a bit of fresh butter
about half the size; beat them
together in a mortar, season with a
little currie powder, roll the paste
into small balls, and boil them two
or three minutes. these will serve
for mock turtle, veal, poultry, and
made dishes.
currie of cod. this should
be made of sliced cod, that has either
been crimped, or sprinkled with
salt for a day, to make it firm. fry
it of a fine brown with onions, and
stew it with a good white gravy, a
little currie powder, a bit of butter
and flour, three or four spoonfuls of
rich cream, salt, and cayenne, if the
powder be not hot enough.
currie of lobsters. take
them from the shells, lay them into
a pan with a small piece of mace,
three or four spoonfuls of veal gravy,
and four of cream. rub smooth one
or two tea-spoonfuls of currie powder,
a tea-spoonful of flour, and an
ounce of butter. simmer them together
an hour, squeeze in half a
lemon, and add a little salt. currie
of prawns is made in the same
way.
currie powder. dry and
reduce the following articles to a
fine powder. three ounces of coriander
seed, three ounces of turmeric,
one ounce of black pepper, and
one of ginger; half an ounce of
lesser cardamoms, and a quarter of
an ounce each of cinnamon, cummin
seed, and cayenne. thoroughly
pound and mix them together, and
keep it in a well-stopped bottle.[]
currie sauce. stir a small
quantity of currie powder in some
gravy, melted butter, or onion sauce.
this must be done by degrees, according
to the taste, taking care not
to put in too much of the currie
powder.
currie soup. cut four pounds
of a breast of veal into small pieces,
put the trimmings into a stewpan
with two quarts of water, twelve
peppercorns, and the same of allspice.
when it boils, skim it clean;
and after boiling an hour and a half,
strain it off. while it is boiling, fry
the bits of veal in butter, with four
onions. when they are done, add
the broth to them, and put it on the
fire. let it simmer half an hour,
then mix two spoonfuls of currie
powder, and the same of flour, with
a little cold water and a tea-spoonful
of salt, and add these to the
soup. simmer it gently till the veal
is quite tender, and it is ready. or
bone a couple of fowls or rabbits,
and stew them in the same manner.
instead of black pepper and allspice,
a bruised shalot may be added, with
some mace and ginger.
custards. to make a cheap
and excellent custard, boil three
pints of new milk with a bit of lemon
peel, a bit of cinnamon, two or three
bay leaves, and sweeten it. meanwhile
rub down smooth a large spoonful
of rice flour in a cup of cold
milk, and mix with it the yolks of
two eggs well beaten. take a basin
of the boiling milk and mix with
the cold, then pour it to the boiling,
stirring it one way till it begin to
thicken, and is just going to boil
up; then pour it into a pan, stir it
some time, add a large spoonful of
peach water, two spoonfuls of brandy,
or a little ratafia. marbles boiled
in custard, or any thing likely to
burn, will prevent it from catching
if shaked about in the saucepan.—to
make a richer custard, boil a pint
of milk with lemon peel and cinnamon.
mix a pint of cream, and the
yolks of five eggs well beaten. when
the milk tastes of the seasoning,
sweeten it enough for the whole;
pour into the cream, stirring it well;
then give the custard a simmer, till
it come to a proper thickness. stir
it wholly one way, season it as above,
but do not let it boil. if the custard
is to be very rich, add a quart of
cream to the eggs instead of milk.
custard paste. six ounces
of butter, three spoonfuls of cream,
the yolks of two eggs, and half a
pound of flour, are to be mixed well
together. let it stand a quarter of
an hour, work it well, and roll it out
thin.
custard pudding. mix by
degrees a pint of good milk with a
large spoonful of flour, the yolks of
five eggs, some orange-flower water,
and a little pounded cinnamon. butter
a bason that will just hold it,
pour in the batter, and tie a floured
cloth over. put it in when the water
boils, turn it about a few minutes
to prevent the egg settling on one
side, and half an hour will boil it.
put currant jelly over the pudding,
and serve it with sweet sauce.
cutlets maintenon. cut
slices of veal three quarters of an
inch thick, beat them with a rolling-pin,
and wet them on both sides with
egg. dip them into a seasoning of
bread crumbs, parsley, thyme, knotted
marjoram, pepper, salt, and a
little grated nutmeg. then put them
into white papers folded over, and
broil them. have ready some melted
butter in a boat, with a little mushroom
ketchup.—another way is to
fry the cutlets, after they have been
prepared as above. dredge a little
flour into the pan, and add a piece
of butter; brown it, pour in a little
boiling water, and boil it quick.
season with pepper, salt, and ketchup,
and pour over them.—or, prepare
as before, and dress the cutlets
in a dutch oven. pour over
them melted butter and mushrooms.
neck steaks especially are good[]
broiled, after being seasoned with
pepper and salt; and in this way
they do not require any herbs.
cutting glass. if glass be
held in one hand under water, and
a pair of scissors in the other, it
may be cut like brown paper; or if
a red hot tobacco pipe be brought
in contact with the edge of the glass,
and afterwards traced on any part
of it, the crack will follow the edge
of the pipe.
cutting of teeth. great
care is required in feeding young
children during the time of teething.
they often cry as if disgusted with
food, when it is chiefly owing to the
pain occasioned by the edge of a
silver or metal spoon pressing on
their tender gums. the spoon ought
to be of ivory, bone, or wood, with
the edges round and smooth, and
care should be taken to keep it sweet
and clean. at this period a moderate
looseness, and a copious flow
of saliva, are favourable symptoms.
with a view to promote the latter,
the child should be suffered to gnaw
such substances as tend to mollify
the gums, and by their pressure to
facilitate the appearance of the teeth.
a piece of liquorice or marshmallow
root will be serviceable, or the gums
may be softened and relaxed by
rubbing them with honey or sweet
oil.
dairy. in a publication intended
for general usefulness, the management
of the dairy, the source of
so many comforts, demands some
attention, in addition to the information
conveyed under various other
articles, connected with this interesting
part of female economy. a
dairy house then ought to be so situated
that the windows or lattices
may front the north, and it should
at all times be kept perfectly cool
and clean. lattices are preferable
to glazed lights, as they admit a free
circulation of air; and if too much
wind draws in, oiled paper may be
pasted over the lattice, or a frame
constructed so as to slide backwards
and forwards at pleasure. dairies
cannot be kept too cool in the summer:
they ought therefore to be
erected, if possible, near a spring of
running water. if a pump can be
fixed in the place, or a stream of
water conveyed through it, it will
tend to preserve a continual freshness
and purity of the air. the floor
should be neatly paved with red
brick, or smooth stone, and laid with
a proper descent, so that no water
may stagnate: it should be well
washed every day, and all the utensils
kept with the strictest regard to
cleanliness. neither the cheese, rennet,
or cheesepress, must be suffered
to contract any taint; nor should
the churns be scalded in the dairy,
as the steam arising from the hot
water tends greatly to injure the
milk. the utensils of the dairy
should all be made of wood: lead,
copper, and brass are poisonous,
and cast iron gives a disagreeable
taste to the productions of the dairy.
milk leads in particular should be
utterly abolished, and well-glazed
earthen pans used in their stead.
sour milk has a corroding tendency,
and the well known effects of the
poison of lead are, bodily debility,
palsy, and death. the best of all
milk vessels are flat wooden trays
about three inches deep, and wide
enough to contain a full gallon of
milk. these may be kept perfectly
clean with good care, and washing
and scalding them well with salt and
water. as soon as the operation of[]
churning is performed, the butter
should be washed immediately in several
waters, till thoroughly cleansed
from the milk, which should be forced
out with a flat wooden ladle, or
skimming dish, provided with a short
handle. this should be quickly performed,
with as little working of the
butter as possible; for if it be too
much beaten and turned, it will become
tough and gluey, which greatly
debases its quality. to beat it up
with the hand is an indelicate practice,
as the butter cannot fail to imbibe
the animal effluvia: a warm
hand especially will soften it, and
make it appear greasy. if the heat
of the weather should render it too
soft to receive the impression of the
mould, it may be put into small vessels,
and allowed to swim in a trough
of cold water, provided the butter
do not come in contact with the water,
which would diminish some of
its best qualities. a little common
salt must be worked up in the butter
at the time of making it, and
care must be taken not to handle it
too much. meat hung in a dairy
will taint the air, and spoil the milk.—see
butter, cheese, churning,
&c.
damp beds. of all other means
of taking cold, damp beds are the
most dangerous, and persons who
keep them in their houses are guilty
of a species of murder, though it unfortunately
happens that no housewife
is willing to acknowledge that
her beds were ever damp. there is
however no other effectual way of
preventing the dreadful effects so
often experienced in this way, than
by keeping the beds in constant use,
or causing them frequently to be
slept in till they are wanted by a
stranger. in inns, where the beds
are used almost every night, nothing
more is necessary than to keep the
rooms well aired, and the linen quite
dry. if a bed be suspected of dampness,
introduce a glass goblet between
the sheets with its bottom upwards,
immediately after the warming
pan is taken out. after a few
minutes, if any moisture adheres to
the inside of the glass, it is a certain
sign that the bed is damp: but if
only a slight steam appears, all is
safe. if a goblet be not at hand, a
looking glass will answer the purpose.
the safest way in all such
cases is to take off the sheets, and
sleep between the blankets.
damp houses. nothing is
more common than for persons to
hazard their lives by inhabiting a
dwelling almost as soon as the plasterer
or the painter has performed
his work, and yet this ought to be
guarded against with the utmost
care. the custom of sitting in a
room lately washed, and before it is
thoroughly dried, is also highly injurious
to health. colds occasioned
by these means often bring on asthmas
and incurable consumptions.
damp walls. when a house
has undergone repairs, the walls are
apt to become damp, as well as when
it has been new built. to prevent
the ill effects, powder some glass
fine, mix it with slacked lime, dry
the mixture well in an iron pot, and
pass it through a flour sieve. then
boil some tar with a little grease
for a quarter of an hour, and make
a cement of the whole together. care
must be taken to prevent any moisture
from mixing with the cement,
which must be used as soon as made.
lay it on the damp part of the wall
like common plaster about a foot
square at a time, or it will quickly
become too hard for use: if the wall
be very wet, a second coating will be
required. common hair mortar may
then be laid on, with the addition of
a little paris plaster, which will prevent
the walls in future from becoming
damp.
damson cheese. pick the
damsons clean, bake them slowly,
till they may be rubbed through a
cullender, leaving nothing but the
skins and stones. boil the pulp and[]
juice three hours over a slow fire,
with some moist sugar, and keep it
stirring to prevent burning. blanch
the kernels, and mix them with the
jam a few minutes before it be taken
off the fire. put it into cups, tie it
down with writing paper dipped in
brandy, and the cheese will keep
several years, if kept in a dry place.
damson pudding. line a
bason with tolerably thin paste, fill
with the fruit, and cover the paste
over it. tie a cloth tight over, and
boil till the fruit is done enough.
damson wine. take a considerable
quantity of damsons and
common plums inclining to ripeness;
slit them in halves, so that the stones
may be taken out, then mash them
gently, and add a little water and
honey. add to every gallon of the
pulp a gallon of spring water, with
a few bay leaves and cloves: boil
the mixture, and add as much sugar
as will sweeten it, skim off the froth,
and let it cool. now press the fruit,
squeezing out the liquid part; strain
all through a fine cloth, and put the
water and juice together in a cask.
having allowed the whole to stand
and ferment for three or four days,
fine it with white sugar, flour, and
whites of eggs. draw it off into
bottles, then cork it well: in twelve
days it will be ripe, and will taste
like weak port, having a flavour of
canary.
damsons preserved. to
keep damsons for winter pies, put
them in small stone jars, or wide-mouthed
bottles; set them up to their
necks in a boiler of cold water, and
scald them. next day, when perfectly
cold, fill up the bottles with
spring water, and close them down.—another
way is to boil one third
as much sugar as fruit over a slow
fire, till the juice adheres to the
fruit, and forms a jam. keep it in
small jars in a dry place. if too
sweet, mix with it some of the fruit
done without sugar.—or choose
some pots of equal size top and bottom,
sufficient to hold eight or nine
pounds each. put in the fruit about
a quarter up, strew in a quarter of
the sugar, then another quantity of
fruit, and so on till all of both are
in. the proportion of sugar is to
be three pounds to nine pounds of
fruit. set the jars in the oven, and
bake the fruit quite through. when
cold, put a piece of clean-scraped
stick into the middle of the jar, and
let the upper part stand above the
top. cover the fruit with writing
paper, and pour melted mutton-suet
over, full half an inch thick. keep
the jars in a cool dry place, and use
the suet as a cover, which may be
drawn up by the stick, if a forked
branch be left to prevent its slipping
out.
davenport fowls. hang
up young fowls for a night. take
the liver, hearts, and tenderest parts
of the gizzards, and shred them
small, with half a handful of young
clary, an anchovy to each fowl, an
onion, and the yolks of four eggs
boiled hard, seasoning the whole
with pepper, salt, and mace. stuff
the fowls with this mixture, and sew
up the vents and necks quite close,
that the water may not get in. boil
them in salt and water till almost
done; then drain them, and put them
into a stewpan with butter enough
to brown them. serve them with
fine melted butter, and a spoonful of
ketchup of either sort, in the dish.
debility. a general relaxation
of the nervous system is the source
of numerous disorders, and requires
a treatment as various as the causes
on which it depends. in general,
gentle heat possesses both stimulating
and strengthening properties,
and this is best communicated by a
warm bath, which instead of relaxing
will invigorate the whole frame.
diet must also be attended to; and
weakly persons should be careful to
eat light and nourishing food, and
plenty of nutricious vegetables. new
laid eggs, soup, strong meat-broth,[]
and shell-fish are also very nourishing.
clothing should be accommodated
to the climate and changes of
weather, so as to preserve as much
as possible a middle temperature
between cold and heat. invalids of
this description require longer and
less disturbed rest than persons in
perfect health and vigour; labour
and exercise adapted to their habits
and strength, a clean but not too soft
bed, an airy and capacious apartment,
and particularly a calm and
composed mind, which last possesses
a most powerful influence in preserving
health and life, for without tranquility,
all other means will be ineffectual.
derbyshire bread. rub
four ounces of butter into four pounds
of flour, add four eggs well beaten,
a pint of milk, and a large spoonful
of yeast. mix them into a paste,
make it into rolls, and let them stand
half an hour to rise before the fire.
put them into the oven, dip them in
milk the next day, and then let them
stand by the fire in a dutch oven
about twenty minutes. the rolls
will then be very good, and keep a
fortnight.
devonshire junket. put
warm milk into a bowl, and turn it
with rennet. then without breaking
the curd, put on the top some scalded
cream, sugar and cinnamon.
diet bread. beat nine eggs,
and add their weight in sifted sugar,
and half as much flour. mix them
well together, grate in the rind of a
lemon, and bake it in a hoop.
diet drink. infuse in five
gallons of small beer, twelve ounces
of red dock-roots, the pith taken out;
three ounces of chicary roots, two
handfuls of sage, balm, brooklime,
and dandelion; two ounces of senna,
two of rhubarb, four ounces of red
saunders, and a few parsley and carraway
seeds. or boil a pound of
the fine raspings of guaiacum, with
six gallons of sweetwort, till reduced
to five; and when it is set to work,
put in the above ingredients. if a
little salt of wormwood be taken with
it, this diet drink will act as a diuretic,
as well as a purgative.
dinners. the first course
for large dinner parties, generally
consists of various soups, fish dressed
many ways, turtle, mock turtle, boiled
meats and stewed: tongue, ham,
bacon, chawls of bacon, boiled turkey
and fowls: rump, sirloin, and
ribs of beef roasted: leg, saddle,
and other roast mutton: roast fillet,
loin, neck, breast, and shoulder of
veal: leg of lamb, loin, fore-quarter,
chine, lamb's head and mince: mutton
stuffed and roasted, steaks variously
prepared, ragouts and fricassees:
meat pies raised, and in dishes:
patties of meat, fish, and fowl:
stewed pigeons, venison, leg of pork,
chine, loin, spare-rib, rabbits, hare,
puddings, boiled and baked: vegetables,
boiled and stewed: calf's
head different ways, pig's feet and
ears different ways.—dishes for the
second course, birds, and game
of all sorts: shell-fish, cold and potted:
collared and potted fish, pickled
ditto, potted birds, ribs of lamb
roasted, brawn, vegetables, stewed
or in sauce: french beans, peas,
asparagus, cauliflower, fricassee,
pickled oysters, spinach, and artichoke
bottoms: stewed celery, sea
kale, fruit tarts, preserved-fruit tarts,
pippins stewed, cheesecakes, various
sorts: a collection of sweet dishes,
creams, jellies, mince pies, and all
the finer sorts of puddings: omlet,
macaroni, oysters in scallops, stewed
or pickled.—for removes of soup
and fish, one or two joints of meat
or fowl are served; and for one
small course, the article suited to
the second must make a part. where
vegetables, fowls, or any other meat
are twice dressed, they add to the
appearance of the table the first time;
and three sweet articles may form
the second appearance, without
greater expence. in some houses,
one dish at a time is sent up with[]
the vegetables, or sauces proper to
it, and this in succession hot and
hot. in others, a course of soups
and fish: then meats and boiled
fowls, turkey, &c. made dishes
and game follow; and lastly, sweet
dishes; but these are not the common
modes. it ought also to be remarked,
that cooks in general do not
think of sending up such articles as
are in the house, unless ordered;
though by so doing, the addition of
something collared or pickled, some
fritters, fried patties, or quick-made
dumplings, would be useful when
there happen to be accidental visitors:
and at all times it is proper to
improve the appearance of the table
rather than let things spoil below,
by which an unnecessary expence
is incurred.—any of the following
articles may be served as a relish,
with the cheese, after dinner. baked
or pickled fish done high, dutch
pickled herrings: sardinias, which
eat like anchovy, but are larger:
anchovies, potted char, ditto lampreys:
potted birds made high, caviare
and sippets of toast: salad,
radishes, french pie, cold butter,
potted cheese, anchovy toast.
distress for rent. in these
days of general complaint and general
distress, when so many families
and individuals are suffering from
the extortions of tax-gatherers, and
the severity of landlords, it is proper
that householders and occupiers
of land should be furnished with a
little information on the subject of
their legal rights and liabilities, in
order to guard against injustice, or
the fatal consequences of illegal proceedings.
it must therefore be observed,
that rent is recoverable by
action of debt at common law; but
the general remedy is distress, by
taking the goods and chattels out of
the possession of the tenant, to procure
satisfaction for rent. a distress
for rent therefore must be made
for nonpayment, or rent in arrears,
and cannot be made on the day in
which the rent becomes due. neither
can distress be made after the
rent has been tendered; or if it be
tendered while the distress is making,
the landlord must deliver up the distress.
any goods or effects that are
damaged by the proceedings of the
landlord, must be made good by
him.—when distress is levied, it
should be for the whole of the rent
in arrears; not a part at one time
and the remainder at another, if there
was at first a sufficiency; but if the
landlord should mistake the value of
the things, he may make a second
distress to supply the deficiency. he
must be careful to demand neither
more nor less than is due; he must
also shew the certainty of the rent,
and when it was due; otherwise the
demand will not be good, nor can he
obtain a remedy.—a landlord may
distrain whatever he finds on the
premises, whether it be the property
of his tenant or not, except such
things as are for the maintenance
and benefit of trade; such as working
tools and implements, sacks of
corn, or meal in a mill. neither fixtures
in a house nor provisions can
be distrained, nor any other article
which cannot be restored in as good
a state as when it was taken; but
wearing apparel may be distrained
when they are not in use. money
out of a bag cannot be distrained,
because it cannot be known again;
but money sealed up in a bag may.
a horse in a cart cannot be distrained,
without also taking the cart; and
if a man be in the cart, these cannot
be taken. a horse bringing goods
to market, goods brought to market
to be sold, goods for exportation on
a wharf or in a warehouse, goods in
the hands of a factor, goods delivered
to a carrier to be conveyed for
hire, wool in a neighbour's barn, are
all considered as goods in the hands
of a third person, and cannot therefore
be distrained by a landlord for
rent. but goods left at an inn or
other place of conveyance, a chaise[]
or horse standing in a stable, though
the property of a third person, may
be distrained for rent. a distress
must not be made after dark, nor on
the sabbath day.—where a landlord
means to distrain for rent, it is not
necessary to demand his rent first,
unless the tenant is on the premises
on the day of payment, and ready to
pay it. but if goods are distrained,
and no cause given for so doing, the
owner may rescue them, if not impounded.
distraining part of the
goods for rent in arrear, in the name
of the whole goods, will be deemed
a lawful seizure. but if distress and
sale be made for rent when it can be
proved that no rent is due or in arrear,
the person so injured may recover
double the value of such goods
distrained, with full costs of suit. if
goods be impounded, though they
have been distrained without a cause,
a tenant cannot touch them, because
they are then in the hands of the
law; but if not impounded or taken
away, he is at liberty to rescue them.—if
distress be made for rent, and
the goods are not replevied within
five days after the distress is made,
and notice left on the premises stating
the cause of such distress, the
person distraining may have the
goods appraised by two persons,
sworn by the constable of the place
for that purpose, and may after such
appraisement sell them to the best
advantage. the rent may then be
taken, including all expences, and
the overplus left in the hands of the
constable for the owner's use. if a
landlord commit an unlawful act or
any other irregularity, in making distress
for rent which is justly due,
the distress itself will not on that
account be deemed unlawful; but
full damages may be demanded by
the injured party, with full costs of
suit; either in an action of trespass,
or on the case. but if full recompense
be tendered to the tenant for
such trespass before the action is
commenced, he is bound to accept it,
or the action will be discharged.—if
a tenant clandestinely remove his
goods, to prevent the landlord from
distraining them for rent, he may seize
the goods within thirty days, wherever
they shall be found; and if not actually
sold previous to the seizure, he
may dispose of them in order to recover
his rent. any tenant or assistant
removing goods to prevent a distress,
is liable to double the value of the
goods, which the landlord may recover
by action at law. if under the
value of fifty pounds, complaint may
be made in writing to two neighbouring
magistrates, who will enforce
the payment by distress, or
commit the offenders to the house of
correction for six months. if any
person after the distress is made,
shall presume to remove the goods
distrained, or take them away from
the person distraining, the party
aggrieved may sue for the injury,
and recover treble costs and damages
against the offender.—a landlord
may not break a lock, nor open a
gate; but if the outer door of the
house be open he may enter, and
break open the inner doors. but
where goods are fraudulently removed,
and locked up to prevent their being
seized, the landlord may break
open every place where they are and
seize them. if in a dwelling house,
an oath must first be made before a
magistrate, that is was suspected the
goods were lodged there. the most
eligible way is to remove the goods
immediately, and to give the tenant
notice where they are removed to;
but it is usual to leave them under
the protection of a person on the
premises for five whole days, after
which it is lawful to sell them. in
making the distress, it is necessary
to give the bailiff a written order for
that purpose, which the landlord
may do himself without any stamp,
only specifying the person's name,
place of abode, and rent in arrears
for which the goods and chattels are
to be seized. after this an inventory[]
is to be made of the articles, a copy
of which is to be given to the tenant,
accompanied with a notice that unless
the arrears of rent and charges
of distress be paid, or the goods replevied
at the expiration of five days
from the day of distress, the said
goods will be appraised and sold according
to law. if the landlord
chooses to indulge the tenant with
a longer time to raise the money, a
memorandum must be taken of the
tenant, stating that possession is
lengthened at his request, or the
landlord will be liable to an action
for exceeding the time of his original
notice.—see tenants.
double rent. if a tenant has
received a written notice, and he refuse
to quit, after such notice has
been regularly served, and will not
give possession at the time required,
he is liable to pay at the rate of
double the annual value of the land
or tenement so detained, for so long
time as the same are detained in his
possession, and the payment may be
recovered by action of debt. or if
the tenant shall give notice of his
intention to quit the premises, and
do not deliver up possession according
to such notice, he is liable to the
payment of double rent, as in the
other case.—the following is the
form of a notice to a tenant to quit,
or to pay double rent. 'mr. a. b.
i hereby give you notice to deliver
up possession and quit, on or before
next michaelmas day, the house and
premises which you now hold of me,
situate in the parish ofin the
county of and in default of
your compliance therewith, i do and
will insist on your paying me for the
same, the yearly rent ofbeing double the annual rent, for
such time as you shall detain the key,
and keep possession, over the said
notice. witness my hand this
day of. c. d. landlord
of the said premises.
witness e. f.'—
if, after notice of double rent be expired,
a single rent is accepted, such
acceptance will prevent the penalty,
until notice is again given, and the
time expired.
down. this valuable part of
goose coating, which contributes so
much to the comfort and even the
luxury of life, comes to maturity when
it begins to fall off of itself; and if
removed too soon, it is liable to be
attacked by worms. lean geese furnish
more than those that are fat, and
the down is more valuable. neither
the feathers nor the down of geese
which have been dead some time are
fit for use: they generally smell bad,
and become matted. none but what
is plucked from living geese, or which
have just been killed, ought to be
exhibited for sale; and in this case
the down should be plucked soon,
or before the geese are entirely cold.
beat a fresh-laid egg, and mix it
with a quarter of a pint of new milk
warmed, but do not heat it after the
egg is put in. add a large spoonful
of capillaire, the same of rose water,
and a little nutmeg scraped. take
it the first and last thing, and it will
be found a fine soft draught for those
who are weakly, or have a cold.—another
remedy. take a handful
of horehound, a handful of rue, a
handful of hyssop, and the same
quantity of ground ivy and of tormentil,
with a small quantity of long
plantain, pennyroyal, and five finger.
boil them in four quarts of
water till reduced to two quarts.
strain it off, then add two pounds
of loaf sugar; simmer it a little, add
a quart of brandy and bottle it for
use. a wine glassful of this to be
taken occasionally.
dried bacon. when two
flitches are to be cured, divide the
hog, cut off the hams, and take out
the chine. it is common to remove
the spare-ribs, but the bacon will be
preserved better from being rusty, if
they are left in. salt the bacon six
days, then drain it from that first[]
pickle: mix a proper quantity of salt
with half a pound of bay-salt, three
ounces of saltpetre, and a pound of
coarse sugar, to each hog. rub the
salts well in, and turn it every day
for a month. drain and smoke it
for a few days, or dry it with bran
or flour, and hang it in the kitchen,
or on a rack suspended from the
ceiling.—good bacon may be known,
if you are going to purchase it, by
the rind being thin, the fat firm, and
of a red tinge, the lean tender, of a
good colour, and adhering to the
bone. if there are yellow streaks in
it, it is going, if not already rusty.
dried cherries. stone six
pounds of kentish cherries, and put
them into a preserving pan with two
pounds of loaf sugar pounded and
strewed among them. simmer them
till they begin to shrivel, then strain
them from the juice, lay them on a
hot hearth or in an oven, when either
is cool enough to dry without baking
them. the same syrup will do
another six pounds of fruit.—to dry
cherries without sugar, stone, and
set them over the fire in a preserving
pan. simmer them in their own liquor,
and shake them in the pan.
put them by in common china dishes:
next day give them another scald,
and when cold put them on sieves to
dry, in an oven moderately warm.
twice heating, an hour each time,
will be sufficient. place them in a
box, with a paper between each layer.—a
superior way of preserving
cherries is to allow one pound of
double-refined sugar to every five
pounds of fruit, after they are
stoned; then to put both into a preserving
pan with very little water,
till they are scalding hot. take the
fruit out immediately and dry them;
return them into the pan again,
strewing the sugar between each layer
of cherries. let it stand to melt,
then set the pan on the fire, and make
it scalding hot as before; take it off,
and repeat this thrice with the sugar.
drain them from the syrup, and lay
them singly to dry on dishes, in the
sun or on a stove. when dry, put
them into a sieve, dip it into a pan
of cold water, and draw it instantly
out again, and pour them on a fine
soft cloth; dry them, and set them
once more in the sun, or on a stove.
keep them in a box, with layers of
white paper, in a dry place. this is
the best way to give plumpness to
the fruit, as well as colour and flavour.
dried haddock. choose
them of two or three pounds weight;
take out the gills, eyes, and entrails,
and remove the blood from the backbone.
wipe them dry, and put some
salt into the bodies and sockets. lay
them on a board for a night, then
hang them up in a dry place, and
after three or four days they will be
fit to eat. skin and rub them with
egg, and strew crumbs over them.
lay them before the fire, baste with
butter till they are quite brown, and
serve with egg sauce.—whitings, if
large, are excellent in this way; and
where there is no regular supply of
fish, it will be found a great convenience.
dried salmon. cut the fish
down, take out the inside and roe.
after scaling it, rub it with common
salt, and let it hang twenty-four
hours to drain. pound three or four
ounces of saltpetre, according to the
size of the fish, two ounces of bay
salt, and two ounces of coarse sugar.
mix them well, rub it into the salmon,
and lay it on a large dish for
two days; then rub it with common
salt, wipe it well after draining, and
in twenty-four hours more it will be
fit to dry. hang it either in a wood
chimney, or in a dry place, keeping
it open with two small sticks.—dried
salmon is broiled in paper, and
only just warmed through. egg
sauce and mashed potatoes may be
eaten with it; or it may be boiled,
especially the part next the head.
an excellent dish of dried salmon
may also be made in the following[]
manner. prepare some eggs boiled
hard and chopped large, pull off
some flakes of the fish, and put them
both into half a pint of thin cream,
with two or three ounces of butter
rubbed in a tea-spoonful of flour.
skim and stir it till boiling hot, make
a wall of mashed potatoes round the
inner edge of a dish, and pour the
above into it.
drink for the sick. pour
a table-spoonful of capillaire, and
the same of good vinegar, into a tumbler
of fresh cold water. tamarinds,
currants, fresh or in jelly, scalded
currants or cranberries, make excellent
drinks; with a little sugar or
not, as most agreeable. or put a
tea-cupful of cranberries into a cup
of water, and mash them. in the
meantime boil two quarts of water
with one large spoonful of oatmeal,
and a bit of lemon peel; then add
the cranberries, and as much fine
lisbon sugar as shall leave a smart
flavour of the fruit. add a quarter
of a pint of sherry, or less, as may
be proper: boil all together for half
an hour, and strain off the drink.
dripping, if carefully preserved,
will baste every thing as well as
butter, except fowls and game; and
for kitchen pies nothing else should
be used. the fat of a neck or loin
of mutton makes a far lighter pudding
than suet.
dripping crust. rub a
pound of clarified dripping into three
pounds of fine flour, and make it into
a paste with cold water. or make
a hot crust with the same quantity,
by melting the dripping in water,
and mixing it hot with the flour.
drop cakes. rub half a pound
of butter into a pound of fine flour;
mix it with half a pound of sugar,
and the same of currants. mix it
into a paste, with two eggs, a large
spoonful of rose water, brandy, and
sweet wine; and put it on plates
ready floured.
dropsy. gentle exercise and
rubbing the parts affected, are highly
proper in this complaint, and the
tepid bath has often procured considerable
relief. the patient ought
to live in a warm dry place, not expose
himself to cold or damp air,
and wear flannel next the skin. vegetable
acids, such as vinegar, the
juice of lemons and oranges, diluted
with water, should be drank in preference
to wine or spirits, either of
which are generally hurtful. the
diet should be light and nourishing,
easy of digestion, and taken in moderation.
horseradish, onions and
garlic, may be used instead of foreign
spices; but tea, coffee, and
punch, are alike improper.
drowning. if a person unfortunately
fall into the water, and
is supposed to be drowned, he should
be carefully undressed as soon as he
is taken out; then laid on a bed or
mattrass in a warm apartment, with
the head and upper part a little raised,
and the nostrils cleaned with a
feather dipped in oil. let the body
be gently rubbed with common salt,
or with flannels dipped in spirits;
the pit of the stomach fomented with
hot brandy, the temples stimulated
with spirits of hartshorn, and bladders
of lukewarm water applied to
different parts of the body, or a
warming-pan wrapped in flannel
gently moved along the back. a
warm bath, gradually increased to
seventy-five degrees, would be highly
proper; or the body may be carried
to a brewhouse, and covered up
with warm grains for an hour or two.
an attempt should be made to inflate
the lungs, either by the help of a pair
of bellows, or a person's blowing
with his mouth through the nostril,
which in the first instance is much
better. if the patient be very young,
or the animation do not appear altogether
suspended, he may be placed
in bed between two persons to
promote natural warmth, or covered
with blankets or warm flannels. stimulating
clysters of warm water and
salt, or six ounces of brandy, should[]
be speedily administered. the means
should be persevered in for several
hours, as there are instances of persons
recovering after all hope was
given up, and they had been abandoned
by their attendants. as soon
as the first symptoms of life are discernible,
care must be taken to cherish
the vital action by the most
gentle and soothing means. fomentations
of aromatic plants may then
be applied to the pit of the stomach,
bladders of warm water placed to
the left side, the soles of the feet
rubbed with salt, and a little white
wine dropped on the tongue. the
patient should then be left in a quiet
state till able to drink a little warm
wine, or tea mixed with a few drops
of vinegar. the absurd practice of
rolling persons on casks, lifting the
feet over the shoulders, and suffering
the head to remain downwards,
in order to discharge the water, has
occasioned the loss of many lives,
as it is now fully and clearly established,
that the respiration being
impeded is in this case the sole cause
of the suspension of life; and which
being restored, the vital functions
soon recover their tone. no attempt
must be made to introduce liquor of
any kind into the mouth, till there
are strong signs of recovery.
ducks. in rearing this species
of poultry, they should be accustomed
to feed and rest in one place, to
prevent their straggling too far to
lay. places near the water to lay
in are advantageous, and these might
consist of small wooden houses, with
a partition in the middle, and a door
at each end. they generally begin
to lay in the month of february.
their eggs should be daily taken
away except one, till they seem inclined
to set, and then they should
be left with a sufficient quantity of
eggs under them. they require no
attention while setting, except to give
them food at the time they come out
to seek it; and water should be
placed at a convenient distance, that
their eggs may not be spoiled by
their long absence in seeking it.
twelve or thirteen eggs will be sufficient.
in an early season it is best
to place them under a hen, that the
ducks may have less time for setting,
for in cold weather they cannot so
well be kept from the water, and
would scarcely have strength to bear
it. they should be placed under
cover, especially in a wet season;
for though water is the natural element
of ducks, yet they are apt to
be killed by the cramp before they
are covered with feathers to defend
them. ducks will eat any thing;
and when to be fatted, they should
have plenty of food, however coarse
it may be, and in three weeks they
will be ready.
duck pie. bone a full-grown
young duck and a fowl. wash and
season them with pepper and salt,
and a small proportion of mace and
allspice in the finest powder. put
the fowl within the duck, and in the
former a calf's tongue, boiled very
tender and peeled. press the whole
close, and draw the legs inwards,
that the body of the fowl may be
quite smooth. the space between
the sides of the crust may be filled
with fine forcemeat, the same as for
savoury pies. bake it in a slow
oven, either in a raised crust or pie
dish, with a thick ornamented crust.
large staffordshire pies are made
as above, but with a goose outwards,
then a turkey, a duck next, then a
fowl; and either tongue, small birds,
or forcemeat in the middle.
duck sauce. put a rich gravy
into the dish, and slice the breast.
cut a lemon, put on it some pepper
and salt, squeeze it on the breast,
and pour a spoonful of gravy over
the meat, before it is sent round.—see
roast duck.
dun birds. roast and baste
them with butter, and sprinkle a little
salt before they are taken up. pour
a good gravy over them, and serve
with shalot sauce in a boat.[]
dunelm of veal. stew a
few small mushrooms in their own
liquor and a bit of butter, a quarter
of an hour. mince them fine, and
put them with their liquor to some
cold minced veal. add a little pepper
and salt, some cream, and a bit of
butter rubbed in less than half a tea-spoonful
of flour. simmer the mince
three or four minutes, and serve it
on thin sippets of bread. cold fowl
may be treated in the same manner.
dutch beef. take a lean
piece of beef, rub it well with treacle
or brown sugar, and let it be turned
often. in three days wipe it, and
salt it with common salt and saltpetre
beaten fine: rub these well in,
and turn it every day for a fortnight.
roll it tight in a coarse cloth, and
press it under a large weight: hang
it to dry in a wood smoke, but turn
it upside down every day. boil it
in pump water, and press it: it will
then grate or cut into shivers, like
dutch beef.
dutch flummery. boil two
ounces of isinglass in a pint and half
of water very gently half an hour;
add a pint of white wine, the juice
of three lemons, and the thin rind of
one. rub a few lumps of sugar on
another lemon to obtain the essence,
and add with them a sufficient quantity
of sugar to sweeten. beat up
the yolks of seven eggs, mix it with
the above, and give them together
one scald. keep the flummery stirring
all the time, pour it into a bason,
stir it till half cold, let it settle,
and then put it into a melon shape.
dutch pudding. melt a
pound of butter in half a pint of
milk; mix it into two pounds of flour,
eight eggs, and four spoonfuls of
yeast. add a pound of currants,
and a quarter of a pound of sugar
beaten and sifted, and bake it an
hour in a quick oven. this is a
very good pudding hot, and equally
so as a cake when cold. if for the
latter, carraways must be used instead
of currants.
dutch rice pudding. soak
four ounces of rice in warm water
half an hour; drain away the water,
put the rice into a stewpan, with
half a pint of milk, and half a stick
of cinnamon, and simmer it till tender.
when cold, add four eggs well
beaten, two ounces of butter melted
in a tea-cupful of cream; and add
three ounces of sugar, a quarter of
a nutmeg, and a good piece of lemon
peel. put a light puffpaste into
a mould or dish, or grated tops and
bottoms, and bake in a quick oven.
dutch waffles. these form
a delicious article in the shape of
puff cakes, which are instantly prepared
and exhibited for sale in stalls
or tents, in the fairs of holland,
where they are eaten hot as they
come from the plate or baking pan,
with fine sugar strewed over them.
mix together three pounds of fine
flour, a dozen eggs, a pound of melted
butter, half a pint of ale, some
milk, and a little yeast. beat it
well, till it forms a thick paste, and
let it stand three or four hours before
the fire to rise. lay it in small
pieces on a hot iron or fryingpan,
with a pair of buttered tongs, till
it is lightly browned. eat the waffles
with fine sugar sifted over, or a
little sack and melted butter.
dyeing. nankeen dye is made
of equal parts of arnetto and common
potash, dissolved in boiling water.
to dye cotton, silk, woollen,
or linen of a beautiful yellow, the
plant called weld, or dyer's weed,
is used for that purpose. blue cloths
dipped in a decoction of it will become
green. the yellow colour of
the dutch pink is obtained from the
juice of the stones and branches of
the weld. black dye is obtained
from a strong decoction of logwood,
copperas, and gum arabic. oak
saw-dust, or the excrescences on the
roots of young oaks, may be used
as a substitute for galls, both in
making ink and black dye.[]
earthenware. an ounce of
dry lean cheese grated fine, and an
equal quantity of quicklime mixed
well together in three ounces of skim
milk, will form a good cement for
any articles of broken earthenware,
when the rendering of the joint visible
is reckoned of no consequence.
a cement of the same nature may be
made of quicklime tempered with
the curd of milk, but the curd should
either be made of whey or buttermilk.
this cement, like the former,
requires to be applied immediately
after it is made, and it will effectually
join any kind of earthenware or
china.
earwigs. these insects are
often destructive in gardens, especially
where carnations, nuts, or filberts,
pears and apples are reared.
their depredations on the flowers
may be prevented by putting the
bowl of a tobacco-pipe on the sticks
which support them, into which they
will creep in the day time, and may
be destroyed. green leaves of elder
laid near fruit trees, or flower roots,
will prevent their approach. large
quantities may be taken by placing
short cuts of reed, bean or wheat
straw, among the branches of fruit
trees, and laying some on the ground
near the root. having committed
their depredations in the night, they
take refuge in these in the day time;
the reed or straw may be taken away
and burnt, and more put in its stead.—if
unfortunately one of these disagreeable
insects have crept into the
ear, from their running so frequently
about our garments, let the afflicted
person lay his head upon a table,
while some friend carefully drop into
the ear a little sweet oil, or oil of
almonds. a drop or two will be
sufficient to destroy the insect, and
remove the pain. an earwig may
be extracted by applying a piece of
apple to the ear, which will entice
the insect to come out.
edgebone of beef. skewer
it up tight, and tie a broad fillet
round it, to keep the skewers in their
places. put it in with plenty of cold
water, and carefully catch the scum
as it rises. when all the scum is
removed, place the boiler on one
side of the fire, to keep simmering
slowly till it is done. a piece weighing
ten pounds will take two hours,
and larger in proportion. the slower
it boils the better it will look, and
the tenderer it will be: if allowed to
boil quick at first, no art can make
it tender afterwards. dress plenty
of carrots, as cold carrots are a general
favourite with cold beef.
eel broth. clean half a pound
of small eels, and set them on the
fire with three pints of water, some
parsley, a slice of onion, and a few
peppercorns. let them simmer till
the eels are broken, and the broth
good. add salt, and strain it off.
the above should make three half
pints of broth, nourishing and good
for weakly persons.
eel pie. cut the eels in lengths
of two or three inches, season with
pepper and salt, and place them in
a dish with some bits of butter, and
a little water. cover the dish with
a paste, and bake it.
eel soup. put three pounds
of small eels to two quarts of water,
a crust of bread, three blades of
mace, some whole pepper, an onion,
and a bunch of sweet herbs. cover
them close, stew till the fish is quite
broken, and then strain it off. toast
some bread, cut it into dice, and
pour the soup on it boiling hot.
part of a carrot may be put in at
first. this soup will be as rich as
if made of meat. a quarter of a
pint of rich cream, with a tea-spoonful
of flour rubbed smooth in it, is
a great improvement.
eggs. in new-laid eggs there
is a small division of the skin at the
end of the shell, which is filled with[]
air, and is perceptible to the eye.
on looking through them against the
sun or a candle, they will be tolerably
clear; but if they shake in the
shell, they are not fresh. another
way to distinguish fresh eggs, is to
put the large end to the tongue; if
it feels warm, it is new and good.
eggs may be bought cheapest in the
spring, when the hens first begin to
lay, before they set: in lent and at
easter they become dear. they may
be preserved fresh for some time by
dipping them in boiling water, and
instantly taking them out, or by oiling
the shell, either of which will
prevent the air from passing through.
they may also be kept on shelves
with small holes to receive one in
each, and be turned every other day;
or close packed in a keg, and covered
with strong lime water. a still
better way of preserving eggs in a
fresh state is to dip them in a solution
of gum-arabic in water, and
then imbed them in powdered charcoal.
the gum-arabic answers the
purpose of a varnish for the eggs,
much better than any resinous gum,
as it can easily be removed by washing
them in water, and is a much
cheaper preparation than any other.
if eggs are greased the oily matter
becomes rancid, and infallibly hastens
the putrefaction of the eggs.
but being varnished with gum water,
and imbedded in charcoal, they
will keep for many years, and may
be removed from one climate to another.
eggs and bacon. lay some
slices of fine streaked bacon in a
clean dish, and toast them before the
fire in a cheese-toaster, turning them
when the upper side is browned; or
if it be wished to have them mellow
and soft, rather than curled and crisp,
parboil the slices before they are
toasted and do them lightly. clear
dripping or lard is to be preferred
to butter for frying the eggs, and be
sure that the fryingpan is quite clean
before it is put in. when the fat is
hot, break two or three eggs into it.
do not turn them; but while they
are frying, keep pouring some of the
fat over them with a spoon. when
the yolk just begins to look white,
which it will in about two minutes,
they are enough, and the white must
not be suffered to lose its transparency.
take up the eggs with a
tin slice, drain the fat from them,
trim them neatly, and send them up
with the bacon round them.
eggs and onions. boil some
eggs hard, take out the yolks whole,
and cut the whites in slices. fry
some onions and mushrooms, put in
the whites, and keep them turning.
pour off the fat, flour the onions,
and add a little gravy. boil them
up, then put in the yolks, with a little
pepper and salt. simmer the
whole about a minute, and serve it
up.
eggs for sallad. boil a
couple of eggs for twelve minutes,
and put them into a bason of cold
water, to render the yolks firm and
hard. rub them through a sieve
with a wooden spoon, and mix them
with a spoonful of water, or fine
double cream, and add two table-spoonfuls
of oil or melted butter.
when these are well mixed, add
by degrees a tea-spoonful of salt,
or powdered lump sugar, and the
same of made mustard. add very
gradually three table-spoonfuls of
vinegar, rub it with the other ingredients
till thoroughly incorporated,
and cut up the white of the egg to
garnish the top of the sallad. let
the sauce remain at the bottom of
the bowl, and do not stir up the sallad
till it is to be eaten. this sauce
is equally good with cold meat, cold
fish, or for cucumbers, celery, and
radishes.
eggs for the sick. eggs
very little boiled or poached, when
taken in small quantities, convey
much nourishment. the yolk only,
when dressed, should be eaten by
invalids. an egg divided, and the[]
yolk and white beaten separately,
then mixed with a glass of wine, will
afford two very wholesome draughts,
and prove lighter than when taken
together. an egg broken into a cup
of tea, or beaten and mixed with a
bason of milk, makes a breakfast
more supporting than tea only.
eggs for turtle. beat in
a mortar three yolks of eggs that
have been boiled hard. make it into
a paste with the yolk of a raw one,
roll it into small balls, and throw
them into boiling water for two minutes
to harden.
egg balls. boil the eggs hard,
and put them in cold water. take
out the yolks, and pound them fine
in a mortar, wetting them with raw
yolks, about one to three. season
them with salt and white pepper,
dry them with flour, and roll them
into small balls, as they swell very
much in boiling. when dressed,
boil them in gravy for a minute.
egg pie. boil twelve eggs hard,
and chop them with one pound of
marrow, or beef suet. season with
a little cinnamon and nutmeg finely
beaten, adding one pound of currants
clean washed and picked, two or
three spoonfuls of cream, a little
sweet wine, and rose water. mix
all together, and fill the pie: when
it is baked, stir in half a pound of
fresh butter, and the juice of a lemon.
egg mince pies. boil six
eggs hard, shred them small, and
double the quantity of shred suet.
then add a pound of currants washed
and picked, or more if the eggs
were large; the peel of one lemon
shred very fine, and the juice; six
spoonfuls of sweet wine, mace, nutmeg,
sugar, a very little salt; orange,
lemon, and citron, candied. cover
the pies with a light paste.
egg sauce. boil the eggs
hard, chop them fine, and put them
into melted butter. if thrown into
cold water after being boiled, the
yolks will become firmer, will be
easier to cut, and the surface be prevented
from turning black. egg
sauce will be found an agreeable accompaniment
to roast fowl, or salt
fish.
egg wine. beat up an egg,
and mix it with a spoonful of cold
water. set on the fire a glass of
white wine, half a glass of water,
with sugar and nutmeg. when it
boils, pour a little of it to the egg
by degrees, till the whole is mixed,
and stir it well. then return the
whole into the saucepan, put it on a
gentle fire, stir it one way for about
a minute. if it boil, or the egg be
stale, it will curdle. the wine may
be made without warming the egg;
it is then lighter on the stomach,
though not so pleasant to the taste.
serve it with toast.
elder. the fœtid smell of the
common elder is such, especially of
the dwarf elder, that if the leaves
and branches be strewed among
cabbage and cauliflower plants, or
turnips, it will secure them from the
ravages of flies and caterpillars;
and if hung on the branches of trees,
it will protect them from the effects
of blight. or if put into the subterraneous
paths of the moles, it
will drive them from the garden. an
infusion of the leaves in water, and
sprinkled over rose-buds and other
flowers, will preserve them from the
depredations of the caterpillar.
elder rob. clear some ripe
elder-berries from the stalks, bake
them in covered jars for two hours,
and squeeze the juice through a
strainer. to four quarts of juice
put one pound of sugar, and stir it
over the fire till reduced to one
quart. when cold, tie it down with
a bladder, and keep it in a dry
place. it is very good for sore
throats and fevers.
elder syrup. pick off the
elder berries when fully ripe, bake
them in a stone jar, strain them
through a coarse sieve, and put the
juice into a clean kettle. to every[]
quart of juice add a pound of fine
soft sugar, boil and skim it well:
when it is clear, pour it into a jar,
cool it, and cover it down. half a
pint of this syrup added to a gallon
of new made wine, will give it a very
rich flavour, or it may be used for
other purposes.
elder wine. pick the berries
from the stalk, and to every quart
allow two quarts of water. boil
them half an hour, run the liquor
and break the fruit through a hair
sieve, and to every quart of juice put
three quarters of a pound of moist
sugar. boil the whole a quarter of
an hour, with some peppercorns,
ginger, and a few cloves. pour it
into a tub, and when of a proper
warmth, into the barrel, with toast
and yeast to work, which there is
more difficulty to make it do than
most other liquors. when it ceases
to hiss, put a quart of brandy to
eight gallons, and stop it up. bottle
it in the spring, or at christmas.—to
make white elder wine, very
much like frontiniac, boil eighteen
pounds of white powder sugar with
six gallons of water, and two whites
of eggs well beaten. skim it clean,
and but in a quarter of a peck of
elder flowers from the tree that bears
white berries, but do not keep them
on the fire. stir it when nearly cold,
and but in six spoonfuls of lemon
juice, four or five spoonfuls of yeast,
and beat it well into the liquor. stir
it every day, put into the cask six
pounds of the best raisins stoned,
and tun the wine. stop it close,
and bottle it in six months. when
well kept, this wine will pass for
frontiniac.
elder flower wine. to
six gallons of spring water put six
pounds of sun raisins cut small, and
a dozen pounds of fine sugar: boil
the whole together for about an hour
and a half. when the liquor is cold,
put in half a peck of ripe elder
flowers, with about a gill of lemon
juice, and half the quantity of ale
yeast. cover it up, and after standing
three days, strain it off. pour
it into a cask that is quite clean,
and that will hold it with ease. when
this is done, add a quart of rhenish
wine to every gallon of liquor, and
let the bung be lightly put in for
twelve or fourteen days. then stop
it down fast, and put it in a cool dry
place for four or five months, till it
is quite settled and fine: then bottle
it off.
english bamboo. about
the middle of may, cut some large
young shoots of elder; strip off the
outward peel, and soak them all
night in some strong salt and water.
dry them separately in a cloth, and
have in readiness the following pickle.
to a quart of vinegar put an
ounce of white pepper, an ounce of
sliced ginger, a little mace and pimento,
all boiled together. put the
elder shoots into a stone jar, pour
on the liquor boiling hot, stop it up
close, and set it by the fire two hours,
turning the jar often to keep it hot.
if not green when cold, strain off
the liquor, pour it on boiling again,
and keep it hot as before.—or if it
be intended to make indian pickle,
the addition of these shoots will be
found to be a great improvement.
in this case it will only be necessary
to pour boiling vinegar and mustard
seed on them, and to keep them till
the jar of pickles shall be ready to
receive them. the cluster of elder
flowers before it opens, makes a delicious
pickle to eat with boiled mutton.
it is prepared by only pouring
vinegar over the flowers.
english brandy. english
or british brandy may be made in
smaller quantities, according to the
following proportions. to sixty gallons
of clear rectified spirits, put
one pound of sweet spirit of nitre,
one pound of cassia buds ground,
one pound of bitter almond meal,
(the cassia and almond meal to be
mixed together before they are put
to the spirits) two ounces of sliced[]
orris root, and about thirty or forty
prune stones pounded. shake the
whole well together, two or three
times a day, for three days or more.
let them settle, then pour in one
gallon of the best wine vinegar; and
add to every four gallons, one gallon
of foreign brandy.
take gooseberries before they are
ripe, crush them with a mallet in
a wooden bowl; and to every gallon
of fruit, put a gallon of water. let
it stand two days, stirring it well.
squeeze the mixture with the hands
through a hop sieve, then measure
the liquor, and to every gallon put
three pounds and a half of loaf sugar.
mix it well in the tub, and let
it stand one day. put a bottle of
the best brandy into the cask, which
leave open five or six weeks, taking
off the scum as it rises. then stop
it up, and let it stand one year in
the barrel before it is bottled.
english sherry. boil thirty
pounds of lump sugar in ten gallons
of water, and clear it of the scum.
when cold, put a quart of new alewort
to every gallon of liquor, and
let it work in the tub a day or two.
then put it into a cask with a pound
of sugar candy, six pounds of fine
raisins, a pint of brandy, and two
ounces of isinglass. when the fermentation
is over, stop it close: let
it stand eight months, rack it off,
and add a little more brandy. return
it to the cask again, and let it
stand four months before it is bottled.
english wines. during the
high price of foreign wine, home-made
wines will be found particularly
useful; and though sugar is dear,
they may be prepared at a quarter
of the expence. if carefully made,
and kept three or four years, a proportionable
strength being given,
they would answer the purpose of
foreign wines for health, and cause
a very considerable reduction in the
expenditure. sugar and water are
the principal basis of home-made
wine; and when these require to be
boiled, it is proper to beat up the
whites of eggs to a froth, and mix
them with the water when cold, in
the proportion of one egg to a gallon.
when the sugar and water are
boiled, the liquor should be cooled
quickly; and if not for wines that
require fermenting, it may be put
into the cask when cold. if the
wine is to be fermented, the yeast
should be put into it when it is milk-warm;
but must not be left more
than two nights to ferment, before
it is put into the cask. particular
care should be taken to have the
cask sweet and dry, and washed inside
with a little brandy, before the
wine is tunned, but it should not be
bunged up close till it has done fermenting.
after standing three or
four months, it will be necessary to
taste the wine, to know whether it be
fit to draw off. if not sweet enough,
some sugar should be added, or draw
it off into another cask, and put in
some sugar-candy: but if too sweet,
let it stand a little longer. when
the wine is racked, the dregs may
be drained through a flannel bag;
and the wine, if not clear enough
for the table, may be used for sauce.
essence of allspice. take
a dram of the oil of pimento, and
mix it by degrees with two ounces
of strong spirit of wine. a few drops
will give the flavour of allspice to a
pint of gravy, or mulled wine.
essence of anchovy. put
into a marble mortar ten or twelve
fine mellow anchovies, that have
been well pickled, and pound them
to a pulp. put this into a clean
well-tinned saucepan, then put a table-spoonful
of cold water into the
mortar, shake it round, and pour it
to the pounded anchovies. set them
by the side of a slow fire, frequently
stirring them together till they are
melted, which they will be in the
course of five minutes. now stir in
a quarter of a dram of good cayenne,[]
and let it remain by the fire a few
minutes longer. rub it through a
hair sieve with the back of a wooden
spoon, and keep it stopped very
closely: if the air gets to it, it is
spoiled directly. essence of anchovy
is made sometimes with sherry,
or madeira, instead of water, or with
the addition of mushroom ketchup.
essence of cayenne. put
half an ounce of cayenne pepper
into half a pint of wine or brandy,
let it steep a fortnight, and then
pour off the clear liquor. this article
is very convenient for the extempore
seasoning and finishing of
soups and sauces, its flavour being
instantly and equally diffused.
essence of celery. steep
in a quarter of a pint of brandy, or
proof spirit, half an ounce of celery
seed bruised, and let it stand a fortnight.
a few drops will immediately
flavour a pint of broth, and are an
excellent addition to pease, and
other soups.
essence of cloves. mix
together two ounces of the strongest
spirit of wine, and a dram of the oil
of cloves. nutmeg, cinnamon, and
mace are prepared in the same manner.
essence of flowers. select
a quantity of the petals of any
flowers which have an agreeable
fragrance, lay them in an earthen
vessel, and sprinkle a little fine salt
upon them. then dip some cotton
into the best florence oil, and lay it
thin upon the flowers; continue a
layer of petals, and a layer of cotton,
till the vessel is full. it is then
to be closed down with a bladder,
and exposed to the heat of the sun.
in about a fortnight a fragrant oil
may be squeezed away from the
whole mass, which will yield a rich
perfume.
essence of ginger. grate
three ounces of ginger, and an ounce
of thin lemon peel, into a quart of
brandy, or proof spirit, and let it
stand for ten days, shaking it up
each day. if ginger is taken to produce
an immediate effect, to warm
the stomach, or dispel flatulence,
this will be found the best preparation.
take the blossoms from the stalks
in warm weather, and spread them
in the shade for twenty-four hours
on a linen cloth; then bruise and
put them into warm water, and leave
them closely covered in a still for
four or five hours near the fire. after
this the blossoms may be distilled
in the usual way.
wash and brush clean the lemons,
and let them get perfectly dry. take
a lump of fine sugar, and rub them
till all the yellow rind is taken up
by the sugar; scrape off the surface
of the sugar into a preserving pot,
and press it hard down. cover it
very close, and it will keep for some
time. by this process is obtained
the whole of the fine essential oil,
which contains the flavour.
this delicate relish is made by
sprinkling a little salt over some
mushrooms, and mashing them three
hours after. next day strain off the
liquor, put it into a stewpan, and
boil it till reduced one half. it will
not keep long, but is preferable to
any of the ketchups. an artificial
bed of mushrooms would supply this
article all the year round.
essence of oysters. take
fine fresh milton oysters, wash them
in their own liquor, skim it, and
pound them in a marble mortar. to
a pint of oysters add a pint of sherry,
boil them up, and add an ounce of
salt, two drams of pounded mace,
and one of cayenne. let it just boil
up again, skim it, and rub it through
a sieve. when cold, bottle and cork
it well, and seal it down. this composition
very agreeably heightens
the flavour of white sauces, and
white made-dishes. if a glass of
brandy be added to the essence, it[]
will keep a considerable time longer
than oysters are out of season.
essence of shalot. peel,
mince, and pound in a mortar, three
ounces of shalots, and infuse them in
a pint of sherry for three days. then
pour off the clear liquor on three
ounces more of shalots, and let the
wine remain on them ten days longer.
an ounce of scraped horseradish
may be added to the above, and a
little thin lemon peel. this will impart
a fine flavour to soups, sauces,
hashes, and various other dishes.
essence of soap. for washing
or shaving, the essence of soap
is very superior to what is commonly
used for these purposes, and a very
small quantity will make an excellent
lather. mix two ounces of salt
of tartar with half a pound of soap
finely sliced, put them into a quart
of spirits of wine, in a bottle that
will contain twice the quantity. tie
it down with a bladder, prick a pin
through it for the air to escape, set
it to digest in a gentle heat, and
shake up the contents. when the
soap is dissolved, filter the liquor
through some paper to free it from
impurities, and scent it with burgamot
or essence of lemon.
essence of turtle. mix
together one wine-glassful of the
essence of anchovy, one and a half
of shalot wine, four wine-glassfuls
of basil wine, two ditto of mushroom
ketchup, one dram of lemon acid,
three quarters of an ounce of lemon
peel very thinly pared, and a quarter
of an ounce of curry powder, and
let them steep together for a week.
the essence thus obtained will be
found convenient to flavour soup,
sauce, potted meats, savoury patties,
and various other articles.
evacuations. few things are
more conducive to health than keeping
the body regular, and paying
attention to the common evacuations.
a proper medium between costiveness
and laxness is highly desirable,
and can only be obtained by regularity
in diet, sleep, and exercise. irregularity
in eating and drinking disturbs
every part of the animal economy,
and never fails to produce
diseases. too much or too little
food will have this effect: the former
generally occasions looseness,
and the latter costiveness; and both
have a tendency to injure health.
persons who have frequent recourse
to medicine for preventing costiveness,
seldom fail to ruin their constitution.
they ought rather to remove
the evil by diet than by drugs,
by avoiding every thing of a hot or
binding nature, by going thinly
clothed, walking in the open air, and
acquiring the habit of a regular discharge
by a stated visit to the place
of retreat. habitual looseness is often
owing to an obstructed perspiration:
persons thus afflicted should
keep their feet warm, and wear
flannel next the skin. their diet
also should be of an astringent quality,
and such as tends to strengthen
the bowels. for this purpose,
fine bread, cheese, eggs, rice milk,
red wine, or brandy and water would
be proper.—insensible perspiration
is one of the principal discharges
from the human body, and is of such
importance to health, that few diseases
attack us while it goes on properly;
but when obstructed, the
whole frame is soon disordered, and
danger meets us in every form. the
common cause of obstructed perspiration,
or taking cold, is the sudden
changes of the weather; and
the best means of fortifying the body
is to be abroad every day, and breathe
freely in the open air. much danger
arises from wet feet and wet
clothes, and persons who are much
abroad are exposed to these things.
the best way is to change wet clothes
as soon as possible, or to keep in
motion till they be dry, but by no
means to sit or lie down. early habits
may indeed inure people to wet
clothes and wet feet without any
danger, but persons of a delicate[]
constitution cannot be too careful.
perspiration is often obstructed by
other means, but it is in all cases attended
with considerable danger.
sudden transitions from heat to cold,
drinking freely of cold water after
being heated with violent exercise,
sitting near an open window when
the room is hot, plunging into cold
water in a state of perspiration, or
going into the cold air immediately
after sitting in a warm room, are
among the various means by which
the health of thousands is constantly
ruined; and more die of colds than
are killed by plagues, or slain in
battle.
eve's pudding. grate three
quarters of a pound of bread; mix
it with the same quantity of shred
suet, the same of apples, and also
of currants. mix with these the
whole of four eggs, and the rind of
half a lemon shred fine. put it into
a shape, and boil it three hours.
serve with pudding sauce, the juice
of half a lemon, and a little nutmeg.
exercise. whether man were
originally intended for labour or not,
it is evident from the human structure,
that exercise is not less necessary
than food, for the preservation
of health. it is generally seen
among the labouring part of the
community, that industry places
them above want, and activity serves
them instead of physic. it seems to
be the established law of the animal
creation, that without exercise no
creature should enjoy health, or be
able to find subsistence. every
creature, except man, takes as much
of it as is necessary: he alone deviates
from this original law, and suffers
accordingly. weak nerves, and
glandular obstructions, which are
now so common, are the constant
companions of inactivity. we seldom
hear the active or laborious
complain of nervous diseases: indeed
many have been cured of them
by being reduced to the necessity of
labouring for their own support.
this shews the source from which
such disorders flow, and the means
by which they may be prevented.
it is evident that health cannot be
enjoyed where the perspiration is
not duly carried on; but that can
never be the case where exercise is
neglected. hence it is that the inactive
are continually complaining
of pains of the stomach, flatulencies,
and various other disorders which
cannot be removed by medicine, but
might be effectually cured by a course
of vigorous exercise. but to render
this in the highest degree beneficial,
it should always be taken in the open
air, especially in the morning, while
the stomach is empty, and the body
refreshed with sleep. the morning
air braces and strengthens the nerves,
and in some measure answers the
purpose of a cold bath. every thing
that induces people to sit still, except
it be some necessary employment,
ought to be avoided; and if
exercise cannot be had in the open
air, it should be attended to as far
as possible within doors. violent
exertions however are no more to be
recommended than inactivity; for
whatever fatigues the body, prevents
the benefit of exercise, and tends to
weaken rather than strengthen it.
fast walking, immediately before or
after meals, is highly pernicious,
and necessarily accelerates the circulation
of the blood, which is attended
with imminent danger to the
head or brain. on the other hand,
indolence not only occasions diseases,
and renders men useless to
society, but it is the parent of vice.
the mind, if not engaged in some
useful pursuit, is constantly in search
of ideal pleasures, or impressed with
the apprehension of some imaginary
evil; and from these sources proceed
most of the miseries of mankind.
an active life is the best
guardian of virtue, and the greatest
preservative of health.[]
facsimiles. to produce a facsimile
of any writing, the pen should
be made of glass enamel, the point
being small and finely polished, so
that the part above the point may
be large enough to hold as much or
more ink than a common writing
pen. a mixture of equal parts of
frankfort black, and fresh butter, is
now to be smeared over sheets of
paper, and is to be rubbed off after
a certain time. the paper thus
smeared is to be pressed for some
hours, taking care to have sheets of
blotting paper between each of the
sheets of black paper. when fit for
use, writing paper is put between
sheets of blackened paper, and the
upper sheet is to be written on, with
common ink, by the glass or enamel
pen. by this method, not only the
copy is obtained on which the pen
writes, but also two or more, made
by means of the blackened paper.
family pies. to make a plain
trust for pies to be eaten hot, or for
fruit puddings, cut some thin slices
of beef suet, lay them in some flour,
mix it with cold water, and roll it
till it is quite soft. or make a paste
of half a pound of butter or lard,
and a pound and a half of flour.
mix it with water, work it up, roll
it out twice, and cover the dish with it.
family wine. an excellent
compound wine, suited to family
use, may be made of equal parts of
red, white, and black currants, ripe
cherries and raspberries, well bruised,
and mixed with soft water, in
the proportion of four pounds of
fruit to one gallon of water. when
strained and pressed, three pounds
of moist sugar are to be added to
each gallon of liquid. after standing
open for three days, during
which it is to be stirred frequently,
it is to be put into a barrel, and left
for a fortnight to work, when a ninth
part of brandy is to be added, and
the whole bunged down. in a few
months it will be a most excellent
wine.
fatting fowls. chickens
or fowls may be fatted in four or
five days, by setting some rice over
the fire with skimmed milk, as much
as will serve for one day. let it
boil till the rice is quite swelled, and
add a tea-spoonful of sugar. feed
them three times a day, in common
pans, giving them only as much as
will quite fill them at once. before
they are fed again, set the pans in
water, that no sourness may be conveyed
to the fowls, as that would
prevent their fattening. let them
drink clean water, or the milk of the
rice; but when rice is given them,
after being perfectly soaked, let as
much of the moisture as possible be
drawn from it. by this method
the flesh will have a clean whiteness,
which no other food gives; and
when it is considered how far a
pound of rice will go, and how much
time is saved by this mode, it will
be found nearly as cheap as any
other food, especially if it is to be
purchased. the chicken pen should
be cleaned every day, and no food
given for sixteen hours before poultry
is to be killed.
fawn. a fawn, like a sucking
pig, should be dressed almost as
soon as it is killed. when very
young, it is trussed, stuffed, and
spitted the same as a hare. but
they are better eating when of the
size of a house lamb, and then roasted
in quarters: the hind quarter is
most esteemed. the meat must be
put down to a very quick fire, and
either basted all the time it is roasting,
or be covered with sheets of fat
bacon. when done, baste it with
butter, and dredge it with a little
salt and flour, till a nice froth is set
upon it. serve it up with venison
sauce. if a fawn be half roasted as[]
soon as received, and afterwards
made into a hash, it will be very
fine.
fear. sudden fear, or an unexpected
fright, often produces epileptic
fits, and other dangerous disorders.
many young people have
lost their lives or their senses by the
foolish attempts of producing violent
alarm, and the mind has been
thrown into such disorders as never
again to act with regularity. a settled
dread and anxiety not only dispose
the body to diseases, but often
render those diseases fatal, which a
cheerful mind would overcome; and
the constant dread of some future
evil, has been known to bring on the
very evil itself. a mild and sympathizing
behaviour towards the afflicted
will do them more good than
medicine, and he is the best physician
and the best friend who administers
the consolation of hope.
feathers. where poultry is
usually sold ready picked, the feathers
which occasionally come in
small quantities are neglected; but
care should be taken to put them
into a clean tub, and as they dry to
change them into paper bags, in
small quantities. they should hang
in a dry kitchen to season; fresh
ones must not be added to those in
part dried, or they will occasion a
musty smell, but they should go
through the same process. in a few
months they will be fit to add to
beds, or to make pillows, without
the usual mode of drying them in a
cool oven, which may be pursued if
they are wanted before five or six
months.
feathers cleaned. in order
to clear feathers from animal
oil, dissolve a pound of quick lime
in a gallon of clear water; and pour
off the clear lime-water for use, at
the time it is wanted. put the feathers
to be cleaned in a tub, and
add to them a sufficient quantity of
the clear lime-water, so as to cover
them about three inches. the feathers,
when thoroughly moistened,
will sink down, and should remain
in the lime-water for three or four
days; after which, the foul liquor
should be separated from them by
laying them on a sieve. they are
afterwards to be washed in clean
water, and dried on nets, the meshes
being about the same fineness as
those of cabbage nets. they must
be shaken from time to time on the
nets; as they dry, they will fall
through the meshes, and are to be
collected for use. the admission of
air will be serviceable in the drying,
and the whole process may be completed
in about three weeks. the
feathers, after being thus prepared,
want nothing farther than beating,
to be used either for beds, bolsters,
pillows, or cushions.
feet. to prevent corns from
growing on the feet, wear easy shoes,
and bathe the feet often in lukewarm
water, with a little salt and potash
dissolved in it. the corn itself may
be completely destroyed by rubbing
it daily with a little caustic solution
of potash, till a soft and flexible
skin is formed. for chilblains, soak
the feet in warm bran and water and
rub them well with flour of mustard.
this should be done before the chilblains
begin to break.
fennel sauce. boil fennel
and parsley, tied together in a bunch;
chop it small, and stir it up with
melted butter. this sauce is generally
eaten with mackarel.
fever drink. to make a refreshing
drink in a fever, put into a
stone jug a little tea sage, two sprigs
of balm, and a small quantity of
wood sorrel, having first washed and
dried them. peel thin a small lemon,
and clear from the white; slice it,
and put in a bit of the peel. then
pour in three pints of boiling water,
sweeten, and cover it close.—another
drink. wash extremely well
an ounce of pearl barley; shift it
twice, then put to it three pints of
water, an ounce of sweet almonds[]
beaten fine, and a bit of lemon peel.
boil the liquor smooth, put in a little
syrup of lemons, and capillaire.—another
way is to boil three pints
of water with an ounce and a half of
tamarinds, three ounces of currants,
and two ounces of stoned raisins,
till nearly a third is consumed.
strain it on a bit of lemon peel,
which should be removed in the
course of an hour, or it will infuse a
bitter taste.
fillet of veal. stuff it well
under the udder, at the bone, and
quite through to the shank. put it
into the oven, with a pint of water
under it, till it comes to a fine brown.
then put it in a stewpan with three
pints of gravy, and stew it quite
tender. add a tea-spoonful of lemon
pickle, a large spoonful of browning,
one of ketchup, and a little cayenne;
thicken it with a bit of butter
rolled in flour. put the veal in
a dish, strain the gravy over it, and
lay round it forcemeat balls. garnish
with pickle and lemon.
fine cake. to make an excellent
cake, rub two pounds of fine
dry flour with one of butter, washed
in plain and then in rose water.
mix with it three spoonfuls of yeast,
in a little warm milk and water.
set it to rise an hour and a half before
the fire, and then beat into it
two pounds of currants, carefully
washed and picked, and one pound
of sifted sugar. add four ounces
of almonds, six ounces of stoned
raisins chopped fine, half a nutmeg,
cinnamon, allspice, and a few cloves,
the peel of a lemon shred very fine,
a glass of wine, one of brandy,
twelve yolks and whites of eggs beat
separately, with orange, citron, and
lemon. beat them up well together,
butter the pan, and bake in a quick
oven.—to make a still finer cake,
wash two pounds and a half of fresh
butter in water first, and then in
rose water, and beat the butter to a
cream. beat up twenty eggs, yolks
and whites, separately, half an hour
each. have ready two pounds and
a half of the finest flour well dried
and kept hot, likewise a pound and
a half of loaf sugar pounded and
sifted, an ounce of spice in very fine
powder, three pounds of currants
nicely cleaned and dry, half a pound
of almonds blanched, and three
quarters of a pound of sweetmeats
cut small. let all be kept by the
fire, and mix the dry ingredients.
pour the eggs strained to the butter,
mix half a glass of sweet wine with
a full glass of brandy, and pour it
to the butter and eggs, mixing them
well together. add the dry ingredients
by degrees, and beat them
together thoroughly for a great length
of time. having prepared and stoned
half a pound of jar raisins, chopped
as fine as possible, mix them carefully,
so that there shall be no
lumps, and add a tea-cupful of
orange flower water. beat the ingredients
together a full hour at
least. have a hoop well buttered,
or a tin or copper cake-pan; take
a white paper, doubled and buttered,
and put in the pan round the
edge, if the cake batter fill it more
than three parts, for space should
be allowed for rising. bake it in a
quick oven: three hours will be requisite.
fine crust. for orange
cheesecakes, or sweetmeats, when
intended to be particularly nice, the
following fine crust may be prepared.
dry a pound of the finest flour and
mix with it three ounces of refined
sugar. work up half a pound of
butter with the hand till it comes to
a froth, put the flour into it by degrees,
adding the yolks of three and
the whites of two eggs, well beaten
and strained. if too thin, add a
little flour and sugar to make it fit
to roll. line some pattipans, and
fill them: a little more than fifteen
minutes will bake them. beat up
some refined sugar with the white
of an egg, as thick as possible, and
ice the articles all over as soon as[]
they are baked. then return them
to the oven to harden, and serve
them up cold, with fresh butter.
salt butter will make a very fine
flaky crust, but if for mince pies, or
any sweet things, it should first be
washed.
fire arms. the danger of
improperly loading fire arms chiefly
arises from not ramming the wadding
close to the powder; and then
when a fowling-piece is discharged,
it is very likely to burst in pieces.
this circumstance, though well
known, is often neglected, and various
accidents are occasioned by
it. hence when a screw barrel pistol
is to be loaded, care should be
taken that the cavity for the powder
be entirely filled with it, so as to
leave no space between the powder
and the ball. for the same reason,
if the bottom of a large tree is to be
shivered with gunpowder, a space
must be left between the charge and
the wadding, and the powder will
tear it asunder. but considering
the numerous accidents that are constantly
occurring, from the incautious
use of fire arms, the utmost
care should be taken not to place
them within the reach of children
or of servants, and in no instance to
lay them up without previously
drawing the charge.
fire irons. to preserve them
from rust, when not in use, they
should be wrapped up in baize, and
kept in a dry place. or to preserve
them more effectually, let them be
smeared over with fresh mutton
suet, and dusted with unslaked lime,
pounded and tied up in muslin.
irons so prepared will keep many
months. use no oil for them at any
time, except a little salad oil, there
being water in all other, which would
soon produce rust.
firmity. to make somersetshire
firmity, boil a quart of fine
wheat, and add by degrees two
quarts of new milk. pick and wash
four ounces of currants, stir them in
the jelly, and boil them together till
all is done. beat the yolks of three
eggs, and a little nutmeg, with two
or three spoonfuls of milk, and add
to the boiling. sweeten the whole,
and serve it in a deep dish, either
warm or cold.
fish. in dressing fish of any
kind for the table, great care is necessary
in cleaning it. it is a common
error to wash it too much, and
by this means the flavour is diminished.
if the fish is to be boiled,
after it is cleaned, a little salt and
vinegar should be put into the water,
to give it firmness. codfish, whiting,
and haddock, are far better if
a little salted, and kept a day; and
if the weather be not very hot, they
will be good two days. when fish
is cheap and plentiful, and a larger
quantity is purchased than is immediately
wanted, it would be proper
to pot or pickle such as will bear
it, or salt and hang it up, or fry it a
little, that it may serve for stewing
the next day. fresh water fish having
frequently a muddy smell and
taste, should be soaked in strong
salt and water, after it has been well
cleaned. if of a sufficient size, it
may be scalded in salt and water,
and afterwards dried and dressed.
fish should be put into cold water,
and set on the fire to do very gently,
or the outside will break before the
inner part is done. crimp fish is
to be put into boiling water; and
when it boils up, pour in a little cold
water to check extreme heat, and
simmer it a few minutes. the fish
plate on which it is done, may be
drawn up, to see if it be ready,
which may be known by its easily
separating from the bone. it should
then be immediately taken out of the
water, or it will become woolly.
the fish plate should be set crossways
over the kettle, to keep hot for
serving; and a clean cloth over the
fish, to prevent its losing its colour.
small fish nicely fried, covered with
egg and crumbs, make a dish far[]
more elegant than if served plain.
great attention is required in garnishing
fish, by using plenty of horseradish,
parsley, and lemon. when
well done, and with very good sauce,
fish is more attended to than almost
any other dish. the liver and roe
should be placed on the dish in order
that they may be distributed in
the course of serving.—if fish is to
be fried or broiled, it must be dried
in a nice soft cloth, after it is well
cleaned and washed. if for frying,
smear it over with egg, and sprinkle
on it some fine crumbs of bread. if
done a second time with the egg and
bread, the fish will look so much the
better. put on the fire a stout fryingpan,
with a large quantity of lard
or dripping boiling hot, plunge the
fish into it, and let it fry tolerably
quick, till the colour is of a fine
brown yellow. if it be done enough
before it has obtained a proper degree
of colour, the pan must be
drawn to the side of the fire. take
it up carefully, and either place it
on a large sieve turned upwards, and
to be kept for that purpose only, or
on the under side of a dish to drain.
if required to be very nice, a sheet
of writing paper must be placed to
receive the fish, that it may be free
from all grease; it must also be
of a beautiful colour, and all the
crumbs appear distinct. the same
dripping, adding a little that is fresh,
will serve a second time. butter
gives a bad colour, oil is the best,
if the expense be no objection. garnish
with a fringe of fresh curled
parsley. if fried parsley be used,
it must be washed and picked, and
thrown into fresh water; when the
lard or dripping boils, throw the
parsley into it immediately from the
water, and instantly it will be green
and crisp, and must be taken up
with a slice.—if fish is to be broiled,
it must be seasoned, floured, and
laid on a very clean gridiron, which
when hot, should be rubbed with a
bit of suet, to prevent the fish from
sticking. it must be broiled over
a very clear fire, that it may not
taste smoky; and not too near, that
it may not be scorched.
fish gravy. skin two or
three eels, or some flounders; gut
and wash them very clean, cut them
into small pieces, and put them into
a saucepan. cover them with water,
and add a little crust of toasted
bread, two blades of mace, some
whole pepper, sweet herbs, a piece
of lemon peel, an anchovy or two,
and a tea-spoonful of horse-radish.
cover the saucepan close, and let it
simmer; then add a little butter and
flour, and boil with the above.
fish pie. to make a fine fish
pie, boil two pounds of small eels.
cut the fins quite close, pick off the
flesh, and return the bones into the
liquor, with a little mace, pepper,
salt, and a slice of onion. then
boil it till it is quite rich, and strain
it. make forcemeat of the flesh,
with an anchovy, a little parsley,
lemon peel, salt, pepper, and crumbs,
and four ounces of butter warmed.
lay it at the bottom of the dish:
then take the flesh of soles, small
cod, or dressed turbot, and rub it
with salt and pepper. lay this on
the forcemeat, pour on the gravy,
and bake it. if cod or soles are
used, the skin and fins must be taken
off.
fish sauce. put into a very
nice tin saucepan a pint of port
wine, a gill of mountain, half a pint
of fine walnut ketchup, twelve anchovies
with the liquor that belongs
to them, a gill of walnut pickle, the
rind and juice of a large lemon, four
or five shalots, a flavour of cayenne,
three ounces of scraped horse-radish,
three blades of mace, and
two tea-spoonfuls of made mustard.
boil it all gently, till the rawness
goes off, and put it into small bottles
for use. cork them very close
and seal the top.—or chop two
dozen of anchovies not washed, and
ten shalots, and scrape three spoonfuls[]
of horseradish. then add ten
blades of mace, twelve cloves, two
sliced lemons, half a pint of anchovy
liquor, a quart of hock or rhenish
wine, and a pint of water. boil it
down to a quart, and strain it off.
when cold, add three large spoonfuls
of walnut ketchup, and put the
sauce into small bottles well corked.—to
make fish sauce without butter,
simmer very gently a quarter of
a pint of vinegar, and half a pint of
soft water, with an onion. add four
cloves, and two blades of mace,
slightly bruised, and half a tea-spoonful
of black pepper. when
the onion is quite tender, chop it
small with two anchovies, and set
the whole on the fire to boil for a
few minutes, with a spoonful of
ketchup. prepare in the mean time
the yolks of three fresh eggs, well
beaten and strained, and mix the
liquor with them by degrees. when
all are well mixed, set the saucepan
over a gentle fire, keeping a bason
in one hand, to toss the sauce to and
fro in, and shake the saucepan over
the fire, that the eggs may not curdle.
do not let it boil, only make
the sauce hot enough to give it the
thickness of melted butter.—fish
sauce à la craster, is made in the
following manner. thicken a quarter
of a pound of butter with flour,
and brown it. add a pound of the
best anchovies cut small, six blades
of pounded mace, ten cloves, forty
corns of black pepper and allspice,
a few small onions, a faggot of sweet
herbs, consisting of savoury, thyme,
basil, and knotted marjoram, also
a little parsley, and sliced horse-radish.
on these pour half a pint
of the best sherry, and a pint and
a half of strong gravy. simmer all
gently for twenty minutes, then
strain it through a sieve, and bottle
it for use. the way of using it is,
to boil some of it in the butter while
melting.
flannels. in order to make
flannels keep their colour and not
shrink, put them into a pail, and
pour on boiling water. let them lie
till cold, before they are washed.
flat beer. much loss is frequently
sustained from beer growing
flat, during the time of drawing.
to prevent this, suspend a pint or
more of ground malt in it, tied up in
a large bag, and keep the bung well
closed. the beer will not then become
vapid, but rather improve the
whole time it is in use.
flat cakes. mix two pounds
of flour, one pound of sugar, and
one ounce of carraways, with four
or five eggs, and a few spoonfuls of
water. make all into a stiff paste,
roll it out thin, cut it into any shape,
and bake on tins lightly floured.
while baking, boil to a thin syrup a
pound of sugar in a pint of water.
when both are hot, dip each cake
into the syrup, and place them on
tins to dry in the oven for a short
time. when the oven is a little
cooler, return them into it, and let
them remain there four or five hours.
cakes made in this way will keep
good for a long time.
flat fish. flounders, plaice,
soles, and other kinds of flat fish,
are good boiled. cut off the fins,
draw and clean them well, dry them
with a cloth, and boil them in salt
and water. when the fins draw out
easily, they are done enough. serve
them with shrimp, cockle, or mustard
sauce, and garnish with red
cabbage.
flatulency. wind in the
stomach, accompanied with pain, is
frequently occasioned by eating flatulent
vegetables, or fat meat, with
large draughts of beverage immediately
afterwards, which turn rancid
on the stomach; and of course,
these ought to be avoided. hot tea,
turbid beer, and feculent liquors
will have the same effect. a phlegmatic
constitution, or costiveness,
will render the complaint more frequent
and painful. gentle laxatives
and a careful diet are the best[]
remedy; but hot aromatics and spirituous
liquors should be avoided.
fleas. want of cleanliness remarkably
contributes to the production
of these offensive insects. the
females of this tribe deposit their
eggs in damp and filthy places, within
the crevices of boards, and on
rubbish, when they emerge in the
form of fleas in about a month.
cleanliness, and frequent sprinkling
of the room with a simple decoction
of wormwood, will soon exterminate
the whole breed of these disagreeable
vermin; and the best remedy
to expel them from bed clothes is a
bag filled with dry moss, the odour
of which is to them extremely offensive.
fumigation with brimstone,
or the fresh leaves of pennyroyal
sewed in a bag, and laid in the bed,
will also have the desired effect.
dogs and cats may be effectually
secured from the persecutions of
these vermin, by occasionally anointing
their skin with sweet oil, or oil
of turpentine; or by rubbing into
their coats some scotch snuff. but
if they be at all mangy, or their skin
broken, the latter would be very
painful and improper.
flies. if a room be swarming
with these noisome insects, the most
ready way of expelling them is to
fumigate the apartment with the
dried leaves of the gourd. if the
window be opened, the smoke will
instantly drive them out: or if the
room be close, it will suffocate them.
but in the latter case, no person
should remain within doors, as the
fume is apt to occasion the headache.
another way is to dissolve
two drams of the extract of quassia
in half a pint of boiling water; and,
adding a little sugar or syrup, pour
the mixture upon plates. the flies
are extremely partial to this enticing
food, and it never fails to destroy
them. camphor placed near
any kind of provision will protect it
from the flies.
flip. to make a quart of flip,
put the ale on the fire to warm, and
beat up three or four eggs, with
four ounces of moist sugar. add a
tea-spoonful of grated nutmeg or
ginger, and a quartern of good old
rum or brandy. when the ale is
nearly boiling, put it into one pitcher,
and the rum and eggs into
another: turn it from one pitcher
to another, till it is as smooth as
cream.
floating island. mix three
half pints of thin cream with a quarter
of a pint of raisin wine, a little
lemon juice, orange flower water,
and sugar. put it into a dish for
the middle of the table, and lay on
with a spoon the following froth
ready prepared. sweeten half a
pound of raspberry or currant jelly,
add to it the whites of four eggs
beaten, and beat up the jelly to a
froth, until it will take any form you
please. it should be raised high,
to represent a castle or a rock.—another
way. scald a codlin before
it be ripe, or any other sharp
apple, and pulp it through a sieve.
beat the whites of two eggs with
sugar, and a spoonful of orange flower
water; mix in the pulp by degrees,
and beat all together till it
produces a large quantity of froth.
serve it on a raspberry cream, or
colour the froth with beet root, raspberry,
or currant jelly, and set it on
a white cream, which has already
been flavoured with lemon, sugar,
and raisin wine. the froth may also
be laid on a custard.
floor cloths. the best are
such as are painted on a fine cloth,
well covered with colour, and where
the flowers do not rise much above
the ground, as they wear out first.
the durability of the cloth will depend
much on these two particulars,
but more especially on the time it has
been painted, and the goodness of the
colours. if they have not been allowed
sufficient space for becoming
thoroughly hardened, a very little use
will injure them: and as they are very[]
expensive articles, care is necessary
in preserving them. it answers to
keep them some time before they
are used, either hung up in a dry
airy place, or laid down in a spare
room. when taken up for the winter,
they should be rolled round a
carpet roller, and care taken not to
crack the paint by turning in the
edges too suddenly. old carpets
answer quite well, painted and seasoned
some months before they are
laid down. if intended for passages,
the width must be directed
when they are sent to the manufactory,
as they are cut before painting.
sweep them first, then wipe them
with a flannel; and when the dust
and spots are removed, rub with a
wax flannel, and dry them with a
plain one. use but little wax, and
rub only with the latter to give a
little smoothness, or it will make
the floor cloth slippery, and endanger
falling. washing now and then
with milk, after the above sweeping
and dry rubbing, will give as good
an appearance, and render the floor
cloths less slippery.
flounders. these are both
sea and river fish: the thames produces
the best. they are in season
from january to march, and from
july to september. their flesh
should be thick and firm, and their
eyes bright: they very soon become
flabby and bad. before they are
dressed, they should be rubbed with
salt inside and out, and lie two hours
to acquire firmness. then dip them
in eggs, cover with grated bread, and
fry them.
flour. good wheat flour may
be known by the quantity of glutinous
matter it contains, and which
will appear when kneaded into
dough. for this purpose take four
ounces of fine flour, mix it with water,
and work it together till it forms
a thick paste. the paste is then
to be well washed and kneaded with
the hands under the water, and the
water to be renewed till it ceases to
become white by the operation. if
the flour be sound, the paste which
remains will be glutinous and elastic,
and brittle after it has been
baked.—adulterated meal and flour
are generally whiter and heavier
than the good, and may be detected
in a way similar to that already
mentioned, under the article adulterations.
or pour boiling water
on some slices of bread, and
drop on it some spirits of vitriol.
put them in the flour; and if it contain
any quantity of whiting, chalk,
or lime, a fermentation will ensue.
vitriol alone, dropped on adulterated
bread or flour, will produce a similar
effect.—american flour requires
nearly twice as much water to make
it into bread as is used for english
flour, and therefore it is more profitable.
fourteen pounds of american
flour will make twenty-one
pounds and a half of bread, while
the best sort of english flour produces
only eighteen pounds and a
half.
flour caudle. into five
large spoonfuls of pure water, rub
smooth one dessert-spoonful of fine
flour. set over the fire five spoonfuls
of new milk, and put into it two
pieces of sugar. the moment it
boils, pour into it the flour and water,
and stir it over a slow fire twenty
minutes. it is a nourishing and
gently astringent food, and excellent
for children who have weak
bowels.
flower garden. the pleasures
of the garden are ever various,
ever new; and in every month of
the year some attention is demanded,
either in rearing the tender
plant, in preparing the soil for its
reception, or protecting the parent
root from the severity of the winter's
blast. ranunculuses, anemones,
tulips, and other bulbous roots,
if not taken up, will be in great
danger from the frost, and their
shoots in the spring will either be[]
impaired, or totally destroyed.——january.
cover the flower beds
with wheat straw, to protect them
from the cold; but where the shoots
begin to appear, place behind them
a reed edge, sloping three feet forward.
a mat is to be let down from
the top in severe weather, and taken
up when it is mild. this will preserve
them, without making them
weak or sickly. the beds and boxes
of seedling flowers should also be
covered, and the fence removed
when the weather is mild. clean
the auricula plants, pick off dead
leaves, and scrape away the surface
of the mould. replenish them with
some that is fine and fresh, set the
pots up to the brim in the mould of
a dry bed, and place behind them a
reed edging. cover carnation plants
from wet, and defend them from
mice and sparrows.——february.
make hotbeds for annual flowers,
of the dung reserved for that purpose,
and sow them upon a good
thickness of mould, laid regularly
over the dung. transplant perennial
flowers, and hardy shrubs, canterbury
bells, lilacs, and the like.
break up and new lay the gravel
walks. weed, rake, and clean the
borders; and where the box of the
edging is decayed, make it up with
a fresh plantation. sow auricula
and polyanthus seeds in boxes, made
of rough boards six inches deep,
with holes at the bottom to run off
the water. fill the boxes with light
mould, scatter the seeds thinly over
the surface, sift some more mould
over them about a quarter of an inch
thick, and place them where they
may enjoy the morning sun. plant
out carnations into pots for flowering.——march.
watch the beds
of tender flowers, and throw mats
over them, supported by hoops, in
hard weather. continue transplanting
all the perennial fibrous rooted
flowers, such as golden-rods, and
sweet-williams. dig up the earth
with a shovel about those which
were planted in autumn, and clean
the ground between them. all the
pots of flowering plants must now
be dressed. pick off dead leaves,
remove the earth at the top, and put
fresh instead; then give them a
gentle watering, and set them in
their places for flowering. be careful
that the roots are not wounded,
and repeat the watering once in
three days. the third week in march
is the time to sow sweet peas, poppies,
catchflies, and all the hardy
annual plants. the last week is
proper for transplanting evergreens,
and a showery day should be chosen
for the purpose. hotbeds should
now be made, to receive the seedlings
of annual flowers raised in the
former bed.——april. tie up
to sticks the stalks of tall flowers,
cut the sticks about two feet long,
thrust them eight inches into the
ground, and hide them among the
leaves. clean and rake the ground
between them. take off the slips
of auriculas, and plant them out
carefully for an increase. transplant
perennial flowers and evergreens,
as in the former months;
take up the roots of colchichams,
and other autumnal bulbous plants.
sow french honeysuckles, wallflowers,
and other hardy plants, upon
the natural ground, and the more
tender sorts on hotbeds. transplant
those sown last month, into
the second hotbed. sow carnations
and pinks on the natural ground, and
on open borders.——may. when
the leaves of sowbreads are decayed,
take up the roots, and lay them
by carefully till the time of planting.
take up the hyacinth roots which
have done flowering, and lay them
sideways in a bed of dry rich mould,
leaving the stems and leaves to die
away: this will greatly strengthen
the roots. roll the gravel walks
carefully and frequently, and keep
the grass clean mowed. clean all
the borders from weeds, take off the
straggling branches from the large[]
flowering plants, and train them up
in a handsome shape. plant out
french and african marigolds from
the hotbeds, with other autumnals,
the last week of this month, choosing
a cloudy warm day. tie up the
stalks of carnations, pot the tender
annuals, such as balsams and amaranths,
and set them in a hotbed
frame, till summer is more advanced
for planting them in the open ground.——june.
choose the evening of
a mild showery day, and plant out
into the open ground, the tender annuals
hitherto kept in pots in the
hotbed frame. they must be carefully
loosened from the sides of the
pot, and taken out with all the mould
about them; a large hole must be
opened for each, to set them upright
in it; and when settled in the
ground by gentle watering, they
must be tied up to sticks. let
pinks, carnations, and sweet-williams,
be laid this month for an increase.
let the layers be covered
lightly, and gently watered every
other day. spring flowers being
now over, and their leaves faded,
the roots must be taken up, and laid
by for planting again at a proper
season. snow-drops, winter-aconite,
and such sorts, are to be thus managed.
the hyacinth roots, laid
flat in the ground, must now be
taken up, and the dead leaves clipped
off; and when cleared from the
mould, they must be spread upon a
mat in an airy room to dry, and laid
by for future planting. tulip roots
also must now be taken up, as the
leaves decay: anemones and ranunculuses
are treated in the same manner.
cut in three or four places,
the cups or poles of the carnations
that are near blowing, that they
may show regularly. at the same
time inoculate some of the fine kind
of roses.——july. clip box edgings,
cut and trim hedges, look over
all the borders, clear them from
weeds, and stir up the mould between
the plants. roll the gravel
frequently, and mow the grass plats.
inoculate roses and jasmines that
require this kind of propagation,
and any of the other flowering
shrubs. gather the seeds of flowers
intended to be propagated, and lay
them upon a shelf in an airy room
in the pods. when they are well
hardened, tie them up in paper
bags, but do not take them out of
the pods till they are wanted. lay
pinks and sweet-williams in the earth
as formerly, cut down the stalks of
those plants which have done flowering,
and which are not kept for
seed. tie up with sticks such as
are coming into flower, as for the
earlier kinds. sow lupins, larkspurs,
and similar sorts, on dry
warm borders, to stand the winter,
and flower early next year.——august.
dig up a mellow border,
and draw lines at five inches distance,
lengthways and across. in
the centre of these squares, plant
the seedling polyanthuses, one in
each square. in the same manner
plant out the seedling auriculas.
shade them till they have taken
root, and water them once a day.
see whether the layers of sweet-williams,
carnations, and such like,
have taken root; transplant such
as are rooted, and give frequent
gentle waterings to the others in order
to promote it. cut down the
stalks of plants that have done flowering,
saving the seed that may be
wanted, as it ripens, and water the
tender annuals every evening. sow
anemones and ranunculuses, tulip,
and narcissus seed. dig up a border
for early tulip roots, and others
for hyacinths, anemones, and ranunculuses.
sow annuals to stand
through the winter, and shift auriculas
into fresh pots.——september.
during this month, preparation
should be made for the next
season. tear up the annuals that
have done flowering, and cut down
such perennials as are past their
beauty. bring in other perennials[]
from the nursery beds, and plant
them with care at regular distances.
take up the box edgings where they
have outgrown their proper size,
and part and plant them afresh.
plant tulip and other flower roots,
slip polyanthuses, and place them
in rich shady borders. sow the
seeds of flower de luce and crown
imperial, as also of auriculas and polyanthuses,
according to the method
before recommended. part off the
roots of flower de luce, piony, and
others of a similar kind. in the
last week transplant hardy flowering
shrubs, and they will be strong
the next summer.——october.
let all the bulbous roots for spring
flowering be put into the ground;
narcissus, maragon, tulips, and such
ranunculuses and anemones as were
not planted sooner. transplant
columbines, monkshood, and all
kinds of fibrous rooted perennials.
place under shelter the auriculas
and carnations that are in pots. dig
up a dry border, and if not dry
enough, dig in some sand, and set
in the pots up to the brim. place
the reed fence sloping behind them,
and fasten a mat to its top, that
may be let down in bad weather.
take off the dead leaves of the auriculas,
before they are thus planted.
bring into the garden some fresh
flowering shrubs, wherever they may
be wanted, and at the end of the
month prune some of the hardier
kind.——november. prepare a
good heap of pasture ground, with
the turf among it, to rot into mould
for the borders. transplant honeysuckles
and spireas, with other
hardy flowering shrubs. rake over
the beds of seedling flowers, and
strew some peas straw over to keep
out the frost. cut down the stems
of perennials which have done flowering,
pull up annuals that are spent,
and rake and clear the ground.
place hoops over the beds of ranunculuses
and anemones, and lay mats
or cloths in readiness to draw over
them, in case of hard rains or frost.
clean up the borders in all parts of
the garden, and take care to destroy
not only the weeds, but all kinds of
moss. look over the seeds of those
flowers which were gathered in summer,
to see that they are dry and
sweet; and prepare a border or two
for the hardier kind, by digging and
cleaning.——december. during
frost or cold rain, draw the mats
and cloths over the ranunculuses;
give the anemones a little air in the
middle of every tolerable day; and
as soon as possible, uncover them
all day, but draw on the mats at
night. throw up the earth where
flowering shrubs are to be planted
in the spring, and turn it once a
fortnight. dig up the borders that
are to receive flower roots in the
spring, and give them the advantage
of a fallow, by throwing up the
ground in a ridge. scatter over it
a very little rotten dung from a
melon bed, and afterwards turn it
twice during the winter. examine
the flowering shrubs, and prune
them. cut away all the dead wood,
shorten luxuriant branches, and if
any cross each other, take away
one. leave them so that the air
may have a free passage between
them. sift a quarter of an inch of
good fresh mould over the roots
of perennial flowers, whose stalks
have been cut down, and then rake
over the borders. this will give
the whole an air of culture and good
management, which is always pleasing.
flower pots. as flowers
and plants should enjoy a free circulation
of air to make them grow
well, sitting rooms are not very well
adapted to the purpose, unless they
could be frequently ventilated by
opening the doors and windows.
in every severe frost or damp weather,
moderate fires should be made
in the rooms where the plants are
placed, and the shutters closed at
night. placing saucers under the[]
pots, and pouring water continually
into them, is highly improper: it
should be poured on the mould, that
it may filter through it, and thereby
refresh the fibres of the plant. many
kinds of annuals, sown in march
and the beginning of april, may be
transplanted into pots about the end
of may, and should be frequently
watered till they have taken root.
if transplanted in the summer season,
the evening is the proper time,
and care must be taken not to break
the fibres of the root. when the
plants are attacked by any kind of
crawling insects, the evil may be
prevented by keeping the saucers
full of water, so as to form a river
round the pot, and rubbing some
oil round the side. oil is fatal to
most kinds of insects, and but few
of them can endure it.
flower seeds. when the
seeds begin to ripen they should be
supported with sticks, to prevent
their being scattered by the wind;
and in wet weather they should be
removed to a dry place, and rubbed
out when convenient. august is in
general the proper time for gathering
flower seeds, but many kinds
will ripen much sooner. to ascertain
whether the seed be fully ripe,
put a little of it into water: if it be
come to maturity, it will sink to the
bottom, and if not it will swim upon
the surface. to preserve them for
vegetation, it is only necessary to
wrap the seed up in cartridge paper,
pasted down and varnished over
with gum, or the white of an egg.
some kinds of seeds are best enclosed
in sealing wax.
flummery. steep in cold water,
for a day and a night, three large
handfuls of very fine white oatmeal.
pour it off clear, add as much more
water, and let it stand the same
time. strain it through a fine hair
sieve, and boil it till it is as thick
as hasty pudding, stirring it well all
the time. when first strained, put
to it one large spoonful of white
sugar, and two of orange flower water.
pour it into shallow dishes,
and serve it up with wine, cider,
and milk; or it will be very good
with cream and sugar.
fomentations. boil two
ounces each of camomile flowers,
and the tops of wormwood, in two
quarts of water. pour off the liquor,
put it on the fire again, dip in a
piece of flannel, and apply it to the
part as hot as the patient can bear
it. when it grows cold, heat it up
again, dip in another piece of flannel,
apply it as the first, and continue
changing them as often as they
get cool, taking care not to let the
air get to the part affected when
the flannel is changed.—to relieve
the toothache, pain in the face, or
any other acute pain, the following
anodyne fomentation may be applied.
take two ounces of white
poppy heads, and half an ounce of
elder flowers, and boil them in three
pints of water, till it is reduced one
third. strain off the liquor, and
foment the part affected.
food. in the early ages of the
world, mankind were chiefly supported
by berries, roots, and such
other vegetables as the earth produced
of itself, according to the
original grant of the great proprietor
of all things. in later ages, especially
after the flood, this grant was
enlarged; and man had recourse to
animals, as well as to vegetables
artificially raised for their support,
while the art of preparing food has
been brought to the highest degree
of perfection. vegetables are however,
with a few exceptions, more
difficult of digestion than animal
food; but a due proportion of both,
with the addition of acids, is the
most conducive to health, as well
as agreeable to the palate. animal
as well as vegetable food may be
rendered unwholesome by being
kept too long; and when offensive
to the senses, they become alike injurious
to health. diseased animals,[]
and such as die of themselves, ought
never to be eaten. such as are fed
grossly, stalled cattle and pigs,
without any exercise, do not afford
food so nourishing or wholesome as
others. salt meat is not so easily
digested as fresh provisions, and
has a tendency to produce putrid
diseases, especially the scurvy. if
vegetables and milk were more used,
there would be less scurvy, and
fewer inflammatory fevers. our
food ought neither to be too moist,
nor too dry. liquid food relaxes
and renders the body feeble: hence
those who live much on tea, and
other watery diet, generally become
weak, and unable to digest solid
food. they are also liable to hysterics,
with a train of other nervous
affections. but if the food be too
dry, it disposes the body to inflammatory
disorders, and is equally to
be avoided. families would do
well to prepare their own diet and
drink, as much as possible, in order
to render it good and wholesome.
bread in particular is so necessary
a part of daily food, that too much
care cannot be taken to see that it
be made of sound grain duly prepared,
and kept from all unwholesome
ingredients. those who make
bread for sale, seek rather to please
the eye than to promote health.
the best bread is that which is neither
too coarse nor too fine, well
fermented, and made of wheat flour,
or wheat and rye mixed together.
good fermented liquors, neither too
weak nor too strong, are to be preferred.
if too weak, they require
to be drunk soon, and then they
produce wind and flatulencies in the
stomach. if kept too long, they
turn sour, and then become unwholesome.
on the other hand, strong
liquor, by hurting the digestion,
tends to weaken and relax: it also
keeps up a constant fever, which
exhausts the spirits, inflames the
blood, and disposes the body to
numberless diseases. beer, cider,
and other family liquors, should be
of such strength as to keep till they
are ripe, and then they should be
used. persons of a weak and relaxed
habit should avoid every thing
hard of digestion: their diet requires
to be light and nourishing,
and they should take sufficient exercise
in the open air. those who
abound with blood, should abstain
from rich wines and highly nourishing
food, and live chiefly on vegetables.
corpulent persons ought
frequently to use radish, garlic, or
such things as promote perspiration.
their drink should be tea, coffee,
or the like; they ought also to take
much exercise, and but little sleep.
those who are of a thin habit, should
follow the opposite course. such
as are troubled with sour risings in
the stomach, should live chiefly on
animal food; and those who are afflicted
with hot risings and heartburn,
should have a diet of acid
vegetables. persons of low spirits,
and subject to nervous disorders,
should avoid all flatulent food, whatever
is hard of digestion, or apt to
turn sour on the stomach. their
diet should be light, cool, and of an
opening nature; not only suited to
the age and constitution, but also to
the manner of life. a sedentary
person should live more sparingly
than one who labours hard without
doors, and those who are afflicted
with any particular disease ought to
avoid such aliment as has a tendency
to increase it. those afflicted with
the gravel ought to avoid every thing
astringent; and the scorbutic of
every description, salted or smoked
provisions. in the first period of
life, the food should be light, but
nourishing, and frequently taken.
for infants in particular, it ought
to be adapted to their age, and the
strength of their digestive powers.
no food whatever that has been prepared
for many hours should be
given them, especially after being
warmed up; for it creates flatulence,[]
heartburn, and a variety of other
disorders. sudden changes from
liquid to solid food should be avoided,
as well as a multiplicity of different
kinds; and all stimulating
dishes and heating liquors, prepared
for adults, should be carefully withheld
from children. the common
but indecent practice of introducing
chewed victuals into their mouth,
is equally disgusting and unwholesome.
solid food is most proper
for the state of manhood, but it
ought not to be too uniform. nature
has provided a great variety for the
use of man, and given him an appetite
suited to that variety: the constant
use of one kind of food therefore
is not good for the constitution,
though any great or sudden change
in diet ought as well to be avoided.
the change should be gradual, as
any sudden transition from a low to
a rich and luxurious mode of living,
may endanger health, and even life
itself. the diet suited to the last
period of life, when nature is on the
decline, approaches nearly to that
of the first: it should be light and
nourishing, and more frequently
taken than in vigorous age. old
people are generally afflicted with
wind, giddiness, and headachs,
which are frequently occasioned by
fasting too long, and even many
sudden deaths arise from the same
cause. the stomach therefore
should never be allowed in any case
to be too long empty, but especially
in the decline of life. proper attention
to diet is of the utmost importance,
not only to the preservation
of health, but in the cure of
many diseases, which may be effected
by diet only. its effects indeed
are not always so quick as those of
medicine, but they are generally
more lasting, and are obtained with
greater ease and certainty. temperance
and exercise are the two
best physicians in the world; and
if they were duly regarded, there
would be little occasion for any other.
food for birds. an excellent
food for linnets, canaries, and
other singing birds, may be prepared
in the following manner. knead
together one pound of split peas
ground to flour, half a pound each
of coarse sugar and fine grated
bread, two ounces of unsalted butter,
and the yolks of two eggs.
brown the paste gently in a fryingpan,
and when cold mix with it two
ounces of mace seed, and two pounds
of bruised hemp seed, separated
from the husk. this paste given to
birds in small quantities will preserve
them in health, and prompt
them to sing every month in the year.
forcemeat. this article,
whether in the form of stuffing balls,
or for patties, makes a considerable
part of good cooking, by the flavour
it imparts to whatsoever dish it may
be added. yet at many tables,
where every thing else is well done,
it is common to find very bad stuffing.
exact rules for the quantity
cannot easily be given; but the following
observations may be useful,
and habit will soon give knowledge
in mixing it to the taste. the selection
of ingredients should of course
be made, according to what they
are wanted for, observing that of
the most pungent, the smallest quantity
should be used. no one flavour
should greatly preponderate; yet
if several dishes be served the same
day, there should be a marked variety
in the taste of the forcemeat,
as well as of the gravies. it should
be consistent enough to cut with a
knife, but neither dry nor heavy.
the following are the articles of
which forcemeat may be made,
without giving it any striking flavour.
cold fowl or veal, scraped
ham, fat bacon, beef suet, crumbs
of bread, salt, white pepper, parsley,
nutmeg, yolk and white of eggs
well beaten to bind the mixture. to
these, any of the following may be
added, to vary the taste, and give it
a higher relish. oysters, anchovy,[]
taragon, savoury, pennyroyal, knotted
marjoram, thyme, basil, yolks
of hard eggs, cayenne, garlic, shalot,
chives, jamaica pepper in fine powder,
or two or three cloves.
forcemeat balls. to make
fine forcemeat balls for fish soups,
or stewed fish, beat together the
flesh and soft parts of a lobster, half
an anchovy, a large piece of boiled
celery, the yolk of a hard egg, a little
cayenne, mace, salt, and white
pepper. add two table-spoonfuls
of bread crumbs, one of oyster
liquor, two ounces of warmed butter,
and two eggs well beaten. make
the whole into balls, and fry them
in butter, of a fine brown.
shred a little ham or gammon, some
cold veal or fowl, beef suet, parsley,
a small quantity of onion, and a
very little lemon peel. add salt,
nutmeg, or pounded mace, bread
crumbs, and either white pepper or
cayenne. pound it all together in
a mortar, and bind it with one or
two eggs beaten and strained. the
same stuffing will do for meat, or
for patties. for fowls, it is usually
put between the skin and the flesh.
chop very fine about two ounces of
onion, and an ounce of green sage.
add four ounces of bread crumbs,
the yolk and white of an egg, a little
pepper and salt; and if approved,
a minced apple. this will do for
either goose or duck stuffing.
chop up the liver, with an anchovy,
some fat bacon, a little suet, some
sweet herbs, and an onion. add
salt, pepper, nutmeg, crumbs of
bread, and an egg to bind all together.
pies. the same as for fowls, only
substituting fat or bacon, instead of
suet. if the pie be of rabbit or
fowls, the livers mixed with fat and
lean pork, instead of bacon, will
make an excellent stuffing. the
seasoning is to be the same as for
fowls or meat.
the same stuffing will do for boiled
or roast turkey as for veal, or to
make it more relishing, add a little
grated ham or tongue, an anchovy,
or the soft part of a dozen oysters.
pork sausage meat is sometimes
used to stuff turkies or fowls, or
fried, and sent up as garnish.
a pound of fine fresh suet, one ounce
of cold veal or chicken, chopped
fine; crumbs of bread, a little shalot
or onion, white pepper, salt, nutmeg,
mace, pennyroyal, parsley, and
lemon thyme, finely shred. beat
as many fresh eggs, yolks and whites
separately, as will make the above ingredients
into a moist paste. roll it
into small balls, and boil them in
fresh lard, putting them in just as
it boils up. when of a light brown
take them out, and drain them before
the fire. if the suet be moist
or stale, a great many more eggs
will be necessary. balls made in
this way are remarkably light; but
being greasy, some people prefer
them with less suet and eggs.
scrape two ounces of undressed lean
veal, free from skin and sinews; two
ounces of beef or veal suet, and
two of bread crumbs. chop fine
two drams of parsley, one of lemon
peel, one of sweet herbs, one of
onion, and add half a dram of mace
or allspice reduced to a fine powder.
pound all together in a mortar,
break into it the yolk and white
of an egg, rub it all up well together,
and season it with a little pepper
and salt. this may be made
more savoury, by the addition of
cold boiled tongue, anchovy, shalot,
cayenne, or curry powder.
forehand of pork. cut
out the bone, sprinkle the inside
with salt, pepper, and dried sage.
roll the pork tight, and tie it up;
warm a little butter to baste it, and[]
then flour it. roast it by a hanging
jack, and about two hours will do it.
roast it either whole, or in separate
parts. if left to be cold, chopped
parsley should be sprinkled over it.
the neck and breast together are
called a scoven.
fowls. in purchasing fowls
for dressing, it is necessary to see
that they are fresh and good. if a
cock bird is young, his spurs will
be short; but be careful to observe
that they have not been cut or pared,
which is a trick too often practised.
if fresh, the vent will be close and
dark. pullets are best just before
they begin to lay, and yet are full
of egg. if hens are old, their combs
and legs will be rough: if young,
they will be smooth. a good capon
has a thick belly and a large
rump: there is a particular fat at
his breast, and the comb is very
pale. black-legged fowls being
moist, are best for roasting.
freckles. the cosmetics generally
recommended for improving
the skin and bloom of the face are
highly pernicious, and ought by no
means to be employed. temperance
in diet and exercise, with frequent
washing and bathing, are the best
means of preserving a healthful
countenance. but those who desire
to soften and improve the skin, may
use an infusion of horseradish in
milk, or the expressed juice of houseleek
mixed with cream, which will
be useful and inoffensive. freckles
on the face, or small discolourations
on other parts of the skin, are constitutional
in some cases; and in
others, they are occasioned by the
action of the sun upon the part, and
frequent exposures to the morning
air. for dispersing them, take four
ounces of lemon juice, one dram of
powdered borax, and two drams of
sugar: mix them together, and let
them stand a few days in a glass
bottle till the liquid is fit for use,
and then rub it on the face. but
for chaps and flaws in the skin, occasioned
by cold, rub on a little
plain unscented pomatum at bed-time,
and let it remain till morning.
or, which is much better, anoint the
face with honey water, made to the
consistence of cream, which will
form a kind of varnish on the skin,
and protect it from the effects of
cold.
french beans. string, and
cut them into four parts; if smaller,
they look so much the better. lay
them in salt and water; and when
the water boils, put them in with
some salt. as soon as they are
done, serve them immediately, to
preserve their colour. or when
half done, drain off the water, and
add two spoonfuls of broth strained.
in finishing them, put in a little
cream, with flour and butter.
french bread. with a quarter
of a peck of fine flour, mix the
yolks of three and the whites of two
eggs, beaten and strained; a little
salt, half a pint of good yeast that
is not bitter, and as much lukewarm
milk as will work it into a thin light
dough. stir it about, but do not
knead it. divide the dough into
three parts, put them into wooden
dishes, set them to rise, then turn
them out into the oven, which must
be quick, and rasp the bread when
done.
french dumplings. grate
a penny loaf, add half a pound of currants,
three quarters of a pound of
beef suet finely shred, and half a
grated nutmeg. beat up the yolks
of three eggs with three spoonfuls
of cream, as much white wine, and
a little sugar. mix all together,
work it up into a paste, make it into
dumplings of a convenient size, and
tie them up in cloths. put them into
boiling water, and let them boil
three quarters of an hour.
french pie. lay a puff paste
round the edge of the dish, and put
in either slices of veal, rabbits or
chickens jointed; with forcemeat[]
balls, sweetbreads cut in pieces, artichoke
bottoms, and a few truffles.
french porridge. stir together
some oatmeal and water, and
pour off the latter. put fresh in,
stir it well, and let it stand till the
next day. strain it through a fine
sieve, and boil the water, which
must be small in quantity, adding
some milk while it is doing. with
the addition of toast, this is much
in request abroad, for the breakfast
of weakly persons.
french pudding. grate six
ounces of brown bread, and shred
half a pound of suet. add four
eggs well beaten, half a pound of
currants picked and washed, a quarter
of a pound of sugar, and a little
nutmeg. mix all together, tie the
pudding up close in a cloth, and
boil it two hours. serve it up with
a sauce of melted butter, a little
sugar and sweet wine.
french rolls. rub one
ounce of butter into a pound of
flour; mix one egg beaten, a little
yeast that is not bitter, and as much
milk as will make the dough tolerably
stiff. beat it well, but do not
knead it: let it rise, and bake it on
tins.
french salad. mince up
three anchovies, a shalot, and some
parsley. put them into a bowl with
two table-spoonfuls of vinegar, one
of oil, and a little salt and mustard.
when well mixed, add by degrees
some cold roast or boiled meat in
very thin slices: put in a few at a
time, not exceeding two or three
inches long. shake them in the
seasoning, and then put more: cover
the bowl close, and let the salad
be prepared three hours before it is
to be eaten. garnish with parsley,
and a few slices of the fat.
fricandeau of beef. take
a nice piece of lean beef; lard it
with bacon seasoned with pepper,
salt, cloves, mace, and allspice. put
it into a stewpan with a pint of broth,
a glass of white wine, a bundle of
parsley, all sorts of sweet herbs, a
clove of garlic, a shalot or two, four
cloves, pepper and salt. when the
meat is become tender, cover it
close. skim the sauce well, strain
it, set it on the fire, and let it boil
till reduced to a glaze. glaze the
larded side with this, and serve the
meat on sorrel sauce.
fricandeau of veal. cut
a large piece from the fat side of the
leg, about nine inches long and half
as thick and broad. beat it with
the rolling pin, take off the skin, and
trim the rough edges. lard the top
and sides, cover it with fat bacon,
and then with white paper. lay it
into a stewpan with any pieces of
undressed veal or mutton, four
onions, a sliced carrot, a faggot of
sweet herbs, four blades of mace,
four bay leaves, a pint of good veal
or mutton broth, and four or five
ounces of lean ham or gammon.
cover the pan close, and let it stew
slowly for three hours; then take
up the meat, remove all the fat from
the gravy, and boil it quick to a
glaze. keep the fricandeau quite
hot, and then glaze it. serve it
with the remainder of the glaze in
the dish, and sorrel sauce in a tureen.—the
following is a cheaper
way of making a good fricandeau of
veal. with a sharp knife cut the
lean part of a large neck from the
best end, scooping it from the bones
a hand's length, and prepare it in
the manner above directed. three
or four bones only will be necessary,
and they will make the gravy; but
if the prime part of the leg is cut
off, it spoils the whole.—another
way is to take two large round
sweetbreads, and prepare them like
veal. make a rich gravy with truffles,
morels, mushrooms, and artichoke
bottoms, and serve it round.
boil rather more than half, in a small
quantity of water, and let them cool.
cut them up, simmer in a little gravy
made of the liquor they were[]
boiled in, adding a bit of veal or
mutton, onion, mace, lemon peel,
white pepper, and a bunch of sweet
herbs. when quite tender, keep
them hot, while the following sauce
is prepared. strain off the liquor,
return it into the saucepan with a
little salt, a scrape of nutmeg, and
a little flour and butter. give it
one boil, and when ready to serve,
beat up the yolk of an egg, add half
a pint of cream, and stir them over
the fire, but do not let it boil. it
will be quite as good however without
the egg. without the addition
of any other meat, the gravy may
be made of the trimmings of the
fowls, such as the necks, feet, small
wing bones, gizzards, and livers.
fricassee of rabbits. skin
them, cut them in pieces, soak in
warm water, and clean them. then
stew them in a little fresh water,
with a bit of lemon peel, a little
white wine, an anchovy, an onion,
two cloves, and a sprig of sweet
herbs. when tender take them out,
strain off the liquor, put a very little
of it into a quarter of a pint of thick
cream, with a piece of butter, and
a little flour. keep it constantly
stirring till the butter is melted;
then put in the rabbit, with a little
grated lemon peel, mace, and lemon
juice. shake all together over the
fire, and make it quite hot. if more
agreeable, pickled mushrooms may
be used instead of lemon.—to make
a brown fricassee, prepare the rabbits
as above, and fry them in butter
to a nice brown. put some
gravy or beef broth into the pan,
shake in some flour, and keep it
stirring over the fire. add some
ketchup, a very little shalot chopped,
salt, cayenne, and lemon juice,
or pickled mushrooms. boil it up,
put in the rabbit, and shake it round
till it is quite hot.
frying. this is often a very
convenient and expeditious mode
of cooking; but though one of the
most common, it is as commonly
performed in a very imperfect manner,
and meets with less attention
than the comfort of a good meal requires.
a fryingpan should be about
four inches deep, with a perfectly
flat and thick bottom, and perpendicular
sides. when used it should
be half filled with fat, for good frying
is in fact, boiling in fat. to
make sure that the pan is quite clean,
rub a little fat over it, then make it
warm, and wipe it out with a clean
cloth. great care must be taken
in frying, never to use any oil, butter,
lard, or drippings, but what is quite
clean, fresh, and free from salt.
any thing dirty spoils the appearance,
any thing bad tasted or stale
spoils the flavour, and salt prevents
its browning. fine olive oil is the
most delicate for frying, but it is
very expensive, and bad oil spoils
every thing that is dressed with it.
for general purposes, and especially
for fish, clean fresh lard is not near
so expensive as oil or clarified butter,
and does almost as well, except
for collops and cutlets. butter often
burns before any one is aware,
and what is fried with it will get a
dark and dirty appearance. dripping,
if nicely clean and fresh, is
almost as good as any thing: if not
clean, it may easily be clarified.
whatever fat be used, let it remain
in the pan a few minutes after frying,
and then pour it through a sieve
into a clean bason. if not burnt, it
will be found much better than it
was at first; but the fat in which
fish has been fried, will not serve
any other purpose. to fry fish,
parsley, potatoes, or any thing that
is watery, the fire must be very clear,
and the fat quite hot, which will be
the case when it has done hissing.
fish will neither be firm nor crisp,
nor of a good colour, unless the fat
be of a proper heat. to determine
this, throw a little bit of bread into
the pan: if it fries crisp, the fat is
ready: if it burns the bread, it is
too hot. whatever is fried before[]
the fat is hot enough, will be pale
and sodden, and offend the palate
and the stomach, as well as the eye.
the fat also must be thoroughly
drained from the fry, especially from
such things as are dressed in bread
crumbs, or the flavour will be impaired.
the dryness of fish depends
much upon its having been
fried in fat of a due degree of heat,
they are then crisp and dry in a few
minutes after being taken out of the
pan: when they are not, lay them
on a soft cloth before the fire, and
turn them till they are dry.
fried carp. scale, draw, and
wash them clean; dry them in flour,
and fry them in hog's lard to a light
brown. fry some toast, cut three-corner
ways, with the roes; lay the
fish on a coarse cloth to drain, and
serve them up with butter, anchovy
sauce, and the juice of a lemon.
garnish with the bread, roe, and
lemon.
fried eels. there is a greater
difference in the goodness of eels
than of any other fish. the true
silver-eel, so called from the bright
colour of the belly, is caught in the
thames. the dutch eels sold at
billingsgate are very bad; those
taken in great floods are generally
good, but in ponds they have usually
a strong rank flavour. except the
middle of summer, they are always
in season. if small, they should
be curled round and fried, being
first dipped into eggs and crumbs of
bread.
fried eggs. boil six eggs
for three minutes, put them in cold
water, and take off the shells, without
breaking the whites. wrap the
eggs up in a puff paste, smear them
over with egg, and grate some bread
over them. put into a stewpan a
sufficient quantity of lard or butter
to swim the eggs; and when the
lard is hot, put in the eggs, and fry
them of a good colour. lay them
on a cloth to drain.
fried herbs. clean and drain
a good quantity of spinach leaves,
two large handfuls of parsley, and
a handful of green onions. chop
the parsley and onions, and sprinkle
them among the spinach. stew
them together with a little salt, and
a bit of butter the size of a walnut.
shake the pan when it begins to
grow warm, and let it lie closely
covered over a slow stove till done
enough. it is served with slices of
broiled calves' liver, small rashers
of bacon, and fried eggs. the latter
on the herbs, and the other in a
separate dish. this is the mode of
dressing herbs in staffordshire.
fried mackarel. stuff the
fish with grated bread, minced parsley
and lemon peel, pepper and salt,
nutmeg, and the yolk of an egg, all
mixed together. serve with anchovy
and fennel sauce. or split
the fish open, cut off their heads,
season and hang them up four or
five hours, and then broil them.
make the sauce of fennel and parsley
chopped fine, and mixed with
melted butter.
fried oysters. to prepare
a garnish for boiled fish, make a
batter of flour, milk, and eggs. season
it a very little, dip the oysters
into the batter, and fry them of a
fine yellow brown. a little nutmeg
should be put into the seasoning,
and a few crumbs of bread into the
flour.
fried parsley. pick some
young parsley very clean, and put it
into a fryingpan with a bit of butter.
stir it with a knife till it becomes
crisp, and use it for garnishing. or
rub the picked parsley in a cloth
to clean it, and set it before the fire
in a dutch oven till it is crisp. this
is better than fried parsley, and may
be rubbed on steaks, calf's liver, or
any other dish of the kind.
fried patties. mince a bit
of cold veal, and six oysters; mix
them with a few crumbs of bread,
salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and a
very small bit of lemon peel. add[]
the liquor of the oysters, warm all
together in a tosser, but it must not
boil, and then let it grow cold. prepare
a good puff-paste, roll it thin,
and cut it into round or square
pieces. put some of the mixture
between two of them, twist the
edges to keep in the gravy, and fry
them of a fine brown. if baked, it
becomes a fashionable dish. all
patties should be washed over with
egg before they are baked.
fried potatoes. slice them
thin, and fry them in butter till
they are brown; then lay them in a
dish, and pour melted butter over
them. potatoes may likewise be
fried in butter, and served up with
powder sugar strewed over them.
any kind of fruit may be fried in the
same manner, and all batter should
be fried in hog's lard.
fried rabbit. cut it into
joints, and fry it in butter of a nice
brown. send it to table with fried
or dried parsley, and gravy or liver
sauce.
fried smelts. wipe them
clean, take away the gills, rub them
over with a feather dipped in egg,
and strew on some grated bread.
fry them in hog's lard over a clear
fire, and put them in when the fat
is boiling hot. when they are of a
fine brown, take them out and drain
off the fat. garnish with fried
parsley and lemon.
fried soles. divide two or
three soles from the backbone, and
take off the head, fins, and tail.
sprinkle the inside with salt, roll
them up tight from the tail and upwards,
and fasten with small skewers.
small fish do not answer, but if large
or of a tolerable size, put half a fish
in each roll. dip them into yolks
of eggs, and cover them with crumbs.
egg them over again, and then put
more crumbs. fry them of a beautiful
colour in lard, or in clarified
butter. or dip the soles in egg,
and cover them with fine crumbs of
bread. set on a fryingpan of the
proper size, and put into it a good
quantity of fresh lard or dripping.
let it boil, and immediately put the
fish into it, and do them of a fine
brown. soles that have been fried,
eat good cold with oil, vinegar, salt
and mustard.
fried tench. scale and clean
the fish well, dry and lay them before
the fire, dust them with flour,
and fry them in dripping or hog's
lard. serve with crisped parsley,
and plain butter. perch, trout, and
grayling may be done the same.
fried turbot. cut a small
turbot across in ribs, dry and flour
it, put it into a fryingpan, and cover
it with boiling lard. fry it brown,
and drain it. clean the pan, put in
a little wine, an anchovy, salt, nutmeg,
and a little ginger. put in the
fish, and stew it till the liquor is
half wasted. then take it out, put
in some butter rolled in flour, with
a minced lemon, and simmer them
to a proper thickness. rub a hot
dish with a piece of shalot, lay the
turbot in the dish, and pour the
sauce over it.
fried venison. cut the meat
into slices, fry it of a bright brown,
and keep it hot before the fire.
make gravy of the bones, add a little
butter rolled in flour, stir it in
the pan till it is thick and brown,
and put in some port and lemon
juice. warm the venison in it, put
in the dish, and pour the sauce over
it. send up currant jelly in a glass.
fritters. make them of pancake
batter, dropped in small quantities
into the pan: or put apple
into batter, pared and sliced, and
fry some of it with each slice. currants,
or very thinly-sliced lemon,
make an agreeable change. fritters
for company should be served
on a folded napkin in the dish. any
sort of sweetmeat, or ripe fruit, may
be made into fritters.
frontiniac. boil twelve[]
pounds of loaf sugar, and six pounds
of raisins cut small, in six gallons
of water. when the liquor is almost
cold, put in half a peck of elder
flowers; and the next day six spoonfuls
of the syrup of lemons, and four
of yeast. let it stand two days,
put it into a barrel that will just
hold it, and bottle it after it has
stood about two months.
frost and blights. when
a fruit tree is in full blossom, the
best way to preserve it from frost
and blights is to twine a rope upon
its branches, and bring the end of
it into a pail of water. if a light
frost happen in the night, the tree
will not be affected by it; but an
ice will be formed on the surface of
the water, in which the end of the
rope is immersed. this experiment
may easily be tried on wall fruit,
and has been found to answer. if
trees be infected with an easterly
blight, the best way is to fumigate
them with brimstone strewed on
burning charcoal: this will effectually
destroy the insects, and preserve
the fruit. afterwards it will be proper
to dash them with water, or
wash the branches with a woollen
cloth, and clear them of all glutinous
matter and excrescences of
every kind, which would harbour the
insects; but the washing should be
performed in the early part of a
warm day, that the moisture may be
exhaled before the cold of the evening
approaches.
frosted potatoes. if
soaked three hours in cold water,
before they are to be prepared as
food, changing the water every hour,
these valuable roots will recover
their salubrious quality and flavour.
while in cold water, they must stand
where a sufficiency of artificial heat
may prevent freezing. if much
frozen, allow a quarter of an ounce
of saltpetre to every peck of potatoes,
and dissolve it in the water.
but if so much penetrated by the
frost as to render them unfit for culinary
purposes, they may be made
into starch, and will yield a large
quantity of flour for that purpose.
froth for creams. sweeten
half a pound of the pulp of damsons,
or any other scalded fruit.
put to it the whites of four eggs
beaten, and beat up the pulp with
them till it will stand up, and take
any form. it should be rough, to
imitate a rock, or the billows of the
ocean. this froth looks and eats
well, and may be laid on cream, custard,
or trifle, with a spoon.
fruit. the method of preserving
any kind of fruit all the year, is
to put them carefully into a wide-mouthed
glass vessel, closed down
with oiled paper. the glasses are
to be placed in a box filled with a
mixture of four pounds of dry sand,
two pounds of bole-armeniac, and
one pound of saltpetre, so that the
fruit may be completely covered.
the fruit should be gathered by the
hand before it be thoroughly ripe,
and the box kept in a dry place.
fruit biscuits. to the pulp
of any scalded fruit, put an equal
weight of sugar sifted, and beat it
two hours. then make it into little
white-paper forms, dry them in a
cool oven, and turn them the next
day. they may be put into boxes
in the course of two or three days.
fruit for children. to
prepare fruit for children, far more
wholesome than in puddings or pies,
put some sliced apples, plums or
gooseberries, into a stone jar, and
sprinkle among them a sufficient
quantity of fine moist sugar. set
the jar on a hot hearth, or in a saucepan
of boiling water, and let it remain
till the fruit is well done.
slices of bread, or boiled rice, may
either be stewed with the fruit, or
added when eaten.
fruit paste. put any kind
of fruit into a preserving pan, stir
it till it will mash quite soft, and[]
strain it. to one pint of juice, add
a pound and a half of fine sugar;
dissolve the sugar in water, and boil
it till the water is dried up. then
mix it with the juice, boil it once,
pour it into plates, and dry it in a
stove. when wanted for use, cut it
in strips, and make paste knots for
garnishing.
fruit puddings. make up
a thick batter of milk and eggs, with
a little flour and salt; put in any
kind of fruit, and either bake or
boil it. apples should be pared
and quartered, gooseberries and
currants should be picked and cleaned,
before they are put into the batter.
or make a thick paste, roll it
out, and line a bason with it, after
it has been rubbed with a little butter.
then fill it with fruit, put on
a lid, tie it up close in a cloth, and
boil it for two hours. the pudding
will be lighter, if only made in a
bason, then turned out into a pudding
cloth, and boiled in plenty of
water.
fruit stains. if stains of
fruit or wine have been long in the
linen, rub the part on each side with
yellow soap. then lay on a thick
mixture of starch in cold water, rub
it well in, and expose the linen to
the sun and air till the stain comes
out. if not removed in three or
four days, rub off the mixture, and
renew the process. when dry, it
may be sprinkled with a little water.—many
other stains may be taken
out by only dipping the linen into
sour buttermilk, and drying it in a
hot sun. then wash it in cold water
and dry it, two or three times a
day.
fruit for tarts. to preserve
fruit for family desserts, whether
cherries, plums, or apples,
gather them when ripe, and put
them in small jars that will hold
about a pound. strew over each
jar six ounces of fine pounded sugar,
and cover each with two bladders,
separately tied down. set the jars
in a large stewpan of water up to
the neck, and let it boil three hours
gently. keep these and all other
sorts of fruit free from damp.
fruit trees. when they have
the appearance of being old or worn
out, and are covered with moss and
insects, they may be revived and
made fruitful by dressing them well
with a brush, dipped in a solution
of strong fresh lime. the outer
rind, with all its incumbrance, will
then fall off; a new and clean one
will be formed, and the trees put on
a healthy appearance.
fruits in jelly. put half
a pint of calf's foot jelly into a
bowl; when stiff, lay in three peaches,
and a bunch of grapes with the
stalk upwards. cover over with
vine leaves, and fill up the bowl with
jelly. let it stand till the next day,
and then set it to the brim in hot
water. when it gives way from the
bowl, turn the jelly out carefully,
and send it to table. any kind of
fruit may be treated in the same
way.
fuel. coals constitute a principal
article of domestic convenience,
especially during the severity
of winter. at that season they often
become very scarce, and are sold
at an extravagant price. to remedy
this evil in some measure, take two-thirds
of soft clay, free from stones,
and work it into three or four bushels
of small coals previously sifted:
form this composition into balls or
cakes, about three or four inches
thick, and let them be thoroughly
dried. when the fire burns clear,
place four or five of these cakes in
the front of the grate, where they
will soon become red, and yield a
clear and strong heat till they are
totally consumed. the expense of
a ton of this composition is but trifling,
when compared with that of a
chaldron of coals, as it may be prepared
at one-fourth of the cost, and
will be of greater service than a chaldron
and a half of the latter. coal[]
dust worked up with horse dung,
cow dung, saw dust, tanner's waste,
or any other combustible matter
that is not too expensive, will also
be found a saving in the article of
fuel. nearly a third of the coals
consumed in large towns and cities
might be saved, if the coal ashes
were preserved, instead of being
thrown into the dust bins, and afterwards
mixed with an equal quantity
of small coal, moistened with water.
this mixture thrown behind the fire,
with a few round coals in front,
would save the trouble of sifting the
ashes, and make a cheerful and
pleasant fire.——the best mode
of lighting a fire.—fill the
grate with fresh coals quite up to
the upper bar but one; then lay on
the wood in the usual manner, rather
collected in a mass than scattered.
over the wood place the
cinders of the preceding day, piled
up as high as the grate will admit,
and placed loosely in rather large
fragments, in order that the draft
may be free: a bit or two of fresh
coal may be added to the cinders
when once they are lighted, but no
small coal must be thrown on at
first. when all is prepared, light
the wood, when the cinders in a
short time being thoroughly ignited,
the gas rising from the coals below,
which will now be affected by the
heat, will take fire as it passes
through them, leaving a very small
portion of smoke to go up the chimney.
one of the advantages of this
mode of lighting a fire is, that
small coal is better suited to the
purpose than large, except a few
pieces in front to keep the small
from falling out of the grate. a fire
lighted in this way will burn all day,
without any thing being done to it.
when apparently quite out, on being
stirred, you have in a few minutes
a glowing fire. when the upper
part begins to cake, it must be
stirred, but the lower must not be
touched.
fumigation. to prevent infection
from fever, take a handful
each of rue, sage, mint, rosemary,
and lavender, all fresh gathered.
cut them small, put them into a
stone jar, pour on a pint of the best
white-wine vinegar, cover the jar
close, and let it stand eight days
in the sun, or near the fire. then
strain it off, and dissolve in it an
ounce of camphor. this liquid
sprinkled about the chamber, or
fumigated, will much revive the patient,
and prevent the attendants
from receiving the infection. or
mix a spoonful of salt in a cup,
with a little powdered magnesia:
pour on the mixture at different
times a spoonful of strong vitriolic
acid, and the vapour arising from it
will destroy the putrid effluvia.
furniture linings. these
articles require to be first washed,
and afterwards dyed of a different
colour, in order to change and improve
their appearance.—for a
buff or salmon colour, according
to the depth of the hue, rub down
on a pewter plate two pennyworth
of spanish arnatto, and then boil it
in a pail of water a quarter of an
hour. put into it two ounces of
potash, stir it round, and instantly
put in the lining. stir it all the
time it is boiling, which must be
five or six minutes; then put it into
cold spring water, and hang the articles
up singly without wringing.
when almost dry, fold the lining,
and mangle it.—for pink, the calico
must be washed extremely clean,
and thoroughly dried. then boil it
in two gallons of soft water, and
four ounces of alum; take it out,
and dry it in the air. meanwhile
boil in the alum water two handfuls
of wheat bran till quite slippery,
and then strain it. take two scruples
of cochineal, and two ounces of
argall finely pounded and sifted, and
mix it with the liquor a little at a
time. put the calico into the liquor,
keep it stirring and boiling, till the[]
liquor is nearly wasted. then take
out the calico, wash it first in chamber
lye, and afterwards in cold water.
rinse it in water-starch strained,
dry it quick without hanging it
in folds, and let it be well mangled.
it would be better still to have it
callendered.—blue. the calico must
be washed clean and dried. then
mix some of scott's liquid blue in
as much water as will be sufficient
to cover the things to be dyed, and
add some starch to give it a light
stiffness. dry a small piece of the
lining to see whether the colour is
deep enough; and if approved, put
it in and wash it in the dye. dry
the articles singly, and mangle or
callender them.
furs. to preserve them from
the moth, comb them occasionally
while in use. when not wanted,
mix among them bitter apples from
the druggists, in small muslin bags,
sewing them in several folds of linen,
carefully turned in at the edges.
keep the furs in a cool place, free
from damp.
gad fly. cows and oxen are
often so distressed by the darts of
the gad fly, that they rush into the
water for refuge till night approaches.
the only remedy is to wash the
backs of the cattle in the spring
with strong tobacco-water, which
would greatly prevent the generating
of these vermin. when sheep are
struck with the fly, the way is to
clip off the wool, to rub the parts
affected with powdered lime or wood
ashes, and afterwards to anoint them
with currier's oil, which will heal
the wounds, and secure the animals
from future attack. or dissolve
half an ounce of corrosive sublimate
in two quarts of soft water, and add
a quarter of a pint of spirits of turpentine.
cut off the wool as far as
it is infected, pour a few drops of
the mixture in a circle round the
maggots produced by the flies, and
afterwards rub a little of it among
them, and the maggots will immediately
be destroyed.
game. game ought not to be
thrown away even after it has been
kept a long time, for when it seems
to be spoiled it may often be made
fit for eating, by carefully cleaning
and washing it with vinegar and
water. if there is danger of birds
not keeping, the best way is to crop
and draw them. pick them clean,
wash them in two or three waters,
and rub them with salt. plunge
them into a kettle of boiling water
one by one, and draw them up and
down by the legs, that the water
may pass through them. let them
remain in the water five or six minutes,
and then hang them up in a
cool place. when drained, season
the insides well with pepper and
salt, and wash them before they are
roasted. the most delicate birds,
even grouse, may thus be preserved.
those that live by suction cannot
be done this way, as they are never
drawn; and perhaps the heat might
make them worse, as the water could
not pass through them; but they
will bear a high flavour. lumps
of charcoal put about birds and
meat will preserve them from taint,
and restore what is spoiling.
game sauce. wash and pare
a head of celery, cut it into thin
slices, boil it gently till it becomes
tender; then add a little beaten
mace, pepper, salt, and nutmeg.
thicken it with flour and butter,
boil it up, pour some of it in the[]
dish, and some in a boat. lemon
pickle or lemon juice may be added
to it.
gammon. take off the rind
of the ham and gammon, and soak
it in water; cover the fat part with
writing paper, roast, and baste it
with canary. when done, sprinkle
it over with crumbs of bread and
parsley. serve it with brown gravy,
after it is well browned, and garnish
it with raspings of bread.
garden hedges. a well
trained hawthorn fence is the strongest,
but as it is apt to get thin and
full of gaps at the bottom, the barberry
is to be preferred, especially
on high banks with a light soil. it
may be raised from the berries as
easily as hawthorn, and will grow
faster, if the suckers be planted
early. the barberry puts up numerous
suckers from the roots; it
will therefore always grow close at
the bottom, and make an impenetrable
fence. in trimming any kind
of close hedge, care should be taken
to slope the sides, and make it pointed
at the top: otherwise, the bottom
being shaded by the upper part,
will make it grow thin and full of
gaps. the sides of a young hedge
may be trimmed, to make it bush the
better; but it should not be topped
till it has arrived at a full yard in
height, though a few of the points
may be taken off. the bottom of
hawthorn hedges may be conveniently
thickened, by putting in some
plants of common sweet briar, or
barberry.
garden rhubarb. to cultivate
the common garden rhubarb,
it should not only have a depth of
good soil, but it should be watered
in dry weather, and well covered
with straw or dung in the winter
season. it will then become solid
when taken out of the ground; and
if cut into large slices, and hung up
in a warm kitchen, it will soon be fit
for use. the plants may be taken
up when the leaves are decayed,
either in spring or in autumn, while
the weather is dry; and when the
roots are cleared from dirt, without
washing, they should be dried in
the sun for a few days before they
are hung up. the better way would
be to wrap them up separately in
whited brown paper, and dry them
on the hob of a common stove.
lemon and orange peel will dry remarkably
well in the same manner.
gargles. common gargles may
be made of figs boiled in milk and
water, with a little sal-ammoniac;
or sage-tea, with honey and vinegar
mixed together. a sore throat may
be gargled with it two or three
times a day.
geese. the rearing of this
species of poultry incurs but little
expense, as they chiefly support
themselves on commons or in lanes,
where they can get at water. the
largest are esteemed the best, as
also are the white and the grey: the
pied and dark coloured are not so
good. thirty days are generally
the time that the goose sets, but in
warm weather she will sometimes
hatch sooner. give them plenty of
food, such as scalded bran and light
oats. as soon as the goslings are
hatched, keep them housed for eight
or ten days, and feed them with barley
meal, bran, and curds. green
geese should begin to fatten at six
or seven weeks old, and be fed as
above. stubble geese require no
fattening, if they have the run of
good fields and pasture.—if geese
are bought at market, for the purpose
of cooking, be careful to see
that they are fresh and young. if
fresh, the feet will be pliable: if
stale, dry and stiff. the bill and
feet of a young one will be yellow,
and there will be but few hairs upon
them: if old, they will be red.
green geese, not more than three
or four months old, should be scalded:
a stubble goose should be picked
dry.
george pudding. boil very[]
tender a handful of whole rice in
a small quantity of milk, with a
large piece of lemon peel. let it
drain; then mix with it a dozen apples,
boiled to a pulp as dry as possible.
add a glass of white wine,
the yolks of five eggs, two ounces
of orange and citron cut thin, and
sweeten it with sugar. line a mould
or bason with a very good paste,
beat the five whites of the eggs to
a very strong froth, and mix it with
the other ingredients. fill the mould,
and bake it of a fine brown colour.
serve it bottom upwards with the
following sauce: two glasses of
wine, a spoonful of sugar, the yolks
of two eggs, and a piece of sugar
the size of a walnut. simmer without
boiling, and pour to and from
the saucepan till the sauce is of a
proper thickness, and then put it
in the dish.
german puddings. melt
three ounces of butter in a pint of
cream, and let it stand till nearly
cold. then mix two ounces of fine
flour, and two ounces of sugar, four
yolks and two whites of eggs, and
a little rose or orange flower water.
bake in little buttered cups half an
hour. they should be served the
moment they are done, and only
when going to be eaten, or they will
not be light. turn the puffs out of
the cups, and serve with white wine
and sugar.
german puffs. mix together
two ounces of blanched almonds
well beaten, a spoonful of rose water,
one white and two yolks of eggs,
a spoonful of flour, half a pint of
cream, two ounces of butter, and
sugar to taste. butter some cups,
half fill them, and put them in the
oven. serve with white wine sauce,
butter, and sugar. this is esteemed
a good middle dish for dinner or
supper.
giblets. let the giblets be
picked clean and washed, the feet
skinned, the bill cut off, the head
split in two, the pinion bones broken,
the liver and gizzard cut in
four, and the neck in two pieces.
put them into a pint of water, with
pepper and salt, an onion, and sweet
herbs. cover the saucepan close,
and stew them on a slow fire till
they are quite tender. take out
the onion and herbs, and put them
into a dish with the liquor.
giblet pie. clean and skin
the giblets very carefully, stew them
with a small quantity of water,
onion, black pepper, and a bunch
of sweet herbs, till nearly done.
let them grow cold: and if not
enough to fill the dish, lay at the
bottom two or three slices of veal,
beef, or mutton. add the liquor of
the stew; and when the pie is baked,
pour into it a large teacupful of
cream. sliced apples added to the
pie are a great improvement. duck
giblets will do; but goose giblets
are much to be preferred.
giblet soup. scald and clean
three or four sets of goose or duck
giblets, and stew them slowly with
a pound or two of gravy beef, scrag
of mutton, or the bone of a knuckle
of veal, an ox tail, or some shanks
of mutton. add a large bunch of
sweet herbs, a tea-spoonful of white
pepper, a large spoonful of salt,
and three onions. put in five pints
of water, cut each of the gizzards
into four pieces, and simmer till
they become quite tender. skin
the stew carefully, add a quarter of
a pint of cream, two tea-spoonfuls
of mushroom powder, and an ounce
of butter mixed with a dessert-spoonful
of flour. let it boil a few
minutes, then put it into a tureen,
add a little salt, and serve up the
soup with the giblets. instead of
cream, it may be seasoned with a
large spoonful of ketchup, some
cayenne, and two glasses of sherry.
gilded frames. these valuable
articles cannot be preserved
from fly stains, without covering
them with strips of paper, and suffering
them to remain till the flies[]
are gone. previous to this, the
light dust should be blown from the
gilding, and a feather or a clean
brush lightly passed over it. linen
takes off the gilding, and deadens
its brightness; it should therefore
never be used for wiping it. some
means should be used to destroy the
flies, as they injure furniture of
every kind, and the paper likewise.
bottles hung about with sugar and
vinegar, or beer, will attract them;
or fly water, put into little shells
placed about the room, but out of
the reach of children.
gilliflower wine. to three
gallons of water put six pounds of
the best raw sugar; boil the sugar
and water together for the space of
half an hour, and keep skimming it
as the scum rises. let it stand to
cool, beat up three ounces of syrup
of betony with a large spoonful of
ale yeast, and put it into the liquor.
prepare a peck of gilliflowers, cut
from the stalks, and put them in to
infuse and work together for three
days, the whole being covered with
a cloth. strain it, and put it into
a cask; let it settle for three or
four weeks, and then bottle it.
ginger beer. to every gallon
of spring water add one ounce
of sliced white ginger, one pound
of lump sugar, and two ounces of
lemon juice. boil the mixture nearly
an hour, and take off the scum;
then run it through a hair sieve into
a tub, and when cool, add yeast in
the proportion of half a pint to nine
gallons. keep it in a temperate
situation two days, during which it
may be stirred six or eight times.
then put it into a cask, which must
be kept full, and the yeast taken
off at the bunghole with a spoon.
in a fortnight, add half a pint of
fining to nine gallons of the liquor,
which will clear it by ascent, if it
has been properly fermented. the
cask must still be kept full, and the
rising particles taken off at the bunghole.
when fine, which may be
expected in twenty-four hours, bottle
and cork it well; and in summer
it will be ripe and fit to drink in a
fortnight.
ginger drops. beat two
ounces of fresh candied orange in
a mortar, with a little sugar, till
reduced to a paste. then mix an
ounce of the powder of white ginger,
with a pound of loaf sugar.
wet the sugar with a little water,
and boil all together to a candy,
and drop it on white paper the size
of mint drops. these make an excellent
stomachic.
ginger wine. to seven gallons
of water put nineteen pounds
of moist sugar, and boil it for half
an hour, taking off the scum as it
rises. then take a small quantity
of the liquor, and add to it nine
ounces of the best ginger bruised.
put it all together, and when nearly
cold, chop nine pounds of raisins
very small, and put them into a nine
gallon cask, with one ounce of
isinglass. slice four lemons into
the cask, taking out all the seeds,
and pour the liquor over them, with
half a pint of fresh yeast. leave
it unstopped for three weeks, and
in about three months it will be fit
for bottling. there will be one gallon
of the sugar and water more
than the cask will hold at first:
this must be kept to fill up as the
liquor works off, as it is necessary
that the cask should be kept full,
til it has done working. the raisins
should be two thirds malaga,
and one third muscadel. spring
and autumn are the best seasons for
making this wine.—another. boil
nine quarts of water with six pounds
of lump sugar, the rinds of two or
three lemons very thinly pared, and
two ounces of bruised white ginger.
let it boil half an hour, and skim
it well. put three quarters of a
pound of raisins into the cask; and
when the liquor is lukewarm, turn
it, adding the juice of two lemons
strained, with a spoonful and a half[]
of yeast. stir it daily, then put in
half a pint of brandy, and half an
ounce of isinglass shavings. stop
it up, and bottle it in six or seven
weeks. the lemon peel is not to
be put into the barrel.
gingerbread. mix with two
pounds of flour, half a pound of
treacle, and half a pound of butter,
adding an ounce of ginger finely
powdered and sifted, and three quarters
of an ounce of caraway seeds.
having worked it very much, set it
to rise before the fire. then roll
out the paste, cut it into any shape,
and bake it on tins. if to be made
into sweetmeats, add some candied
orange-peel, shred into small pieces.—another
sort. to three quarters
of a pound of treacle, put one egg
beaten and strained. mix together
four ounces of brown sugar, half an
ounce of sifted ginger, and a quarter
of an ounce each of cloves,
mace, allspice, and nutmeg, beaten
as fine as possible; also a quarter
of an ounce of coriander and caraway
seeds. melt a pound of butter,
and mix with the above, adding as
much flour as will knead it into a
pretty stiff paste. roll it out, cut
it into cakes, bake them on tin
plates in a quick oven, and a little
time will do them. gingerbread
buttons or drops may be made of
a part of the paste.—a plain sort
of gingerbread may be prepared as
follows. mix three pounds of flour
with half a pound of butter, four
ounces of brown sugar, and half an
ounce of pounded ginger. make it
into a paste, with a pound and a
quarter of warm treacle. or make
the gingerbread without butter, by
mixing two pounds of treacle with
the following ingredients. four
ounces each of orange, lemon, citron,
and candied ginger, all thinly sliced;
one ounce each of coriander seeds,
caraways, and pounded ginger, adding
as much flour as will make it
into a soft paste. lay it in cakes
on tin plates, and bake it in a quick
oven. keep it dry in a covered
earthen vessel, and the gingerbread
will be good for some months. if
cakes or biscuits be kept in paper,
or a drawer, the taste will be disagreeable.
a tureen, or a pan and
cover, will preserve them long and
moist; or if intended to be crisp,
laying them before the fire, or keeping
them in a dry canister, will
make them so.
gingerbread nuts. carefully
melt half a pound of butter,
and stir it up in two pounds of treacle.
add an ounce of pounded
ginger, two ounces of preserved lemon
and orange peel, two ounces
of preserved angelica cut small, one
of coriander seed pounded, and the
same of caraway whole. mix them
together, with two eggs, and as
much flour as will bring it to a fine
paste. make it into nuts, put them
on a tin plate, and bake them in a
quick oven.
glass. broken glass may be
mended with the same cement as
china, or if it be only cracked, it
will be sufficient to moisten the part
with the white of an egg, strewing
it over with a little powdered lime,
and instantly applying a piece of
fine linen. another cement for
glass is prepared from two parts of
litharge, one of quick lime, and one
of flint glass, each separately and
finely powdered, and the whole
worked up into a paste with drying
oil. this compound is very durable,
and acquires a greater degree of
hardness when immersed in water.
glasses. these frail and expensive
articles may be rendered
less brittle, and better able to bear
sudden changes of temperature, by
first plunging them into cold water,
then gradually heating the water till
it boils, and suffering it to cool in
the open air. glasses of every description,
used for the table, will
afterwards bear boiling water suddenly[]
poured into them, without
breaking. when they have been
tarnished by age or accident, their
lustre may be restored by strewing
on them some fuller's earth, carefully
powdered and cleared of sand
and dirt, and then rubbing them
gently with a linen cloth, or a little
putty.
gloves. leather gloves may
be repaired, cleaned, and dyed of a
fine yellow, by steeping a little
saffron in boiling water for about
twelve hours; and having lightly
sewed up the tops of the gloves, to
prevent the dye from staining the
insides, wet them over with a sponge
or soft brush dipped in the liquid.
a teacupful will be sufficient for a
single pair.
gloucester cheese. this
article is made of milk immediately
from the cow; and if it be too hot
in the summer, a little skim milk or
water is added to it, before the rennet
is put in. as soon as the curd
is come it is broken small, and cleared
of the whey. the curd is set in
the press for about a quarter of an
hour, in order to extract the remainder
of the liquid. it is then
put into the cheese tub again,
broken small, and scalded with water
mixed with a little whey. when
the curd is settled, the liquor is
poured off; the curd is put into a
vat, and worked up with a little salt
when about half full. the vat is
then filled up, and the whole is turned
two or three times in it, the edges
being pared, and the middle rounded
up at each turning. at length,
the curd being put into a cloth, it is
placed in the press, then laid on the
shelves, and turned every day till
it becomes sufficiently firm to bear
washing.
gloucester jelly. take
rice, sago, pearl barley, hartshorn
shavings, and eringo root, each one
ounce. simmer with three pints of
water till reduced to one, and then
strain it. when cold it will be a
jelly; of which give, dissolved in
wine, milk, or broth, in change with
other nourishment.
gnats. the stings of these
troublesome insects are generally
attended with a painful swelling.
one of the most effectual remedies
consists of an equal mixture of turpentine
and sweet oil, which should
immediately be applied to the wounded
part, and it will afford relief in
a little time. olive oil alone, unsalted
butter, or fresh lard, if rubbed
on without delay, will also be
found to answer the same purpose.
they may be destroyed by fumigation,
the same as for flies.
gold. to clean gold, and restore
its lustre, dissolve a little sal
ammoniac in common wine. boil
the gold in it, and it will soon recover
its brilliance. to clean gold
or silver lace, sew it up in a linen
cloth, and boil it with two ounces
of soap in a pint of water: afterwards
wash the lace in clear water.
when the lace happens to be tarnished,
the best liquor for restoring
its lustre is spirits of wine, which
should be warmed before it is applied.
this application will also
preserve the colour of silk or embroidery.
gold rings. if a ring sticks
tight on the finger, and cannot easily
be removed, touch it with mercury,
and it will become so brittle
that a slight blow will break it.
goose feathers. these being
deemed particularly valuable,
the birds in some counties are plucked
four or five times in a year. the
first operation is performed in the
spring for feathers and quills, and
is repeated for feathers only, between
that period and michaelmas.
though the plucking of geese appears
to be a barbarous custom, yet
experience has proved, that if carefully
done, the birds thrive better,
and are more healthy, when stripped[]
of their feathers, than if they
were left to drop them by moulting.
geese intended for breeding in farm
yards, and which are called old
geese, may be plucked three times
a year, at an interval of seven weeks,
but not oftener. every one should
be thirteen or fourteen weeks old
before they are subject to this operation,
or they are liable to perish
in cold summers; and if intended
for the table, they would become
poor and lose their quality, were
they stripped of their feathers at an
earlier period.
goose pie. quarter a goose,
season it well, put it in a baking
dish, and lay pieces of butter over
it. put on a raised crust, and bake
it in a moderate oven. to make a
richer pie, forcemeat may be added,
and slices of tongue. duck pie is
made in the same manner.
goose sauce. put into melted
butter a spoonful of sorrel juice,
a little sugar, and some scalded
gooseberries. pour it into boats,
and send it hot to table.
gooseberry fool. put the
fruit into a stone jar, with some
good lisbon sugar. set the jar on
a stove, or in a saucepan of water
over the fire: if the former, a large
spoonful of water should be added
to the fruit. when it is done enough
to pulp, press it through a cullender.
have ready a sufficient quantity of
new milk, and a tea-cupful of raw
cream, boiled together, or an egg
instead of the latter. when cold,
sweeten it pretty well with fine lisbon
sugar, and mix the pulp with it
by degrees.
gooseberry hops. gather
the largest green gooseberries of the
walnut kind, and slit the tops into
four quarters, leaving the stalk end
whole. pick out the seeds, and
with a strong needle and thread fasten
five or six together, by running
the thread through the bottoms, till
they are of the size of a hop. lay
vine leaves at the bottom of a tin
preserving-pan, cover them with the
hops, then a layer of leaves, and so
on: lay a good many on the top,
and fill the pan with water. stop
it down so close that no steam can
escape, set it by a slow fire till scalding
hot, and then take it off to cool.
repeat the operation till the gooseberries,
on being opened, are found
to be of a good green. then drain
them on sieves, and make a thin
syrup of a pound of sugar to a pint
of water, well boiled and skimmed.
when the syrup is half cold, put in
the fruit; give it a boil up, and repeat
it thrice. gooseberry hops
look well and eat best dried, and in
this case they may be set to dry in
a week. but if to be kept moist,
make a syrup in the above proportions,
adding a slice of ginger in the
boiling. when skimmed and clear,
give the gooseberries one boil, and
pour the syrup cold over them. if
found too sour, a little sugar may
be added, before the hops that are
for drying receive their last boil.
the extra syrup will serve for pies,
or go towards other sweetmeats.
gooseberry jam. gather
some ripe gooseberries, of the clear
white or green sort, pick them clean
and weigh them. allow three quarters
of a pound of lump sugar to a
pound of fruit, and half a pint of
water. boil and skim the sugar and
water, then put in the fruit, and boil
it gently till it is quite clear. break
the gooseberries into jam, and put
into small pots.—another. gather
some ripe gooseberries in dry weather,
of the red hairy sort, and pick
off the heads and tails. put twelve
pounds of them into a preserving
pan, with a pint of currant juice,
drawn as for jelly. boil them pretty
quick, and beat them with a spoon;
when they begin to break, add six
pounds of white lisbon sugar, and
simmer them slowly to a jam. they
require long boiling, or they will not
keep; but they make an excellent
jam for tarts and puffs. when the[]
jam is put into jars, examine it after
two or three days; and if the syrup
and fruit separate, the whole must
be boiled again. in making white
gooseberry jam, clarified sugar
should be used; and in all cases
great care must be taken to prevent
the fruit from burning to the bottom
of the pan.
gooseberry pudding. stew
some gooseberries in a jar over a
hot hearth, or in a saucepan of water,
till reduced to a pulp. take a
pint of the juice pressed through a
coarse sieve, and mix it with three
eggs beaten and strained. add an
ounce and a half of butter, sweeten
it well, put a crust round the dish,
and bake it. a few crumbs of roll
should be mixed with the above to
give it a little consistence, or four
ounces of naples biscuits.
gooseberry trifle. scald
as much fruit as when pulped through
a sieve, will cover the bottom of a
dish intended to be used. mix with
it the rind of half a lemon grated
fine, sweetened with sugar. put
any quantity of common custard
over it, and a whip on the top, as
for other trifles.
gooseberry vinegar. boil
some spring water; and when cold,
put to every three quarts, a quart
of bruised gooseberries in a large
tub. let them remain two or three
days, stirring often; then strain
through a hair bag, and to each gallon
of liquor add a pound of the
coarsest sugar. put it into a barrel,
with yeast spread upon a toast, and
cover the bung hole with a piece of
slate. the greater the quantity of
sugar and fruit, the stronger the
vinegar.
gooseberry wine. when
the weather is dry, gather gooseberries
about the time they are half
ripe. pick them clean as much as
a peck into a convenient vessel, and
bruise them with a piece of wood,
taking as much care as possible to
keep the seeds whole. now having
put the pulp into a canvas bag, press
out all the juice; and to every gallon
of the gooseberries, add about
three pounds of fine loaf sugar. mix
the whole together by stirring it
with a stick, and as soon as the sugar
is quite dissolved, pour it into
a cask which will exactly hold it.
if the quantity be about eight or
nine gallons, let it stand a fortnight:
if twenty gallons, forty days, and so
on in proportion. set it in a cool
place; and after standing the proper
time, draw it off from the lees.
put it into another clean vessel of
equal size, or into the same, after
pouring out the lees and making it
clean. let a cask of ten or twelve
gallons stand for about three months,
and twenty gallons for five months,
after which it will be fit for bottling
off.
gather some dry gooseberries of
the hairy sort, before the seeds become
large, and take care not to
cut them in taking off the stalks and
buds. if gathered in the damp, or
the gooseberry skins are the least
broken in the preparation, the fruit
will mould. fill some jars or wide-mouthed
bottles, put the corks
loosely in, and set the bottles up
to the neck in a kettle of water.
when the fruit looks scalded, take
them out; and when perfectly cold,
cork them down close, and rosin
the top. dig a trench sufficiently
deep to receive all the bottles, and
cover them with the earth a foot and
a half. when a frost comes on, a
little fresh litter from the stable will
prevent the ground from hardening,
so that the fruit may more easily be
dug up.—green gooseberries may
also be preserved for winter use,
without bedding them in the earth.
scald them as above, and when
cold, fill the bottles up with cold
water. cork and rosin them down,
and keep them in a dry place.—another
way. having prepared the
gooseberries as above, prepare a[]
kettle of boiling water, and put into
it as much roche alum as will harden
the water, or give it a little
roughness when dissolved: but if
there be too much it will spoil the
fruit. cover the bottom of a large
sieve with gooseberries, without laying
one upon another; and hold the
sieve in the water till the fruit begins
to look scalded on the outside.
turn them gently out of the sieve
on a cloth on the dresser, cover them
with another cloth, putting some
more to be scalded, till the whole
are finished. observe not to put
one quantity upon another, or they
will become too soft. the next day
pick out any bad or broken ones,
bottle the rest, and fill up the bottles
with the alum water in which
they were scalded. if the water be
left in the kettle, or in a glazed pan,
it will spoil; it must therefore be
quickly put into the bottles. gooseberries
prepared in this way, and
stopped down close, will make as
fine tarts as when fresh from the
trees.—another way. in dry weather
pick some full grown but unripe
gooseberries, top and tail them,
and put them into wide-mouthed
bottles. stop them lightly with
new velvet corks, put them into the
oven after the bread is drawn, and
let them stand till they are shrunk
one fourth. take them out of the
oven, fasten the corks in tight, cut
off the tops, and rosin them down
close. set them in a dry place;
and if well secured from the air,
they will keep the year round. currants
and damsons may be preserved
in the same way.
melt some hog's lard, add as much
clivers or goosegrass as the lard will
moisten, and boil them together over
a slow fire. keep the mixture stirring
till it becomes a little brown,
and then strain it through a cloth.
when cold, take the ointment from
the water, and put it up in gallipots.
gout. gouty patients are required
to abstain from all fermented
and spirituous liquors, and to use
wine very moderately; carefully
to avoid all fat, rancid, and salted
provisions, and high seasoned dishes
of every description. the constant
use of barley bread is recommended,
with large doses of powdered ginger
boiled in milk for breakfast.
absorbent powders of two scruples
of magnesia, and three or four grains
each of rhubarb and purified kali,
should be taken during the intervals
of gouty fits, and repeated
every other morning for several
weeks. the feet should be kept
warm, sinapisms frequently applied
to them, and the part affected should
be covered with flannel.
gout cordial. take four
pounds of sun raisins sliced and
stoned, two ounces of senna, one
ounce of fennel seed, one of coriander,
half an ounce of cochineal,
half an ounce of saffron, half an
ounce of stick liquorice, and half a
pound of rhubarb: infuse them all
in two gallons of brandy, and let it
stand for ten days. stir it occasionally,
then strain it off, and bottle
it. take a small wine-glass full,
when the gout is in the head or
stomach; and if the pain be not
removed, take two large spoonfuls
more.—or take six drams of opium,
half an ounce of soap of tartar, half
an ounce of castile soap, one dram
of grated nutmeg, three drams of
camphor, two scruples of saffron,
and nine ounces of sweet spirit of
sal-ammoniac. put them all into a
wine flask in a sand-heat for ten
days, shaking it occasionally till the
last day or two: then pour it off
clear, and keep it stopped up close
for use. take thirty or forty drops
in a glass of peppermint two hours
after eating; it may also be taken
two or three times in the day or
night if required.
granaries. these depositaries
are very liable to be infested[]
with weasels, and various kinds of
insects. to prevent their depredations,
the floors of granaries should
be laid with poplars of lombardy.
grapes. to preserve this valuable
fruit, prepare a cask or barrel,
by carefully closing up its crevices
to prevent access of the external
air. place a layer of bran,
which has been well dried in an
oven; upon this place a layer of
bunches of grapes, well cleaned,
and gathered in the afternoon of a
dry day, before they are perfectly
ripe. proceed then with alternate
layers of bran and grapes till the
barrel is full, taking care that the
bunches of grapes do not touch each
other, and to let the last layer be of
bran; then close the barrel so that
the air may not be able to penetrate.
grapes thus packed will keep for
a twelvemonth. to restore their
freshness, cut the end of each bunch,
and put that of white grapes into
white wine, and that of black grapes
into red wine, as flowers are put into
water to keep them fresh. it is
customary in france to pack grapes
for the london market in saw dust,
but it must be carefully dried with
a gentle heat, or the turpentine and
other odours of the wood will not
fail to injure the fruit. oak saw
dust will answer the purpose best.
grape wine. to every gallon
of ripe grapes put a gallon of
soft water, bruise the grapes, let
them stand a week without stirring,
and draw the liquor off fine. to
every gallon of liquor allow three
pounds of lump sugar, put the whole
into a vessel, but do not stop it till
it has done hissing; then stop it
close, and in six months it will be
fit for bottling.—a better wine,
though smaller in quantity, will be
made by leaving out the water, and
diminishing the quantity of sugar.
water is necessary only where the
juice is so scanty, or so thick, as in
cowslip, balm, or black currant wine,
that it could not be used without it.
gravel. the gout or rheumatism
has a tendency to produce this
disorder; it is also promoted by the
use of sour liquor, indigestible food,
especially cheese, and by a sedentary
life. perspiration should be assisted
by gentle means, particularly
by rubbing with a warm flannel;
the diet regulated by the strictest
temperance, and moderate exercise
is not to be neglected. for medicine,
take the juice of a horseradish,
made into a thin syrup by mixing it
with sugar; a spoonful or two to be
taken every three or four hours.
gravel walks. to preserve
garden walks from moss and weeds,
water them frequently with brine,
or salt and water, both in the spring
and in autumn. worms may be
destroyed by an infusion of walnut-tree
leaves, or by pouring into the
holes a ley made of wood ashes and
lime. if fruit trees are sprinkled
with it, the ravages of insects will
be greatly prevented.
gravies. a few general observations
are necessary on the subject
of soups and gravies. when
there is any fear of gravy meat being
spoiled before it be wanted, it should
be well seasoned, and lightly fried,
in order to its keeping a day or two
longer; but the gravy is best when
the juices are fresh. when soups
or gravies are to be put by, let them
be changed every day into fresh
scalded pans. whatever liquor has
vegetables boiled in it, is apt to
turn sour much sooner than the
juices of meat, and gravy should
never be kept in any kind of metal.
when fat remains on any soup, a
tea-cupful of flour and water mixed
quite smooth, and boiled in, will
take it off. if richness or greater
consistence be required, a good
lump of butter mixed with flour,
and boiled in the soup or gravy, will
impart either of these qualities.
long boiling is necessary to obtain
the full flavour; and gravies and
soups are best made the day before[]
they are wanted. they are also
much better when the meat is laid
in the bottom of the pan, and stewed
with herbs, roots, and butter,
than when water is put to the meat
at first; and the gravy that is drawn
from the meat, should almost be
dried up before the water is added.
the sediment of gravies that have
stood to be cold, should not be used
in cooking. when onions are strong,
boil a turnip with them, if for sauce;
and this will make them mild and
pleasant. if soups or gravies are
too weak, do not cover them in boiling,
that the watery particles may
evaporate. a clear jelly of cow
heels is very useful to keep in the
house, being a great improvement
to soups and gravies. truffles and
morels thicken soups and sauces,
and give them a fine flavour. the
way is to wash half an ounce of
each carefully, then simmer them
a few minutes in water, and add
them with the liquor to boil in the
sauce till quite tender. as to the
materials of which gravy is to be
made, beef skirts will make as good
as any other meat. beef kidney, or
milt, cut into small pieces, will answer
the purpose very well; and so
will the shank end of mutton that
has been dressed, if much be wanted.
the shank bones of mutton,
if well soaked and cleaned, are a
great improvement to the richness
of the gravy. taragon gives the
flavour of french cookery, and in
high gravies it is a great improvement;
but it should be added only
a short time before serving. to draw
gravy that will keep for a week, cut
some lean beef thin, put it into a
fryingpan without any butter, cover
it up, and set it on the fire, taking
care that it does not burn. keep
it on the fire till all the gravy that
comes out of the meat is absorbed,
then add as much water as will
cover the meat, and keep it stewing.
put in some herbs, onions, spice,
and a piece of lean ham. let it
simmer till it is quite rich, and keep
it in a cool place; but do not remove
the fat till the gravy is to be
used.
gravy for fowl. when
there is no meat to make gravy of,
wash the feet of the fowl nicely, and
cut them and the neck small. simmer
them with a little bread browned,
a slice of onion, a sprig of parsley
and thyme, some salt and pepper,
and the liver and gizzard, in a
quarter of a pint of water, till half
wasted. take out the liver, bruise
it, and strain the liquor to it. then
thicken it with flour and butter, and
a tea-spoonful of mushroom ketchup
will make the gravy very good.
set on a saucepan with half a pint
of veal gravy, adding half a dozen
leaves of basil, a small onion, and
a roll of orange or lemon peel. let
it boil up for a few minutes, and
strain it off. put to the clear gravy
the juice of a seville orange, half a
teaspoonful of salt, the same of pepper,
and a glass of red wine. shalot
and cayenne may be added. this
is an excellent sauce for all kinds of
wild water-fowl, and should be sent
up hot in a boat, as some persons
like wild fowl very little done, and
without any sauce. the common
way of gashing the breast, and
squeezing in a lemon, cools and hardens
the flesh, and compels every
one to eat it that way, whether they
approve of it or not.
gravy for mutton. to
make mutton taste like venison,
provide for it the following gravy.
pick a very stale woodcock or snipe,
and cut it to pieces, after having
removed the bag from the entrails.
simmer it in some meat gravy, without
seasoning; then strain it, and
serve it with the mutton.
gravy soup. wash and soak
a leg of beef; break the bone, and
set it on the fire with a gallon of
water, a large bunch of sweet herbs,
two large onions sliced and fried[]
to a fine brown, but not burnt; add
two blades of mace, three cloves,
twenty berries of allspice, and forty
black peppers. stew the soup till
it is rich, and then take out the
meat, which may be eaten at the
kitchen table, with a little of the
gravy. next day take off the fat,
which will serve for basting, or for
common pie crust. slice some carrots,
turnips, and celery, and simmer
them till tender. if not approved,
they can be taken out before
the soup is sent to table, but the
flavour will be a considerable addition.
boil vermicelli a quarter
of an hour, and add to it a large
spoonful of soy, and one of mushroom
ketchup. a french roll
should be made hot, then soaked in
the soup, and served in the tureen.
put into a bason a glass of small
beer, a glass of water, some pepper
and salt, grated lemon peel, a bruised
clove or two, and a spoonful of walnut
pickle, or mushroom ketchup.
slice an onion, flour and fry it in a
piece of butter till it is brown. then
turn all the above into a small tosser,
with the onion, and simmer it covered
for twenty minutes. strain it
off for use, and when cold take off
the fat.
grayline. having scaled and
washed the fish, then dry them.
dust them over with flour, and lay
them separately on a board before
the fire. fry them of a fine colour
with fresh dripping; serve them
with crimp parsley, and plain butter.
perch and tench may be done the
same way.
grease extracted. the
ashes of burnt bones finely powdered,
or calcined hartshorn, heated
over the fire in a clean vessel, and
laid on each side of the grease spot,
if on books or paper, with a weight
laid upon it to assist the effect, will
completely remove it; or the powder
may be wrapped in thin muslin,
and applied in the same manner.
when prints get foul and dirty, they
may readily be cleaned in the same
manner as linen is bleached, by being
exposed to the sun and air, and
frequently wetted with clean water.
if this do not fully succeed, the print
may be soaked in hot water; and if
pasted on canvas, it should first be
taken off by dipping it in boiling
water, which will loosen it from the
canvas. the dirt occasioned by
flies, may be gently taken off with
a wet sponge, after the print has
been well soaked. spots of white-wash
may be removed by spirit of
sea salt diluted with water.—if
grease spots appear in leather, a
different process must be pursued.
a paste made of mealy potatoes,
dry mustard, and spirits of turpentine,
mixed together, and applied to
the spot, will extract the grease
from leather, if rubbed off after it
has been allowed sufficient time to
dry. a little vinegar may be added,
to render the application more
effectual.
green fruit. green peaches,
plums, or other fruit, should be
put into a preserving pan of spring
water, covered with vine leaves, and
set over a clear fire. when they
begin to simmer take them off, and
take the fruit out carefully with a
slice. peel and preserve them as
other fruit.
green gages. in order to
preserve them for pies and tarts,
choose the largest when they begin
to soften. split them without paring;
and having weighed an equal quantity
of sugar, strew a part of it over
the fruit. blanch the kernels with
a small sharp knife. next day pour
the syrup from the fruit, and boil
it gently six or eight minutes with
the other sugar; skim it, and add
the plums and kernels. simmer it
till clear, taking off any scum that
rises; put the fruit singly into small
pots, and pour the syrup and kernels
to it. if the fruit is to be candied,
the syrup must not be added:[]
for the sake of variety, it may be
proper to do some each way.
green goose pie. bone
two young green geese, of a good
size; but first take away every plug,
and singe them nicely. wash them
clean, and season them well with
salt, pepper, mace, and allspice.
put one inside the other, and press
them quite close, drawing the legs
inward. put a good deal of butter
over them, and bake them either
with or without a crust: if the latter,
a cover to the dish must fit close
to keep in the steam.
green peas. peas should not
be shelled till they are wanted, nor
boiled in much water. put them in
when the water boils, with a little
salt, and a lump of sugar. when
they begin to dent in the middle,
they are done enough. strain them
through a cullender, put a piece of
butter in the dish, and stir them till
it is melted. garnish with boiled
mint.
if it be wished to keep them for
winter use, shell the peas, and put
them into a kettle of water when it
boils. warm them well, without
boiling, and pour them into a cullender.
when the water drains off,
turn them out on a dresser covered
with a cloth, and put over another
cloth to dry them perfectly. deposit
them in wide-mouth bottles,
leaving only room to pour clarified
mutton suet upon them an inch
thick, and also for the cork. rosin
it down, and keep it in the cellar or
in the earth, the same as other green
fruit. when the peas are to be
used, boil them tender, with a piece
of butter, a spoonful of sugar, and
a little mint.—another way. shell
the peas, scald and dry them as
above. put them on tins or earthen
dishes in a cool oven once or twice
to harden, and keep them in paper
bags hung up in the kitchen. when
they are to be used, let them be an
hour in water; then set them on
with cold water, a piece of butter,
and a sprig of dried mint, and boil
them.
green peas soup. in shelling
the peas, divide the old from
the young. stew the old ones to a
pulp, with an ounce of butter, a
pint of water, a leaf or two of lettuce,
two onions, pepper and salt.
put to the liquor that stewed them
some more water, the hearts and
tender stalks of the lettuces, the
young peas, a handful of spinach
cut small, salt and pepper to relish,
and boil them till quite soft. if the
soup be too thin, or not rich enough,
add an ounce or two of butter, mixed
with a spoonful of rice or flour,
and boil it half an hour longer.
before serving, boil in the soup
some green mint shred fine. when
the peas first come in, or are very
young, the stock may be made of
the shells washed and boiled, till
they are capable of being pulped.
more thickening will then be wanted.
green peas stewed. put
into a stewpan a quart of peas, a
lettuce and an onion both sliced,
and no more water than hangs about
the lettuce from washing. add a
piece of butter, a little pepper and
salt, and stew them very gently for
two hours. when to be served,
beat up an egg, and stir it into them,
or a bit of flour and butter. chop
a little mint, and stew in them.
gravy may be added, or a tea-spoonful
of white powdered sugar;
but the flavour of the peas themselves
is much better.
green sauce. mix a quarter
of a pint of sorrel juice, a glass
of white wine, and some scalded
gooseberries. add sugar, and a
bit of butter, and boil them up, to
serve with green geese or ducklings.
gridiron. the bars of a gridiron
should be made concave, and
terminate in a trough to catch the
gravy, and keep the fat from dropping
into the fire and making a
smoke, which will spoil the broiling.[]
upright gridirons are the best, as
they can be used at any fire, without
fear of smoke, and the gravy is
preserved in the trough under them.
the business of the gridiron may
be done by a dutch oven, when occasion
requires.
grief. in considering what is
conducive to health or otherwise, it
is impossible to overlook this destructive
passion, which like envy
is 'the rottenness of the bones.'
anger and fear are more violent,
but this is more fixed: it sinks deep
into the mind, and often proves
fatal. it may generally be conquered
at the beginning of any calamity;
but when it has gained
strength, all attempts to remove it
are ineffectual. life may be dragged
out for a few years, but it is
impossible that any one should enjoy
health, whose mind is bowed
down with grief and trouble. in
this case some betake themselves
to drinking, but here the remedy
only aggravates the disease. the
best relief, besides what the consolations
of religion may afford, is to
associate with the kind and cheerful,
to shift the scene as much as
possible, to keep up a succession
of new ideas, apply to the study of
some art or science, and to read and
write on such subjects as deeply
engage the attention. these will
sooner expel grief than the most
sprightly amusements, which only
aggravate instead of relieving the
anguish of a wounded heart.
grill sauce. to half a pint
of gravy add an ounce of fresh butter,
and a table-spoonful of flour,
previously well rubbed together;
the same of mushroom or walnut
ketchup, two tea-spoonfuls of lemon
juice, one of made mustard, one of
caper, half a one of black pepper,
a little lemon peel grated fine, a
tea-spoonful of essence of anchovies,
a very small piece of minced
shalot, and a little chili vinegar, or
a few grains of cayenne. simmer
them all together for a few minutes,
pour a little of it over the grill, and
send up the rest in a sauce tureen.
grilled mutton. cut a
breast of mutton into diamonds, rub
it over with egg, and strew on some
crumbs of bread and chopped parsley.
broil it in a dutch oven, baste
it with butter, and pour caper sauce
or gravy into the dish.
ground rice milk. boil
one spoonful of ground rice, rubbed
down smooth, with three half
pints of milk, a little cinnamon, lemon
peel, and nutmeg. sweeten it
when nearly done.
boil a large spoonful of ground rice
in a pint of new milk, with lemon
peel and cinnamon. when cold,
add sugar, nutmeg, and two eggs
well beaten. bake it with a crust
round the dish. a pudding of russian
seed is made in the same manner.
grouse. twist the head under
the wing, and roast them like
fowls, but they must not be overdone.
serve with a rich gravy in
the dish, and bread sauce. the
sauce recommended for wild fowl,
may be used instead of gravy.
grubs. various kinds of grubs
or maggots, hatched from beetles,
are destructive of vegetation, and
require to be exterminated. in
a garden they may be taken and
destroyed by cutting a turf, and laying
it near the plant which is attacked,
with the grass side downwards.
but the most effectual way
is to visit these depredators at midnight,
when they may be easily
found and destroyed.
gudgeons. these delicate
fish are taken in running streams,
where the water is clear. they
come in about midsummer, and are
to be had for five or six months.
they require to be dressed much
the same as smelts, being considered
as a species of fresh-water
smelts.[]
guinea fowl. pea and guinea
fowl eat much like pheasants,
and require to be dressed in the
same way.
guinea hens. these birds
lay a great number of eggs; and if
their nest can be discovered, it is
best to put them under common
hens, which are better nurses. they
require great warmth, quiet, and
careful feeding with rice swelled in
milk, or bread soaked in it. put
two peppercorns down their throat
when first hatched.
gunpowder. reduce to powder
separately, five drams of nitrate
of potass, one dram of sulphur, and
one of new-burnt charcoal. mix
them together in a mortar with a
little water, so as to make the compound
into a dough, which roll out
into round pieces of the thickness
of a pin, upon a slab. this must
be done by moving a board backwards
and forwards until the dough
is of a proper size. when three or
four of these strings or pieces are
ready, put them together, and with
a knife cut the whole off in small
grains. place these grains on a
sheet of paper in a warm place,
and they will soon dry. during
granulation, the dough must be prevented
from sticking, by using a
little of the dry compound powder.
this mode of granulation, though
tedious, is the only one to be used
for so small a quantity, for the sake
of experiment. in a large way, gunpowder
is granulated by passing the
composition through sieves.
haddocks. these fish may be
had the greater part of the year,
but are most in season during the
first three months. in choosing,
see that the flesh is firm, the eyes
bright, and the gills fresh and red.
clean them well, dry them in a
cloth, and rub them with vinegar to
prevent the skin from breaking.
dredge them with flour, rub the
gridiron with suet, and let it be hot
when the fish is laid on. turn them
while broiling, and serve them up
with melted butter, or shrimp sauce.
hair. frequent cutting of the
hair is highly beneficial to the whole
body; and if the head be daily
washed with cold water, rubbed
dry, and exposed to the air, it will
be found an excellent preventive
of periodical headachs. pomatums
and general perfumery are very injurious;
but a mixture of olive oil
and spirits of rosemary, with a few
drops of oil of nutmeg, may be used
with safety. if a lead comb be
sometimes passed through the hair,
it will assume a darker colour, but
for health it cannot be recommended.
hair powder. to know whether
this article be adulterated with
lime, as is too frequently the case,
put a little of the powder of sal-ammoniac
into it, and stir it up
with warm water. if the hair powder
has been adulterated with lime,
a strong smell of alkali will arise
from the mixture.
hair water. to thicken the
hair, and prevent its falling off, an
excellent water may be prepared in
the following manner. put four
pounds of pure honey into a still,
with twelve handfuls of the tendrils
of vines, and the same quantity of
rosemary tops. distil as cool and
as slowly as possible, and the liquor
may be allowed to drop till it begins
to taste sour.
hams. when a ham is to be
dressed, put it into water all night,
if it has hung long; and let it lie[]
either in a hole dug in the earth, or
on damp stones sprinkled with water,
two or three days, to mellow it.
wash it well, and put it into a boiler
with plenty of water; let it simmer
four, five, or six hours, according
to the size. when done enough, if
before the time of serving, cover it
with a clean cloth doubled, and keep
the dish hot over some boiling water.
take off the skin, and rasp
some bread over the ham. preserve
the skin as whole as possible, to
cover the ham when cold, in order
to prevent its drying. garnish the
dish with carrot when sent to table.
if a dried ham is to be purchased,
judge of its goodness by sticking a
sharp knife under the bone. if it
comes out with a pleasant smell,
the ham is good: but if the knife
be daubed, and has a bad scent, do
not buy it. hams short in the hock
are best, and long-legged pigs are
not fit to be pickled.
ham sauce. when a ham is
almost done with, pick all the meat
clean from the bone, leaving out
any rusty part. beat the meat and
the bone to a mash, put it into a
saucepan with three spoonfuls of
gravy, set it over a slow fire, and
stir it all the time, or it will stick to
the bottom. when it has been on
some time, put to it a small bundle
of sweet herbs, some pepper, and
half a pint of beef gravy. cover it
up, and let it stew over a gentle fire.
when it has a good flavour of the
herbs, strain off the gravy. a little
of this sauce will be found an improvement
to all gravies.
hands. when the hands or
feet are severely affected with the
cold, they should not immediately
be exposed to the fire, but restored
to their usual tone and feeling, by
immersing them in cold water, and
afterwards applying warmth in the
most careful and gradual manner.
persons subject to chopped hands
in the winter time, should be careful
to rub them quite dry after every
washing; and to prevent their being
injured by the weather, rub
them with a mixture of fresh lard,
honey, and the yolks of eggs; or a
little goose fat will answer the purpose.
hard dumplings. make a
paste of flour and water, with a little
salt, and roll it into balls. dust
them with flour, and boil them nearly
an hour. they are best boiled
with a good piece of meat, and for
variety, a few currants may be
added.
hares. if hung up in a dry
cool place, they will keep a great
time; and when imagined to be past
eating, they are often in the highest
perfection. they are never good
if eaten when fresh killed. a hare
will keep longer and eat better, if
not opened for four or five days, or
according to the state of the weather.
if paunched when it comes
from the field, it should be wiped
quite dry, the heart and liver taken
out, and the liver scalded to keep
for stuffing. repeat this wiping
every day, rub a mixture of pepper
and ginger on the inside, and put a
large piece of charcoal into it. if
the spice be applied early, it will
prevent that musty taste which long
keeping in the damp occasions, and
which also affects the stuffing. if
an old hare is to be roasted, it should
be kept as long as possible, and
well soaked. this may be judged
of, in the following manner. if the
claws are blunt and rugged, the ears
dry and tough, and the haunch
thick, it is old. but if the claws
are smooth and sharp, the ears easily
tear, and the cleft in the lip is
not much spread, it is young. if
fresh and newly killed, the body
will be stiff, and the flesh pale. to
know a real leveret, it is necessary
to look for a knob or small bone near
the foot on its fore leg: if there be
none, it is a hare.
hare pie. cut up the hare,
and season it; bake it with eggs[]
and forcemeat, in a dish or raised
crust. when cold take off the lid,
and cover the meat with savoury
jelly: see the article.
hare sauce. this usually
consists of currant jelly warmed up;
or it may be made of half a pint of
port, and a quarter of a pound of
sugar, simmered together over a
clear fire for about five minutes. it
may also be made of half a pint of
vinegar, and a quarter of a pound
of sugar, reduced to a syrup.
hare soup. take an old hare
unfit for other purposes, cut it
into pieces, and put it into a jar;
add a pound and a half of lean beef,
two or three shank bones of mutton
well cleaned, a slice of lean bacon
or ham, an onion, and a bunch of
sweet herbs. pour on two quarts
of boiling water, cover the jar close
with bladder and paper, and set it
in a kettle of water. simmer till
the hare is stewed to pieces, strain
off the liquor, boil it up once, with
a chopped anchovy, and add a
spoonful of soy, a little cayenne,
and salt. a few fine forcemeat balls,
fried of a good brown, should be
served in the tureen.
harrico of mutton. remove
some of the fat, and cut the
middle or best end of the neck into
rather thin steaks. flour and fry
them in their own fat, of a fine light
brown, but not enough for eating.
then put them into a dish while
you fry the carrots, turnips, and
onions; the carrots and turnips in
dice, the onions sliced. they must
only be warmed, and not browned.
then lay the steaks at the bottom
of a stewpan, the vegetables over
them, and pour on as much boiling
water as will just cover them. give
them one boil, skim them well, and
then set the pan on the side of the
fire to simmer gently till all is tender.
in three or four hours skim
them; add pepper and salt, and a
spoonful of ketchup.
harrico of veal. take the
best end of a small neck, cut the
bones short, but leave it whole.
then put it into a stewpan, just
covered with brown gravy; and
when it is nearly done, have ready
a pint of boiled peas, six cucumbers
pared and sliced, and two cabbage-lettuces
cut into quarters, all stewed
in a little good broth. add them
to the veal, and let them simmer ten
minutes. when the veal is in the
dish, pour the sauce and vegetables
over it, and lay the lettuce with
forcemeat balls round it.
hartshorn jelly. simmer
eight ounces of hartshorn shavings
with two quarts of water, till reduced
to one. strain and boil it
with the rinds of four china oranges,
and two lemons pared thin. when
cool, add the juice of both, half a
pound of sugar, and the whites of
six eggs beaten to a froth. let the
jelly have three or four boils without
stirring, and strain it through a
jelly bag.
hashed beef. put into a
stewpan, a pint and a half of broth
or water, a large table-spoonful of
mushroom ketchup, with the gravy
saved from the beef. add a quarter
of an ounce of onion sliced very
fine, and boil it about ten minutes.
put a large table-spoonful of flour
into a basin, just wet it with a little
water, mix it well together, then
stir it into the broth, and boil it five
or ten minutes. rub it through a
sieve, return it to the stewpan, put
in the hash, and let it stand by the
side of the fire till the meat is warm.
a tea-spoonful of parsley chopped
very fine, and put in five minutes
before it is served up, will be an
agreeable addition; or to give a
higher relish, a glass of port wine,
and a spoonful of currant jelly.
hashes and meats dressed a second
time, should only simmer gently, till
just warmed through.
hashed duck. cut a cold[]
duck into joints, and warm it in
gravy, without boiling, and add a
glass of port wine.
hashed hare. season the
legs and wings first, and then broil
them, which will greatly improve
the flavour. rub them with cold
butter and serve them quite hot.
the other parts, warmed with gravy,
and a little stuffing, may be served
separately.
hashed mutton. cut thin
slices of dressed mutton, fat and
lean, and flour them. have ready
a little onion boiled in two or three
spoonfuls of water; add to it a little
gravy, season the meat, and make it
hot, but not to boil. serve up the
hash in a covered dish. instead of
onion, a clove, a spoonful of currant
jelly, and half a glass of port
wine, will give an agreeable venison
flavour, if the meat be fine. for a
change, the hash may be warmed up
with pickled cucumber or walnut
cut small.
hashed venison. warm it
with its own gravy, or some of it
without seasoning; but it should
only be warmed through, and not
boiled. if no fat be left, cut some
slices of mutton fat, set it on the fire
with a little port wine and sugar,
and simmer it dry. then put it to
the hash, and it will eat as well as
the fat of venison.
hasty dish of eggs. beat
up six eggs, pour them into a saucepan,
hold it over the fire till they
begin to thicken, and keep stirring
from the bottom all the time. then
add a piece of butter the size of a
walnut, stir it about till the eggs
and water are thoroughly mixed,
and the eggs quite dry. put it on
a plate, and serve it hot.
hasty fritters. melt some
butter in a saucepan, put in half a
pint of good ale, and stir a little
flour into it by degrees. add a few
currants, or chopped apples; beat
them up quick, and drop a large
spoonful at a time into the pan, till
the bottom is nearly covered. keep
them separate, turn them with a
slice; and when of a fine brown,
serve them up hot, with grated sugar
over them.
hasty pudding. boil some
milk over a clear fire, and take it
off. keep putting in flour with one
hand, and stirring it with the other,
till it becomes quite thick. boil it
a few minutes, pour it into a dish,
and garnish with pieces of butter.
to make a better pudding, beat up
an egg and flour into a stiff paste,
and mince it fine. put the mince
into a quart of boiling milk, with a
little butter and salt, cinnamon and
sugar, and stir them carefully together.
when sufficiently thickened,
pour it into a dish, and stick bits
of butter on the top. or shred
some suet, add grated bread, a few
currants, the yolks of four eggs and
the whites of two, with some grated
lemon peel and ginger. mix the
whole together, and make it into
balls the size and shape of an egg,
with a little flour. throw them into
a skillet of boiling water, and
boil them twenty minutes; but when
sufficiently done, they will rise to
the top. serve with cold butter, or
pudding sauce.
hats. gentlemen's hats are
often damaged by a shower of rain,
which takes off the gloss, and leaves
them spotted. to prevent this,
shake out the wet as much as possible,
wipe the hat carefully with a
clean handkerchief, observing to
lay the beaver smooth. then fix
the hat in its original shape, and
hang it to dry at a distance from
the fire. next morning, brush it
several times with a soft brush in
the proper direction, and the hat
will have sustained but little injury.
a flat iron moderately heated, and
passed two or three times gently
over the hat, will raise the gloss,
and give the hat its former good appearance.
haunch of mutton. keep[]
it as long as it can be preserved
sweet, and wash it with warm milk
and water, or vinegar if necessary.
when to be dressed especially, observe
to wash it well, lest the outside
should contract a bad flavour
from keeping. lay a paste of coarse
flour on strong paper, and fold the
haunch in it; set it a great distance
from the fire, and allow proportionate
time for the paste. do not
remove it till nearly forty minutes
before serving, and then baste it
continually. bring the haunch nearer
the fire before the paste is taken off,
and froth it up the same as venison.
a gravy must be made of a pound
and a half of a loin of old mutton,
simmered in a pint of water to half
the quantity, and no seasoning but
salt. brown it with a little burnt
sugar, and send it up in the dish.
care should be taken to retain a
good deal of gravy in the meat, for
though long at the fire, the distance
and covering will prevent its roasting
out. serve with currant-jelly
sauce.
haunch of venison. if it
be the haunch of a buck, it will
take full three hours and a half
roasting; if a doe, about half an
hour less. venison should be rather
under than overdone. sprinkle
some salt on a sheet of white paper,
spread it over with butter, and cover
the fat with it. then lay a
coarse paste on strong white paper,
and cover the haunch; tie it with
fine packthread, and set it at a distance
from a good fire. baste it
often: ten minutes before serving
take off the paste, draw the meat
nearer the fire, and baste it with
butter and a good deal of flour, to
make it froth up well. gravy for
it should be put into a boat, and
not into the dish, unless there is
none in the venison. to make the
gravy, cut off the fat from two or
three pounds of a loin of old mutton,
and set it in steaks on a gridiron
for a few minutes just to brown
one side. put them into a saucepan
with a quart of water, keep it
closely covered for an hour, and
simmer it gently. then uncover it,
stew it till the gravy is reduced to
a pint, and season it with salt only.
currant-jelly sauce must be served
in a boat. beat up the jelly with
a spoonful or two of port wine, and
melt it over the fire. where jelly
runs short, a little more wine must
be added, and a few lumps of sugar.
serve with french beans. if the
old bread sauce be still preferred,
grate some white bread, and boil it
with port wine and water, and a
large stick of cinnamon. when
quite smooth, take out the cinnamon,
and add some sugar.
hay stacks. in making stacks
of new hay, care should be taken to
prevent its heating and taking fire,
by forming a tunnel completely
through the centre. this may be
done by stuffing a sack full of straw,
and tying up the mouth with a cord;
then make the rick round the sack,
drawing it up as the rick advances,
and taking it out when finished.
head ache. this disorder generally
arises from some internal
cause, and is the symptom of a disease
which requires first to be attended
to; but where it is a local
affection only, it may be relieved
by bathing the part affected with
spirits of hartshorn, or applying a
poultice of elder flowers. in some
cases the most obstinate pain is removed
by the use of vervain, both
internally in the form of a decoction,
and also by suspending the
herb round the neck. persons afflicted
with headache should beware
of costiveness: their drink should
be diluting, and their feet and legs
kept warm. it is very obvious, that
as many disorders arise from taking
cold in the head, children should be
inured to a light and loose covering
in their infancy, by which means
violent headaches might be prevented
in mature age: and the maxim[]
of keeping the feet warm and the
head cool, should be strictly attended
to.
head and pluck. whether
of lamb or mutton, wash the head
clean, take the black part from the
eyes, and the gall from the liver.
lay the head in warm water; boil
the lights, heart, and part of the
liver; chop them small, and add a
little flour. put it into a saucepan
with some gravy, or a little of the
liquor it was boiled in, a spoonful
of ketchup, a small quantity of lemon
juice, cream, pepper, and salt.
boil the head very white and tender,
lay it in the middle of the dish, and
the mince meat round it. fry the
other part of the liver with some
small bits of bacon, lay them on the
mince meat, boil the brains the same
as for a calf's head, beat up an egg
and mix with them, fry them in
small cakes, and lay them on the
rim of the dish. garnish with lemon
and parsley.
heart burn. persons subject
to this disorder, ought to drink
no stale liquors, and to abstain from
flatulent food. take an infusion of
bark, or any other stomachic bitter;
or a tea-spoonful of the powder of
gum arabic dissolved in a little water,
or chew a few sweet almonds
blanched. an infusion of anise
seeds, or ginger, have sometimes
produced the desired effect.
hedge hog. make a cake of
any description, and bake it in a
mould the shape of a hedge hog.
turn it out of the mould, and let it
stand a day or two. prick it with
a fork, and let it remain all night in
a dish full of sweet wine. slit some
blanched almonds, and stick about
it, and pour boiled custard in the
dish round it.
herb pie. pick two handfuls
of parsley from the stems, half the
quantity of spinach, two lettuces,
some mustard and cresses, a few
leaves of borage, and white beet
leaves. wash and boil them a little,
drain and press out the water,
cut them small; mix a batter of
flour, two eggs well beaten, a pint
of cream, and half a pint of milk,
and pour it on the herbs. cover
with a good crust, and bake it.
herb tea. if betony be gathered
and dried before it begins to
flower, it will be found to have the
taste of tea, and all its good qualities,
without any of its bad ones: it
is also considered as a remedy for
the headache. hawthorn leaves
dried, and one third of balm and
sage, mixed together, will make a
wholesome and strengthening drink.
an infusion of ground ivy, mixed
with a few flowers of lavender, and
flavoured with a drop of lemon
juice, will make an agreeable substitute
for common tea. various
other vegetables might also be employed
for this purpose; such as
sage, balm, peppermint, and similar
spicy plants; the flowers of the
sweet woodroof, those of the burnet,
or pimpernel rose; the leaves
of peach and almond trees, the
young and tender leaves of bilberry,
and common raspberry; and the
blossoms of the blackthorn, or sloe
tree. most of these when carefully
gathered and dried in the shade,
especially if they be managed like
indian tea-leaves, bear a great resemblance
to the foreign teas, and
are at the same time of superior flavour
and salubrity.
herbs for winter. take
any sort of sweet herbs, with three
times the quantity of parsley, and
dry them in the air, without exposing
them to the sun. when quite
dry, rub them through a hair sieve,
put them in canisters or bottles, and
keep them in a dry place: they will
be useful for seasoning in the winter.
mint, sage, thyme, and such
kind of herbs, may be tied in small
bunches, and dried in the air: then
put each sort separately into a bag,
and hang it up in the kitchen. parsley
should be picked from the stalks[]
as soon as gathered, and dried in
the shade to preserve the colour.
cowslips and marigolds should be
gathered dry, picked clean, dried
in a cloth, and kept in paper bags.
hessian soup. clean the
root of a neat's tongue very nicely,
and half an ox's head, with salt and
water, and soak them afterwards in
water only. then stew them in five
or six quarts of water, till tolerably
tender. let the soup stand to be
cold, take off the fat, which will do
for basting, or to make good paste
for hot meat pies. put to the soup
a pint of split peas, or a quart of
whole ones, twelve carrots, six turnips,
six potatoes, six large onions,
a bunch of sweet herbs, and two
heads of celery. simmer them without
the meat, till the vegetables are
done enough to pulp with the peas
through a sieve; and the soup will
then be about the thickness of cream.
season it with pepper, salt, mace,
allspice, a clove or two, and a little
cayenne, all in fine powder. if the
peas are bad, and the soup not thick
enough, boil in it a slice of roll, and
pass it through the cullender; or
add a little rice flour, mixing it by
degrees.—to make a ragout with the
above, cut the nicest part of the
head, the kernels, and part of the
fat from the root of the tongue, into
small thick pieces. rub these with
some of the above seasoning, putting
them into a quart of the liquor
reserved for that purpose before the
vegetables were added; flour them
well, and simmer till they are nicely
tender. then add a little mushroom
and walnut ketchup, a little
soy, a glass of port wine, and a tea-spoonful
of made mustard, and boil
all up together. serve with small
eggs and forcemeat balls. this
furnishes an excellent soup and a
ragout at a small expense.
hiccough. a few small
draughts of water in quick succession,
or a tea-spoonful of vinegar,
will often afford immediate relief.
peppermint water mixed with a few
drops of vitriolic acid may be taken;
and sometimes sneezing, or the
stench of an extinguished tallow
candle, has been found sufficient.
boil the leg in a floured cloth an
hour and a quarter; cut the loin
into chops, fry them, lay them round
the leg, with a bit of parsley on
each, and serve it up with spinach
or brocoli.
hind quarter of pig. to
dress this joint lamb fashion, take
off the skin, roast it, and serve it up
with mint sauce. a leg of lamb
stuffed like a leg of pork, and roasted,
with drawn gravy, is very good.
a loin of mutton also, stuffed like a
hare, and basted with milk. put
gravy in the dish, served with currant
jelly, or any other sauce.
hiving of bees. when it is
intended to introduce a swarm of
bees into a new hive, it must be thoroughly
cleaned, and the inside
rubbed with virgin wax. a piece
of nice honeycomb, made of very
white wax, and about nine inches
long, should be hung on the cross
bars near the top of the hive, to form
a kind of nest for the bees, and excite
them to continue their work.
the new hive being thus prepared,
is then to be placed under an old
one, before the bees begin to swarm,
in such a manner as to be quite close,
and to leave the bees no passage except
into the new hive. as these
insects generally work downwards,
they will soon get into their new
habitation; and when it is occupied
by one half of the swarm, some
holes must be made in the top of
the old hive, and kept covered till
the proper time of making use of
them. preparation being thus made,
take the opportunity of a fine morning,
about eight or nine o'clock, at
which time most of the bees are out,
gathering their harvest. the comb
is to be cut through by means of a
piece of iron wire, and the old hive[]
separated from the new one. an
assistant must immediately place
the cover, which should be previously
fitted, upon the top of the
new one. the old hive is then to
be taken to the distance of twenty
or thirty yards, and placed firm
upon a bench or table, but so as to
leave a free space both above and
below. the holes at the top being
opened, one of the new boxes is to
be placed on the top of the old hive,
having the cover loosely fastened
on it; and is to be done in such a
manner, by closing the intervals between
them with linen cloths, that
the bees on going out by the holes
on the top of the old hive can only
go into the new one. but in order
to drive the bees into the new hive,
some live coals must be placed under
the old one, upon which some
linen may be thrown, to produce a
volume of smoke; and the bees feeling
the annoyance, will ascend to
the top of the old hive, and at length
will go through the holes into the
new one. when they have nearly
all entered, it is to be removed
gently from the old hive, and placed
under the box already mentioned,
the top or cover having been taken
off. if it should appear the next
morning that the two boxes, of
which the new hive is now composed,
do not afford sufficient room
for the bees, a third or fourth box
may be added, under the others, as
their work goes on, changing them
from time to time so long as the season
permits the bees to gather wax
and honey. when a new swarm is
to be hived, the boxes prepared as
above and proportioned to the size
of the swarm, are to be brought
near the place where the bees have
settled. the upper box with the
cover upon it, must be taken from
the others. the cross bars at the
top should be smeared with honey
and water, the doors must be closed,
the box turned upside down, and
held under the swarm, which is then
to be shaken into it as into a common
hive. when the whole swarm
is in the box, it is to be carried to
the other boxes, previously placed
in their destined situation, and carefully
put upon them. the interstices
are to be closed with cement,
and all the little doors closed, except
the lowest, through which the
bees are to pass. the hive should
be shaded from the sun for a few
days, that the bees may not be
tempted to leave their new habitation.
it is more advantageous however
to form artificial swarms, than
to collect those which abandon their
native hives; and the hive here recommended
is more particularly
adapted to that purpose. by this
mode of treatment, we not only
avoid the inconveniences which attend
the procuring of swarms in the
common way, but obtain the advantage
of having the hives always
well stocked, which is of greater
consequence than merely to increase
their number; for it has been observed,
that if a hive of four thousand
bees give six pounds of honey,
one of eight thousand will give twenty-four
pounds. on this principle
it is proper to unite two or more
hives, when they happen to be thickly
stocked. this may be done by
scattering a few handfuls of balm
in those hives which are to be united,
which by giving them the same
smell, they will be unable to distinguish
one another. after this preparation,
the hives are to be joined
by placing them one upon the other,
in the evening when they are at rest,
and taking away those boxes which
are nearly empty. all the little doors
must be closed, except the lowest.——if
bees are kept in single straw
hives in the usual way, the manner
of hiving them is somewhat different.
they are first allowed to swarm, and
having settled, they are then taken
to the hive. if they fix on the lower
branch of a tree, it may be cut off
and laid on a cloth, and the hive[]
placed over it, so as to leave room
for the bees to ascend into it. if
the queen can be found, and put
into the hive, the rest will soon follow.
but if it be difficult to reach
them, let them remain where they
have settled till the evening, when
there will be less danger of escaping.
after this the hive is to be placed
in the apiary, cemented round the
bottom, and covered from the wet
at top. the usual method of uniting
swarms, is by spreading a cloth at
night upon the ground close to the
hive, in which the hive with the new
swarm is to be placed. by giving
a smart stroke on the top of the
hive, all the bees will drop into a
cluster upon the cloth. then take
another hive from the beehouse,
and place it over the bees, when
they will ascend into it, and mix
with those already there. another
way is to invert the hive in which
the united swarms are to live, and
strike the bees of the other hive into
it as before. one of the queens
is generally slain on this occasion,
together with a considerable number
of the working bees. to prevent
this destruction, one of the queens
should be sought for and taken,
when the bees are beaten out of the
hive upon the cloth, before the union
is effected. bees never swarm till
the hive is too much crowded by
the young brood, which happens in
may or june, according to the warmth
of the season. a good swarm should
weigh five or six pounds; those that
are under four pounds weight,
should be strengthened by a small
additional swarm. the size of the
hive ought to be proportionate to
the number of the bees, and should
be rather too small than too large,
as they require to be kept dry and
warm in winter. in performing these
several operations, it will be necessary
to defend the hands and face
from the sting of the bees. the
best way of doing this is to cover
the whole head and neck with a
coarse cloth or canvas, which may
be brought down and fastened round
the waist. through this cloth the
motion of the bees may be observed,
without fearing their stings; and
the hands may be protected by a
thick pair of gloves.
hodge podge. boil some
slices of coarse beef in three quarts
of water, and one of small beer.
skim it well, put in onions, carrots,
turnips, celery, pepper and salt.
when the meat is tender, take it out,
strain off the soup, put a little butter
and flour into the saucepan, and
stir it well, to prevent burning. take
off the fat, put the soup into a stewpan,
and stew the beef in it till it is
quite tender. serve up the soup
with turnips and carrots, spinage
or celery. a leg of beef cut in
pieces, and stewed five or six hours,
will make good soup; and any kind
of roots or spices may be added or
omitted at pleasure. or stew some
peas, lettuce, and onions, in a very
little water, with a bone of beef or
ham. while these are doing, season
some mutton or lamb steaks,
and fry them of a nice brown. three
quarters of an hour before serving,
put the steaks into a stewpan, and
the vegetables over them. stew
them, and serve all together in a
tureen. another way of making
a good hodge podge, is to stew a
knuckle of veal and a scrag of mutton,
with some vegetables, adding
a bit of butter rolled in flour.
hog's cheeks. if to be dried
as usual, cut out the snout, remove
the brains, and split the head, taking
off the upper bone to make the
chawl a good shape. rub it well
with salt, and next day take away
the brine. on the following day
cover the head with half an ounce
of saltpetre, two ounces of bay salt,
a little common salt, and four ounces
of coarse sugar. let the head be
often turned, and after ten days
smoke it for a week like bacon.
hog's ears forced. parboil[]
two pair of ears, or take some that
have been soused. make a forcemeat
of an anchovy, some sage and
parsley, a quarter of a pound of
chopped suet, bread crumbs, and
only a little salt. mix all these
with the yolks of two eggs, raise
the skin of the upper side of the
ears, and stuff them with the mixture.
fry the ears in fresh butter,
of a fine colour; then pour away
the fat, and drain them. prepare
half a pint of rich gravy, with a
glass of fine sherry, three tea-spoonfuls
of made mustard, a little butter
and flour, a small onion whole, and
a little pepper or cayenne. put
this with the ears into a stewpan,
and cover it close; stew it gently
for half an hour, shaking the pan
often. when done enough, take out
the onion, place the ears carefully
in a dish, and pour the sauce over
them. if a larger dish is wanted,
the meat from two feet may be added
to the above.
hog's head. to make some
excellent meat of a hog's head, split
it, take out the brains, cut off the
ears, and sprinkle it with salt for
a day. then drain it, salt it again
with common salt and saltpetre for
three days, and afterwards lay the
whole in a small quantity of water
for two days. wash it, and boil it
till all the bones will come out.
skin the tongue, and take the skin
carefully off the head, to put under
and over. chop the head as quick
as possible, season it with pepper
and salt, and a little mace or allspice
berries. put the skin into a
small pan, with the chopped head
between, and press it down. when
cold it will turn out, and make a
kind of brawn. if too fat, a few
bits of lean pork may be prepared
in the same way, and added to it.
add salt and vinegar, and boil these
with some of the liquor for a pickle
to keep it.
hog's lard. this should be
carefully melted in a jar placed in
a kettle of water, and boiled with a
sprig of rosemary. after it has
been prepared, run it into bladders
that have been extremely well cleaned.
the smaller they are, the better
the lard will keep: if the air
reaches it, it becomes rank. lard
being a most useful article for frying
fish, it should be prepared with
care. mixed with butter, it makes
fine crust.
hollow biscuits. mix a
pound and a quarter of butter with
three pounds and a half of flour,
adding a pint of warm water. cut
out the paste with a wine glass, or
a small tin, and set them in a brisk
oven, after the white bread is drawn.
hones. for joining them together,
or cementing them to their
frames, melt a little common glue
without water, with half its weight
of rosin, and a small quantity of red
ochre.
honey. the honey produced
by young bees, and which flows
spontaneously, is purer than that
expressed from the comb; and hence
it is called virgin honey. the best
sort is of a thick consistence, and
of a whitish colour, inclining to yellow:
it possesses an agreeable smell,
and a pleasant taste. when the
combs are removed from the hive,
they are taken by the hand into a
sieve, and left to drain into a vessel
sufficiently wide for the purpose.
after it has stood a proper time to
settle, the pure honey is poured into
earthen jars, tied down close to
exclude the air.
honey vinegar. when honey
is extracted from the combs, by
means of pressure, take the whole
mass, break and separate it, and into
each tub or vessel put one part
of combs, and two of water. set
them in the sun, or in a warm place,
and cover them with cloths. fermentation
takes place in a few days,
and continues from eight to twelve
days, according to the temperature
of the situation in which the operation[]
is carried on. during the fermentation,
stir the matter from time
to time, and press it down with the
hand, that it may be perfectly soaked.
when the fermentation is over,
put the matter to drain on sieves or
strainers. at the bottom of the
vessels will be found a yellow liquor,
which must be thrown away, because
it would soon contract a disagreeable
smell, which it would
communicate to the vinegar. then
wash the tubs, put into them the
water separated from the other matter,
and it will immediately begin
to turn sour. the tubs must then
be covered again with cloths, and
kept moderately warm. a pellicle
or skin is formed on the surface, beneath
which the vinegar acquires
strength. in a month's time it begins
to be sharp, but must be suffered
to stand a little longer, and
then put into a cask, of which the
bunghole is to be left open. it may
then be used like any other vinegar.
all kinds of vinegar may be strengthened
by suffering it to be repeatedly
frozen, and then separating the upper
cake of ice or water from it.
hooping cough. this disorder
generally attacks children, to
whom it often proves fatal for want
of proper management. those who
breathe an impure air, live upon
poor sustenance, drink much warm
tea, and do not take sufficient exercise,
are most subject to this convulsive
cough. in the beginning of
the disorder, the child should be
removed to a change of air, and the
juice of onions or horseradish applied
to the soles of the feet. the
diet light and nourishing, and taken
in small quantities; the drink must
be lukewarm, consisting chiefly of
toast and water, mixed with a little
white wine. if the cough be attended
with feverish symptoms, a
gentle emetic must be taken, of camomile
flowers, and afterwards the
following liniment applied to the pit
of the stomach. dissolve one scruple
of tartar emetic in two ounces of
spring water, and add half an ounce
of the tincture of cantharides: rub
a tea-spoonful of it every hour on
the lower region of the stomach
with a warm piece of flannel, and
let the wetted part be kept warm
with flannel. this will be found to
be the best remedy for the hooping
cough.
hops. the quality of this article
is generally determined by the
price; yet hops may be strong, and
not good. they should be bright,
of a pleasant flavour, and have no
foreign leaves or bits of branches
among them. the hop is the husk
or seed pod of the hop vine, as the
cone is that of the fir tree; and the
seeds themselves are deposited, like
those of the fir, round a little soft
stalk, enveloped by the several folds
of this pod or cone. if in the gathering,
leaves or tendrils of the
vine are mixed with the hops, they
may help to increase the weight,
but will give a bad taste to the beer;
and if they abound, they will spoil
it. great attention therefore must
be paid to see that they are free
from any foreign mixture. there are
also numerous sorts of hops, varying
in size, in form, and quality. those
that are best for brewing are generally
known by the absence of a
brown colour, which indicates perished
hops; a colour between green
and yellow, a great quantity of the
yellow farina, seeds not too large
or hard, a clamminess when rubbed
between the fingers, and a lively
pleasant smell, are the general indications
of good hops. at almost
any age they retain the power of
preserving beer, but not of imparting
a pleasant flavour; and therefore
new hops are to be preferred.
supposing them to be of a good quality,
a pound of hops may be allowed
to a bushel of malt, when the
beer is strong, or brewed in warm[]
weather; but under other circumstances,
half the quantity will be
sufficient.
hop-top soup. take a quantity
of hop-tops when they are in
the greatest perfection, tie them in
small bunches, soak them in water,
and put them to some thin peas-soup.
boil them up, add three
spoonfuls of onion juice, with salt
and pepper. when done enough,
serve them up in a tureen, with sippets
of toasted bread at the bottom.
horseradish powder. in
november or december, slice some
horseradish the thickness of a shilling,
and lay it to dry very gradually
in a dutch oven, for a strong heat
would very soon evaporate its flavour.
when quite dry, pound it
fine, and bottle it.
pour a quart of the best vinegar on
three ounces of scraped horseradish,
an ounce of minced shalot, and a
dram of cayenne. let it stand a
week, and it will give an excellent
relish to cold beef, or other articles.
a little black pepper and mustard,
celery or cress seed, may be added
to the above.
house drains. the smell of
house drains is oftentimes exceedingly
offensive, but may be completely
prevented by pouring down
them a mixture of lime water, and
the ley of wood ashes, or suds that
have been used in washing. an
article known by the name of a sink
trap may be had at the ironmongers,
which is a cheap and simple apparatus,
for carrying off the waste water
and other offensive matter from
sinks and drains. but as the diffusion
of any collection of filth
tends to produce disease and mortality,
it should not be suffered to
settle and stagnate near our dwellings,
and every possible care should
be taken to render them sweet and
wholesome.
house tax. as the present
system of taxation involves so important
a part of the annual expenditure,
and is in many instances attended
with so much vexation and
trouble, it concerns every housekeeper
to be acquainted with the
extent of his own liability, and of
course to regulate his conveniences
accordingly. it appears then, that
every inhabited dwellinghouse, containing
not more than six windows or
lights, is subject to the yearly sum of
six shillings and six-pence, if under
the value of five pounds a year.
but every dwellinghouse worth five
pounds and under twenty pounds rent
by the year, pays the yearly sum of one
shilling and six-pence in the pound;
every house worth twenty pounds
and under forty pounds a year, two
shillings and three-pence in the
pound; and for every house worth
forty pounds and upwards, the yearly
sum of two shillings and ten-pence
in the pound. these rents however
are to be taken from the rates in
which they are charged, and not
from the rents which are actually
paid.
household bread. four
ounces of salt are dissolved in three
quarts of water, and mixed with a
pint of yeast. this mixture is poured
into a cavity made in a peck of
second flour, placed in a large pan
or trough. when properly kneaded
and fermented, it is divided into
pieces of a certain weight, and
baked. sometimes, in farm houses,
a portion of rice flour, boiled potatoes,
or rye meal, is mixed with the
flour, previous to kneading the dough.
the rye and rice serve to bind the
bread, but the potatoes render it
light and spongy.—or, for a larger
quantity, put a bushel of flour into
a trough, two thirds wheat and one
of rye. mix a quart of yeast with
nine quarts of warm water, and
work it into the flour till it becomes
tough. leave it to rise about an
hour; and as soon as it rises, add[]
a pound of salt, and as much warm
water as before. work it well, and
cover it with flannel. make the
loaves a quarter of an hour before
the oven is ready; and if they weigh
five pounds each, they will require
to be baked two hours and a half.
hung beef. make a strong
brine with bay salt, common salt,
and saltpetre, and put in ribs of
beef for nine days. then dry it, or
smoke it in a chimney. or rub the
meat with salt and saltpetre, and
repeat it for a fortnight, and dry it
in wood smoke.
hungary water. to one
pint of highly rectified spirits of wine,
put an ounce of the oil of rosemary,
and two drams of the essence of ambergris.
shake the bottle well several
times, and let the cork remain
out twenty-four hours. shake it
daily for a whole month, and then
put the water into small bottles for
use.
hunter's beef. to a round
of beef that weighs twenty-five
pounds, allow three ounces of saltpetre,
three ounces of the coarsest
sugar, an ounce of cloves, half an
ounce of allspice, a nutmeg, and
three handfuls of common salt, all
in the finest powder. the beef should
hang two or three days; then rub
the above mixture well into it, and
turn and rub it every day for two or
three weeks. the bone must be
taken out first. when to be dressed,
dip it into cold water, to take
off the loose spice; bind it up tight
with tape, and put it into a pan with
a tea-cupful of water at the bottom.
cover the top of the meat with shred
suet, and the pan with a brown crust
and paper, and bake it five or six
hours. when cold, take off the
paste and tape. the gravy is very
fine, and a little of it is a great improvement
to any kind of hash or
soup. both the gravy and the meat
will keep some time. the meat
should be cut with a very sharp
knife, and quite smooth, to prevent
waste.
hunter's pudding. mix together
a pound of suet, a pound of
flour, a pound of currants, and a
pound of raisins stoned and cut.
add the rind of half a lemon finely
shred, six peppercorns in fine powder,
four eggs, a glass of brandy, a
little salt, and as much milk as will
make it of a proper consistence.
boil it in a floured cloth, or a melon
mould, eight or nine hours. a spoonful
of peach water may sometimes
be added to change the flavour.
this pudding will keep six months
after it is boiled, if tied up in the
same cloth when cold, and hung up,
folded in writing paper to preserve
it from the dust. when to be eaten,
it must be boiled a full hour, and
served with sweet sauce.
hysterics. the sudden effusion
of water on the face and hands,
while the fit is on, and especially
immersing the feet in cold water,
will afford relief. fetid smells are
also proper; such as the burning of
feathers, leather, or the smoke of
sulphur, and the application of
strong volatile alkali, or other pungent
matters to the nostrils. to
effect a radical cure, the cold bath,
mineral waters, and other tonics are
necessary. in germany however,
they cure hysteric affections by eating
carraway seeds finely powdered,
with a little ginger and salt, spread
on bread and butter every morning.[]
ice for iceing. to prepare
artificial ice for articles of confectionary,
procure a few pounds of
real ice, reduce it nearly to powder,
and throw a large handful or more
of salt amongst it. this should be
done in as cool a place as possible.
the ice and salt being put into a
pail, pour some cream into an ice
pot, and cover it down. then immerse
it in the ice, and draw that
round the pot, so as to enclose every
part of it. in a few minutes stir it
well with a spoon or spatula, removing
to the centre those parts
which have iced round the edges.
if the ice cream or water be in a
a form, shut the bottom close, and
move the whole in the ice, as a spoon
cannot be used for that purpose
without danger of waste. there
should be holes in the pail, to let
off the ice as it thaws. when any
fluid tends towards cold, moving it
quickly will encrease that tendency;
and likewise, when any fluid is tending
to heat, stirring it will facilitate
its boiling.
ice creams. mix the juice
of the fruits with as much sugar as
will be wanted, before the cream is
added, and let the cream be of a
middling richness.
ice waters. rub some fine
sugar on lemon or orange, to give
the colour and flavour; then squeeze
the juice of either on its respective
peel. add water and sugar to make
a fine sherbet, and strain it before
it be put into the ice-pot. if orange,
the greater proportion should be of
the china juice, and only a little of
seville, and a small bit of the peel
grated by the sugar. the juice of
currants or raspberries, or any other
sort of fruit, being squeezed out,
sweetened, and mixed with water,
may be prepared for iceing in the
same way.
iceing for cakes. beat and
sift half a pound of fine sugar, put
it into a mortar with four spoonfuls
of rose water, and the whites of two
eggs beaten and strained. whisk
it well, and when the cake is almost
cold, dip a feather in the iceing, and
cover the cake well. set it in the
oven to harden, but suffer it not to
remain to be discoloured, and then
keep it in a dry place.—for a very
large cake, beat up the whites of
twenty fresh eggs, and reduce to
powder a pound of double refined
sugar, sifted through a lawn sieve.
mix these well in a deep earthen
pan, add orange flower water, barely
sufficient to give it a flavour, and
a piece of fresh lemon peel. whisk
it for three hours till the mixture is
thick and white, then with a thin
broad piece of board spread it all
over the top and sides, and set it in
a cool oven, and an hour will harden
it.
iceing for tarts. beat
well together the yolk of an egg and
some melted butter, smear the tarts
with a feather, and sift sugar over
them as they are put into the oven.
or beat up the white of an egg,
wash the paste with it, and sift over
some white sugar.
iliac passion. this dangerous
malady, in which the motion of
the bowels is totally impeded or inverted,
arises from spasms, violent
exertions of the body, eating of unripe
fruit, drinking of sour liquors,
worms, obstinate costiveness, and
various other causes, which produce
the most excruciating pain in the
region of the abdomen. large
blisters applied to the most painful
part, emollient clysters, fomentations,
and the warm bath, are
amongst the most likely means; but
in many instances, this disorder is
not to be controuled by medicine.[]
no remedy however can be applied
with greater safety or advantage,
than frequent doses of castor oil:
and if this fail, quicksilver in a natural
state is the only medicine on
which any reliance can be placed.
imperial. put into a stone
jar two ounces of cream of tartar,
and the juice and paring of two lemons.
pour on them seven quarts
of boiling water, stir it well, and
cover it close. when cold, sweeten
it with loaf sugar; strain, bottle,
and cork it tight. this makes a very
pleasant and wholesome liquor; but
if drunk too freely, it becomes injurious.
in bottling it off, add half
a pint of rum to the whole quantity.
imperial cream. boil a
quart of cream with the thin rind of
a lemon, and stir it till nearly cold.
have ready in a dish or bowl, in
which it is to be served, the juice
of three lemons strained, mixed
with as much sugar as will sweeten
the cream. pour this into the dish
from a large tea-pot, holding it
high, and moving it about to mix
with the juice. it should be made
at least six hours before it is used;
and if the day before, it would be
still better.
imperial water. put into
an earthen pan, four ounces of sugar,
and the rind of three lemons.
boil an ounce of cream of tartar in
three quarts of water, and pour it
on the sugar and lemon. let it stand
all night, clear it through a bag,
and bottle it.
incense. compound in a marble
mortar, a large quantity of lignum
rhodium, and anise, with a
little powder of dried orange peel,
and gum benzoin. add some gum
dragon dissolved in rose water, and
a little civet. beat the whole together,
form the mixture into small
cakes, and place them on paper to
dry. one of these cakes being
burnt, will diffuse an agreeable
odour throughout the largest apartment.
indelible ink. gum arabic
dissolved in water, and well mixed
with fine ivory black, will make
writing indelible. if the writing be
afterwards varnished over with the
white of an egg clarified, it will preserve
it to any length of time.
indian pickle. lay a pound
of white ginger in water one night;
then scrape, slice, and lay it in salt
in a pan, till the other ingredients
are prepared. peel and slice a
pound of garlic, lay it in salt three
days, and afterwards dry it in the
sun. salt and dry some long pepper
in the same way: then prepare
various sorts of vegetables in the
following manner. quarter some
small white cabbages, salt them
three days, then squeeze and lay
them in the sun to dry. cut some
cauliflowers into branches, take off
the green part of radishes, cut celery
into lengths of about three
inches, put in young french beans
whole, and the shoots of elder,
which will look like bamboo. choose
apples and cucumbers of a sort the
least seedy, quarter them, or cut
them in slices. all must be salted,
drained, and dried in the sun, except
the latter, over which some
boiling vinegar must be poured. in
twelve hours drain them, but use
no salt. put the spice into a large
stone jar, adding the garlic, a quarter
of a pound of mustard seed, an
ounce of turmeric, and vinegar sufficient
for the quantity of pickle.
when the vegetables are dried and
ready, the following directions must
be observed. put some of them into
a half-gallon stone jar, and pour
over them a quart of boiling vinegar.
next day take out those vegetables;
and when drained, put them into a
large stock jar. boil the vinegar,
pour it over some more of the vegetables,
let them lie all night, and
complete the operation as before.[]
thus proceed till each set is cleansed
from the dust they may have contracted.
then to every gallon of
vinegar, put two ounces of flour of
mustard, gradually mixing in a little
of it boiling hot, and stop the jar
tight. the whole of the vinegar
should be previously scalded, and set
to cool before it is put to the spice.
this pickle will not be ready for a
year, but a small quantity may be
got ready for eating in a fortnight,
by only giving the cauliflower one
scald in water, after salting and
drying as above, but without the
preparative vinegar: then pour the
vinegar, which has the spice and
garlic, boiling hot over it. if at
any time it be found that the vegetables
have not swelled properly,
boiling the pickle, and pouring it
hot over them, will make them plump.—another
way. cut the heads of
some good cauliflowers into pieces,
and add some slices of the inside
of the stalk. put to them a white
cabbage cut in pieces, with inside
slices of carrot, turnips, and onions.
boil a strong brine of salt and water,
simmer the vegetables in it one minute,
drain them, and dry them on
tins over an oven till they are
shriveled up; then put them into a
jar, and prepare the following pickle.
to two quarts of good vinegar, put
an ounce of the flour of mustard,
one of ginger, one of long pepper,
four of cloves, a few shalots, and a
little horseradish. boil the vinegar,
put the vegetables into a jar, and
pour it hot over them. when cold,
tie them down, and add more vinegar
afterwards, if necessary. in
the course of a week or two, the
pickle will be fit for use.
indigestion. persons of
weak delicate habits, particularly
the sedentary and studious, are frequently
subject to indigestion. the
liberal use of cold water alone, in
drinking, washing, and bathing, is
often sufficient to effect a cure.
drinking of sea water, gentle purgatives,
with bark and bitters, light
and nourishing food, early rising,
and gentle exercise in the open air,
are also of great importance.
infection. during the prevalence
of any infectious disease,
every thing requires to be kept perfectly
clean, and the sick room to
be freely ventilated. the door or
window should generally be open,
the bed curtains only drawn to shade
the light, clothes frequently changed
and washed in cold water, all discharges
from the patient instantly
removed, and the floor near the bed
rubbed every day with a wet cloth.
take also a hot brick, lay it in an
earthen pan, and pour pickle vinegar
upon it. this will refresh the
patient, as well as purify the surrounding
atmosphere. those who
are obliged to attend the patients,
should not approach them fasting,
nor inhale their breath; and while
in their apartment, should avoid eating
and drinking, and swallowing
their own saliva. it will also be of
considerable service to smell vinegar
and camphor, to fumigate the
room with tobacco, and to chew
myrrh and cinnamon, which promote
a plentiful discharge from the
mouth. as soon as a person has
returned from visiting an infected
patient, he ought immediately to
wash his mouth and hands with
vinegar, to change his clothes, and
expose them to the fresh air; and
to drink an infusion of sage, or
other aromatic herbs. after the disorder
has subsided, the walls of the
room should be washed with hot lime,
which will render it perfectly sweet.
inflammations. in external
inflammations, attended with
heat and swelling of the part affected,
cooling applications and a
little opening medicine are the best
adapted; and in some cases, cataplasms
of warm emollient herbs may
be used with advantage.[]
eyes. in this case leeches should
be applied to the temples; and after
the bleeding has ceased, a small
blister may be tried, with a little
opening medicine. much benefit
has been derived from shaving the
head, cutting the hair, and bathing
the feet in warm water. if the inflammation
has arisen from particles
of iron or steel falling into the eyes,
the offending matter is best extracted
by the application of the loadstone.
if eyes are blood-shotten, the
necessary rules are, an exclusion
from light, cold fomentations, and
abstinence from animal food and
stimulating liquors. for a bruise
in the eye, occasioned by any accident,
the best remedy is a rotten
apple, and some conserve of roses.
fold them in a piece of thin cambric,
apply it to the part affected,
and it will take out the bruise.
bowels. this is a complaint that
requires great care. if the belly be
swelled, and painful to the touch,
apply flannels to it, dipped in hot
water and wrung out, or use a warm
bath. a blister should be employed
as soon as possible, and mild emollient
injections of gruel or barley
water, till stools be obtained. the
patient should be placed between
blankets, and supplied with light
gruel; and when the violence of the
disorder is somewhat abated, the
pain may be removed by opiate
clysters. a common bread and milk
poultice, applied as warm as possible
to the part affected, has also
been attended with great success:
but as this disorder is very dangerous,
it would be proper to call in
medical assistance without delay.
ink. to make an excellent writing
ink, take a pound of the best
aleppo galls, half a pound of copperas,
a quarter of a pound of gum
arabic, and a quarter of a pound of
white sugar candy. bruise the galls
and beat the other ingredients fine,
and infuse them together in three
quarts of rain water. let the mixture
stand by the fire three or four
days, and then boil it gently over a
slow fire; or if infused in cold water,
and afterwards well strained,
it will nearly answer the same purpose.
care must be taken to obtain
good materials, and to mix
them in due proportion. to preserve
the ink from mouldiness, it
should be put into a large glass bottle
with a ground stopper, and frequently
shaked; but if a crust be
formed, it should be carefully taken
out, and not mixed with the ink.
a little more gum and sugar candy
may be added, to render the
ink more black and glossy; but
too much will make it sticky, and
unfit for use.—another method
is to bruise a pound of good galls,
black and heavy, and put them into
a stone jar. then pour on a gallon
of rain water, nearly of a boiling
heat, and let it stand by the fire
about a fortnight. afterwards add
four ounces of green copperas or
sulphate of iron, four ounces of logwood
shavings, one ounce of alum,
one of sugar candy, and four of gum
arabic. let the whole remain about
two days longer in a moderate heat,
stir the ingredients together once or
twice a day, and keep the jar slightly
covered. the ink is then to be
strained through a flannel, put into
a bottle with a little brandy at the
top, well corked, and set by for use
in a temperate place. a few cloves
bruised with gum arabic, and put
into the bottle, will prevent the ink
from getting mouldy; and if some
of superior quality be required,
white wine or vinegar must be used
instead of water.
ink powder. for the convenience
of travellers by sea or by
land, ink powders have been invented,
which consist of nothing else
than the substances employed in the
composition of common ink, pounded
and pulverized, so that it be instantaneously[]
converted into ink by
mixing it up with a little water.
walkden's ink powder is by far the
best.
ink stains. the stains of
ink, on cloth, paper, or wood, may
be removed by almost all acids;
but those acids are to be preferred,
which are least likely to injure the
texture of the stained substance.
the muriatic acid, diluted with five
or six times its weight of water,
may be applied to the spot; and
after a minute or two, may be washed
off, repeating the application as
often as it is found necessary. but
the vegetable acids are attended
with less risk, and are equally effectual.
a solution of lemon or tartareous
acid, in water, may be applied
to the most delicate fabrics,
without any danger of injuring them:
and the same solution will discharge
writing, but not printing ink. hence
they may be employed in cleaning
books which have been defaced by
writing on the margin, without impairing
the text. lemon juice and
the juice of sorrel will also remove
ink stains, but not so easily as the
concrete acid of lemons, or citric
acid. on some occasions it will be
found sufficient, only to dip the
spotted part in the fine melted tallow
of a mould candle, and afterwards
wash it in the usual way.
insects. the most effectual
remedy against the whole tribe of
insects, which prey upon plants and
vegetables, is the frequent use of
sulphur, which should be dusted
upon the leaves through a muslin
rag or dredging box, or fumed on a
chaffing dish of burning charcoal.
this application will also improve
the healthiness of plants, as well as
destroy their numerous enemies.
another way is to boil together an
equal quantity of rue, wormwood,
and tobacco, in common water, so
as to make the liquor strong, and
then to sprinkle it on the leaves
every morning and evening. by
pouring boiling water on some tobacco
and the tender shoots of elder,
a strong decoction may also
be made for this purpose, and shed
upon fruit trees with a brush: the
quantity, about an ounce of tobacco
and two handfuls of elder to a gallon
of water. elder water sprinkled
on honeysuckles and roses, will prevent
insects from lodging on them.
if a quantity of wool happen to be
infected with insects, it may be
cleansed in the following manner.
dissolve a pound of alum, and as
much cream of tartar, in a quart of
boiling water, and add two full gallons
of cold water to it. the wool
is then to be soaked in it for several
days, and afterwards to be washed
and dried.
inside of a sirloin. cut
out all the meat and a little fat, of
the inside of a cold sirloin of beef,
and divide it into pieces of a finger's
size and length. dredge the meat
with flour, and fry it in butter, of
a nice brown. drain the butter
from the meat, and toss it up in a
rich gravy, seasoned with pepper,
salt, anchovy, and shalot. it must
not be suffered to boil; and before
serving, add two spoonfuls of vinegar.
garnish with crimped parsley.
invisible ink. boil half an
ounce of gold litharge well pounded,
with a little vinegar in a brass vessel
for half an hour. filter the
liquid through paper, and preserve
it in a bottle closely corked. this
ink is to be used with a clean pen,
and the writing when dry will become
invisible. but if at any time
it be washed over with the following
mixture, it will instantly become
black and legible. put some quicklime
and red orpiment in water,
place some warm ashes under it for
a whole day, filter the liquor, and
cork it down. whenever applied
in the slightest degree, it will render
the writing visible.
irish beef. to twenty pounds
of beef, put one ounce of allspice,[]
a quarter of an ounce of mace, cinnamon,
and nutmeg, and half an
ounce each of pepper and saltpetre.
mix all together, and add some common
salt. put the meat into a salting
pan, turn it every day, and rub
it with the seasoning. after a month
take out the bone, and boil the meat
in the liquor it was pickled in, with
a proper quantity of water. it
may be stuffed with herbs, and eaten
cold.
irish pancakes. beat eight
yolks and four whites of eggs, strain
them into a pint of cream, sweeten
with sugar, and add a grated nutmeg.
stir three ounces of butter
over the fire, and as it melts pour it
to the cream, which should be warm
when the eggs are put to it. mix
it smooth with nearly half a pint of
flour, and fry the pancakes very thin;
the first with a bit of butter, but not
the others. serve up several at a
time, one upon another.
irish stew. take five thick
mutton chops, or two pounds off
the neck or loin; four pounds of
potatoes, peeled and divided; and
half a pound of onions, peeled and
sliced. put a layer of potatoes at
the bottom of a stewpan, then a
couple of chops, and some of the
onions, and so on till the pan is
quite full. add a small spoonful of
white pepper, about one and a half
of salt, and three quarters of a pint
of broth or gravy. cover all close
down, so as to prevent the escape of
steam, and let them stew two hours
on a very slow fire. it must not be
suffered to burn, nor be done too
fast: a small slice of ham will be an
agreeable addition.
iron moulds. wet the injured
part, rub on a little of the
essential salt of lemons, and lay it
on a hot waterplate. if the linen
becomes dry, wet it and renew
the process, observing that the plate
is kept boiling hot. much of the
powder sold under the name of salt
of lemons is a spurious preparation,
and therefore it is necessary to dip
the linen in a good deal of water,
and to wash it as soon as the stain
is removed, in order to prevent the
part from being worn into holes by
the acid.
iron pots. to cure cracks or
fissures in iron pots or pans, mix
some finely sifted lime with whites
of eggs well beaten, till reduced to
a paste. add some iron file dust,
and apply the composition to the injured
part, and it will soon become
hard and fit for use.
iron and steel. various
kinds of polished articles, in iron
and steel, are in danger of being
rusted and spoiled, by an exposure
to air and moisture. a mixture of
nearly equal quantities of fat, oil
varnish, and the rectified spirits of
turpentine, applied with a sponge,
will give a varnish to those articles,
which prevents their contracting any
spots of rust, and preserves their
brilliancy, even though exposed to
air and water. common articles of
steel or iron may be preserved from
injury by a composition of one
pound of fresh lard, an ounce of
camphor, two drams of black lead
powder, and two drams of dragon's
blood in fine powder, melted over
a slow fire, and rubbed on with a
brush or sponge, after it has been
left to cool.
isinglass jelly. boil an
ounce of isinglass in a quart of water,
with a few cloves, lemon peel,
or wine, till it is reduced to half the
quantity. then strain it, and add a
little sugar and lemon juice.
issue ointment. for dressing
blisters, in order to keep them
open, make an ointment of half an
ounce of spanish flies finely powdered,
mixed with six ounces of yellow
basilicon ointment.
italian beef steaks. cut
a fine large steak from a rump that
has been well kept, or from any tender
part. beat it, and season with
pepper, salt, and onion. lay it in[]
an iron stewpan that has a cover to
fit it quite close, and set it by the
side of the fire without water. it
must have a strong heat, but care
must be taken that it does not burn:
in two or three hours it will be quite
tender, and then serve with its own
gravy.
itch. rub the parts affected
with the ointment of sulphur, and
keep the body gently open by taking
every day a small dose of sulphur
and treacle. when the cure
is effected, let the clothes be carefully
fumigated with sulphur, or the
contagion will again be communicated.
the dry itch requires a vegetable
diet, and the liberal use of
anti-scorbutics: the parts affected
may be rubbed with a strong decoction
of tobacco.
ivory. bones and ivory may
be turned to almost any use, by being
softened in the following manner.
boil some sage in strong vinegar,
strain the liquor through a piece of
cloth, and put in the articles. in
proportion to the time they are
steeped in the liquor, ivory or bones
will be capable of receiving any new
impression.
japan blacking. take three
ounces of ivory black, two ounces
of coarse sugar, one ounce of sulphuric
acid, one ounce of muriatic
acid, a lemon, a table-spoonful of
sweet oil, and a pint of vinegar.
first mix the ivory black and sweet
oil together, then the lemon and
sugar, with a little vinegar to qualify
the blacking; then add both the
acids, and mix them all well together.
the sugar, oil, and vinegar
prevent the acids from injuring the
leather, and add to the lustre of the
blacking.—a cheap method is to take
two ounces of ivory black, an ounce
and a half of brown sugar, and half
a table-spoonful of sweet oil. mix
them well, and then gradually add
half a pint of small beer.—or take
a quarter of a pound of ivory black,
a quarter of a pound of moist sugar,
a table-spoonful of flour, a piece of
tallow about the size of a walnut,
and a small piece of gum arabic.
make a paste of the flour, and whilst
hot, put in the tallow, then the sugar,
and afterwards mix the whole
well together in a quart of water.
jarganel pears. these may
be preserved in a fine state, in the
following manner. pare them very
thin, simmer in a thin syrup, and
let them lie a day or two. make
the syrup richer, and simmer them
again. repeat this till they are
clear; then drain, and dry them in
the sun or a cool oven a very little
time. they may also be kept in
syrup, and dried as wanted, which
makes them more moist and rich.
jaundice. the diet of persons
affected with the jaundice ought to
be light and cooling, consisting
chiefly of ripe fruits, and mild vegetables.
many have been effectually
cured, by living for several days
on raw eggs. buttermilk whey
sweetened with honey, or an infusion
of marshmallow roots, ought
to constitute the whole of the patient's
drink. honey, anti-scorbutics,
bitters, and blisters applied to
the region of the liver, have all been
found serviceable in the cure of the
jaundice.
jelly for cold fish. clean
a maid, and put it into three quarts
of water, with a calf's foot, or cow
heel. add a stick of horseradish,
an onion, three blades of mace,
some white pepper, a piece of lemon[]
peel, and a good slice of lean gammon.
stew it to a jelly, and strain
it off. when cold, remove every
particle of fat, take it up from the
sediment, and boil it with a glass of
sherry, the whites of four or five
eggs, and a piece of lemon. boil
without stirring; after a few minutes
set it by to stand half an hour,
and strain it through a bag or sieve,
with a cloth in it. cover the fish
with it when cold.
these must be taken up the moment
they are boiled enough, or they will
be too soft. they may be served
plain, or with fricassee sauce.
jugged hare. after cleaning
and skinning an old hare, cut it
up, and season it with pepper, salt,
allspice, pounded mace, and a little
nutmeg. put it into a jar with an
onion, a clove or two, a bunch of
sweet herbs, a piece of coarse beef,
and the carcase bones over all. tie
the jar down with a bladder and
strong paper, and put it into a saucepan
of water up to the neck, but no
higher. keep the water boiling five
hours. when it is to be served,
boil up the gravy with flour and butter;
and if the meat get cold, warm
it up in the gravy, but do not boil it.
jugged veal. cut some
slices of veal, and put them into an
earthen jug, with a blade of mace,
a little pepper, salt, and nutmeg.
add a sprig of sweet herbs, and a
bit of lemon peel. cover the jug
close, that the steam may not escape;
set it in a pot of boiling water,
and about three hours will do it.
half an hour before it is done, put
in a piece of butter rolled in flour,
and a little lemon juice, or lemon
pickle. turn it out of the jug into
a dish, take out the herbs and lemon
peel, and send it to table garnished
with lemon.
jumbles. powder and sift half
a pound of fine lump sugar, and
mix it with half a pound of dried
flour. beat up two eggs in a table-spoonful
of orange or rose water,
shred the peel of half a lemon very
fine, mix the whole together, and
make it into a paste. cut the paste
into fancy shapes, bake them slightly
on tins, and take them out of the
oven as soon as the edges begin to
brown.
ketchup. the liquor obtained
from mushrooms, approaches the
nearest to meat gravy, in flavour
and quality, of any other vegetable
juice, and is the best substitute for
it, in any of those savoury dishes
intended to please the palate. but
in order to have it wholesome and
good, it must be made at home, the
mushrooms employed in preparing
ketchup for sale being generally in
a state of putrefaction; and in a few
days after the mushrooms are gathered,
they become the habitation of
myriads of insects. in order to procure
and preserve the flavour of the
vegetable for any considerable time,
the mushrooms should be sought
from the beginning of september, and
care taken to select only the right
sort, and such as are fresh gathered.
full grown flaps are the best for
ketchup. place a layer of these
at the bottom of a deep earthen
pan, and sprinkle them with salt;
then another layer of mushrooms,
and some more salt on them, and so
on alternately. let them remain
two or three hours, by which time
the salt will have penetrated the
mushrooms, and rendered them easy
to break. then pound them in a[]
mortar, or mash them with the hand,
and let them remain two days longer,
stirring them up, and mashing them
well each day. then pour them into
a stone jar, and to each quart
add an ounce of whole black pepper.
stop the jar very close, set it in a
stewpan of boiling water, and keep
it boiling at least for two hours.
take out the jar, pour the juice clear
from the settlings through a hair
sieve into a clean stewpan, and let
it boil very gently for half an hour.
if intended to be exquisitely fine, it
may be boiled till reduced to half
the quantity. it will keep much
better in this concentrated state,
and only half the quantity be required.
skim it well in boiling,
and pour it into a clean dry jar;
cover it close, let it stand in a cool
place till the next day, and then
pour it off as gently as possible, so
as not to disturb the settlings. if
a table-spoonful of brandy be added
to each pint of ketchup, after standing
a while, a fresh sediment will
be deposited, from which the liquor
is quietly to be poured off, and bottled
into half pints, as it is best preserved
in small quantities, which are
soon used. it must be closely corked
and sealed down, or dipped in
bottle cement, that the air may be
entirely excluded. if kept in a cool
dry place, it may be preserved for
a long time; but if it be badly corked,
and kept in a damp place, it
will soon spoil. examine it from
time to time, by placing a strong
light behind the neck of the bottle;
and if any pellicle appears about it,
it must be boiled up again with a
few peppercorns. no more spice
is required than what is necessary
to feed the ketchup, and keep it from
fermenting. brandy is the best preservative
to all preparations of this
kind.
keeping provisions. when
articles of food are procured, the
next thing to be considered is, how
they may be best preserved, in order
to their being dressed. more
waste is oftentimes occasioned by
the want of judgment or of necessary
care in this particular, than by
any other means; and what was
procured with expense and difficulty
is rendered unwholesome, or given
to the dogs. very few houses have
a proper place to keep provisions
in; the best substitute is a hanging-safe,
suspended in an airy situation.
a well-ventilated larder, dry and
shady, would be better for meat and
poultry, which require to be kept a
proper time to be ripe and tender.
the most consummate skill in culinary
matters, will not compensate
the want of attention to this particular.
though animal food should
be hung up in the open air, till its
fibres have lost some degree of their
toughness; yet if kept till it loses
its natural sweetness, it is as detrimental
to health as it is disagreeable
to the taste and smell. as soon
therefore as you can detect the
slightest trace of putrescence, it has
reached its highest degree of tenderness,
and should be dressed immediately.
much of course will depend
on the state of the atmosphere:
if it be warm and humid, care must
be taken to dry the meat with a
cloth, night and morning, to keep it
from damp and mustiness. during
the sultry months of summer, it is
difficult to procure meat that is not
either tough or tainted. it should
therefore be well examined when
it comes in; and if flies have touched
it, the part must be cut off, and
then well washed. meat that is to
be salted should lie an hour in cold
water, rubbing well any part likely
to have been fly-blown. when taken
out of the water, wipe it quite dry,
then rub it thoroughly with salt, and
throw a handful over it besides.
turn it every day, and rub in the
pickle, which will make it ready for
the table in three or four days. if
to be very much corned, wrap it in a
well-floured cloth, after rubbing it[]
with salt. this last method will corn
fresh beef fit for the table the day
it comes in, but it must be put into
the pot when the water boils. if the
weather permit, meat eats much
better for hanging two or three days
before it is salted. in very cold
weather, meat and vegetables touched
by the frost should be brought
into the kitchen early in the morning,
and soaked in cold water. putting
them into hot water, or near the
fire, till thawed, makes it impossible
for any heat to dress them properly
afterwards. in loins of meat, the
long pipe that runs by the bone
should be taken out, as it is apt to
taint; as also the kernels of beef.
rumps and edgebones of beef when
bruised, should not be purchased.
to preserve venison, wash it well
with milk and water, then dry it
with clean cloths till not the least
damp remains, and dust it all over
with pounded ginger, which will
protect it against the fly. by thus
managing and watching, it will hang
a fortnight. when to be used, wash it
with a little lukewarm water, and dry
it. pepper is likewise good to keep it.
kidney pudding. split and
soak the kidney, and season it.
make a paste of suet, flour, and
milk; roll it, and line a bason with
some of it. put in the kidney, cover
the paste over, and pinch it round
the edge. tie up the bason in a cloth,
and boil it a considerable time. a
steak pudding is made in the same
way.
kitchen economy. many
articles thrown away, or suffered to
be wasted in the kitchen, might by
proper management be turned to a
good account. the shank bones of
mutton, so little esteemed in general,
would be found to give richness to
soups or gravies, if well soaked and
brushed, before they are added to
the boiling. they are also particularly
nourishing for sick persons.
roast beef-bones, or shank bones of
ham, make fine peas-soup; and
should be boiled with the peas the
day before the soup is to be eaten,
that the fat may be taken off. the
liquor in which meat has been boiled
makes an excellent soup for the
poor, by adding to it vegetables, oatmeal,
or peas. when whites of eggs
are used for jelly, or other purposes,
a pudding or a custard should be
made to employ the yolks. if not
immediately wanted, they should
be beat up with a little water, and
put in a cool place, or they will soon
harden, and become useless. it is
a great mistake to imagine that the
whites of eggs make cakes and puddings
heavy: on the contrary, if
beaten long and separately, they
contribute greatly to give lightness.
they are also an advantage to paste,
and make a pretty dish beaten with
fruit, to set in cream. all things
likely to be wanted should be in
readiness; sugars of different sorts,
currants washed, picked, and perfectly
dry; spices pounded, and
kept in very small bottles closely
corked, but not more than are likely
to be used in the course of a month.
much waste may be prevented by
keeping every article in the place
best suited to it. vegetables will
keep best on a stone floor, if the
air be excluded. meat in a cold
dry place. salt, sugar, and sweetmeats
require to be kept dry; candles
cold, but not damp. dried
meats and hams the same. rice,
and all sorts of seeds for puddings
and saloops, should be close covered
to preserve from insects; but that
will not prevent it, if long kept.
kitchen garden. here a
little attention will be requisite every
month in the year, as no garden can
be long neglected, without producing
weeds which exhaust the soil, as
well as give a very slovenly appearance.—january.
throw up a heap
of new dung to heat, that it may be
ready to make hotbeds for early cucumbers,
and raising of annuals for
the flower garden. dig up the[]
ground that is to be sown with the
spring crops, that it may lie and
mellow. nurse the cauliflower plants
kept under glasses, carefully shut
out the frost, but in the middle of
milder days let in a little air. pick
up the dead leaves, and gather up
the mould about the stalks. make
a slight hotbed in the open ground
for young sallads, and place hoops
over it, that it may be covered in
very cold weather. sow a few beans
and peas, and seek and destroy
snails and other vermin.—february.
dig and level beds for sowing
radishes, onions, carrots, parsnips,
and dutch lettuce. leeks
and spinage should also be sown in
this month, likewise beets, celery,
sorrel, and marigolds, with any other
of the hardy kinds. the best way
with beans and peas, is to sow a
new crop every fortnight, that if one
succeeds and another fails, as will
often be the case, there still may be
a constant supply of these useful
articles for the table. plant kidney
beans upon a hotbed for an early
crop; the dwarf, the white and
battersea beans, are the best sorts.
they must have air in the middle of
mild days when they are up, and
once in two days they should be
gently watered. transplant cabbages,
plant out silesia and cos lettuce
from the beds where they grew
in winter, and plant potatoes and jerusalem
artichokes.—march. sow
more carrots, and also some large
peas, rouncevals and gray. in better
ground sow cabbages, savoys,
and parsnips for a second crop;
and towards the end of the month,
put in a larger quantity of peas and
beans. sow parsley, and plant mint.
sow cos and imperial lettuce, and
transplant the finer kinds. in the
beginning of the month, sow dutch
parsley for the roots. the last week
take advantage of the time, or the
dry days, to make beds for asparagus.
clear up the artichoke roots,
slip off the weakest, and plant them
out for a new crop, leaving four on
each good root to bear, and on such
as are weaker two. dig up a warm
border, and sow some french beans;
let them have a dry soil, and give
them no water till they appear above
ground.—april. on a dry warm
border, plant a large crop of french
beans. plant cuttings of sage, and
other aromatics. sow marrowfat
peas, and plant some beans for a
late crop. sow thyme, sweet marjoram,
and savoury. sow young
sallads once in ten days, and some
cos and silesia lettuces. the seeds
of all kinds being now in the ground,
look to the growing crops, clear
away the weeds every where among
them, dig up the earth between the
rows of beans, peas, and all other
kinds that are distantly planted.
this gives them a strong growth,
and brings them much sooner to
perfection than can be done in any
other way. draw up the mould to
the stalks of the cabbage and cauliflower
plants, and in cold nights
cover the glasses over the early cucumbers
and melons.—may. once
in two days water the peas, beans,
and other large growing plants. destroy
the weeds in all parts of the
ground, dig up the earth between
the rows, and about the stems of all
large kinds. sow small sallads once
in two days, as in the former month:
at the same time choose a warm
border, and sow some purslain. sow
also some endive, plant peas and
beans for a large crop, and french
beans to succeed the others. the
principal object with these kinds of
vegetables, is to have them fresh
and young throughout the season.
choose a moist day, and an hour
before sunset plant out some savoys,
cabbages, and red cabbages. draw
the earth carefully up to their stems,
and give them a few gentle waterings.—june.
transplant the cauliflowers
sown in may, give them a rich
bed, and frequent waterings. plant
out thyme, and other savoury herbs[]
sown before, and in the same manner
shade and water them. take advantage
of cloudy weather to sow
turnips; and if there be no showers,
water the ground once in two days.
sow brocoli upon a rich warm border,
and plant out celery, for blanching.
this must be planted in trenches
a foot and a half deep, and the
plants must be set half a foot asunder
in the rows. endive should also
be planted out for blanching, but
the plants should be set fifteen
inches asunder, and at the same
time some endive seed should be
sown for a second crop. pick up
snails, and in the damp evenings
kill the naked slugs.—july. sow a
crop of french beans to come in
late, when they will be very acceptable.
clear all the ground from
weeds, dig between the rows of beans
and peas, hoe the ground about
the artichokes, and every thing of
the cabbage kind. water the crops
in dry weather, and the cucumbers
more freely. watch the melons as
they ripen, but give them very little
water. clear away the stalks of
beans and peas that have done bearing.
spinach seed will now be
ready for gathering, as also that of
the welch onion, and some others:
take them carefully off, and dry
them in the shade. take up large
onions, and spread them upon mats
to dry for the winter.—august.
spinach and onions should be sowed
on rich borders, prepared for that
purpose. these two crops will live
through the winter, unless very severe,
and be valuable in the spring.
the second week in this month sow
cabbage seed of the early kind, and
in the third week sow cauliflower
seed. this will provide plants to
be nursed up under bell glasses in
the winter. some of these may also
be planted in the open ground in a
well defended situation. the last
week of this month sow another
crop, to supply the place of these in
case of accidents; for if the season
be very severe, they may be lost;
and if very mild, they will run to
seed in the spring. these last crops
must be defended by a hotbed frame,
and they will stand out and supply
deficiencies. sow cabbage lettuces,
and the brown dutch kinds, in a
warm and well sheltered border.
take up garlic, and spread it on a
mat to harden. in the same manner
take up onions and rocambole, and
shalots at the latter end of the
month.—september. sow various
kinds of lettuces, silesia, cos,
and dutch, and when they come up,
shelter them carefully. the common
practice is to keep them under
hand-glasses, but they will thrive
better under a reed fence, placed
sloping over them. make up fresh
warm beds with the dung that has
lain a month in the heap. plant
the spawn in these beds, upon pasture
mould, and raise the top of the
bed to a ridge, to throw off the wet.
look to the turnip beds and thin
them, leaving the plants six inches
apart from each other. weed the
spinach, onions, and other new-sown
plants. earth up the celery, and
sow young sallads upon warm and
well-sheltered borders. clean asparagus
beds, cut down the stalks,
pare off the earth from the surface
of the alleys, throw it upon the beds
half an inch thick, and sprinkle over
it a little dung from an old melon
bed. dig up the ground where
summer crops have ripened, and lay
it in ridges for the winter. the ridges
should be disposed east and west,
and turned once in two months, to
give them the advantage of a fallow.
sow some beans and peas on warm
and well-sheltered borders, to stand
out the winter.—october. set
out cauliflower plants, where they
can be sheltered; and if glasses
are used, put two under each, for
fear of one failing. sow another
crop of peas, and plant more beans;
choose a dry spot for them, where
they can be sheltered from the[]
winter's cold. transplant the lettuces
sown last month, where they
can be defended by a reed fence, or
under a wall. transplant cabbage
plants and coleworts, where they
are to remain. take great care of
the cauliflower plants sown early in
summer; and as they now begin to
show their heads, break in the leaves
upon them to keep off the sun and
rain; it will both harden and whiten
them.—november. weed the
crops of spinach, and others that
were sown late, or the wild growth
will smother and starve the crop.
dig up a border under a warm wall,
and sow some carrots for spring;
sow radishes in a similar situation,
and let the ground be dug deep for
both. turn the mould that was
trenched and laid up for fallowing;
this will destroy the weeds, and enrich
the soil by exposing it to the
air. prepare some hotbeds for salading,
cover them five inches with
mould, and sow them with lettuces,
mustard, rape, cresses, and radish.
plant another crop of beans, and sow
more peas for a succession. trench
the ground between the artichokes,
and throw a thick ridge of earth
over the roots: this will preserve
them from the frost, and prevent
their shooting at an improper time.
make a hotbed for asparagus. take
up carrots and parsnips, and put
them in sand to be ready for use.
give air occasionally to the plants
under hand-glasses and on hotbeds,
or they will suffer as much for want
of it, as they would have done by
an exposure to the cold.—december.
plant cabbages and savoys
for seed: this requires to be done
carefully. dig up a dry border,
and break the mould well; then take
up some of the stoutest cabbage and
savoy plants, hang them up by the
stalks four or five days, and afterwards
plant them half way up the
stalks into the ground. draw up
a good quantity of mould about the
stalk that is above ground, make it
into a kind of hill round each, and
leave them to nature. sow another
crop of peas, and plant some more
beans, to take their chance for succeeding
the other. make another
hotbed for asparagus, to yield a
supply when the former is exhausted.
continue to earth up celery,
and cover some endive with a good
quantity of peas straw, as it is growing,
that it may be taken up when
wanted, and be preserved from the
winter's frost.
kitchen pepper. mix in the
finest powder, one ounce of ginger,
half an ounce each of cinnamon,
black pepper, nutmeg, and jamaica
pepper; ten cloves, and six ounces
of salt. keep it in a bottle, and it
will be found an agreeable addition
to any brown sauces or soups. spice
in powder, kept in small bottles
close stopped, goes much farther
than when used whole. it must be
dried before it is pounded, and
should be done in quantities that
may be used in three or four months.
nutmeg need not be done, but the
others should be kept in separate
bottles, with a label on each.
kitchen utensils. continual
attention must be paid to the
condition of the boilers, saucepans,
stewpans, and other kitchen requisites,
which ought to be examined
every time they are used. their
covers also must be kept perfectly
clean, and well tinned. stewpans
in particular should be cleaned, not
only on the inside, but about a couple
of inches on the outside, or the
broths and soups will look green and
dirty, and taste bitter and poisonous.
not only health but even life depends
on the perfectly clean and
wholesome state of culinary utensils.
if the tinning of a pan happens
to be scorched or blistered, it
is best to send it directly to be repaired,
to prevent any possible danger
arising from the solution of the
metal. stewpans and soup pots
should be made with thick round[]
bottoms, similar to those of copper
saucepans; they will then wear
twice as long, and may be cleaned
with half the trouble. the covers
should be made to fit as close as
possible, that the broth or soup may
not waste by evaporation. they
are good for nothing, unless they fit
tight enough to keep the steam in,
and the smoke out. stewpans and
saucepans should always be bright
on the upper rim, where the fire does
not burn them; but it is not necessary
to scour them all over, which
would wear out the vessels. soup
pots and kettles should be washed
immediately after being used, and
carefully dried by the fire, before
they are put by. they must also
be kept in a dry place, or damp and
rust will soon destroy them. copper
utensils should never be used in
the kitchen; or if they be, the utmost
care should be taken not to
let the tin be rubbed off, and to have
them fresh done when the least defect
appears. neither soup nor
gravy should at any time be suffered
to remain in them longer than is absolutely
necessary for the purposes
of cookery, as the fat and acid employed
in the operation, are capable
of dissolving the metal, and so of
poisoning what is intended to be
eaten. stone and earthen vessels
should be provided for soups and
gravies intended to be set by, as
likewise plenty of common dishes,
that the table-set may not be used
for such purposes. vegetables soon
turn sour, and corrode metals and
glazed red ware, by which a strong
poison is produced. vinegar, by
its acidity, does the same, the glazing
being of lead or arsenic. care
should be taken of sieves, jelly bags,
and tapes for collared articles, to
have them well scalded and kept
dry, or they will impart an unpleasant
flavour when next used. stewpans
especially, should never be
used without first washing them out
with boiling water, and rubbing them
well with a dry cloth and a little
bran, to clean them from grease and
sand, or any bad smell they may
have contracted since they were
last used. in short, cleanliness is
the cardinal virtue of the kitchen;
and next to this, economy.
knife board. common knife
boards with brick dust, soon wear
out the knives that are sharpened
upon them. to avoid this, cover
the board with thick buff leather,
and spread over it a thin paste of
crocus martis, with a little emery
finely powdered, and mixed up with
lard or sweet oil. this will give a
superior edge and polish to the knives,
and make them wear much longer
than in the usual way of cleaning
them.
knuckle of veal. as few
persons are fond of boiled veal, it
may be well to cut the knuckle small,
and take off some cutlets or collops
before it is dressed; but as the
knuckle will keep longer than the
fillet, it is best not to cut off the
slices till wanted. break the bones
to make it take less room, wash the
joint well, and put it into a saucepan
with three onions, a blade or
two of mace, and a few peppercorns.
cover it with water, and
simmer it till quite done. in the
mean time some macaroni should be
boiled with it if approved, or rice,
or a little rice flour, to give it a
small degree of thickness; but avoid
putting in too much. before it is
served, add half a pint of milk and
cream, and let it go to table either
with or without the meat.—a knuckle
of veal may also be fried with sliced
onion and butter, to a good brown.
prepare some peas, lettuce, onion,
and a cucumber or two, stewed in a
small quantity of water for an hour.
add these to the veal, and stew it
till the meat is tender enough to eat,
but not overdone. put in pepper,
salt, and a little shred mint, and
serve all together.[]
lamb. in purchasing this meat,
observe particularly the neck of a
fore-quarter. if the vein is bluish,
it is fresh: if it has a green or yellow
cast, it is stale. in the hind-quarter,
if there is a faint smell under
the kidney, and the knuckle is
limp, the meat is stale. if the eyes
are sunk, the head is not fresh.
grass lamb comes into season in
april or may, and continues till
august. house lamb may be had
in large towns almost all the year,
but it is in highest perfection in december
and january.
lamb chops. cut up a neck
or loin, rub the chops with egg, and
sprinkle them over with grated bread,
mixed with a little parsley, thyme,
marjoram, and lemon peel, chopped
fine. fry them in butter till they
are of a light brown, put them in a
warm dish, garnished with crisped
parsley. or make a gravy in the
pan with a little water, and butter
rolled in flour, and pour it over
them.
lamb cutlets. cut some
steaks from the loin, and fry them.
stew some spinach, put it into a dish,
and lay the cutlets round it.
lamb's fry. serve it fried of
a beautiful colour, and with a good
deal of dried or fried parsley over it.
lamb's head. a house-lamb's
head is the best; but any other may
be made white by soaking it in cold
water. boil the head separately
till it is very tender. have ready
the liver and lights three parts boiled
and cut small: stew them in a
little of the water in which they
were boiled, season and thicken
with flour and butter, and serve the
mince round the head.
lamb pie. make it of the loin,
neck, or breast; the breast of house-lamb
especially, is very delicate and
fine. it should be lightly seasoned
with pepper and salt, the bone taken
out, but not the gristle. a small
quantity of jelly gravy is to be put
in hot, but the pie should not be cut
till cold. put in two spoonfuls of
water before baking. grass lamb
makes an excellent pie, and should
only be seasoned with pepper and
salt. put in two spoonfuls of water
before baking, and as much gravy
when it comes from the oven. it
may generally be remarked, that
meat pies being fat, it is best to let
out the gravy on one side, and put
it in again by a funnel, at the centre,
when a little may be added.
lamb steaks. quarter some
cucumbers, and lay them into a deep
dish; sprinkle them with salt, and
pour vinegar over them. fry the
steaks of a fine brown, and put them
into a stewpan; drain the cucumbers,
and put them over the steaks.
add some sliced onions, pepper and
salt; pour hot water or weak broth
on them, and stew and skim them
well.
lamb steaks brown. season
some house-lamb steaks with
pepper, salt, nutmeg, grated lemon
peel, and chopped parsley: but dip
them first into egg, and fry them
quick. thicken some good gravy
with a little flour and butter, and
add to it a spoonful of port wine,
and some oysters. boil up the liquor,
put in the steaks warm, and
serve them up hot. palates, balls,
or eggs, may be added, if approved.
lamb steaks white. steaks
of house-lamb should be stewed in
milk and water till very tender, with
a bit of lemon peel, a little salt,
mace, and pepper. have ready some
veal gravy, and put the steaks into
it; mix some mushroom powder, a
cup of cream, and a dust of flour; shake
the steaks in this liquor, stir
it, and make it quite hot. just before[]
taking up the steaks, put in a
few white mushrooms. when poultry
is very dear, this dish will be
found a good substitute.
blanch them, and put them a little
while into cold water. stew them
with a ladleful of broth, some pepper
and salt, a few small onions, and
a blade of mace. stir in a bit of
butter and flour, and stew them half
an hour. prepare two or three eggs
well beaten in cream, with a little
minced parsley, and a dust of grated
nutmeg. add a few tops of boiled
asparagus, stir it well over the fire,
but let it not boil after the cream is
in, and take great care that it does
not curdle. young french beans or
peas may be added, but should first
be boiled of a beautiful colour.
skin and wash, dry and flour them;
then fry them of a beautiful brown
in hog's lard. lay them on a sieve
before the fire, till the following
sauce is prepared. thicken nearly
half a pint of veal gravy with flour
and butter, and then add to it a
slice of lemon, a large spoonful of
mushroom ketchup, a tea-spoonful
of lemon pickle, a taste of nutmeg,
and the yolk of an egg well beaten
in two large spoonfuls of thick
cream. put this over the fire, stir
it well till it is hot, and looks white;
but do not let it boil, or it will curdle.
then put in the fry, shake it
about near the fire for a minute or
two, and serve it in a very hot dish
and cover.—a fricassee of lambstones
and sweetbreads may be prepared
another way. have ready
some lambstones blanched, parboiled,
and sliced. flour two or three
sweetbreads: if very thick, cut them
in two. fry all together, with a
few large oysters, of a fine yellow
brown. pour off the butter, add a
pint of good gravy, some asparagus
tops about an inch long, a little
nutmeg, pepper, and salt, two shalots
shred fine, and a glass of white
wine. simmer them ten minutes,
put a little of the gravy to the yolks
of three eggs well beaten, and mix
the whole together by degrees.
turn the gravy back into the pan,
stir it till of a fine thickness without
boiling, and garnish with lemon.
lameness. much lameness,
as well as deformity, might certainly
be prevented, if stricter attention
were paid to the early treatment of
children. weakness of the hips,
accompanied with a lameness of
both sides of the body, is frequently
occasioned by inducing them to
walk without any assistance, before
they have strength sufficient to support
themselves. such debility may
in some measure be counteracted,
by tying a girdle round the waist,
and bracing up the hips; but it requires
to be attended to at an early
period, or the infirmity will continue
for life. it will also be advisable
to bathe such weak limbs in
cold water, or astringent decoctions,
for several months. if the
lameness arise from contraction,
rather than from weakness, the best
means will be frequent rubbing of
the part affected. if this be not
sufficient, beat up the yolk of a new
laid egg, mix it well with three
ounces of water, and rub it gently
on the part. perseverance in the
use of this simple remedy, has been
successful in a great number of instances.
lamprey. to stew lamprey
as at worcester, clean the fish carefully,
and remove the cartilage which
runs down the back. season with
a small quantity of cloves, mace,
nutmeg, pepper, and allspice. put
it into a small stewpot, with beef
gravy, port, and sherry. cover it
close, stew it till tender, take out
the lamprey, and keep it hot. boil
up the liquor with two or three anchovies
chopped, and some butter
rolled in flour. strain the gravy
through a sieve, add some lemon
juice, and ready-made mustard.[]
serve with sippets of bread and
horseradish. when there is spawn,
it must be fried and laid round.
eels done the same way, are a good
deal like the lamprey.
larks. to dress larks and
other small birds, draw and spit
them on a bird spit. tie this on
another spit, and roast them. baste
gently with butter, and strew bread
crumbs upon them till half done.
brown them in dressing, and serve
with bread crumbs round.
lavender water. to a pint
of highly rectified spirits of wine,
add an ounce of the essential oil of
lavender, and two drams of the essence
of ambergris. put the whole
into a quart bottle, shake it frequently,
and decant it into small
bottles for use.
laver. this is a plant that
grows on the rocks near the sea in
the west of england, and is sent in
pots prepared for eating. place
some of it on a dish over the lamp,
with a bit of butter, and the squeeze
of a seville orange. stir it till it is
hot. it is eaten with roast meat,
and tends to sweeten the blood. it
is seldom liked at first, but habit
renders it highly agreeable.
leaf impressions. to take
impressions of leaves and plants,
oil a sheet of fine paper, dry it in
the sun, and rub off the superfluous
moisture with another piece of paper.
after the oil is pretty well
dried in, black the sheet by passing
it over a lighted lamp or candle.
lay the leaf or plant on the black
surface, with a small piece of paper
over it, and rub it carefully till the
leaf is thoroughly coloured. then
take it up undisturbed, lay it on the
book or paper which is to receive
the impression, cover it with a piece
of blotting paper, and rub it on the
back a short time with the finger as
before. impressions of the minutest
veins and fibres of a plant may be
taken in this way, superior to any
engraving, and which may afterwards
be coloured according to nature.
a printer's ball laid upon a leaf,
which is afterwards pressed on wet
paper, will also produce a fine impression;
or if the leaf be touched
with printing ink, and pressed with
a rolling pin, nearly the same effect
will be produced.
leather. to discharge grease
from articles made of leather, apply
the white of an egg; let it dry
in the sun, and then rub it off. a
paste made of dry mustard, potatoe
meal, and two spoonfuls of the spirits
of turpentine, applied to the
spot and rubbed off dry, will also
be found to answer the purpose. if
not, cleanse it with a little vinegar.
tanned leather is best cleaned with
nitrous acid and salts of lemon diluted
with water, and afterwards
mixed with skimmed milk. the
surface of the leather should first
be cleaned with a brush and soft
water, adding a little free sand, and
then repeatedly scoured with a brush
dipped in the nitrous mixture. it
is afterwards to be cleaned with a
sponge and water, and left to dry.
leavened bread. take two
pounds of dough from the last baking,
and keep it in flour. put the
dough or leaven into a peck of flour
the night before it is baked, and
work them well together in warm
water. cover it up warm in a wooden
vessel, and the next morning it
will be sufficiently fermented to mix
with two or three bushels of flour: then
work it up with warm water,
and a pound of salt to each bushel.
cover it with flannel till it rises,
knead it well, work it into broad
flat loaves or bricks, and bake them
as other bread.
leek milk. wash a large
handful of leeks, cut them small,
and boil them in a gallon of milk
till it become as thick as cream.
then strain it, and drink a small
bason full twice a day. this is good
for the jaundice.
leek soup. chop a quantity[]
of leeks into some mutton broth or
liquor, with a seasoning of salt and
pepper. simmer them an hour in
a saucepan; mix some oatmeal with
a little cold water quite smooth, and
pour it into the soup. simmer it
gently over a slow fire, and take care
that it does not burn to the bottom.
this is a scotch dish.
leg of lamb. to make it
look as white as possible, it should
be boiled in a cloth. at the same
time the loin should be fried in
steaks, and served with it, garnished
with dried or fried parsley. spinach
to eat with it. the leg may be
roasted, or dressed separately.
leg of mutton. if roasted,
serve it up with onion or currant-jelly
sauce. if boiled, with caper
sauce and vegetables.
leg of pork. salt it, and
let it lie six or seven days in the
pickle, turn and rub it with the brine
every day. put it into boiling water,
if not too salt; use a good quantity
of water, and let it boil all the
time it is on the fire. send it to
table with peas pudding, melted butter,
turnips, carrots, or greens. if
it is wanted to be dressed sooner, it
may be hastened by putting a little
fresh salt on it every day. it will
then be ready in half the time, but
it will not be quite so tender.—to
dress a leg of pork like goose, first
parboil it, then take off the skin,
and roast it. baste it with butter,
and make a savoury powder of finely
minced or dried and powdered
sage, ground black pepper, and
bread crumbs rubbed together
through a cullender; to which may
be added an onion, very finely
minced. sprinkle the joint with
this mixture when it is almost roasted,
put half a pint of made gravy
into the dish, and goose stuffing under
the knuckle skin, or garnish with
balls of it, either fried or boiled.
leg of veal. let the fillet
be cut large or small, as best suits
the size of the company. take out
the bone, fill the space with a fine
stuffing, skewer it quite round, and
send it to table with the large side
uppermost. when half roasted, or
before, put a paper over the fat,
and take care to allow sufficient
time: as the meat is very solid,
place it at a good distance from the
fire, that it may be gradually heated
through. serve it up with melted
butter poured over it. some of it
would be good for potting.
lemon brandy. pare two
dozen of lemons, and steep the peels
in a gallon of brandy. squeeze the
lemons on two pounds of fine sugar,
and add six quarts of water. the
next day put the ingredients together,
pour on three pints of boiling
milk, let it stand two days, and
strain it off.
lemon cake. beat up the
whites of ten eggs, with three spoonfuls
of orange flower water; put in
a pound of sifted sugar, and the
rind of a lemon grated. when it is
well mixed, add the juice of half a
lemon, and the yolks of ten eggs
beaten smooth. stir in three quarters
of a pound of flour, put the cake
into a buttered pan, and bake it an
hour carefully.
lemon cheesecakes. mix
four ounces of fine sifted sugar
and four ounces of butter, and melt
it gently. then add the yolks of
two and the white of one egg, the
rind of three lemons shred fine, and
the juice of one and a half; also one
savoy biscuit, some blanched almonds
pounded, and three spoonfuls
of brandy. mix them well together,
and put in the following
paste. eight ounces of flour, six
ounces of butter, two thirds of which
must first be mixed with the flour;
then wet it with six spoonfuls of water,
and roll in the remainder.—another
way. boil two large lemons,
or three small ones, and after
squeezing, pound them well together[]
in a mortar, with four ounces of
loaf sugar, the yolks of six eggs, and
eight ounces of fresh butter. fill
the pattipans half full. orange
cheesecakes are done in the same
way, only the peel must be boiled
in two or three waters to take out
the bitterness: or make them of
orange marmalade well beaten in a
mortar.
lemon cream. put to a pint
of thick cream, the yolks of two
eggs well beaten, four ounces of fine
sugar, and the thin rind of a lemon.
boil it up, and stir it till nearly cold.
put the juice of a lemon into a bowl,
and pour the cream upon it, stirring
it till quite cold. white lemon cream
is made in the same way, only put
the whites of the eggs instead of the
yolks, whisking it extremely well to
a froth.
lemon custards. beat the
yolks of eight eggs till they are as
white as milk; then put to them a
pint of boiling water, the rinds of
two lemons grated, and the juice
sweetened to taste. stir it on the
fire till it thickens; then add a large
glass of rich wine, and half a glass
of brandy. give the whole one
scald, and put it in cups to be eaten
cold.
lemon drops. grate three
large lemons, with a large piece of
double-refined sugar. then scrape
the sugar into a plate, add half a
tea-spoonful of flour, mix well, and
beat it into a light paste with the
white of an egg. drop it upon white
paper, and put the drops into a moderate
oven on a tin plate.
lemon honeycomb. sweeten
the juice of a lemon to your taste,
and put it in the dish that you intend
to serve it in. mix the white
of an egg well beaten, with a pint
of rich cream, and a little sugar.
whisk it; and as the froth rises,
put it on the lemon juice. prepare
it the day before it is to be used.
lemon juice. in order to
keep this article ready for use, the
best way is to buy the fruit when it
is cheap, and lay it two or three
days in a cool place. if too unripe
to squeeze immediately, cut the peel
off some of them, and roll them under
the hand, to make them part
with the juice more freely. others
may be left unpared for grating,
when the pulp is taken out, and they
are dried. squeeze the juice into
a china bason, and strain it through
some muslin which will not permit
any of the pulp to pass. having
prepared some small phials, perfectly
dry, fill them with the juice
so near the top as only to admit half
a tea-spoonful of sweet oil into each.
cork the bottles tight, and set them
upright in a cool place. when the
lemon juice is wanted, open only
such a sized bottle as will be used
in two or three days. wind some
clean cotton round a skewer, and
dipping it in, the oil will be attracted;
and when all of it is removed,
the juice will be as fine as when first
bottled. hang the peels up to dry,
and keep them from the dust.
lemon mince pies. squeeze
a large lemon, boil the outside till
tender enough to beat to a mash.
add to it three large apples chopped,
four ounces of suet, half a
pound of washed currants, and four
ounces of sugar. put in the juice
of a lemon, and candied fruit, as
for other pies. make a short crust,
and fill the pattipans as usual.
lemon pickle. wipe six lemons,
and cut each into eight pieces.
put on them a pound of salt, six large
cloves of garlic, two ounces of horseradish
sliced thin; likewise of cloves,
mace, nutmeg, and cayenne, a quarter
of an ounce of each, and two
ounces of flour of mustard. to
these add two quarts of vinegar,
and boil it a quarter of an hour in a
well-tinned saucepan; or, which is
better, do it in a jar, placed in a
kettle of boiling water, or set the[]
jar on a hot hearth till done. then
set the jar by closely covered, stirring
it daily for six weeks, and afterwards
put the pickle into small bottles.
lemon pudding. beat the
yolks of four eggs; add four ounces
of white sugar, the rind of a lemon
being rubbed with some lumps of it
to take the essence. then peel and
beat it into a paste, with the juice
of a large lemon, and mix all together
with four or five ounces of warmed
butter. put a crust into a shallow
dish, nick the edges, and put
the above into it. when sent to
table, turn the pudding out of the
dish.
lemon puffs. beat and sift
a pound and a quarter of double-refined
sugar; grate the rind of two
large lemons, and mix it well with
the sugar. then beat the whites of
three new-laid eggs a great while;
add them to the sugar and peel, and
beat it together for an hour. make
it up into any shape, put it on paper
laid on tin plates, and bake in a moderate
oven. oiling the paper will
make it come off with ease, but it
should not be removed till quite
cold.
lemon sauce. cut thin slices
of lemon into very small dice, and
put them into melted butter. give
it one boil, and pour it over boiled
fowls.
pare off as thin as possible the rind
of a lemon, or of a seville orange,
so as not to cut off any of the white
with it. then peel off all the white,
and cut the lemon into slices, about
as thick as two half crowns. pick
out the peps, and divide the slices
into small squares. prepare the
liver as for liver and parsley sauce,
and add to it the slices of lemon,
and a little of the peel finely minced.
warm up the sauce in melted butter,
but do not let it boil.
lemon syrup. put a pint of
fresh lemon juice to a pound and
three quarters of lump sugar. dissolve
it by a gentle heat, skim it till
the surface is quite clear, and add
an ounce of lemon peel cut very thin.
let them simmer very gently for a
few minutes, and run the syrup
through a flannel. when cold, bottle
and cork it closely, and keep it
in a cool place.
lemon water. a delightful
drink may be made of two slices of
lemon, thinly pared into a teapot,
with a little sugar, or a large spoonful
of capillaire. pour in a pint of
boiling water, and stop it close two
hours.
lemon whey. pour into boiling
milk as much lemon juice as
will make a small quantity quite
clear; dilute it with hot water to an
agreeable smart acid, and add a bit
or two of sugar. this is less heating
than if made of wine; and if intended
only to excite perspiration,
will answer the purpose as well.
vinegar whey is made in the same
manner, by using vinegar only, instead
of lemon juice.
lemon white sauce. cut
the peel of a small lemon very thin,
and put it into a pint of sweet rich
cream, with a sprig of lemon thyme,
and ten white peppercorns. simmer
gently till it tastes well of the
lemon, then strain and thicken it
with a quarter of a pound of butter,
and a dessert-spoonful of flour rubbed
in it. boil it up, stir it well,
and pour the juice of the lemon
strained into it. dish up the chickens,
and mix with the cream a little
white gravy quite hot, but do not
boil them together: add a little salt
to flavour.
lemons for puddings. to
keep oranges or lemons for puddings,
squeeze out the pulp, and put
the outsides into water for a fortnight.
then boil them in the same
water till they are quite tender, strain
the liquor from them, and when they
are tolerably dry, put them into any
jar of candy that happens to be left[]
from old sweetmeats. or boil a
small quantity of syrup of lump sugar
and water, and put over them.
in a week or ten days boil them
gently in it till they look clear, and
cover them with it in the jar. if
the fruit be cut in halves, they will
occupy less space.
lemonade. to prepare lemonade
a day before it is wanted
for use, pare two dozen lemons as
thin as possible. put eight of the
rinds into three quarts of hot water,
not boiling, and cover it over for
three or four hours. rub some fine
loaf sugar on the lemons to attract
the essence, and put it into a china
bowl, into which the juice of the
lemons is to be squeezed. add a
pound and a half of fine sugar, then
put the water to the above, and three
quarts of boiling milk. pour the
mixture through a jelly bag, till it
is perfectly clear.—another way.
pare a quantity of lemons, and pour
some hot water on the peels. while
infusing, boil some sugar and water
to a good syrup, with the white of
an egg whipt up. when it boils,
pour a little cold water into it. set
it on again, and when it boils take
off the pan, and let it stand by to
settle. if there be any scum, take
it off, and pour it clear from the sediment,
to the water in which the
peels were infused, and the lemon
juice. stir and taste it, and add
as much more water as shall be necessary
to make a very rich lemonade.
wet a jelly bag, and squeeze
it dry; then strain the liquor, and
it will be very fine.—to make a lemonade
which has the appearance
of jelly, pare two seville oranges
and six lemons very thin, and steep
them four hours in a quart of hot
water. boil a pound and a quarter
of loaf sugar in three pints of water,
and skim it clean. add the two
liquors to the juice of six china
oranges, and twelve lemons; stir
the whole well, and run it through a
jelly bag till it is quite clear. then
add a little orange water, if approved,
and more sugar if necessary.
let it be well corked, and it will
keep.—lemonade may be prepared
in a minute, by pounding a quarter
of an ounce of citric or crystalised
lemon acid, with a few drops of
quintessence of lemon peel, and
mixing it by degrees with a pint of
clarified syrup or capillaire.
lent potatoes. beat three
or four ounces of almonds, and three
or four bitter ones when blanched,
putting a little orange flower water
to prevent oiling. add eight ounces
of butter, four eggs well beaten and
strained, half a glass of raisin wine,
and sugar to taste. beat all together
till quite smooth, and grate in
three savoy biscuits. make balls
of the above with a little flour, the
size of a chesnut; throw them into
a stewpan of boiling lard, and boil
them of a beautiful yellow brown.
drain them on a sieve, and serve
with sweet sauce in a boat.
lethargy. this species of
apoplexy discovers itself by an invincible
drowsiness, or inclination
to sleep; and is frequently attended
with a degree of fever, and coldness
of the extremities. blisters and
emetics have often procured relief.
the affusion of cold water upon the
head, and the burning of feathers or
other fetid substances, held near the
nostrils, are also attended with advantage.
lice. want of cleanliness, immoderate
warmth, violent perspiration,
and a corrupted state of the
fluids, tend to promote the generation
of this kind of vermin. the
most simple remedy is the seed of
parsley, reduced to a fine powder
and rubbed to the roots of the hair,
or to rub the parts affected with
garlic and mustard. to clean the
heads of children, take half an ounce
of honey, half an ounce of sulphur,
an ounce of vinegar, and two ounces
of sweet oil. mix the whole into a
liniment, and rub a little of it on the[]
head repeatedly. lice which infest
clothes, may be destroyed by fumigating
the articles of dress with the
vapour of sulphur. garden lice
may be treated in the same way as
for destroying insects.
light cake. mix a pound
of flour, half a pound of currants,
and a little nutmeg, sugar, and salt.
melt a quarter of a pound of butter
in a quarter of a pint of milk, and
strain into it two spoonfuls of yeast
and two eggs. stir it well together,
set it before the fire to rise, and
bake it in a quick oven.
light paste. for tarts and
cheesecakes, beat up the white of
an egg to a strong froth, and mix it
with as much water as will make
three quarters of a pound of fine
flour into a very stiff paste. roll
it out thin, lay two or three ounces
of butter upon it in little bits, dredge
it with a little flour, and roll it up
tight. roll it out again, and add
the same proportion of butter, and
so proceed till the whole is worked up.
light puffs. mix two spoonfuls
of flour, a little grated lemon
peel, some nutmeg, half a spoonful
of brandy, a little loaf-sugar, and
one egg. fry it enough, but not
brown; beat it in a mortar with
five eggs, whites and yolks. put
a quantity of lard in a fryingpan;
and when quite hot, drop a dessert-spoonful
of batter at a time, and
turn them as they brown. send
the puffs to table quickly, with sweet
sauce.
lime water. pour two gallons
of water upon a pound of fresh-burnt
lime; and when the ebullition
ceases, stir it up well, and let it
stand till the lime is settled. filter
the liquor through paper, and keep
it for use closely stopped. it is
chiefly used for the gravel, in which
case a pint or more may be drunk
daily. for the itch, or other diseases
of the skin, it is to be applied
externally.
linen. linen in every form is
liable to all the accidents of mildew,
iron moulds, ink spots, and various
other stains, which prove highly injurious,
if not speedily removed. in
case of mildew, rub the part well
with soap, then scrape and rub on
some fine chalk, and lay the linen
out to bleach. wet it a little now
and then, and repeat the operation
if necessary. ink spots and iron
moulds may be removed, by rubbing
them with the salt of sorrel, or weak
muriatic acid, and laying the part
over a teapot or kettle of boiling
water, so that it may be affected by
the steam. or some crystals of
tartar powdered, and half the quantity
of alum, applied in the same
manner, will be found to extract the
spots. the spirits of salts diluted
with water, will remove iron moulds
from linen; and sal ammoniac with
lime, will take out the stains of wine.
fruit stains may generally be removed
by wetting the part with
water, and exposing it to the fumes
of brimstone. when ink has been
suddenly spilled on linen, wet the
place immediately with the juice of
sorrel or lemon, or with vinegar,
and rub it with hard white soap.
or add to the juice a little salts,
steam the linen over boiling water,
and wash it afterwards in ley. if
ink be spilled on a green tablecloth
or carpet, the readiest way is to
take it up immediately with a spoon,
and by pouring on fresh water, while
the spoon is constantly applied, the
stains will soon be removed. scorched
linen may be restored by means
of the following application. boil
two ounces of fuller's earth, an ounce
of hen's dung, half an ounce of soap,
and the juice of two onions, in half
a pint of vinegar, till reduced to a
good consistency. spread the composition
over the damaged part, let
it dry on, and then wash it well
once or twice. if the threads be
not actually consumed by the scorch,
the linen will soon be restored to its
former whiteness.[]
lip salve. put into a small
jar two ounces of white wax, half
an ounce of spermaceti, and a quarter
of a pint of oil of sweet almonds.
tie it down close, and put the jar
into a small saucepan, with as much
water as will nearly reach the top
of the jar, but not so as to boil over
it, and let it simmer till the wax is
melted. then put in a pennyworth
of alkanet root tied up in a rag, with
the jar closed, and boil it till it becomes
red. take out the alkanet
root, and put in two pennyworth of
essence of lemon, and a few drops
of bergamot. pour some into small
boxes for present use, and the remainder
into a gallipot tied down
with a bladder.—another. an ounce
of white wax and ox marrow, with
three ounces of white pomatum,
melted together over a slow fire,
will make an agreeable lip salve,
which may be coloured with a dram
of alkanet, and stirred till it becomes
a fine red.
steep the crumb of a penny loaf
grated, in about a pint of warm
milk. when sufficiently soaked,
beat up six eggs, whites and yolks,
and mix with the bread. add two
ounces of warmed butter, some sugar,
orange flower water, a spoonful
of brandy, a little nutmeg, and a
tea-cupful of cream. beat all well
together, bake in buttered teacups,
and serve with pudding sauce. a
quarter of a pound of currants may
be added, but the puddings are good
without. orange or lemon will be
an agreeable addition.
liver and herbs. clean
and drain a good quantity of spinach,
two large handfuls of parsley, and
a handful of green onions. chop the
parsley and onions, and sprinkle
them among the spinach. stew them
together with a little salt and butter,
shake the pan when it begins to
grow warm, and cover it close till
done enough over a slow fire. lay
on slices of liver, fried of a nice
brown and slices of bacon just
warmed at the fire. on the outside
part of the herbs lay some eggs
nicely fried, and trimmed round.
or the eggs may be served on the
herbs, and the liver garnished with
the bacon separately.
liver sauce. chop some liver
of rabbits or fowls, and do it
the same as for lemon sauce, with
a very little pepper and salt, and
some parsley.
wash the fresh liver of a fowl or
rabbit, and boil it five minutes in a
quarter of a pint of water. chop
it fine, or pound or bruise it in a
little of the liquor it was boiled in,
and rub it through a sieve. wash
about one third the bulk of parsley
leaves, put them into boiling water,
with a tea-spoonful of salt, and let
them boil. then lay the parsley
on a hair sieve, mince it very fine,
and mix it with the liver. warm
up the sauce in a quarter of a pint
of melted butter, but do not let it
boil.
lobsters. if they have not
been long taken, the claws will have
a strong motion, when the finger is
pressed upon the eyes. the heaviest
are the best, and it is preferable
to boil them at home. if purchased
ready boiled, try whether
their tails are stiff, and pull up with
a spring; otherwise that part will
be flabby. the male lobster is
known by the narrow back part of
his tail, and the two uppermost fins
within it are stiff and hard: those
of the hen are soft, and the tail
broader. the male, though generally
smaller, has the highest flavour, the
flesh is firmer, and the colour when
boiled is a deeper red.
lobster patties. to be
made as oyster patties, gently stewed
and seasoned, and put into paste
baked in pattipans, with the addition
of a little cream, and a very
small piece of butter.
lobster pie. boil two or[]
three small lobsters, take out the
tails, and cut them in two. take
out the gut, cut each into four pieces,
and lay them in a small dish. put
in the meat of the claws, and that
picked out of the body; pick off
the furry parts of the latter, and
take out the lady; beat the spawn
in a mortar, and likewise all the
shells. stew them with some water,
two or three spoonfuls of vinegar,
pepper, salt, and some pounded
mace. a large piece of butter rolled
in flour must be added, when the
goodness of the shells is obtained.
give it a boil or two, and pour it
into a dish strained; strew some
crumbs, and put a paste over all.
bake it slowly, and only till the
paste is done.
lobster salad. make a
salad, cut some of the red part of
the lobster, and add to it. this
will form a pleasing contrast to the
white and green of the vegetables.
be careful not to put in too much
oil, as shell-fish absorbs the sharpness
of the vinegar. serve it up in
a dish, not in a bowl.
lobster sauce. pound the
spawn with two anchovies, pour on
two spoonfuls of gravy, and strain
all into some melted butter. then
put in the meat of the lobster, give
it all one boil, and add the squeeze
of a lemon. or leave out the anchovies
and gravy, and do it as
above, either with or without salt
and ketchup, as may be most approved.
many persons prefer the
flavour of the lobster and salt only.
lobster soup. take the
meat from the claws, bodies, and
tails, of six small lobsters. remove
the brown fur, and the bag in the
head; beat the fins in a mortar,
the chine, and the small claws. boil
it very gently in two quarts of water,
with the crumb of a french roll,
some white pepper, salt, two anchovies,
a large onion, sweet herbs,
and a bit of lemon peel, till all the
goodness is extracted, and then strain
it off. beat the spawn in a mortar
with a bit of butter, a quarter of a
nutmeg, and a tea-spoonful of flour,
and then mix it with a quart of
cream. cut the tails into pieces,
and give them a boil up with the
cream and soup. serve with forcemeat
balls made of the remainder
of the lobster, mace, pepper, salt,
a few crumbs, and an egg or two.
let the balls be made up with a little
flour, and heated in the soup.
lodgings. the tenure on
which the generality of houses are
held, does not warrant a tenant to
let, or a lodger to take apartments
by the year. to do this, the tenant
ought himself to be the proprietor
of the premises, or to hold possession
by lease for an unexpired term
of several years, which would invest
him with the right of a landlord to
give or receive half a year's notice,
or proceed as in other cases of landlord
and tenant. unfurnished lodgings
are generally let by the week,
month, or quarter; and if ever they
be let by the year, it is a deviation
from a general custom, and attended
with inconvenience. if a lodger
should contend that he agreed for
a whole year, he must produce some
evidence of the fact; such as a
written agreement, or the annual
payment of rent; otherwise he must
submit to the general usage of being
denominated a quarterly lodger. in
the case of weekly tenants, the rent
must be paid weekly; for if once
allowed to go to a quarter, and the
landlord accept it as a quarter's
rent, he breaks the agreement; the
inmate then becomes a quarterly
lodger, and must receive a quarter's
notice to quit. more care however
is still required in letting lodgings
that are ready furnished, as the law
does not regard them in the same
light as other tenements. such
apartments are generally let by the
week, on payment of a certain sum,
part of which is for the room, and
part for the use of the furniture[]
which is attended with some difficulty.
properly considered, the
payment is not rent, nor are the
same remedies lawful as in unfurnished
lodgings. the best way to
let furnished lodgings is to have a
written agreement, with a catalogue
of all the goods, and to let the
apartments and the furniture for
separate sums: in which case, if
the rent be not paid, distress may
be made for it, though not for the
furniture. persons renting furnished
apartments frequently absent
themselves, without apprising the
housekeeper, and as often leave the
rent in arrear. in such a case, the
housekeeper should send for a constable,
after the expiration of the
first week, and in his presence enter
the apartment, take out the lodger's
property and secure it, until a request
be made for it. if after fourteen
days' public notice in the gazette,
the lodger do not come and
pay the arrears, the housekeeper
may sell the property for the sum
due. when a housekeeper is troubled
with a disagreeable character,
the best way to recover possession
of the apartment is to deliver a
written notice by a person that can
be witness, stating that if the lodger
did not quit that day week, the landlord
would insist on his paying an
advance of so much per week; and
if he did not quit after such notice,
he would make the same advance
after every following week. in the
city of london, payment may be
procured by summoning to the court
of requests at guildhall, for any
sum not exceeding five pounds. in
other parts of the kingdom there
are similar courts of conscience,
where payment may be enforced to
the amount of forty shillings.
loin of mutton. if roasted,
it is better to cut it lengthways
as a saddle; or if for steaks, pies,
or broth. if there be more fat on
the loin than is agreeable, take off
a part of it before it is dressed; it
will make an excellent suet pudding,
or crust for a meat pie, if cut very
fine.
london bread. according
to the method practised by the london
bakers, a sack of flour is sifted
into the kneading trough, to make
it lie loose. six pounds of salt,
and two pounds of alum, are separately
dissolved in hot water; and
the whole being cooled to about
ninety degrees, is mixed with two
quarts of yeast. when this mixture
has been well stirred, it is
strained through a cloth or sieve,
and is then poured into a cavity
made in the flour. the whole is
now mixed up into a dough, and a
small quantity of flour being sprinkled
over it, it is covered up with
cloths, and the lid of the trough is
shut down, the better to retain the
heat. the fermentation now goes
on, and the mass becomes enlarged
in bulk. in the course of two or
three hours, another pailful of warm
water is well mixed with the sponge,
and it is again covered up for about
four hours. at the end of this time,
it is to be kneaded for more than
an hour, with three pailfuls of
warm water. it is now returned to
the trough in pieces, sprinkled with
dry flour, and at the end of four
hours more, it is again kneaded for
half an hour, and divided into quartern
and half-quartern loaves. the
weight of a quartern loaf, before
baking, should be four pounds fifteen
ounces; after baking, four
pounds six ounces, avoirdupois.
when the dough has received its
proper shape for loaves, it is put
into the oven, at a heat that will
scorch flour without burning, where
it is baked two hours and a half, or
three hours.
london porter. a late
writer has given considerable information
respecting the brewing of
porter. his intention being to exhibit
the advantages derived from
domestic brewing, he has annexed[]
the price of each article of the composition,
though it will be seen that
the expense on some of the principal
articles has been considerably
reduced since that estimate was
given.
s.
d.
one quarter of malt
lb. of hops
lb. of treacle
lb. of liquorice root bruised
lb. of essentia bina
lb. of colouring
capsicum half an ounce
spanish liquorice two ounces
india berries one ounce
salt of tartar two drams
heading a quarter of an ounce
ginger three ounces
lime four ounces
linseed one ounce
cinnamon bark two drams
coals
total expense£ 
this will produce ninety gallons
of good porter, and fifty gallons of
table beer; the cost of the porter
at the large breweries being £ s.
and that of the beer £ s. leaves
a profit of £ to the brewer.—the
'essentia bina' is composed of eight
pounds of moist sugar, boiled in an
iron vessel, for no copper one could
withstand the heat sufficiently, till
it becomes of a thick syrupy consistence,
perfectly black, and extremely
bitter. the 'colouring' is
composed of eight pounds of moist
sugar, boiled till it attains a middle
state, between bitter and sweet. it
gives that fine mellow colour usually
so much admired in good porter.
these ingredients are added to the
first wort, and boiled with it. the
'heading' is a mixture of half alum,
and half copperas, ground to a fine
powder. it is so called, from its
giving to porter that beautiful head
or froth, which constitutes one of
the peculiar properties of porter,
and which publicans are so anxious
to raise to gratify their customers.
the linseed, ginger, limewater, cinnamon,
and several other small articles,
are added or withheld according
to the taste or practice of
the brewer, which accounts for the
different flavours so observable in
london porter. of the articles here
enumerated, it is sufficient to observe,
that however much they may
surprise, however pernicious or disagreeable
they may appear, they
have always been deemed necessary
in the brewing of porter. they must
invariably be used by those who
wish to continue the taste, the flavour
and appearance, to which they
have been accustomed.—omitting
however those ingredients which are
deemed pernicious, it will be seen
by the following estimate how much
more advantageous it is to provide
even a small quantity of home-brewed
porter, where this kind of
liquor is preferred.
ingredients necessary for brewing
five gallons of porter.
s.d.
one peck of malt
quarter of a pound of liquorice bruised
spanish liquorice
essentia
colour
treacle
hops
capsicum and ginger
coals
total expense
this will produce five gallons of good porter,which if bought of the brewer would cost
but being brewed at home, for
leaves a clear gain of
this saving is quite enough to pay
for time and trouble, besides the
advantage of having a wholesome
liquor, free from all poisonous ingredients.
porter thus brewed will
be fit for use in a week, and may
be drunk with pleasure. to do
ample justice to the subject however,
it may be proper briefly to notice
the specific properties of the
various ingredients which enter into
the composition of london porter.
it is evident that some porter is more
heady than others, and this arises
from the greater or less quantity of
stupefying ingredients intermixed
with it. malt itself, to produce intoxication,
must be used in such
large quantities as would very much
diminish the brewer's profit. of the
wholesomeness of malt there can be
no doubt; pale malt especially is
highly nutritive, containing more
balsamic qualities than the brown
malt, which being subject to a
greater degree of fire in the kiln, is
sometimes so crusted and burnt,
that the mealy part loses some of its
best qualities. amber malt is that
which is dried in a middling degree,
between pale and brown, and is now
much in use, being the most pleasant,
and free from either extreme.
hops are an aromatic grateful bitter,
very wholesome, and undoubtedly
efficacious in giving both flavour
and strength to the beer. yeast
is necessary to give the liquor that
portion of elastic air, of which the
boiling deprives it. without fermentation,
or working, no worts,
however rich, can inebriate. liquorice
root is pleasant, wholesome, and
aperient; and opposes the astringent
qualities of some of the other
ingredients; it ought therefore to
be used, as should spanish liquorice,
which possesses the same properties.
capsicum disperses wind,
and when properly used, cannot be
unwholesome: it leaves a glow of
warmth on the stomach, which is
perceptible in drinking some beers.
ginger has the same effect as capsicum,
and it also cleanses and flavours
the beer. but capsicum being
cheaper is more used, and by
its tasteless though extremely hot
quality, cannot be so readily discovered
in beer as ginger. treacle
partakes of many of the properties
of liquorice; and by promoting the
natural secretions, it renders porter
and beer in general very wholesome.
treacle also is a cheaper article
than sugar, and answers the purpose
of colour, where the beer is intended
for immediate consumption; but in
summer, when a body is required to
withstand the temperature of the
air, and the draught is not quick,
sugar alone can give body to porter.
treacle therefore is a discretionary
article. coriander seed, used principally
in ale, is warm and stomachic;
but when used in great quantity,
it is pernicious. coculus indicus,
the india berry, is poisonous
and stupefying, when taken in any
considerable quantity. when ground
into fine powder it is undiscoverable
in the liquor, and is but too much
used to the prejudice of the public
health. what is called heading,
should be made of the salt of steel;
but a mixture of alum and copperas
being much cheaper, is more frequently
used. alum is a great drier,
and causes that thirst which some
beer occasions; so that the more
you drink of it, the more you want.
alum likewise gives a taste of age
to the beer, and is penetrating to
the palate. copperas is well known
to be poisonous, and may be seen
in the blackness which some beer
discovers. salt is highly useful in
all beers; it gives a pleasing relish,
and also fines the liquor.—these remarks
are sufficient to show the
propriety of manufacturing at home
a good wholesome article for family
use, instead of resorting to a public
house for every pint of beer which
nature demands, and which when
procured is both expensive and[]
pernicious. and lest any objection
should be made, as to the difficulty
and inconvenience of brewing,
a few additional observations will
here be given, in order to facilitate
this very important part of domestic
economy. be careful then to
procure malt and hops of the very
best quality, and let the brewing
vessels be closely inspected; the
least taint may spoil a whole brewing
of beer. the mash tub should
be particularly attended to, and a
whisp of clean hay or straw is to be
spread over the bottom of the vessel
in the inside, to prevent the flour
of the malt running off with the
liquor. the malt being emptied into
the mash tub, and the water
brought to boil, dash the boiling
water in the copper with cold water
sufficient to stop the boiling,
and leave it just hot enough to scald
the finger, always remembering to
draw off the second mash somewhat
hotter than the first. the water
being thus brought to a proper temperature
by the addition of cold
water, lade it out of the copper over
the malt till it becomes thoroughly
wet, stirring it well to prevent the
malt from clotting. when the water
is poured on too hot, it sets the
malt, and closes the body of the
grain, instead of opening it so as to
dissolve in the liquor. cover up the
mash tub close to compress the
steam, and prevent the liquid from
evaporating. let the wort stand
an hour and a half or two hours after
mashing, and then let the liquor
run off into a vessel prepared to receive
it. if at first it runs thick
and discoloured, draw off a pailful
or two, and pour it back again into
the mash tub till it runs clear. in
summer it will be necessary to put
a few hops into the vessel which receives
the liquor out of the mash
tub, to prevent its turning sour,
which the heat of the weather will
sometimes endanger. let the second
mash run out as before, and
let the liquor stand an hour and a
half, but never let the malt be dry:
keep lading fresh liquor over it till
the quantity of wort to be obtained
is extracted, always allowing for
waste in the boiling. the next consideration
is boiling the wort when
obtained. the first copperful must
be boiled an hour; and whilst boiling,
add the ingredients specified
above, in the second estimate. the
hops are now to be boiled in the
wort, but are to be carefully strained
from the first wort, in order to be
boiled again in the second. eight
pounds is the common proportion
to a quarter of malt; but in summer
the quantity must be varied from
eight to twelve pounds, according
to the heat of the atmosphere. after
the wort has boiled an hour,
lade it out of the copper and cool
it. in summer it should be quite
cold before it is set to work; in
winter it should be kept till a slight
degree of warmth is perceptible by
the finger. when properly cooled
set it to work, by adding yeast in
proportion to the quantity. if considerable,
and if wanted to work
quick, add from one to two gallons.
porter requires to be brought forward
quicker than other malt liquor:
let it work till it comes to a good
deep head, then cleanse it by adding
the ginger. the liquor is now fit
for tunning: fill the barrels full, and
let the yeast work out, adding fresh
liquor to fill them up till they have
done working. now bung the barrels,
but keep a watchful eye upon
them for some time, lest the beer
should suddenly ferment again and
burst them, which is no uncommon
accident where due care is not
taken. the heat of summer, or a
sudden change of weather, will occasion
the same misfortune, if the
barrels are not watched, and eased
when they require it, by drawing the
peg. the only part which remains
to complete the brewing, is fining
the beer. to understand this, it is[]
necessary to remark, that london
porter is composed of three different
sorts of malt; pale, brown, and
amber. the reason for using these
three sorts, is to attain a peculiar
flavour and colour. amber is the
most wholesome, and for home brewing
it is recommended to use none
else. in consequence of the subtleness
of the essentia, which keeps
continually swimming in the beer,
porter requires a considerable body
of finings; but should any one
choose to brew without the essentia,
with amber malt, and with colour
only, the porter will soon refine of
itself. the finings however are composed
of isinglass dissolved in stale
beer, till the whole becomes of a
thin gluey consistence like size. one
pint is the usual proportion to a barrel,
but sometimes two, and even
three are found necessary. particular
care must be taken that the beer
in which the isinglass is dissolved,
be perfectly clear, and thoroughly
stale.—by attending to these directions,
any person may brew as
good, if not better porter, than they
can be supplied with from the public
houses. many notions have been
artfully raised, that porter requires
to be brewed in large quantities,
and to be long stored, to render it
sound and strong; but experience
will prove the falsehood of these
prejudices, which have their origin
with the ignorant, and are cherished
by the interested. one brewing
under another will afford ample
time for porter to refine for use, and
every person can best judge of the
extent of his own consumption.
porter is not the better for being
brewed in large quantities, except
that the same trouble which brews
a peck, will brew a bushel. this
mode of practice will be found simple
and easy in its operation, and
extremely moderate in point of trouble
and expense.
london syllabub. put a
pint and a half of port or white wine
into a bowl, nutmeg grated, and a
good deal of sugar. then milk into
it near two quarts of milk, frothed
up. if the wine be rather sharp, it
will require more for this quantity
of milk. in devonshire, clouted
cream is put on the top, with pounded
cinnamon and sugar.
looking glasses. in order
to clean them from the spots of
flies and other stains, rub them over
with a fine damp cloth. then polish
with a soft woollen cloth, and powder
blue.
love. as health is materially
affected by the passions, it is of some
consequence to observe their separate
influence, in order to obviate
some of their ill effects. love is unquestionably
the most powerful, and
is less under the controul of the understanding
than any of the rest. it
has a kind of omnipotence ascribed
to it, which belongs not to any other.
'love is strong as death; many
waters cannot quench it, neither can
the floods drown it.' other passions
are necessary for the preservation
of the individual, but this is necessary
for the continuation of the species:
it was proper therefore that
it should be deeply rooted in the
human breast. there is no trifling
with this passion: when love has
risen to a certain height, it admits
of no other cure but the possession
of its object, which in this case
ought always if possible to be obtained.
the ruinous consequences arising
from disappointment, which happen
almost every day, are dreadful to
relate; and no punishment can be
too great for those whose wilful conduct
becomes the occasion of such
catastrophes. parents are deeply
laden with guilt, who by this means
plunge their children into irretrievable
ruin; and lovers are deserving
of no forgiveness, whose treacherous
conduct annihilates the hopes and
even the existence of their friends.[]
macaroni. the usual way of
preparing macaroni is to boil it in
milk, or weak veal broth, flavoured
with salt. when tender, put it into
a dish without the liquor. add to
it some bits of butter and grated
cheese; over the top grate more,
and add a little more butter. set
the dish into a dutch oven a quarter
of an hour, but do not let the
top become hard.—another way.
wash it well, and simmer in half
milk and half broth, of veal or mutton,
till it is tender. to a spoonful
of this liquor, put the yolk of an egg
beaten in a spoonful of cream; just
make it hot to thicken, but not to
boil. spread it on the macaroni,
and then grate fine old cheese all
over, with bits of butter. brown
the whole with a salamander.—another.
wash the macaroni, then
simmer it in a little broth, with a
little salt and pounded mace. when
quite tender, take it out of the liquor,
lay it in a dish, grate a good
deal of cheese over, and cover it
with fine grated bread. warm some
butter without oiling, and pour it
from a boat through a small earthen
cullender all over the crumbs; then
put the dish into a dutch oven to
roast the cheese, and brown the
bread of a fine colour. the bread
should be in separate crumbs, and
look light.
macaroni pudding. simmer
in a pint of milk, an ounce or
two of the pipe sort of macaroni,
and a bit of lemon and cinnamon.
when quite tender, put it into a
dish with milk, two or three eggs,
but only one white. add some sugar,
nutmeg, a spoonful of peach
water, and the same of raisin wine.
bake with a paste round the edges.
a layer of orange marmalade, or
raspberry jam, in a macaroni pudding,
is a great improvement. in
this case omit the almond water, or
ratifia, which would otherwise be
wanted to give it a flavour.
macaroni soup. boil a pound
of the best macaroni in a quart of
good stock, till it is quite tender.
then take out half, and put it into
another stewpot. add some more
stock to the remainder, and boil it
till all the macaroni will pulp through
a fine sieve. then add together the
two liquors, a pint or more of boiling
cream, the macaroni that was
first taken out, and half a pound of
grated parmesan cheese. make it
hot, but do not let it boil. serve it
with the crust of a french roll, cut
into the size of a shilling.
macaroons. blanch four
ounces of almonds, and pound them
with four spoonfuls of orange water.
whisk the whites of four eggs to a
froth, mix it with the almonds, and
a pound of sifted sugar, till reduced
to a paste. lay a sheet of
wafer paper on a tin, and put on the
paste in little cakes, the shape of
macaroons.
mackarel. their season is
generally may, june, and july;
but may sometimes be had at an
earlier period. when green gooseberries
are ready, their appearance
may at all times be expected. they
are so tender a fish that they carry
and keep worse than any other:
choose those that are firm and bright,
and sweet scented. after gutting
and cleaning, boil them gently, and
serve with butter and fennel, or
gooseberry sauce. to broil them,
split and sprinkle with herbs, pepper
and salt; or stuff with the same,
adding crumbs and chopped fennel.
though very indifferent when eaten
raw, this fruit makes an excellent
sweetmeat, or is fine in the form
of tarts. prick them with a needle
to prevent bursting, simmer them
very gently in a thin syrup, put them[]
in a china bowl, and when cold pour
the syrup over. let them lie three
days, then make a syrup of three
pounds of sugar to five pounds of
fruit, with no more water than hangs
to large lumps of the sugar dipped
quickly, and instantly brought out.
boil the plums in this fresh syrup,
after draining the first from them.
do them very gently till they are
clear, and the syrup adheres to
them. put them one by one into
small pots, and pour the liquor over.
reserve a little syrup in the pan for
those intended to be dried, warm up
the fruit in it, drain them out, and
put them on plates to dry in a cool
oven. these plums are apt to ferment,
if not boiled in two syrups;
the former will sweeten pies, but
will have too much acid to keep.
a part may be reserved, with the
addition of a little sugar, to do those
that are dry, for they will not require
to be so sweet as if kept wet,
and will eat very nicely if boiled
like the rest. one parcel may be
done after another, and save much
sugar, but care must be taken not
to break the fruit.
mahogany. to give a fine colour
to mahogany, let the furniture
be washed perfectly clean with vinegar,
having first taken out any ink
stains there may be, with spirits of
salt, taking the greatest care to touch
the stained part very slightly, and
then the spirits must be instantly
washed off. use the following liquid.
put into a pint of cold-drawn
linseed oil, four pennyworth of alkanet
root, and two pennyworth of
rose pink. let it remain all night
in an earthen vessel, then stirring it
well, rub some of it all over the mahogany
with a linen rag; and when
it has lain some time, rub it bright
with linen cloths. dining tables
should be covered with mat, oil
cloth, or baize, to prevent staining;
and should be instantly rubbed when
the dishes are removed, while the
board is still warm.
maids. this kind of fish, as
well as skate, requires to be hung
up a day before it is dressed, to
prevent its eating tough. maids
may either be broiled or fried; or
if a tolerable size, the middle part
may be boiled, and the fins fried.
they should be dipped in egg, and
covered with crumbs.
malt. this article varies very
much in value, according to the quality
of the barley, and the mode of
manufacture. when good it is full
of flour, and in biting a grain asunder
it will easily separate; the shell
will appear thin, and well filled up
with flour. if it bite hard and steely,
the malt is bad. the difference of
pale and brown malt arises merely
from the different degrees of heat
employed in the drying: the main
object is the quantity of flour. if
the barley was light and thin, whether
from unripeness, blight, or any
other cause, it will not malt so well;
but instead of sending out its roots
in due time, a part of it will still be
barley. this will appear by putting
a handful of unground malt in cold
water, and stirring it about till every
grain is wetted; the good will swim,
and the unmalted barley sink to the
bottom. but if the barley be well
malted, there is still a variety in the
quality: for a bushel of malt from
fine, plump, heavy barley, will be
better than the same quantity from
thin and light barley. weight therefore
here is the criterion of quality;
and a bushel of malt weighing forty-five
pounds is cheaper than any
other at almost any price, supposing
it to be free from unmalted barley, for
the barley itself is heavier than the
malt. the practice of mixing barley
with the malt on a principle of
economy, is not to be approved; for
though it may add a little to the
strength of the wort, it makes the
beer flat and insipid, and of course
unwholesome.
marble. chimney pieces, or
marble slabs, may be cleaned with[]
muriatic acid, either diluted or in a
pure state. if too strong, it will
deprive the marble of its polish,
but may be restored by using a piece
of felt and a little putty powdered,
rubbing it on with clean water.
another method is, making a paste
of a bullock's gall, a gill of soap
lees, half a gill of turpentine, and
a little pipe clay. the paste is then
applied to the marble, and suffered
to remain a day or two. it is afterwards
rubbed off, and applied a second
or third time, to render the
marble perfectly clean, and give it
the finest polish.
marble cement. if by any
accident, marble or alabaster happen
to be broken, it may be strongly
cemented together in the following
manner. melt two pounds of bees'
wax, and one pound of rosin. take
about the same quantity of marble
or other stones that require to be
joined, and reduce it to a powder;
stir it well together with the melted
mixture, and knead the mass in water,
till the powder is thoroughly incorporated
with the wax and rosin.
the parts to be joined must be heated
and made quite dry, and the
cement applied quite hot. melted
sulphur, laid on fragments of stone
previously heated, will make a firm
and durable cement. little deficiencies
in stones or corners that
have been stripped or broken off,
may be supplied with some of the
stone powdered and mixed with
melted sulphur: but care must be
taken to have both parts properly
heated.
marble paper. for marbling
books or paper, dissolve four ounces
of gum arabac in two quarts of water,
and pour it into a broad vessel.
mix several colours with water in
separate shells: with small brushes
peculiar to each colour, sprinkle
and intermix them on the surface of
the gum water, and curl them with
a stick so as to form a variety of
streaks. the edges of a book
pressed close may then be slightly
dipped in the colours on the surface
of the water, and they will take the
impression of the mixture. the
edges may then be glazed with the
white of an egg, and the colours
will remain. a sheet of paper may
be marbled in the same way.
marble stains. to take
stains out of marble, make a tolerably
thick mixture of unslaked lime
finely powdered, with some strong
soap-ley. spread it instantly over
the marble with a painter's brush,
and in two month's time wash it off
perfectly clean. prepare a fine
thick lather of soft soap, boiled in
soft water; dip a brush in it, and
scour the marble well with powder.
clear off the soap, and finish with
a smooth hard brush till the stains
are all removed. after a very good
rubbing, the marble will acquire a
beautiful polish. if the marble has
been injured by iron stains, take an
equal quantity of fresh spirits of
vitriol and lemon juice. mix them
in a bottle, shake it well, and wet the
spots. rub with a soft linen cloth,
and in a few minutes they will disappear.
marble veal. the meat is
prepared in the same way as potted
beef or veal. then beat up a boiled
tongue, or slices of ham, with butter,
white pepper, and pounded
mace. put a layer of veal in the
pot, then stick in pieces of tongue
or ham, fill up the spaces with veal,
and pour clarified butter over it.
marking ink. mix two drams
of the tincture of galls with one dram
of lunar caustic, and for marking of
linen, use it with a pen as common
ink. the cloth must first be wetted
in a strong solution of salt of tartar,
and afterwards dried, before any
attempt be made to write upon it.
a beautiful red ink may also be prepared
for this purpose by mixing
half an ounce of vermillion, and a
dram of the salt of steel, with as
much linseed oil as will make it of[]
a proper consistency, either to use
with a pen or a hair pencil. other
colours may be made in the same
way, by substituting the proper ingredients
instead of vermillion.
mangoes. cut off the tops of
some large green cucumbers, take
out the seeds, and wipe them dry.
fill them with mustard-seed, horseradish,
sliced onion, ginger, and
whole pepper. sow on the tops,
put the mangoes into a jar, cover
them with boiling vinegar, and do
them the same as any other pickle.
melons are done in the same way.
marigold wine. boil three
pounds and a half of lump sugar in
a gallon of water, put in a gallon of
marigold flowers, gathered dry and
picked from the stalks, and then
make it as for cowslip wine. if the
flowers be gathered only a few at a
time, measure them when they are
picked, and turn and dry them in
the shade. when a sufficient quantity
is prepared, put them into a
barrel, and pour the sugar and water
upon them. put a little brandy
into the bottles, when the wine is
drawn off.
marmalade. for a cough or
cold, take six ounces of malaga
raisins, and beat them to a fine
paste, with the same quantity of
sugarcandy. add an ounce of the
conserve of roses, twenty-five drops
of oil of vitriol, and twenty drops of
oil of sulphur. mix them well together,
and take a small tea-spoonful
night and morning.
marrow bones. cover the
top of them with a floured cloth,
boil and serve them with dry toast.
take half a pound of marshmallow
roots, three ounces of linseed, and
three ounces of fenugreek seed;
bruise and boil them gently half an
hour in a quart of water, and then
add two quarts of sweet oil. boil
them together till the water is all
evaporated, and strain off the oil.
add a pound of bees' wax, half a
pound of yellow rosin, and two
ounces of common turpentine. melt
them together over a slow fire, and
keep stirring till the ointment is
cold.
mashed parsnips. boil the
roots tender, after they have been
wiped clean. scrape them, and
mash them in a stewpan with a little
cream, a good piece of butter, pepper
and salt.
mashed potatoes. boil the
potatoes, peel them, and reduce
them to paste. add a quarter of a
pint of milk to two pounds weight,
a little salt, and two ounces of butter,
and stir it all well together over
the fire. they may either be served
up in this state, or in scallops, or
put on the dish in a form, and the
top browned with a salamander.
mattrasses. cushions, mattrasses,
and bed clothes stuffed with
wool, are particularly liable to be
impregnated with what is offensive
and injurious, from persons who
have experienced putrid and inflammatory
fevers, and cannot therefore
be too carefully cleaned, carded,
and washed. it would also be proper
frequently to fumigate them with
vinegar or muriatic gas. if these
articles be infested with insects, dissolve
a pound and a half of alum,
and as much cream of tartar, in
three pints of boiling water. mix
this solution in three gallons of cold
water, immerse the wool in it for
several days, and then let it be
washed and dried. this operation
will prevent the insects from attacking
it in future.
mead. dissolve thirty pounds
of honey in thirteen gallons of water;
boil and skim it well. then
add of rosemary, thyme, bay leaves,
and sweetbriar, about a handful altogether.
boil the whole for an
hour, and put it into a tub, with two
or three handfuls of ground malt.
stir it till it is about blood warm,
then strain it through a cloth, and
return it into the tub. cut a toast,[]
spread it over with good ale yeast,
and put it into the tub. when the
liquor has sufficiently fermented,
put it into a cask. take an ounce
and a half each of cloves, mace,
and nutmegs, and an ounce of sliced
ginger. bruise the spices; tie them
up in a cloth, and hang it in the vessel,
which must be stopped up close
for use.—another way. put four
or five pounds of honey into a gallon
of boiling water, and let it continue
to boil an hour and a half.
skim it quite clean, put in the rinds
of three or four lemons, and two
ounces of hops sewed up in a bag.
when cold, put the liquor into a
cask, stop it up close, and let it
stand eight or nine months.
measles. in general, all that
is needful in the treatment of this
complaint is to keep the body open
by means of tamarinds, manna, or
other gentle laxatives; and to supply
the patient frequently with barley
water, or linseed tea sweetened
with honey. bathe the feet in warm
water; and if there be a disposition
to vomit, it ought to be promoted
by drinking a little camomile tea.
if the disorder appear to strike inward,
the danger may be averted by
applying blisters to the arms and
legs, and briskly rubbing the whole
body with warm flannels.
meat. in all sorts of provisions,
the best of the kind goes the farthest;
it cuts out with most advantage,
and affords most nourishment.
round of beef, fillet of veal,
and leg of mutton, are joints that
bear a higher price; but as they
have more solid meat, they deserve
the preference. those joints however
which are inferior, may be
dressed as palatably; and being
cheaper, they should be bought in
turn; for when weighed with the
prime pieces, it makes the price of
these come lower. in loins of meat,
the long pipe that runs by the bone
should be taken out, as it is apt to
taint; as also the kernels of beef.
rumps and edgebones of beef are
often bruised by the blows which the
drovers give the beasts, and the part
that has been struck always taints;
these joints therefore when bruised
should not be purchased. and as
great loss is often sustained by the
spoiling of meat, after it is purchased,
the best way to prevent
this is to examine it well, wipe it
every day, and put some pieces of
charcoal over it. if meat is brought
from a distance in warm weather,
the butcher should be desired to
cover it close, and bring it early in
the morning, to prevent its being fly-blown.—all
meat should be washed
before it is dressed. if for boiling,
the colour will be better for the
soaking; but if for roasting, it
should afterwards be dried. particular
care must be taken that the
pot be well skimmed the moment it
boils, otherwise the foulness will be
dispersed over the meat. the more
soups or broth are skimmed, the better
and cleaner they will be. boiled
meat should first be well floured,
and then put in while the water is
cold. meat boiled quick is sure to
be hard; but care must be taken,
that in boiling slow it does not stop,
or the meat will be underdone. if
the steam be kept in, the water will
not be much reduced; but if this
be desirable, the cover must be removed.
as to the length of time
required for roasting and boiling,
the size of the joint must direct, as
also the strength of the fire, and the
nearness of the meat to it. in boiling,
attention must be paid to the
progress it makes, which should be
regular and slow. for every pound
of meat, a quarter of an hour or
twenty minutes is generally allowed,
according as persons choose to have
it well or underdone. in preparing
a joint for roasting, care must be
taken not to run the spit through the
best parts of the meat, and that no[]
black stains appear upon it at the
time of serving.
meat sauce. put to a clean
anchovy, a glass of port wine, a little
strong broth, a sliced shalot,
some nutmeg, and the juice of a seville
orange. stew them together,
and mix it with the gravy that runs
from the meat.
meat screen. this is a great
saver of coals, and should be sufficiently
large to guard what is roasting
from currents of air. it should
be placed on wheels, have a flat top,
and not be less than about three
feet and a half wide, with shelves
in it, about one foot deep. it will
then answer all the purposes of a
large dutch oven, a plate warmer,
and a hot hearth. some are made
with a door behind, which is convenient;
but the great heat to which
they are exposed soon shrinks the
materials, and the currents of air
through the cracks cannot be prevented.
those without a door are
therefore best.
medley pie. cut into small
pieces some fat pork, or other meat
underdone, and season it with salt
and pepper. cover the sides of the
dish with common crust, put in a
layer of sliced apples with a little
sugar, then a layer of meat, and a
layer of sliced onions, till the dish
is full. put a thick crust over it,
and bake it in a slow oven. currants
or scalded gooseberries may
be used instead of apples, and the
onions omitted.
melon flummery. put
plenty of bitter almonds into some
stiff flummery, and make it of a
pale green with spinach juice. when
it becomes as thick as cream, wet
the melon mould, and put the flummery
into it. put a pint of calf's
foot jelly into a bason, and let it
stand till the next day: then turn
out the melon, and lay it in the midst
of the bason of jelly. fill up the
bason with jelly beginning to set,
and let it stand all night. turn it
out the next day, the same as for
fruit in jelly: make a garland of
flowers, and place it on the jelly.
melon mangoes. there is
a particular sort for preserving,
which must be carefully distinguished.
cut a square small piece out
of one side, and through that take
out the seeds, and mix with them
mustard-seed and shred garlic.
stuff the melon as full as the space
will allow, replace the square piece,
and bind it up with fine packthread,
boil a good quantity of vinegar, to
allow for wasting, with peppercorns,
salt, and ginger. pour the liquor
boiling hot over the mangoes four
successive days; and on the last
day put flour of mustard, and scraped
horseradish into the vinegar just as
it boils up. observe that there is
plenty of vinegar before it is stopped
down, for pickles are soon
spoiled if not well covered. also
the greater number of times that
boiling vinegar is poured over them,
the sooner they will be ready for
eating. mangoes should be pickled
soon after they are gathered. large
cucumbers, called green turley, prepared
as mangoes, are very excellent,
and come sooner to table.
melted butter. though a
very essential article for the table,
it is seldom well prepared. mix on
a trencher, in the proportion of a
tea-spoonful of flour to four ounces
of the best butter. put it into a
saucepan, and two or three table-spoonfuls
of hot water; boil it quick
for a minute, and shake it all the
time. milk used instead of water,
requires rather less butter, and looks
whiter.
mice. the poisonous substances
generally prepared for the destruction
of mice are attended with danger,
and the use of them should by
all means be avoided. besides the
common traps, baited with cheese,
the following remedy will be found[]
both safe and efficacious. take a
few handfuls of wheat flour, or malt
meal, and knead it into a dough.
let it grow sour in a warm place,
mix with it some fine iron filings,
form the mass into small balls, and
put them into the holes frequented
by the mice. on eating this preparation,
they are inevitably killed.
cats, owls, or hedgehogs, would be
highly serviceable in places infested
with mice. an effectual mousetrap
may be made in the following manner.
take a plain four square
trencher, and put into the two contrary
corners of it a large pin, or
piece of knitting needle. then take
two sticks about a yard long, and
lay them on the dresser, with a notch
cut at each end of the sticks, placing
the two pins on the notches, so
that one corner of the trencher may
lie about an inch on the dresser or
shelf that the mice come to. the
opposite corner must be baited with
some butter and oatmeal plastered
on the trencher; and when the mice
run towards the butter, it will tip
them into a glazed earthen vessel
full of water, which should be placed
underneath for that purpose. to
prevent the trencher from tipping
over so as to lose its balance, it may
be fastened to the shelf or dresser
with a thread and a little sealing
wax, to restore it to its proper position.
to prevent their devastations
in barns, care should be taken
to lay beneath the floor a stratum of
sharp flints, fragments of glass mixed
with sand, or broken cinders. if
the floors were raised on piers of
brick, about fifteen inches above the
ground, so that dogs or cats might
have a free passage beneath the
building, it would prevent the vermin
from harbouring there, and tend
greatly to preserve the grain. field
mice are also very destructive in the
fields and gardens, burrowing under
the ground, and digging up the
earth when newly sown. their habitations
may be discovered by the
small mounds of earth that are raised
near the entrance, or by the passages
leading to their nests; and by
following these, the vermin may
easily be destroyed. to prevent
early peas being eaten by the mice,
soak the seed a day or two in train
oil before it is sown, which will promote
its vegetation, and render the
peas so obnoxious to the mice, that
they will not eat them. the tops of
furze, chopped and thrown into the
drills, when the peas are sown, will
be an effectual preventive. sea
sand strewed thick on the surface
of the ground, round the plants liable
to be attacked by the mice, will have
the same effect.
mildew. to remove stains in
linen occasioned by mildew, mix
some soft soap and powdered starch,
half as much salt, and the juice of a
lemon. lay it on the part on both
sides with a painter's brush, and let
it lie on the grass day and night till
the stain disappears.
milk butter. this article is
principally made in cheshire, where
the whole of the milk is churned
without being skimmed. in the summer
time, immediately after milking,
the meal is put to cool in earthen
jars till it become sufficiently coagulated,
and has acquired a slight
degree of acidity, enough to undergo
the operation of churning. during
the summer, this is usually performed
in the course of one or two days.
in order to forward the coagulation
in the winter, the milk is placed near
the fire; but in summer, if it has
not been sufficiently cooled before
it is added to the former meal, or if
it has been kept too close, and be
not churned shortly after it has acquired
the necessary degree of consistence,
a fermentation will ensue;
in which case the butter becomes
rancid, and the milk does not yield
that quantity which it would, if
churned in proper time. this also
is the case in winter, when the jars
have been placed too near the fire,[]
and the milk runs entirely to whey.
milk butter is in other respects made
like the common butter.
milk and cream. in hot
weather, when it is difficult to preserve
milk from becoming sour, and
spoiling the cream, it may be kept
perfectly sweet by scalding the new
milk very gently, without boiling,
and setting it by in the earthen dish
or pan that it is done in. this method
is pursued in devonshire, for
making of butter, and for eating;
and it would answer equally well in
small quantities for the use of the
tea table. cream already skimmed
may be kept twenty-four hours if
scalded, without sugar; and by adding
as much pounded lump sugar as
shall make it pretty sweet, it will
be good two days, by keeping it in
a cool place.
milk porridge. make a fine
gruel of half grits well boiled, strain
it off, add warm or cold milk, and
serve with toasted bread.
milk punch. pare six oranges
and six lemons as thin as possible,
and grate them afterwards with sugar
to extract the flavour. steep
the peels in a bottle of rum or brandy,
stopped close twenty-four hours.
squeeze the fruit on two pounds of
sugar, add to it four quarts of water,
and one of new milk boiling hot.
stir the rum into the above, and run
it through a jelly bag till perfectly
clear. bottle and cork it close immediately.
milk of roses. mix an ounce
of oil of almonds with a pint of rose
water, and then add ten drops of the
oil of tartar.
milk soup. boil a pint of
milk with a little salt, cinnamon,
and sugar. lay thin slices of bread
in a dish, pour over them a little of
the milk, and keep them hot over a
stove without burning. when the
soup is ready, beat up the yolks of
five or six eggs, and add them to the
milk. stir it over the fire till it
thickens, take it off before it curdles,
and pour it upon the bread in the
dish.
milking. cows should be
milked three times a day in the summer,
if duly fed, and twice in the
winter. great care should be taken
to drain the milk completely from
the udder; for if any be suffered to
remain, the cow will give less every
meal, till at length she becomes dry
before her proper time, and the next
season she will scarcely give a sufficient
quantity of milk to pay the
expences of her keeping. the first
milk drawn from a cow is also thinner,
and of an inferior quality to
that which is afterwards obtained:
and this richness increases progressively,
to the very last drop that can
be drawn from the udder. if a cow's
teats be scratched or wounded, her
milk will be foul, and should not
be mixed with that of other cows,
but given to the pigs. in warm weather,
the milk should remain in the
pail till nearly cold, before it is
strained; but in frosty weather this
should be done immediately, and a
small quantity of boiling water mixed
with it. this will produce plenty
of cream, especially in trays of a
large surface. as cows are sometimes
troublesome to milk, and in
danger of contracting bad habits,
they always require to be treated
with great gentleness, especially
when young, or while their teats are
tender. in this case the udder ought
to be fomented with warm water before
milking, and the cow soothed
with mild treatment; otherwise she
will be apt to become stubborn and
unruly, and retain her milk ever after.
a cow will never let down her
milk freely to the person she dreads
or dislikes.
millet pudding. wash three
spoonfuls of the seed, put it into a
dish with a crust round the edge,
pour over it as much new milk as
will nearly fill the dish, two ounces
of butter warmed with it, sugar,
shred lemon peel, and a dust of[]
ginger and nutmeg. as you put it
in the oven, stir in two beaten eggs,
and a spoonful of shred suet.
mince pies. of scraped beef,
free from skin and strings, weigh
two pounds, of suet picked and
chopped four pounds, and of currants
nicely cleaned and perfectly
dry, six pounds. then add three
pounds of chopped apples, the peel
and juice of two lemons, a pint of
sweet wine, a nutmeg, a quarter of
an ounce of cloves, the same of mace,
and pimento, in the finest powder.
mix the whole well together, press
it into a deep pan, and keep it covered
in a dry cool place. a little
citron, orange, and lemon peel,
should be put into each pie when
made. the above quantity of mince
meat may of course be reduced, in
equal proportions, for small families.—mince
pies without meat, are
made in the following manner. pare,
core, and mince six pounds of apples;
shred three pounds of fresh
suet, and stone three pounds of raisins
minced. add to these, a quarter
of an ounce each of mace and
cinnamon, and eight cloves, all finely
powdered. then three pounds of
the finest powder sugar, three quarters
of an ounce of salt, the rinds of
four and the juice of two lemons,
half a pint of port, and half a pint
of brandy. mix well together, and
put the ingredients into a deep pan.
prepare four pounds of currants,
well washed and dried, and add them
when the pies are made, with some
candied fruit.
minced beef. shred fine the
underdone part, with some of the
fat. put it into a small stewpan
with some onion, or a very small
quantity of shalot, a little water,
pepper and salt. boil it till the
onion is quite soft; then put some
of the gravy of the meat to it, and
the mince, but do not let it boil.
prepare a small hot dish with sippets
of bread, mix a large spoonful
of vinegar with the mince, and pour
it into the dish. if shalot vinegar
is used, the raw onion and shalot
may be dispensed with.
minced collops. chop and
mince some beef very small, and season
it with pepper and salt. put it,
in its raw state, into small jars, and
pour on the top some clarified butter.
when to be used, put the clarified
butter into a fryingpan, and
fry some sliced onions. add a little
water to it, put in the minced
meat, and it will be done in a few
minutes. this is a favourite scotch
dish, and few families are without it.
it keeps well, and is always ready
for an extra dish.
minced veal. cut some cold
veal as fine as possible, but do not
chop it. put to it a very little lemon-peel
shred, two grates of nutmeg,
some salt, and four or five
spoonfuls either of weak broth, milk,
or water. simmer these gently with
the meat, adding a bit of butter rubbed
in flour, but take care not to let
it boil. put sippets of thin toasted
bread, cut into a three-cornered
shape, round the dish.
mint sauce. pick and wash
the mint clean, and chop it fine.
put it into a small bason, and mix
it with sugar and vinegar.
mint vinegar. as fresh mint
is not at all times to be had, a welcome
substitute will be found in the
preparation of mint vinegar. dry
and pound half an ounce of mint
seed, pour upon it a quart of the
best vinegar, let it steep ten days,
and shake it up every day. this
will be useful in the early season of
house lamb.
mites. though they principally
affect cheese, there are several species
of this insect which breed in
flour and other eatables, and do
considerable injury. the most effectual
method of expelling them is
to place a few nutmegs in the sack
or bin containing the flour, the odour
of which is insupportable to mites;
and they will quickly be removed,[]
without the meal acquiring any unpleasant
flavour. thick branches
of the lilac, or the elder tree, peeled
and put into the flour, will have the
same effect. quantities of the
largest sized ants, scattered about
cheese-rooms and granaries, would
presently devour all the mites, without
doing any injury.
mixed wine. take an equal
quantity of white, red, and black
currants, cherries, and raspberries;
mash them, and press the juice
through a strainer. boil three pounds
of moist sugar in three quarts of water,
and skim it clean. when cold,
mix a quart of juice with it, and put
it into a barrel that will just hold it.
put in the bung, and after it has
stood a week, close it up, and let it
stand three or four months. when
the wine is put into the barrel, add
a little brandy to it.
mock brawn. boil two pair
of neat's feet quite tender, and pick
all the flesh off the bone. boil the
belly piece of a porker nearly enough,
and bone it. roll the meat of the
feet up in the pork, tie it up in a
cloth with tape round it, and boil
it till it becomes very tender. hang
it up in the cloth till it is quite cold,
put it into some souse, and keep it
for use.
mock turtle. divide a calf's
head with the skin on, and clean it
well. half boil it, take all the meat
off in square pieces, break the bones
of the head, and boil them in some
veal and beef broth, to add to the
richness. fry some shalot in butter,
and dredge in flower enough to
thicken the gravy; stir this into the
browning, and give it one or two
boils. skim it carefully, and then
put in the head; add a pint of madeira,
and simmer till the meat is
quite tender. about ten minutes
before serving, put in some basil,
tarragon, chives, parsley, cayenne
pepper, and salt; also two spoonfuls
of mushroom ketchup, and one
of soy. squeeze the juice of a lemon
into the tureen, and pour the soup
upon it. serve with forcemeat balls,
and small eggs.—a cheaper way.
prepare half a calf's head as above,
but without the skin. when the
meat is cut off, break the bones, and
put them into a saucepan with some
gravy made of beef and veal bones,
and seasoned with fried onions,
herbs, mace, and pepper. have
ready prepared two or three ox-palates
boiled so tender as to blanch,
and cut into small pieces; to which
a cow heel, likewise cut into pieces,
is a great improvement. brown
some butter, flour, and onion, and
pour the gravy to it; then add the
meats as above, and stew them together.
add half a pint of sherry,
an anchovy, two spoonfuls of walnut
ketchup, the same of mushroom
ketchup, and some chopped herbs
as before. the same sauce as before.—another
way. put into a pan
a knuckle of veal, two fine cow heels,
two onions, a few cloves, peppercorns,
berries of allspice, mace, and
sweet herbs. cover them with water,
tie a thick paper over the pan,
and set it in an oven for three hours.
when cold, take off the fat very
nicely, cut the meat and feet into
bits an inch and a half square, remove
the bones and coarse parts,
and then put the rest on to warm,
with a large spoonful of walnut and
one of mushroom ketchup, half a
pint of sherry or madeira, a little
mushroom powder, and the jelly of
the meat. if it want any more seasoning,
add some when hot, and
serve with hard eggs, forcemeat
balls, a squeeze of lemon, and a
spoonful of soy. this is a very easy
way of making an excellent dish of
mock turtle.—another. stew a
pound and a half of scrag of mutton,
with three pints of water till
reduced to a quart. set on the broth,
with a calf's foot and a cow heel;
cover the stewpan tight, and let it
simmer till the meat can be separated
from the bones in proper pieces.[]
set it on again with the broth, adding
a quarter of a pint of sherry or
madeira, a large onion, half a tea-spoonful
of cayenne, a bit of lemon
peel, two anchovies, some sweet
herbs, eighteen oysters chopped fine,
a tea-spoonful of salt, a little nutmeg,
and the liquor of the oysters. cover
it close, and simmer it three quarters,
of an hour. serve with forcemeat
balls, and hard eggs in the
tureen.—an excellent and very cheap
mock turtle may be made of two or
three cow heels, baked with two
pounds and a half of gravy beef,
herbs, and other ingredients as
above.
moles. as these little animals
live entirely on worms and insects,
of which they consume incalculable
numbers, they may be considered
as harmless, and even useful, rather
than otherwise; and it has been
observed in fields and gardens where
the moles had been caught, that they
afterwards abounded with vermin
and insects. but when the moles
become too numerous, they are hurtful
to vegetation, and require to be
destroyed. besides the common
method of setting traps in their subterraneous
passages, many might be
dug out of the earth by carefully
watching their situation and motions
before the rising of the sun, and
striking in a spade behind them to
cut off their retreat. the smell of
garlic is so offensive to them, that
if a few heads of that plant were
thrust into their runs, it would expel
them from the place.
moonshine pudding. put
into a baking dish a layer of very
thin bread and butter, strewed over
with currants and sweetmeats, and
so on till the dish is full. mix together
a pint and a half of cream,
the yolks of six eggs, half a grated
nutmeg, and some sugar. pour the
mixture on the top of the pudding,
and bake it three quarters of an
hour.
moor fowl. to dress moor
fowl with red cabbage, truss the
game as for boiling. set them on
the fire with a little soup, and let
them stew for half an hour. cut a
red cabbage into quarters, add it to
the moor fowl, season with salt and
white pepper, and a little piece of
butter rolled in flour. a glass of
port may be added, if approved.
lift out the cabbage, and place it
neatly in the dish, with the moor
fowl on it. pour the sauce over
them, and garnish with small slices
of fried bacon.
morella cherries. when
the fruit is quite ripe, take off the
stalks, prick them with a pin, and
allow a pound and a half of lump
sugar to every pound of cherries.
reduce part of the sugar to powder,
and strew it over them. next
day dissolve the remainder in half
a pint of currant juice, set it over a
slow fire, put in the cherries with
the sugar, and give them a gentle
boil. take out the cherries carefully,
boil the syrup till it is thick,
pour it upon the cherries, and tie
them down.—any other kind of
fruit may be treated in the same
way, only using such kind of juice
to boil in the syrup as is most suitable
to the fruit to be preserved. it
is proper to put apple jelly over
jam or preserved fruit, or to sift
sugar over the tops of the jars; and
when cold, cover them with brandy
paper. if the air be admitted, they
will not keep.
morella wine. cleanse from
the stalks sixty pounds of morella
cherries, and bruise them as to break
the stones. press out the juice,
mix it with six gallons of sherry
wine, and four gallons of warm water.
powder separately an ounce of
nutmeg, cinnamon, and mace, and
hang them separately in small bags,
in the cask containing the liquor.
bung it down; and in a few weeks
it will become a deliciously flavoured
wine.
morels. in their green state[]
they have a very rich, high flavour,
and are delicious additions to some
dishes, or sent up as a stew by themselves,
when they are fresh and fine.
when dried they are of very little
use, and serve only to soak up good
gravy, from which they take more
flavour than they give.
moss. to destroy moss on
trees, remove it with a hard brush
early in the spring of the year, and
wash the trees afterwards with urine
or soap suds, and plaster them with
cow dung. when a sort of white
down appears on apple trees, clear
off the red stain underneath it, and
anoint the infected parts with a mixture
of train oil and scotch snuff,
which will effectually cure the disease.
moths. one of the most speedy
remedies for their complete extirpation,
is the smell of turpentine,
whether it be by sprinkling it on
woollen stuffs, or placing sheets of
paper moistened with it between
pieces of cloth. it is remarkable
that moths are never known to infest
wool unwashed, or in its natural
state, but always abandon the place
where such raw material is kept.
those persons therefore to whom
the smell of turpentine is offensive,
may avail themselves of this circumstance,
and place layers of undressed
wool between pieces of cloth, or
put small quantities in the corners
of shelves and drawers containing
drapery of that description. this,
or shavings of the cedar, small slips
of russia leather, or bits of camphor,
laid in boxes or drawers where
furs or woollen clothes are kept,
will effectually preserve them from
the ravages of the moth and other
insects.
muffins. stir together a pint
of yeast with a pint and half of
warm milk and water, and a little
salt. strain it into a quarter of a
peck of fine flour, knead it well, and
set it an hour to rise. pull it into
small pieces, roll it into balls with
the hand, and keep them covered
up warm. then spread them into
muffins, lay them on tins, and bake
them; and as the bottoms begin to
change colour, turn them on the
other side. a better sort may be
made by adding two eggs, and two
ounces of butter melted in half a
pint of milk. muffins should not
be cut, but pulled open.
mulberry syrup. put the
mulberries into a kettle of water,
and simmer them over the fire till
the juice runs from them. squeeze
out the juice, and add twice the
weight of sugar. set it over a slow
fire, skim it clean, and simmer it
till the sugar is quite dissolved.
mulberry wine. gather
mulberries on a dry day, when they
are just changed from redness to a
shining black. spread them thinly
on a fine cloth, or on a floor or
table, for twenty-four hours, and
then press them. boil a gallon of
water with each gallon of juice,
putting to every gallon of water an
ounce of cinnamon bark, and six
ounces of sugarcandy finely powdered.
skim and strain the water
when it is taken off and settled, and
put it to the mulberry juice. now
add to every gallon of the mixture,
a pint of white or rhenish wine.
let the whole stand in a cask to ferment,
for five or six days. when
settled draw it off into bottles, and
keep it cool.
mulled ale. boil a pint of
good sound ale with a little grated
nutmeg and sugar, beat up three
eggs, and mix them with a little cold
ale. then pour the hot ale to it,
and return it several times to prevent
its curdling. warm and stir it
till it is thickened, add a piece of
butter or a glass of brandy, and
serve it up with dry toast.
mulled wine. boil some
spice in a little water till the flavour
is gained, then add an equal quantity
of port, with sugar and nutmeg.
boil all together, and serve with[]
toast.—another way. boil a blade
of cinnamon and some grated nutmeg
a few minutes, in a large tea-cupful
of water. pour to it a pint
of port wine, add a little sugar, beat
it up, and it will be ready. good
home-made wine may be substituted
instead of port.
mumbled hare. boil the
hare, but not too much; take off the
flesh, and shred it very fine. add
a little salt, nutmeg, lemon peel,
and the juice of a lemon. put it into
a stewpan with a dozen eggs,
and a pound of butter, and keep it
stirring.
weigh six pounds of the fruit, bake
it in a stone jar, remove the stones,
and put in the kernels after they are
broken and picked. pour half the
juice on two pounds and a half of
lisbon sugar; when melted and
simmered a few minutes, skim it,
and add the fruit. keep it doing
very gently till the juice is much reduced,
but take care to stir it constantly,
to prevent its burning. pour
it into small moulds, pattipans, or
saucers. the remaining juice may
serve to colour creams, or be added
to a pie.
mushrooms. before these
are prepared for eating, great care
must be taken to ascertain that they
are genuine, as death in many instances
has been occasioned by
using a poisonous kind of fungus,
resembling mushrooms. the eatable
mushrooms first appear very
small, of a round form, and on a little
stalk. they grow very fast, and
both the stalk and the upper part
are white. as the size increases,
the under part gradually opens, and
shows a kind of fringed fur, of a
very fine salmon colour; which continues
more or less till the mushroom
has gained some size, and
then it turns to a dark brown. these
marks should be attended to, and
likewise whether the skin can be
easily parted from the edges and
middle. those that have a white or
yellow fur should be carefully avoided,
though many of them have a
similar smell, but not so strong and
fragrant, as the genuine mushroom.
great numbers of these may be produced,
by strewing on an old hotbed
the broken pieces of mushrooms;
or if the water in which they have
been washed be poured on the bed,
it will nearly answer the same purpose.
mushrooms dried. wipe
them clean, take out the brown part
of the large ones, and peel off the
skin. lay them on paper to dry in
a cool oven, and keep them in paper
bags in a dry place. when used,
simmer them in the gravy, and they
will swell to nearly their former
size. or before they are made into
powder, it is a good way to simmer
them in their own liquor till it dry
up into them, shaking the pan all
the time, and afterwards drying
them on tin plates. spice may be
added or not. tie the mushrooms
down close in a bottle, and keep it
in a dry place.
mushroom ketchup. take
the largest broad mushrooms, break
them into an earthen pan, strew salt
over, and stir them occasionally for
three days. then let them stand
twelve days, till there is a thick
scum over. strain and boil the liquor
with jamaica and black peppers,
mace, ginger, a clove or two,
and some mustard seed. when cold,
bottle it, and tie a bladder over the
cork. in three months boil it again
with fresh spice, and it will then
keep a twelvemonth.—another way.
fill a stewpan with large flap mushrooms,
that are not worm-eaten,
and the skins and fringe of such
as have been pickled. throw a
handful of salt among them, and set
them by a slow fire. they will produce
a great deal of liquor, which
must be strained; then add four
ounces of shalots, two cloves of garlic,
a good deal of whole pepper,[]
ginger, mace, cloves, and a few bay
leaves. boil and skim it well, and
when cold, cork it up close. in two
months boil it up again with a little
fresh spice, and a stick of horseradish.
it will then keep a year,
which mushroom ketchup rarely
does, if not boiled a second time.
mushroom powder. wash
half a peck of large mushrooms
while quite fresh, and free them
from grit and dirt with flannel.
scrape out the black part clean, and
do not use any that are worm-eaten.
put them into a stewpan over the
fire without any water, with two
large onions, some cloves, a quarter
of an ounce of mace, and two spoonfuls
of white pepper, all in powder.
simmer and shake them till all the
liquor be dried up, but be careful
they do not burn. lay them on
tins or sieves in a slow oven till they
are dry enough to beat to powder;
then put the powder into small bottles,
corked, and tied closely, and
kept in a dry place. a tea-spoonful
of this powder will give a very fine
flavour to any soup or gravy, or any
sauce; and it is to be added just
before serving, and one boil given to
it after it is put in.
mushroom sauce. melt
some butter with flour, in a little
milk or cream. put in some mushrooms,
a little salt and nutmeg, and
boil it up together in a saucepan.
or put the mushrooms into melted
butter, with veal gravy, salt, and
nutmeg.
muslin patterns. in order
to copy muslin patterns, the drawing
is to be placed on a sheet of
white paper, and the outline pricked
through with a pin. the white
sheet may then be laid on a second
clear one, and a muslin bag of powdered
charcoal sifted or rubbed over
it. the pierced paper being removed,
a perfect copy may be traced
on the other; and in this way, patterns
may be multiplied very expeditiously.
mustard. mix by degrees,
the best durham flour of mustard
with boiling water, rubbing it perfectly
smooth, till it comes to a proper
thickness. add a little salt,
keep it in a small jar close covered,
and put only as much into the glass
as will be used soon. the glass
should be wiped daily round the
edges. if for immediate use, mix
the mustard with new milk by degrees,
till it is quite smooth, and a
little raw cream. it is much softer
this way, does not taste bitter, and
will keep well. a tea-spoonful of
sugar, to half a pint of mustard, is
a great improvement, and tends
much to soften it. patent mustard
is nearly as cheap as any other, and
is generally preferred.
musty flour. when flour
has acquired a musty smell and
taste, from dampness and other
causes, it may be recovered by the
simple use of magnesia, allowing
thirty grains of the carbonate to one
pound of flour. it is to be leavened
and baked in the usual way of making
bread. the loaves will be found
to rise well in the oven, to be more
light and spongy, and also whiter
than bread in the common way. it
will likewise have an excellent taste,
and will keep well. the use of magnesia
in bread making is well worthy
of attention, for if it improves musty
flour, and renders it palatable, it
would much more improve bread
in general, and be the interest of
families to adopt it. the use of
magnesia in bread, independent of
its improving qualities, is as much
superior to that of alum as one substance
can be to another.
mutton. in cutting up mutton,
in order to its being dressed,
attention should be paid to the different
joints. the pipe that runs
along the bone of the inside of a
chine must be removed, and if the
meat is to be kept some time, the
part close round the tail should be
rubbed with salt, after first cutting[]
out the kernel. a leg is apt to be
first tainted in the fat on the thick
part, where the kernel is lodged,
and this therefore should be removed,
or the meat cannot be expected
to keep well. the chine and
rib bones should be wiped every
day, and the bloody part of the neck
be cut off to preserve it. the brisket
changes first in the breast; and if
it is to be kept, it is best to rub it
with a little salt, should the weather
be hot. every kernel should be
taken out of all sorts of meat as
soon as it is brought in, and then
wiped dry. for roasting, it should
hang as long as it will keep, the
hind quarter especially, but not so
long as to taint; for whatever may
be authorised by the prevailing
fashion, putrid juices certainly
ought not to be taken into the stomach.
great care should be taken
to preserve by paper the fat of what
is roasted. mutton for boiling will
not look of a good colour, if it has
hung long.—in purchasing this meat,
choose it by the fineness of the grain,
the goodness of its colour, and see
that the fat be firm and white. it is
not the better for being young: if it
be wether mutton, of a good breed
and well fed, it is best for age. the
flesh of ewe mutton is paler, and the
texture finer. ram mutton is very
strong flavoured, the flesh is of a
deep red, and the fat is spongy:
wether mutton is the best.
mutton broth. soak a neck
of mutton in water for an hour, cut
off the scrag, and put it into a stewpot,
with two quarts of water. as
soon as it boils, skim it well, and
simmer it an hour and a half. cut
the best end of the mutton into
pieces, two bones in each, and take
off some of the fat. prepare four
or five carrots, as many turnips, and
three onions, all sliced, but not cut
small. put them soon enough to
get quite tender, and add four large
spoonfuls of scotch barley, first wetted
with cold water. twenty minutes
before serving, put in some chopped
parsley, add a little salt, and send
up all together. this is a scotch
dish, and esteemed very excellent in
the winter.
mutton chops. cut them
from the loin or neck, broil them on
a clear fire, and turn them often, or
the fat dropping into the fire will
smoke them. when done, put them
into a warm dish, rub them with
butter, slice a shalot in a spoonful
of boiling water, with a little salt
and ketchup, and pour it over the
chops. the ketchup may be omitted,
and plain butter used instead.
prepare a seasoning of
chopped parsley and thyme, grated
bread, pepper and salt. smear the
chops over with egg, strew the seasoning
on them, and roll each in buttered
paper. close the ends, put
them in a dutch oven or fryingpan,
and let them broil slowly. when
done, send them to table in the paper,
with gravy in a boat.
mutton collops. from a
loin of mutton that has been well
kept, cut some thin collops nearest
to the leg. take out the sinews,
season the collops with salt, pepper,
and mace; and strew over them
shred parsley, thyme, and two or
three shalots. fry them in butter
till half done; add half a pint of
gravy, a little lemon juice, and a
piece of butter rubbed in flour. simmer
them together very gently for
five minutes, and let the collops be
served up immediately, or they will
become hard.
mutton cutlets. to do
them in the portuguese way, half
fry the chops with sliced shalot or
onion, chopped parsley, and two
bay leaves. season with pepper
and salt; then lay a forcemeat on
a piece of white paper, put the chop
on it, and twist the paper up, leaving
a hole for the end of the bones[]
to go through. broil the cutlets on
a gentle fire, serve them with a little
gravy, or with sauce robart.
mutton ham. choose a fine-grained
leg of wether mutton, of
twelve or fourteen pounds weight;
cut it ham shape, and let it hang
two days. then put into a stewpan
half a pound of bay salt, the same
of common salt, two ounces of saltpetre,
and half a pound of coarse
sugar, all in powder. mix, and
make it quite hot; then rub it well
into the ham. let it be turned in
the liquor every day; at the end of
four days add two ounces more of
common salt; in twelve days take
it out, dry it, and hang it up a week
in wood smoke. it is to be used in
slices, with stewed cabbage, mashed
potatoes, or eggs.
mutton hashed. cut thin
slices of dressed mutton, fat and
lean, and flour them. boil the bones
with a little onion, season the meat,
and warm it up with the gravy, but
it should not boil. instead of onion,
a clove, a spoonful of currant jelly,
and a glass of port wine, will make
it taste like venison.
mutton kebobbed. take
all the fat out of a loin of mutton,
and that on the outside also if too
fat, and remove the skin. joint it
at every bone, mix a small nutmeg
grated with a little salt and pepper,
crumbs of bread, and herbs. dip
the steaks into the yolks of three
eggs, and sprinkle the above mixture
all over them. then place the steaks
together as they were before they
were cut asunder, tie and fasten
them on a small spit. roast them
before a quick fire; set a dish under,
and baste them with a good
piece of butter, and the liquor that
comes from the meat, but throw
some more of the above seasoning
over. when done enough, lay the
meat in a dish. prepare an additional
half pint of good gravy, put
into it two spoonfuls of ketchup,
and rub down a tea-spoonful of flour
with it. give it a boil, skim off all
the fat, and pour it over the mutton.
be careful to keep the meat hot, till
the gravy is quite ready.
mutton pie. cut steaks from
a loin or neck of mutton that has
hung some time; beat them, and
remove some of the fat. season
with salt, pepper, and a little onion.
put a little water at the bottom of
the dish, and a little paste on the
edge; then cover it with a tolerably
thick paste. or raise small pies,
breaking each bone in two to shorten
it; cover it over, and pinch the
edges together. when the pies
come from the oven, pour into each
a spoonful of good mutton gravy.
mutton pudding. season
some chops with salt and pepper, and
a taste of onion. place a layer of
meat at the bottom of the dish, pour
over them a batter of potatoes boiled
and pressed through a cullender, and
mixed with an egg and milk. put in
the rest of the chops, and the batter,
and bake it. batter made of flour
eats very well, but requires more
egg, and is not so good as potatoe.
another way is to cut slices off a
leg that has been underdone, and
put them into a bason lined with a
fine suet crust. season with pepper
and salt, and finely shred onion
or shalot.
stew six rumps in some
good mutton gravy half an hour;
then take them up, and let them
stand to cool. clear the gravy from
the fat, and put into it four ounces
of boiled rice, an onion stuck with
cloves, and a blade of mace. boil
them till the rice is thick. wash
the rumps with yolks of eggs well
beaten, and strew over them crumbs
of bread, a little pepper and salt,
chopped parsley and thyme, and
grated lemon peel, fried in butter,
of a fine brown. while the rumps
are stewing, lard the kidneys, and[]
set them to roast in a dutch oven.
when the rumps are ready, the grease
must be drained from them before
they are put in the dish; the pan
being cleared likewise from the fat,
warm up the rice in it. lay the
latter on the dish, place the rumps
round upon the rice, the narrow ends
towards the middle, and the kidneys
between. garnish with hard eggs
cut in halves, the white being left
on, or with different coloured pickles.
mutton sauce. two spoonfuls
of the liquor in which the mutton
is boiled, the same quantity of
vinegar, two or three shalots finely
shred, with a little salt, put into a
saucepan with a bit of butter rolled
in flour, stirred together and boiled
once, will make good sauce for boiled
mutton.
mutton sausages. take
a pound of the rawest part of a leg
of mutton that has been either roasted
or boiled; chop it quite small,
and season it with pepper, salt, mace,
and nutmeg. add to it six ounces
of beef suet, some sweet herbs, two
anchovies, and a pint of oysters, all
chopped very small; a quarter of a
pound of grated bread, some of the
anchovy liquor, and two eggs well
beaten. when well mixed together,
put it into a small pot; and use it
by rolling it into balls or sausages,
and fry them. if approved, a little
shalot may be added, or garlick,
which is a great improvement.
mutton steaks. these
should be cut from a loin or neck
that has been well kept; if a neck,
the bones should not be long. broil
them on a clear fire, season them
when half done, and let them be often
turned. take them up into a
very hot dish, rub a bit of butter on
each, and serve them up hot and
hot the moment they are done.—to
do them maintenon, half fry them
first, then stew them while hot, with
herbs, crumbs, and seasoning. rub
a bit of butter on some writing paper,
to prevent its catching the fire,
wrap the steaks in it, and finish them
on the gridiron.
nankeen dye. the article generally
sold under this title, and
which produces a fine buff colour so
much in use, is made of equal parts
of arnetto and common potash, dissolved
and boiled in water. the
yellow colour called dutch pink, is
made from a decoction of weld or
dyer's weed; and if blue cloths be
dipped in this liquid, they will take
the colour of a fine green.
nasturtions, if intended for
capers, should be kept a few days
after they are gathered. then pour
boiling vinegar over them, and cover
them close when cold. they will
not be fit to eat for some months;
but are then finely flavoured, and by
many are preferred to capers.
neat's tongue. if intended
to be stewed, it should be simmered
for two hours, and peeled. then
return it to the same liquor, with
pepper, salt, mace, and cloves, tied
up in a piece of cloth. add a few
chopped capers, carrots and turnips
sliced, half a pint of beef gravy, a
little white wine, and sweet herbs.
stew it gently till it is tender, take
out the herbs and spices, and thicken
the gravy with butter rolled in
flour.
neck of mutton. this joint
is particularly useful, because so
many dishes may be made of it;
but it is not esteemed advantageous
for a family. the bones should be
cut short, which the butchers will[]
not do unless particularly desired.
the best end of the neck may be
boiled, and served with turnips; or
roasted, or dressed in steaks, in
pies, or harrico. the scrags may
be stewed in broth; or with a small
quantity of water, some small onions,
a few peppercorns, and a little rice,
and served together. when a boiled
neck is to look particularly nice,
saw down the chine bone, strip the
ribs halfway down, and chop off the
ends of the bones about four inches.
the skin should not be taken off till
boiled, and then the fat will look
the whiter. when there is more
fat than is agreeable, it makes a very
good suet pudding, or crust for a
meat pie if cut very fine.
neck of pork. a loin or
neck of pork should be roasted. cut
the skin across with a sharp penknife,
at distances of half an inch.
serve with vegetables and apple
sauce.
neck of veal. cut off the
scrag to boil, and cover it with onion
sauce. it should be boiled in milk
and water. parsley and butter may
be served with it, instead of onion
sauce. or it may be stewed with
whole rice, small onions, and peppercorns,
with a very little water.
it may also be boiled and eaten with
bacon and greens. the best end of
the neck may either be roasted,
broiled as steaks, or made into a pie.
neck of venison. rub it
with salt, and let it lie four or five
days. flour it, and boil it in a
cloth, allowing to every pound a
quarter of an hour. cauliflower,
turnips, and cabbages, are eaten
with it, and melted butter. garnish
the dish with some of the vegetables.
nelson puddings. put into
a dutch oven six small cakes, called
nelson balls or rice cakes, made in
small teacups. when quite hot,
pour over them boiling melted butter,
white wine, and sugar.
new casks. if not properly
prepared before they are used, new
casks are apt to give beer and other
liquor a bad taste. they must therefore
be well scalded and seasoned
several days successively before they
are used, and frequently filled with
fresh water. the best way however
is to boil two pecks of bran or malt
dust in a copper of water, and pour
it hot into the cask; then stop it
up close, let it stand two days, wash
it out clean, and let the cask be well
dried.
newcastle pudding. butter
a half melon mould or quart basin,
stick it all round with dried cherries
or fine raisins, and fill it up with
custard and layers of thin bread
and butter. boil or steam it an
hour and a half.
newmarket pudding. put
on to boil a pint of good milk, with
half a lemon peel, a little cinnamon,
and a bay leaf. boil it gently for
five or ten minutes, sweeten with
loaf sugar, break the yolks of five
and the whites of three eggs into a
basin, beat them well, and add the
milk. beat it all up well together,
and strain it through a tammis, or
fine hair sieve. prepare some bread
and butter cut thin, place a layer of
it in a pie dish, and then a layer of
currants, and so on till the dish is
nearly full. pour the custard over
it, and bake it half an hour.
norfolk dumplins. make
a thick batter with half a pint of
milk and flour, two eggs, and a little
salt. take a spoonful of the batter,
and drop it gently into boiling water;
and if the water boil fast, they
will be ready in a few minutes. take
them out with a wooden spoon, and
put them into a dish with a piece of
butter. these are often called drop
dumplins, or spoon dumplins.
norfolk punch. to make
a relishing liquor that will keep many
years, and improve by age, put the
peels of thirty lemons and thirty
oranges into twenty quarts of french
brandy. the fruit must be pared
so thin and carefully, that not the[]
least of the white is left. let it infuse
twelve hours. prepare thirty
quarts of cold water that has been
boiled, put to it fifteen pounds of
double-refined sugar, and when well
incorporated, pour it upon the brandy
and peels, adding the juice of
the oranges and of twenty-four lemons.
mix them well, strain the
liquor through a fine hair sieve, into
a very clean cask, that has held
spirits, and add two quarts of new
milk. stir the liquor, then bung it
down close, and let it stand six
weeks in a warm cellar. bottle off
the liquor, but take care that the
bottles be perfectly clean and dry,
the corks of the best quality, and
well put in. of course a smaller
quantity of this punch may be made,
by observing only the above proportions.—another
way. pare six
lemons and three seville oranges
very thin, squeeze the juice into a
large teapot, put to it three quarts
of brandy, one of white wine, one
of milk, and a pound and a quarter
of lump sugar. let it be well mixed,
and then covered for twenty-four
hours. strain it through a jelly
bag till quite clear, and then bottle
it off.
make a hasty pudding with
a pint of milk and flour, put it into
a bason, and let it stand till the
next day. then mash it with a spoon,
add a quarter of a pound of clarified
butter, as many currants picked and
washed, two ounces of candied peel
cut small, and a little sugar and
brandy. bake it in teacups, turn
them out on a dish, and pour wine
sauce over them.
nose bleeding. violent
bleeding at the nose may sometimes
be prevented by applying lint dipped
in vinegar, or a strong solution
of white vitriol, with fomentations
of the temples and forehead made
of nitre dissolved in water. but as
bleeding at the nose is often beneficial,
it should not be suddenly
stopped.
notice to quit. the usual
mode of letting houses is by the year,
at a certain annual rent to be paid
quarterly: therefore unless a written
agreement can be produced, to
show that the premises were engaged
for a shorter period, the law
considers the tenant as entered for
one whole year, provided the rent
exceeds forty shillings per annum,
and this consideration must govern
the notice to quit. every tenant
who holds from year to year, which
is presumed to be the case in every
instance where proof is not given to
the contrary, is entitled to half a
year's notice, which must be given
in such a manner that the tenant
must quit the premises at the same
quarter day on which he took possession:
so that if his rent commenced
at michaelmas, the notice
must be served at or before lady-day,
that he may quit at michaelmas.
if a tenant come in after any
of the regular quarter days, and pay
a certain sum for the remainder of
the quarter, he does not commence
annual tenant until the remainder of
the quarter is expired; but if he
pay rent for the whole quarter, he
is to be considered as yearly tenant
from the commencement of his rent,
and his notice to quit must be regulated
accordingly. should it happen
that the landlord cannot ascertain
the precise time when the tenancy
commenced, he may enquire
of the tenant, who must be served
with notice to quit at the time he
mentions, and must obey the warning
agreeably to his own words,
whether it be the true time or not.
if he refuse to give the desired information,
the landlord, instead of
'on or before midsummer next,'
must give in his notice, 'at the end
and expiration of the current year of
your tenancy, which shall expire
next after the end of one half year[]
from the date hereof.' if notice be
given up to a wrong time, or a quarter
instead of half a year, such warning
will be sufficient, if the party
make no objection at the time he
receives it. when premises are
held by lease, the expiration of the
term is sufficient notice to quit,
without giving any other warning for
that purpose. the following is the
form of a landlord's notice to his
tenant:—'i do hereby give you notice
to quit the house and premises you
hold of me, situate in the parish ofin the county ofon or before midsummer next. dated
theday ofin the
yearr. c.'—the following
is a tenant's notice to his
landlord:—'sir, i hereby give you
warning of my intention to quit your
house in the parish ofon
or before michaelmas next. dated
theday ofin the year
c. r.'—these forms will
also serve for housekeepers and
lodgers, if 'apartment' be added instead
of house or premises. care
however must be taken to give the
address correctly: 'r. c. landlord
of the said premises, to c. r. the
tenant thereof.' or, 'to mr. r. c.
the landlord of the said premises.'
nottingham pudding. peel
six large apples, take out the core
with the point of a small knife or
an apple scoop, but the fruit must
be left whole. fill up the centre
with sugar, place the fruit in a pie
dish, and pour over a nice light batter,
prepared as for batter pudding,
and bake it an hour in a moderate
oven.
nutmeg graters. those
made with a trough, and sold by the
ironmongers, are by far the best,
especially for grating fine and fast.
nuts. hazel nuts may be preserved
in great perfection for several
months, by burying them in earthen
pots well closed, a foot or two in the
ground, especially in a dry or sandy
place.
oat cakes. these may be made
the same as muffins, only using fine
yorkshire oatmeal instead of flour.
another sort is made of fine oatmeal,
warm water, yeast and salt, beat to
a thick batter, and set to rise in a
warm place. pour some of the batter
on a baking stone, to any size
you please, about as thick as a pancake.
pull them open to butter
them, and set them before the fire.
if muffins or oat cakes get stale, dip
them in cold water, and crisp them
in a dutch oven.
oatmeal. this article has undergone
a very considerable improvement,
since the introduction
of what are termed embden groats,
manufactured in england it is true,
out of dutch oats, but of a quality
superior to any thing before known
in this country under the name of
oatmeal, and which may now be
had of almost all retailers at a moderate
price.
oatmeal flummery. put
three large handfuls of fine oatmeal
into two quarts of spring water, and
let it steep a day and a night. pour
off the clear water, put in the same
quantity of fresh water, and strain
the oatmeal through a fine sieve.
boil it till it is as thick as hasty
pudding, keep it stirring all the time,
that it may be smooth and fine.
when first strained, a spoonful of
sugar should be added, two spoonfuls
of orange flower-water, two or[]
three spoonfuls of cream, a blade of
mace, and a bit of lemon peel.
when boiled enough, pour the flummery
into a shallow dish, and serve
it up.
oatmeal pudding. pour a
quart of boiling milk over a pint of
the best oatmeal, and let it soak all
night. next day beat two eggs,
and mix a little salt. butter a bason
that will just hold it, cover it
tight with a floured cloth, and boil
it an hour and a half. eat it with
cold butter and salt. when cold,
slice and toast it, and eat it as oat-cake,
buttered.
old writings. when old
deeds or writings are so much defaced
that they can scarcely be deciphered,
bruise and boil a few nut
galls in white wine; or if it be a
cold infusion, expose it to the sun
for two or three days. then dip a
sponge into the infusion, pass it
over the writing that is sunk, and it
will instantly be revived, if the infusion
be strong enough of the galls.
vitriolic or nitrous acid a little diluted
with water, will also render
the writing legible; but care must
be taken that the solution be not
too strong, or it will destroy the
paper or the parchment which contains
the writing.
ointments. an excellent ointment
for burns, scalds, chilblains,
and dressing blisters, may be made
in the following manner. take eight
ounces of hog's lard quite fresh,
one ounce of bees' wax, and one of
honey. put them into a kettle over
the fire, and stir it together till it is
all melted. pour it into a jar for
keeping, add a large spoonful of
rose water, and keep stirring it till
it is cold.—bad scalds and burns
should first have a poultice of grated
potatoes applied to them for several
hours, and then a plaster of the
ointment, which must be renewed
morning and evening.—for blisters,
a plaster of this should be spread
rather longer than the blister, and
put on over the blister plaster when
it has been on twenty-four hours,
or sooner if it feel uneasy. by this
means the blister plaster will slip
off when it has done drawing, without
any pain or trouble.—for chilblains,
it has never been known to
fail of a cure, if the feet have been
kept clean, dry, and warm.—an
emollient ointment, for anointing
any external inflammations, may be
made as follows. take two pounds
of palm oil, a pint and a half of
olive oil, half a pound of yellow wax,
and a quarter of a pound of venice
turpentine. melt the wax in the
oil over the fire, mix in the turpentine,
and strain off the ointment.
scrape two ounces of bees' wax into
half a pint of sallad oil, and let it
simmer gently over the fire till the
whole is incorporated. take it off
the fire, beat up the yolks of three
eggs with a spoonful of oil, and stir
up all together till it is quite cold.
this is made of four ounces of fresh
lard, two drams of white wax, and
one ounce of prepared tutty. melt
the wax with the lard over a gentle
fire, and sprinkle in the tutty, continually
stirring them till the ointment
is cold.
ointment of lead. this
should consist of half a pint of olive
oil, two ounces of white wax, and
three drams of the sugar of lead finely
powdered. rub the sugar of lead
with some of the oil, add to it the
other ingredients, which should be
previously melted together, and stir
them till the ointment is quite cold.
this cooling ointment may be used
in all cases where the intention is to
dry and skin over the wound, as in
burns and scalds.
take half a pound of
marshmallow roots, three ounces of
linseed, and three ounces of fennugreek
seed. bruise and boil them
gently half an hour in a quart of[]
water, and then add two quarts of
sweet oil. boil them together till
the water is all evaporated: then
strain off the oil, and add to it a
pound of bees' wax, half a pound of
yellow rosin, and two ounces of
common turpentine. melt them together
over a slow fire, and keep
stirring till the ointment is cold.
this is the safest and best application
for the itch, and will have no
disagreeable smell, if made in the
following manner. take four ounces
of fresh lard, an ounce and a half
of flour of sulphur, two drams of
crude sal-ammoniac, and ten or a
dozen drops of lemon essence.
when made into an ointment, rub
it on the parts affected.
olives. this foreign article,
sent over in a state of preservation,
requires only to be kept from the
air. olives are of three kinds, italian,
spanish, and french, of different
sizes and flavour. each
should be firm, though some are
most fleshy.
omlet. make a batter of eggs
and milk, and a very little flour.
add chopped parsley, green onions,
or chives, or a very small quantity
of shalot, a little pepper and salt,
and a scrape or two of nutmeg. boil
some butter in a small frying-pan,
and pour the above batter into it.
when one side is of a fine yellow
brown, turn it and do the other:
double it when served. some lean
ham scraped, or grated tongue, put
in at first, is a very pleasant addition.
four eggs will make a pretty
omlet, but some will use eight or
ten, and only a small proportion of
flour, but a good deal of parsley.
if the taste be approved, a little
tarragon will give a fine flavour.
ramakins and omlet, though usually
served in the course, would be
much better if they were sent up
after, that they might be eaten as
hot as possible.
onion gravy. peel and slice
some onions into a small stewpan,
with an ounce of butter, adding cucumber
or celery if approved. set
it on a slow fire, and turn the onion
about till it is lightly browned; then
stir in half an ounce of flour, a little
broth, a little pepper and salt, and
boil it up for a few minutes. add
a table-spoonful of port wine, the
same of mushroom ketchup, and
rub it through a fine sieve. it may
be sharpened with a little lemon
juice or vinegar. the flavour of this
sauce may be varied by adding tarragon,
or burnt vinegar.
onion sauce. peel the onions
and boil them tender. squeeze the
water from them, chop and add
them to butter that has been melted
rich and smooth, with a little good
milk instead of water. boil it up
once, and serve it for boiled rabbits,
partridges, scrag or knuckle of veal
or roast mutton. a turnip boiled
with the onions makes them milder.
onion soup. put some carrots,
turnips, and a shank bone, into
the liquor in which a leg or neck
of mutton has been boiled, and simmer
them together two hours. strain
it on six onions, sliced and fried of
a light brown; simmer the soup
three hours, and skim it carefully.
put a small roll into it, or fried
bread, and serve it up hot.
onions. in order to obtain a
good crop of onions, it is proper to
sow at different seasons. on light
soils sow in august, january, or early
in february: on heavy wet soils in
march, or early in april. onions
however should not be sown so soon
as january, unless the ground be in
a dry state, which is not often the
case at that time of the year: otherwise,
advantage should be taken of
it. as this valuable root is known
frequently to fail by the common
method of culture, the best way is
to sow the seed successively, that
advantage may be taken of the seasons
as they happen.
orange biscuits. boil[]
whole seville oranges in two or three
waters, till most of the bitterness is
gone. cut them, and take out the
pulp and juice; then beat the outside
very fine in a mortar, and put
to it an equal weight of double-refined
sugar beaten and sifted. when
extremely well mixed to a paste,
spread it thin on china dishes, and
set them in the sun, or before the
fire. when half dry, cut it into
what form you please, and turn the
other side up to dry. keep the
biscuits in a box, with layers of paper.
they are intended for desserts,
and are also useful as a stomachic,
to carry in the pocket on journeys,
and for gouty stomachs.
orange brandy. steep the
peels of twenty seville oranges in
three quarts of brandy, and let it
stand a fortnight in a stone bottle.
boil two quarts of water with a
pound and a half of loaf sugar nearly
an hour, clarify,it with the white
of an egg, strain it, and boil it till
reduced nearly one half. when cold,
strain the brandy into the syrup.
orange butter. boil six
hard eggs, beat them in a mortar
with two ounces of fine sugar, three
ounces of butter, and two ounces of
blanched almonds beaten to a paste.
moisten with orange-flower water;
and when all is mixed, rub it through
a cullender on a dish, and serve
with sweet biscuits between.
blanch half a pound of almonds,
beat them very fine, with orange-flower
water, half a pound of fine
sugar beaten and sifted, a pound
of butter that has been melted carefully
without oiling, and which must
be nearly cold before it is used.
then beat the yolks of ten and the
whites of four eggs. pound in a
mortar two candied oranges, and a
fresh one with the bitterness boiled
out, till they are as tender as marmalade,
without any lumps. beat
the whole together, and put it into
pattipans.
orange chips. cut oranges
in halves, squeeze the juice through
a sieve, and soak the peels in water.
next day boil them in the same till
tender; then drain and slice the
peels, add them to the juice, weigh
as much sugar, and put all together
into a broad earthen dish. place
the dish at a moderate distance from
the fire, often stirring till the chips
candy, and then set them in a cool
room to dry, which commonly requires
about three weeks.
orange cream. boil the
rind of a seville orange very tender,
and beat it fine in a mortar. add
to it a spoonful of the best brandy,
the juice of a seville orange, four
ounces of loaf sugar, and the yolks
of four eggs. beat them all together
for ten minutes; then by gentle
degrees, pour in a pint of boiling
cream, and beat it up till cold.
set some custard cups into a deep
dish of boiling water, pour the cream
into the cups, and let it stand again
till cold. put at the top some small
strips of orange paring cut thin, or
some preserved chips.
soak four ounces of the leaves of
the flowers in cold water for an hour;
drain, and put them between napkins,
and roll with a rolling-pin till
they are bruised. have ready boiled
a pound of sugar to add to it in a
thick syrup, give them a simmer
until the syrup adheres to the sides
of the pan, drop it in little cakes on
a plate, and dry them in a cool room.
orange fool. mix the juice
of three seville oranges, three eggs
well beaten, a pint of cream, a little
nutmeg and cinnamon, and sweeten
it to taste. set the whole over a
slow fire, and stir it till it becomes
as thick as good melted butter, but
it must not be boiled. then pour
it into a dish for eating cold.
orange jam. lay half a
dozen oranges in water four or five
days, changing the water once or
twice every day. take out the[]
oranges, and wipe them dry. tie
them up in separate cloths, and boil
them four hours in a large kettle,
changing the water once or twice.
peel off the rinds and pound them
well in a marble mortar, with two
pounds of fine sugar to one pound
of orange. then beat all together,
and cover the jam down in a pot.
orange jelly. grate the
rind of two seville and two china
oranges, and two lemons. squeeze
the juice of three of each, and strain
it; add a quarter of a pound of
lump sugar dissolved in a quarter of
a pint of water, and boil it till it
nearly candies. prepare a quart of
jelly, made of two ounces of isinglass;
add to it the syrup, and boil
it once up. strain off the jelly,
and let it stand to settle before it
is put into the mould.
orange juice. when the
fresh juice cannot be procured, a
very useful article for fevers may be
made in the following manner.
squeeze from the finest fruit, a pint
of juice strained through fine muslin.
simmer it gently with three
quarters of a pound of double-refined
sugar twenty minutes, and
when cold put it into small bottles.
orange marmalade. rasp
the oranges, cut out the pulp, then
boil the rinds very tender, and beat
them fine in a marble mortar. boil
three pounds of loaf sugar in a pint
of water, skim it, and add a pound
of the rind; boil it fast till the syrup
is very thick, but stir it carefully.
then add a pint of the pulp
and juice, the seeds having been removed,
and a pint of apple liquor;
boil it all gently about half an hour,
until it is well jellied, and put it
into small pots. lemon marmalade
may be made in the same way, and
both of them are very good and elegant
sweetmeats.
orange peel. scrape out
all the pulp, soak the peels in water,
and stir them every day. in a
week's time put them in fresh water,
and repeat it till all the bitterness
is extracted. boil the peels in fresh
water over a slow fire till they are
quite tender, and reduce the liquor
to a quantity sufficient to boil it to
a thick syrup. put the peels into
the syrup, simmer them gently, take
them out of the syrup, and let them
cool. lay them to dry in the sun,
and the peel will be nicely candied.
orange pudding. grate
the rind of a seville orange, put to
it six ounces of fresh butter, and six
or eight ounces of lump sugar pounded.
beat them all in a marble mortar,
and add at the same time the
whole of eight eggs well beaten and
strained. scrape a raw apple, and
mix it with the rest. put a paste
round the bottom and sides of the
dish, and over the orange mixture
lay cross bars of paste. half an
hour will bake it.—another. mix
two full spoonfuls of orange paste
with six eggs, four ounces of fine
sugar, and four ounces of warm butter.
put the whole into a shallow
dish, with a paste lining, and bake
it twenty minutes.—another. rather
more than two table-spoonfuls
of the orange paste, mixed with six
eggs, four ounces of sugar, and four
ounces of butter melted, will make
a good pudding, with a paste at the
bottom of the dish. twenty minutes
will bake it.—or, boil the rind of a
seville orange very soft, and beat
it up with the juice. then add half
a pound of butter, a quarter of a
pound of sugar, two grated biscuits,
and the yolks of six eggs. mix all
together, lay a puff paste round the
edge of the dish, and bake it half
an hour.
orange tart. squeeze, pulp,
and boil two seville oranges quite
tender. weigh them, add double
the quantity of sugar, and beat them
together to a paste. add the juice
and pulp of the fruit, and a little
bit of fresh butter the size of a walnut,
and beat all together. choose
a very shallow dish, line it with a[]
light puff-crust, lay the orange paste
in it, and ice it over. or line a tart
pan with a thin puff-paste, and put
into it orange marmalade made with
apple jelly. lay bars of paste, or
a croquant cover over, and bake it
in a moderate oven.—another.
squeeze some seville oranges into
a dish, grate off the outside rind,
throw the peel into water, and change
it often for two days. boil a saucepan
of water, put in the oranges,
and change the water three or four
times to take out the bitterness:
when they are quite tender, dry and
beat them fine in a mortar. take
their weight in double refined sugar,
boil it to a syrup, and skim it clean:
then put in the pulp, and boil it till
it is quite clear. put it cold into
the tarts, and the juice which was
squeezed out, and bake them in a
quick oven. lemon tarts are made
in the same way.
orange wine. to six gallons
of water put fifteen pounds of
soft sugar: before it boils, add the
whites of six eggs well beaten, and
take off the scum as it rises. when
cold, add the juice of fifty oranges,
and two thirds of the peels cut very
thin; and immerse a toast covered
with yeast. in a month after it has
been in the cask, add a pint of brandy,
and two quarts of rhenish wine.
it will be fit to bottle in three or
four months, but it should remain in
bottles for twelve months before it
is drunk.
oranges. if intended to be
kept for future use, the best way is
to dry and bake some clean sand;
and when it is cold, put it into a
vessel. place on it a layer of oranges
or lemons with the stalk end downwards,
so that they do not touch
each other, and cover them with
the sand two inches deep. this
will keep them in a good state of
preservation for several months.
another way is to freeze the fruit,
and keep them in an ice-house.
when used they are to be thawed in
cold water, and will be good at any
time of the year. if oranges or
lemons are designed to be used for
juice, they should first be pared to
preserve the peel dry. some should
be halved, and when squeezed, the
pulp cut out, and the outsides dried
for grating. if for boiling in any
liquid, the first way is the best.
oranges carved. with a
penknife cut on the rinds any shape
you please, then cut off a piece near
and round the stalk, and take all the
pulp out carefully with an apple
scoop. put the rinds into salt and
water two days, and change the water
daily. boil them an hour or
more in fresh salt and water, and
drain them quite dry. let them
stand a night in plain water, and
then another night in a thin syrup,
in which boil them the next day a
few minutes. this must be repeated
four days successively. then let
them stand six or seven weeks, observing
often whether they keep well;
otherwise the syrup must be boiled
again. then make a rich syrup for
the oranges.
oranges in jelly. cut a
hole in the stalk part, the size of a
shilling, and with a blunt knife
scrape out the pulp quite clear without
cutting the rind. tie each part
separately in muslin, and lay them
in spring water two days, changing
the water twice a day. in the last
water boil them over a slow fire till
they are quite tender. observe that
there is enough at first to allow for
wasting, as they must be kept covered
till the last. to every pound
of fruit, allow two pounds of double-refined
sugar, and one pint of water.
boil the two latter, with the
juice of the orange, till reduced to
a syrup. clarify it, skim it well,
and let it stand to be cold. then
boil the fruit in the syrup half an
hour; and if not clear, repeat it
daily till they are done.—lemons
are preserved in a similar way. pare
and core some green pippins, and[]
boil them in water till it is strongly
flavoured with them. the fruit
should not be broken, only gently
pressed with the back of a spoon,
and the water strained through a
jelly bag till it is quite clear. to
every pint of liquor put a pound of
double-refined sugar, the peel and
juice of a lemon, and boil the whole
to a strong syrup. drain off the
syrup from the fruit, and turning
each lemon with the hole upwards
in the jar, pour the apple jelly over
it. the bits cut out must undergo
the same process with the fruit,
and the whole covered down with
brandy paper.
oranges preserved. to
fill preserved oranges for a corner
dish, take a pound of naples biscuits,
some blanched almonds, the
yolks of four eggs beaten, four
ounces of butter warmed, and sugar
to taste. grate the biscuits, mix
them with the above, and some
orange-flower water. fill the preserved
oranges, and bake them in a
very slow oven. if to be frosted,
sift some fine sugar over them, as
soon as they are filled; otherwise
they should be wiped. or they may
be filled with custard, and then the
fruit need not be baked, but the
custard should be put in cold.
orangeade. squeeze out the
juice of an orange, pour boiling water
on a little of the peel, and cover
it close. boil water and sugar to
a thin syrup, and skim it. when
all are cold, mix the juice, the infusion,
and the syrup, with as much
more water as will make a rich sherbet.
strain the whole through a
jelly bag; or squeeze the juice and
strain it, and water and capillaire.
orchard. fruit trees, whether
in orchards, or espaliers, or
against walls, require attention, in
planting, pruning, or other management,
almost every month in the
year, to render them productive,
and to preserve the fruit in a good
state.—january. cut out dead
wood and irregular branches, clean
the stumps and boughs from the
moss with a hollow iron. repair
espaliers by fastening the stakes and
poles with nails and wire, and tying
the shoots down with twigs of osier.
put down some stakes by all the
new-planted trees. cut grafts to be
ready, and lay them in the earth
under a warm wall.—february.
most kinds of trees may be pruned
this month, though it is generally
better to do it in autumn; but whatever
was omitted at that season,
should be done now. the hardiest
kinds are to be pruned first; and
such as are more tender, at the latter
end of the month, when there
will be less danger of their suffering
in the wounded part from the frost.
transplant fruit trees to places
where they are wanted. open a
large hole, set the earth carefully
about the roots, and nail them at
once to the wall, or fasten them to
strong stakes. sow the kernels of
apples and pears, and the stones of
plums for stocks. endeavour to
keep off the birds that eat the buds
of fruit trees at this season of the
year.—march. the grafts which
were cut off early and laid in the
ground, are now to be brought into
use; the earliest kinds first, and
the apples last of all. when this
is done, take off the heads of the
stocks that were inoculated the preceding
year. a hand's breadth of
the head should be left, for tying
the bud securely to it, and that the
sap may rise more freely for its nourishment.
the fruit trees that were
planted in october should also be
headed, and cut down to about four
eyes, that the sap may flow more
freely.—april. examine the fruit
trees against the walls and espaliers,
take off all the shoots that project
in front, and train such as rise kindly.
thin apricots upon the trees,
for there are usually more than can
ripen; and the sooner this is done,
the better will the rest succeed.[]
water new-planted trees, plant the
vine cuttings, and inspect the grown
ones. nip off improper shoots;
and when two rise from the same eye,
take off the weakest of them. weed
strawberry beds, cut off the strings,
stir the earth between them, and
water them once in two or three
days. dig up the borders near the
fruit trees, and never plant any large
kind of flowers or vegetables upon
them. any thing planted or sown
near the trees, has a tendency to
impoverish the fruit.—may. if any
fresh shoots have sprouted upon the
fruit trees, in espaliers, or against
walls, take them off. train the
proper ones to the walls or poles,
at due distances, and in a regular
manner. look over vines, and stop
every shoot that has fruit upon it,
to three eyes beyond the fruit. then
train the branches regularly to the
wall, and let such as are designed
for the next year's fruiting grow
some time longer, as their leaves
will afford a suitable shade to the
fruit. water the trees newly planted,
keep the borders about the old
ones clear, and pick off the snails
and other vermin.—june. renew
the operation of removing from wall
trees and espaliers, all the shoots
that project in front. train proper
branches to their situations, where
they are wanted. once more thin
the wall fruit: leave the nectarines
four inches apart, and the peaches
five, but none nearer: the fruit will
be finer, and the next year the tree
will be stronger, if this precaution
be adopted. inoculate the apricots,
and choose for this purpose a cloudy
evening. water trees lately planted,
and pick up snails and vermin.—july.
inoculate peaches and
nectarines, and take off all projecting
shoots in espaliers and wall fruit-trees.
hang phials of honey and water
upon fruit-trees, to protect them
from the depredations of insects,
and look carefully for snails, which
also will destroy the fruit. keep the
borders clear from weeds, and stir
the earth about the roots of the trees;
this will hasten the ripening of the
fruit. examine the fruit trees that
were grafted and budded the last
season, to see that there are no
shoots from the stocks. whenever
they rise, take them off, or they
will deprive the intended growth of
its nourishment. attend to the
trees lately planted, and water them
often; and whatever good shoots
they make, fasten them to the wall
or espalier. repeat the care of the
vines, take off improper or irregular
shoots, and nail up the loose branches.
let no weeds rise in the ground
about them, for they will exhaust
the nourishment, and impoverish
the fruit.—august. watch the
fruit on the wall trees, and keep off
the devourers, of which there will
be numberless kinds swarming about
them during this month. send away
the birds, pick up snails, and hang
bottles of sweet water for flies and
wasps. fasten loose branches, and
gather the fruit carefully as it ripens.
examine the vines all round, and
remove those trailing branches which
are produced so luxuriantly at this
season of the year. suffer not the
fruit to be shaded by loose and unprofitable
branches, and keep the
ground clear of weeds, which otherwise
will impoverish the fruit.—september.
the fruit must now
be gathered carefully every day, and
the best time for this purpose is an
hour after sun-rise: such as is gathered
in the middle of the day is
always flabby and inferior. the
fruit should afterwards be laid in a
cool place till wanted. grapes as
they begin to ripen will be in continual
danger from the birds, if not properly
watched and guarded. transplant
gooseberries and currants, and
plant strawberries and raspberries:
they will then be rooted before winter,
and flourish the succeeding season.—october.
it is a useful
practice to prime the peach and[]
nectarine trees, and also the vines,
as it invigorates the buds in the
spring of the year. cut grapes for
preserving, with a joint of the vine
to each bunch. for winter keeping,
gather fruits as they ripen.
transplant all garden trees for
flowering, prune currant bushes, and
preserve the stones of the fruit for
sowing.—november. stake up
all trees planted for standards, or
the winds will rock them at the
bottom, and the frost will be let in
and destroy them. throw a good
quantity of peas straw about them,
and lay on it some brick bats or
pebbles to keep it fast: this will
mellow the ground, and keep the
frost from the roots. continue to
prune wall fruit-trees, and prune
also at this time the apple and pear
kinds. pull off the late fruit of
figs, or it will decay the branches.—december.
prepare for planting
trees where they will be wanted in
the spring, by digging the ground
deep and turning it well, in the place
intended for planting. scatter over
the borders some fresh mould and
rotted dung, and in a mild day dig
it in with a three-pronged fork.
look over the orchard trees, and
cut away superfluous wood and dead
branches. let the boughs and shoots
stand clear of each other, that the
air may pass between, and the fruit
will be better flavoured. this management
is required for old trees:
those that are newly planted are to
be preserved by covering the ground
about their roots.
orgeat. boil a quart of new
milk with a stick of cinnamon, sweeten
it to taste, and let it cool. then
pour it gradually over three ounces
of almonds, and twenty bitter almonds
that have been blanched and
beaten to a paste, with a little water
to prevent oiling. boil all together,
and stir it till cold, then
add half a glass of brandy.—another
way. blanch and pound three
quarters of a pound of almonds, and
thirty bitter ones, with a spoonful
of water. stir in by degrees two
pints of water, and three pints of
milk, and strain the whole through
a cloth. dissolve half a pound of
fine sugar in a pint of water, boil
and skim it well; mix it with the
other, adding two spoonfuls of
orange-flower water, and a teacupful
of the best brandy.
orgeat for the sick. beat
two ounces of almonds with a tea-spoonful
of orange-flower water,
and a bitter almond or two; then
pour a quart of milk and water to
the paste. sweeten with sugar,
or capillaire. this is a fine drink
for those who feel a weakness in the
chest. in the gout also it is highly
useful, and with the addition of half
an ounce of gum arabic, it has been
found to allay the painfulness of the
attendant heat. half a glass of
brandy may be added, if thought
too cooling in the latter complaint,
and the glass of orgeat may be put
into a basin of warm water.
ortolans. pick and singe,
but do not draw them. tie them
on a bird spit, and roast them.
some persons like slices of bacon
tied between them, but the taste of
it spoils the flavour of the ortolan.
cover them with crumbs of bread.
ox cheek. soak half a head
three hours, and clean it in plenty
of water. take off all the meat,
and put it into a stewpan with an
onion, a sprig of sweet herbs, pepper,
salt, and allspice. lay the
bones on the top, pour on two or
three quarts of water, and close it
down. let it stand eight or ten
hours in a slow oven, or simmer it
on a hot hearth. when tender skim
off the fat, and put in celery, or any
other vegetable. slices of fried
onion may be put into it a little before
it is taken from the fire.
ox cheek soup. break the
bones of the cheek, wash it clean,
put it into a stewpan, with a piece
of butter at the bottom. add half[]
a pound of lean ham sliced, one
parsnip, two carrots, three onions,
four heads of celery, cut small, and
three blades of mace. set it over
a slow fire for a quarter of an hour,
then add a gallon of water, and simmer
it gently till reduced to half the
quantity. if intended as soup only,
strain it off, and put in a head of
sliced celery, with a little browning,
to give it a fine colour. warm two
ounces of vermicelli and put into it;
boil it ten minutes, and pour it into
a tureen, with the crust of a french
roll. if to be used as stew, take
up the cheek as whole as possible;
put in a boiled carrot cut in small
pieces, a slice of toasted bread, and
some cayenne pepper. strain the
soup through a hair sieve upon the
meat, and serve it up.
ox feet. these are very nutricious,
in whatever way they are
dressed. if to be eaten warm, boil
them, and serve them up in a napkin.
melted butter for sauce, with
mustard, and a large spoonful of
vinegar. or broil them very tender,
and serve them as a brown fricassee.
the liquor will do to make jelly
sweet or relishing, and likewise to
give richness to soups or gravies.
they may also be fried, after being
cut into four parts, dipped in egg,
and properly floured. fried onions
may be served round the dish, with
sauce as above. or they may be
baked for mock turtle. if to be
eaten cold, they only require mustard,
pepper, and vinegar.—another
way. extract the bones from
the feet, and boil the meat quite
tender; then put it into a fryingpan
with a little butter. after a
few minutes, add some chopped
mint and parsley, the yolks of two
eggs beat up fine, half a pint of
gravy, the juice of a lemon, and a
little salt and nutmeg. put the
meat into a dish, and pour the sauce
over it.
ox feet jelly. take a heel
that has been only scalded, not
boiled, slit it in two, and remove
the fat from between the claws.
simmer it gently for eight hours in
a quart of water, till reduced to a
pint and half, and skim it clean
while it is doing. this strong jelly
is useful in making calves' feet jelly,
or may be added to mock turtle,
and other soups.
ox palates. boil them tender,
blanch and scrape them. rub
them with pepper, salt, and bread,
and fry them brown on both sides.
pour off the fat, put beef or mutton
gravy into the stewpan for sauce,
with an anchovy, a little lemon
juice, grated nutmeg and salt. thicken
it with butter rolled in flour:
when these have simmered a quarter
of an hour, dish them up, and
garnish with slices of lemon.
oxford dumplins. mix together
two ounces of grated bread,
four ounces of currants, the same of
shred suet, a bit of lump sugar, a
little powdered pimento, and plenty
of grated lemon peel. add two eggs
and a little milk; then divide the
whole into five dumplins, and fry
them of a fine yellow brown. made
with half the quantity of flour, instead
of bread, they are very excellent.
serve them up with sweet
sauce.
oxford sausages. chop
a pound and a half of pork, and the
same of veal, cleared of skin and
sinews. add three quarters of a
pound of beef suet, mince and mix
them together. steep the crumb
of a penny loaf in water, and mix it
with the meat; add also a little
dried sage, pepper and salt.
oyster loaves. open a
quart of fresh oysters, wash and
stew them in their own liquor, with
two anchovies, a bunch of sweet
herbs, a blade of mace, and a bit of
lemon peel. drain off the liquor,
boil up a quarter of a pound of butter
till it turns brown; add half a
spoonful of flour, and boil it up
again. put in some of the oyster[]
liquor, with a little gravy, white
wine, mace, nutmeg, a few cloves,
and a small piece of shalot. stew
all together till it becomes as thick
as cream; then put in the oysters,
and stew them a few minutes. fry
some bread crumbs in butter or
sweet dripping till they are crisp
and brown, drain them well, put in
the oysters, and dish them up.—another.
open the oysters, and
save the liquor; wash them in it,
and strain it through a sieve. put
a little of the liquor into a tosser,
with a bit of butter and flour, white
pepper, a scrape of nutmeg, and a
little cream. stew the oysters in
the liquor, cut them into dice, and
then put them into rolls sold for the
purpose.
oyster patties. put a fine
puff-crust into small pattipans, and
cover with paste, with a bit of bread
in each. while they are baking,
take off the beard of the oysters,
cut the oysters small, put them in a
small tosser, with a dust of grated
nutmeg, white pepper and salt, a
taste of lemon peel, shred as fine as
possible, a spoonful of cream, and
a little of the oyster liquor. simmer
them together a few minutes, and
fill the pattipans as soon as they
are baked, first taking out the bread.
a bread crust should be put into all
patties, to keep them hollow while
baking.
oyster pie. open the oysters,
take off the beards, parboil
the oysters, and strain off the liquor.
parboil some sweetbreads, cut them
in slices, place them in layers with
the oysters, and season very lightly
with salt, pepper and mace. then
add half a teacup of liquor, and the
same of gravy. bake in a slow oven;
and before the pie is sent to table,
put in a teacup of cream, a little
more oyster liquor, and a cup of
white gravy, all warmed together,
but not boiled.
oyster sauce. save the liquor
in opening the oysters, boil it
with the beards, a bit of mace and
lemon peel. in the mean time,
throw the oysters into cold water,
and drain it off. strain the liquor,
put it into a saucepan with the oysters,
and as much butter, mixed
with a little milk, as will make sauce
enough; but first rub a little flour
with it. set them over the fire, and
keep stirring all the time. when
the butter has boiled once or twice,
take them off, and keep the saucepan
near the fire, but not on it; for
if done too much, the oysters will
be hard. squeeze in a little lemon
juice, and serve it up. if for company,
a little cream is a great improvement.
observe, the oysters
will thin the sauce, and therefore
allow butter accordingly.
oyster soup. beat the yolks
of ten hard eggs, and the hard part
of two quarts of oysters, in a mortar,
and put them to two quarts of
fish stock. simmer all together for
half an hour, and strain it off. having
cleared the oysters of the beards,
and washed them well, put them into
the soup, and let it simmer five
minutes. beat up the yolks of six
raw eggs, and add them to the soup.
stir it all well together one way, by
the side of the fire, till it is thick and
smooth, but do not let it boil. serve
up all together.
oyster mouth soup. make
a rich mutton broth, with two large
onions, three blades of mace, and a
little black pepper. when strained,
pour it on a hundred and fifty oysters,
without the beards, and a bit
of butter rolled in flour. simmer it
gently a quarter of an hour, and
serve up the soup.
oysters. of the several kinds
of oysters, the pyfleet, colchester,
and milford, are much the best.
the native milton are fine, being
white and fleshy; but others may
be made to possess both these qualities
in some degree, by proper
feeding. colchester oysters come
to market early in august, the[]
milton in october, and are in the
highest perfection about christmas,
but continue in season till the middle
of may. when alive and good,
the shell closes on the knife; but if
an oyster opens its mouth, it will
soon be good for nothing. oysters
should be eaten the minute they are
opened, with their own liquor in the
under shell, or the delicious flavour
will be lost. the rock oyster is the
largest, but if eaten raw it tastes
coarse and brackish, but may be improved
by feeding. in order to do this,
cover the oysters with clean water,
and allow a pint of salt to about two
gallons; this will cleanse them from
the mud and sand contracted in the
bed. after they have lain twelve
hours, change it for fresh salt and
water; and in twelve hours more
they will be fit to eat, and will continue
in a good state for two or three
days. at the time of high water in
the place from whence they were
taken, they will open their shells, in
expectation of receiving their usual
food. the real colchester or pyfleet
barrelled oysters, that are packed
at the beds, are better without
being put into water; they are carefully
and tightly packed, and must
not be disturbed till wanted for the
table. in temperate weather these
will keep good for a week or ten
days. to preserve barrelled oysters
however, the best way is to remove
the upper hoop, so that the head
may fall down upon the oysters, and
then to place a weight upon it. this
will compress the oysters, keep in
the liquor, and preserve them for
several days.
pain in the ear. this complaint
is sometimes so prevalent as
to resemble an epidemic, particularly
amongst children. the most effectual
remedy yet discovered has
been a clove of garlic, steeped for
a few minutes in warm sallad oil,
and put into the ear, rolled up in
muslin or fine linen. when the garlic
has accomplished its object, and
is removed from the ear, it should
be replaced with cotton, to prevent
the patient taking cold.
paint. painted doors and windows
may be made to look well for
a considerable time, if properly cleaned.
a cloth should never be used,
for it leaves some lint behind; but
take off the dust with a painter's
brush, or a pair of bellows. when
the painting is soiled or stained, dip
a sponge or a bit of flannel in soda
water, wash it off quickly, and dry
it immediately, or the strength of
the soda will eat off the colour.
when wainscot requires scouring, it
should be done from the top downwards,
and the soda be prevented
from running on the uncleaned part
as much as possible, or marks will
appear after the whole is finished.
one person should dry the board
with old linen, as fast as the other
has scoured off the dirt, and washed
away the soda.
paint for iron. for preserving
palisadoes and other kinds
of iron work exposed to the weather,
heat some common litharge in a
shovel over the fire. then scatter
over it a small quantity of sulphur,
and grind it in oil. this lead will
reduce it to a good lead colour, which
will dry very quickly, get remarkably
hard, and resist the weather
better than any other common paint.
paintings. oil paintings frequently
become smoked or dirty,
and in order to their being properly
cleaned, require to be treated with[]
the greatest care. dissolve a little
common salt in some stale urine,
dip a woollen cloth in the liquid, and
rub the paintings over with it till
they are quite clean. then wash
them with a sponge and clean water,
dry them gradually, and rub them
over with a clean cloth.
paling preserved. the
following cheap and valuable composition
will preserve all sorts of
wood work exposed to the vicissitudes
of the weather. take some
well-burnt lime, and expose it to the
air till it falls to powder, without
putting any water to it, and mix with
it two thirds of wood ashes, and one
third of fine sand. sift the whole
through a fine sieve, and work it up
with linseed oil to the consistence
of common paint, taking care to
grind it fine, and mix it well together.
the composition may be improved
by the addition of an equal
quantity of coal tar with the linseed
oil; and two coats of it laid on any
kind of weather boards, will be found
superior to any kind of paint used
for that purpose.
persons of a full habit may find relief
in bleeding; but where it is accompanied
with nervous affections,
as is generally the case, bleeding
must by all means be avoided. frequent
bathing the feet in warm water,
a stimulating plaster applied to
the left side, and gentle exercise,
are the most proper.
palsy. the luxurious, the sedentary,
and those who have suffered
great anxiety and distress of mind,
are the most subject to this disorder,
which generally attacks the left
side, and is attended with numbness
and drowsiness. the parts affected
ought to be frequently rubbed with
a flesh brush, or with the hand.
blisters, warm plasters, volatile liniments,
and electricity should likewise
be employed. the following
electuary is also recommended. mix
an ounce of flour of mustard, and
an ounce of the conserve of roses,
in some syrup of ginger; and take
a tea-spoonful of it three or four
times a day.
panada. to make panada in
five minutes, set a little water on the
fire with a glass of white wine, some
sugar, and a scrape of nutmeg and
lemon peel, grating meanwhile some
crumbs of bread. the moment the
mixture boils up, keeping it still on
the fire, put in the crumbs, and let
it boil as fast as it can. when of a
proper thickness just to drink, take
it off.—another way. make the
panada as above, but instead of a
glass of wine, put in a tea-spoonful
of rum, a little butter and sugar.
this makes a very pleasant article
for the sick.—another. put into
the water a bit of lemon peel, and
mix in the crumbs: when nearly
boiled enough, add some lemon or
orange syrup. observe to boil all
the ingredients; for if any be added
after, the panada will break, and
not turn to jelly.
pancakes. make a light batter
of eggs, flour, and milk. fry it
in a small pan, in hot dripping or
lard. salt, nutmeg, or ginger, may
be added. sugar and lemon should
be served, to eat with them. when
eggs are very scarce, the batter may
be made of flour and small beer,
with the addition of a little ginger;
or clean snow, with flour, and a very
little milk, will serve instead of egg.
fine pancakes, fried without butter
or lard, are made as follows. beat
six fresh eggs extremely well, strain
and mix them with a pint of cream,
four ounces of sugar, a glass of
wine, half a nutmeg grated, and as
much flour as will make it almost
as thick as ordinary pancake batter,
but not quite. heat the fryingpan
tolerably hot, wipe it with a clean
cloth, and pour in the batter so as
to make the pancakes thin.—new
england pancakes are made of a
pint of cream, mixed with five spoonfuls
of fine flour, seven yolks and[]
four whites of eggs, and a very little
salt. they are then fried very thin
in fresh butter, and sent to table
six or eight at once, with sugar and
cinnamon strewed between them.—another
way to make cream pancakes.
stir a pint of cream gradually
into three spoonfuls of flour,
and beat them very smooth. add
to this six eggs, half a pound of
melted butter, and a little sugar.
these pancakes will fry from their
own richness, without either butter
or lard. run the batter over the
pan as thin as possible, and when
the pancakes are just coloured they
are done enough.
pap bread. to prepare a light
nourishing food for young children,
pour scalding water on some thin
slices of good white bread, and let
it stand uncovered till it cools.
then drain off the water, bruise the
bread fine, and mix it with as much
new milk as will make a pap of a
moderate thickness. it will be warm
enough for use, without setting it
on the fire. it is common to add
sugar, but the pap is better without
it, as is almost all food intended for
children; and the taste will not require
it, till habit makes it familiar.
paper. all sorts of paper improve
by keeping, if laid in a dry
place, and preserved from mould
and damp. it is bought much
cheaper by the ream, than by the
quire. the expense of this article
is chiefly occasioned by the enormous
duty laid upon it, and the necessity
of importing foreign rags to
supply the consumption. if more
care were taken in families generally,
to preserve the rags and cuttings
of linen from being wasted,
there would be less need of foreign
imports, and paper might be manufactured
a little cheaper.
paper hangings. to clean
these properly, first blow off the
dust with the bellows, and then
wipe the paper downwards in the
slightest manner with the crumb of
a stale white loaf. do not cross the
paper, nor go upwards, but begin at
the top, and the dirt of the paper
and the crumbs will fall together.
observe not to wipe more than half
a yard at a stroke, and after doing
all the upper part, go round again,
beginning a little above where you
left off. if it be not done very lightly,
the dirt will adhere to the paper;
but if properly attended to, the paper
will look fresh and new.
paper paste. to make a
strong paste for paper, take two
large spoonfuls of fine flour, and as
much pounded rosin as will lie upon
a shilling. mix them up with as
much strong beer as will make the
paste of a due consistence, and boil
it half an hour. it is best used
cold.
parsley. to preserve parsley
through the winter, gather some fine
fresh sprigs in may, june, or july.
pick and wash them clean, set on a
stewpan half full of water, put a little
salt in it, boil and scum it clean.
then add the parsley, let it boil for
two minutes, and take it out and lay
it on a sieve before the fire, that it
may be dried as quick as possible.
put it by in a tin box, and keep it
in a dry place. when wanted, lay
it in a basin, and cover it with warm
water for a few minutes before you
use it.
parsley and butter. wash
some parsley very clean, and pick
it carefully leaf by leaf. put a tea-spoonful
of salt into half a pint of
boiling water, boil the parsley in it
about ten minutes, drain it on a
sieve, mince it quite fine, and then,
bruise it to a pulp. put it into a
sauce boat, and mix with it by degrees
about half a pint of good
melted butter, only do not put so
much flour to it, as the parsley will
be sure to add to its thickness.
parsley and butter should not be
poured over boiled dishes, but be
sent up in a boat. the delicacy of
this elegant and innocent relish,[]
depends upon the parsley being
minced very fine. with the addition
of a slice of lemon cut into dice, a
little allspice and vinegar, it is made
into dutch sauce.
parsley pie. lay a fowl, or
a few bones of the scrag of veal,
seasoned, into a dish. scald a cullenderful
of picked parsley in milk;
season it, and add it to the fowl or
meat, with a tea-cupful of any sort
of good broth or gravy. when baked,
pour into it a quarter of a pint of
cream scalded, with a little bit of
butter and flour. shake it round,
and mix it with the gravy in the dish.
lettuces, white mustard leaves, or
spinach, well scalded, may be added
to the parsley.
parsley sauce. when no
parsley leaves are to be had, tie up
a little parsley seed in a piece of
clean muslin, and boil it in water
ten minutes. use this water to melt
the butter, and throw into it a little
boiled spinach minced, to look like
parsley.
parsnips. carrots and parsnips,
when laid up for the winter, should
have the tops cut off close, be cleared
of the rough earth, and kept in a
dry place. lay a bed of dry sand
on the floor, two or three inches
thick, put the roots upon it close
together, with the top of one to the
bottom of the next, and so on. cover
the first layer with sand two inches
thick, and then place another layer
of roots, and go on thus till the whole
store are laid up. cover the heap
with dry straw, laid on tolerably
thick. beet roots, salsify, hamburgh
parsley roots, horseradish,
and turnips, should all be laid up in
the same manner, as a supply against
frosty weather, when they cannot be
got out of the ground.
parsnips boiled. these require
to be done very tender, and
may be served whole with melted
butter, or beaten smooth in a bowl,
warmed up with a little cream, butter,
flour, and salt. parsnips are
highly nutricious, and make an agreeable
sauce to salt fish.
parsnips fricasseed. boil
them in milk till they are soft. then
cut them lengthways into bits, two
or three inches long, and simmer
them in a white sauce, made of two
spoonfuls of broth. add a bit of
mace, half a cupful of cream, a little
flour and butter, pepper and salt.
parsnip wine. to twelve
pounds of sliced parsnips, add four
gallons of water, and boil them till
they become soft. squeeze the liquor
well out of them, run it through
a sieve, and add to every gallon three
pounds of lump sugar. boil the
whole three quarters of an hour, and
when it is nearly cold, add a little
yeast. let it stand in a tub for ten
days, stirring it from the bottom
every day, and then put it into a
cask for twelve months. as it works
over, fill it up every day.
partridge boiled. this
species of game is in season in the
autumn. if the birds be young, the
bill is of a dark colour, and the legs
inclined to yellow. when fresh and
good, the vent will be firm; but when
stale, this part will look greenish.
boiled partridges require to be
trussed the same as chickens: from
twenty to twenty-five minutes will
do them sufficiently. serve them
up with either white or brown mushroom
sauce, or with rice stewed in
gravy, made pretty thick, and seasoned
with pepper and salt. pour
the sauce over them, or serve them
up with celery sauce. a boiled
pheasant is dressed in the same manner,
allowing three quarters of an
hour for the cooking.
partridge pie. pick and
singe four partridges, cut off the legs
at the knee, season with pepper, salt,
chopped parsley, thyme, and mushrooms.
lay a veal steak and a slice
of ham at the bottom of the dish,
put in the partridge, and half a pint
of good broth. lay puff paste on
the edge of the dish, and cover with[]
the same; brush it over with egg,
and bake it an hour.
partridge soup. skin two
old partridges, and cut them into
pieces, with three or four slices of
ham, a stick of celery, and three
large onions sliced. fry them all
in butter till brown, but take care
not to burn them. then put them
into a stewpan, with five pints of
boiling water, a few peppercorns, a
shank or two of mutton, and a little
salt. stew it gently two hours,
strain it through a sieve, and put it
again into a stewpan, with some
stewed celery and fried bread. when
it is near boiling, skim it, pour it
into a tureen, and send it up hot.
paste puddings. make a
paste of butter and flour, roll it out
thin, and spread any kind of jam,
or currants over it, with some suet
chopped fine. roll it up together,
close the paste at both ends, and
boil it in a cloth.
pastry. an adept in pastry
never leaves any part of it adhering
to the board or dish, used in making
it. it is best when rolled on marble,
or a very large slate. in very
hot weather, the butter should be
put into cold water to make it as
firm as possible; and if made early
in the morning, and preserved from
the air until it is to be baked, the
pastry will be found much better.
an expert hand will use much less
butter and produce lighter crust
than others. good salt butter well
washed, will make a fine flaky crust.
when preserved fruits are used in
pastry, they should not be baked
long; and those that have been done
with their full proportion of sugar,
require no baking at all. the crust
should be baked in a tin shape, and
the fruit be added afterwards; or it
may be put into a small dish or tart
pans, and the covers be baked on a
tin cut out into any form.
patties. slice some chicken,
turkey, or veal, with dressed ham,
or sirloin of beef. add some parsley,
thyme, and lemon peel, chopped
very fine. pound all together in a
mortar, and season with salt and
white pepper. line the pattipans
with puff paste, fill them with meat,
lay on the paste, close the edges,
cut the paste round, brush it over
with egg, and bake the patties twenty
minutes.
pavements. for cleaning
stone stairs, and hall pavements,
boil together half a pint each of size
and stone-blue water, with two table-spoonfuls
of whiting, and two
cakes of pipe-clay, in about two
quarts of water.—wash the stones
over with a flannel slightly wetted
in this mixture; and when dry, rub
them with a flannel and brush.
payment of rent. rent
due for tenements let from year to
year, is commonly paid on the four
quarter days; and when the payments
are regularly made at the
quarter, the tenant cannot be deprived
of possession at any other
time than at the end of a complete
year from the commencement of his
tenancy. if therefore he took possession
at midsummer, he must quit
at midsummer, and notice thereof
must be sent at or before the preceding
christmas. a similar notice
is also required from the tenant
to the landlord, when it is intended
to leave the premises.—every quarter's
rent is deemed a separate debt,
for which the landlord can bring a
separate action, or distress for nonpayment.
the landlord himself is
the proper person to demand rent:
if he employs another person, he
must be duly authorised by power of
attorney, clearly specifying the person
from whom, and the premises
for which the rent is due: or the
demand will be insufficient, if the
tenant should be inclined to evade
payment. the following is the form
of a receipt for rent:—'received of
r. c. february , , the sum[]
of ten pounds twelve shillings for a
quarter's rent, due at christmas last.'
pea fowl. these require to
be fed the same as turkeys. they
are generally so shy, that they are
seldom to be found for some days after
hatching; and it is very wrong
to pursue them, as many ignorant
people do, under the idea of bringing
them home. it only causes the
hen to carry the young ones through
dangerous places, and by hurrying
she is apt to tread upon them. the
cock bird kills all the young chickens
he can get at, by one blow on
the centre of the head with his bill,
and he does the same by his own
brood, before the feathers of the
crown come out. nature therefore
directs the hen to hide and keep
them out of his way, till the feathers
rise.
pea powder. pound together
in a marble mortar half an ounce
each of dried mint and sage, a dram
of celery seed, and a quarter of a
dram of cayenne, and rub them
through a fine sieve. this gives a
very savoury relish to pea soup,
and to water gruel. a dram of allspice,
or black pepper, may be
pounded with the above, as an addition,
or instead of the cayenne.
peach wine. take peaches,
apricots, and nectarines, when they
are full of juice, pare them, and
take out the stones. then slice
them thin, pour over them from one
to two gallons of water, and a quart
of white wine. simmer the whole
gently for a considerable time, till
the sliced fruit becomes soft. pour
off the liquid part into another vessel,
containing more peaches that
have been sliced but not heated;
let them stand for twelve hours,
then pour out the liquid part, and
press what remains through a fine
hair bag. let the whole be now
put into a cask to ferment, and add
a pound and a half of loaf sugar to
each gallon. boil an ounce of
beaten cloves in a quart of white
wine, and put it into the cask; the
morella wine will have a delicious
flavour. wine may be made of
apricots by only bruising, and pouring
the hot water upon them: this
wine does not require so much
sweetening. to give it a curious
flavour, boil an ounce of mace, and
half an ounce of nutmegs, in a quart
of white wine; and when the wine
is fermenting, pour the liquid in
hot. in about twenty days or a
month, these wines will be fit for
bottling.
cleanse a pound of pearl barley,
and put to it three quarts of milk,
half a pound of sugar, and a grated
nutmeg. bake it in a deep pan,
take it out of the oven, and beat up
six eggs with it. then butter a
dish, pour in the pudding, and bake
it again an hour.
pearls. to make artificial
pearls, take the blay or bleak fish,
which is very common in the rivers
near london, and scrape off the fine
silvery scales from the belly. wash
and rub them in water; let the water
settle, and a sediment will be
found of an oily consistence. a little
of this is to be dropped into a
hollow glass bead of a bluish tint,
and shaken about, so as to cover all
the internal surface. after this the
bead is filled up with melted white
wax, to give it weight and solidity.
pears. large ones, when intended
to be kept, should be tied
and hung up by the stalk.
peas. young green peas, well
dressed, are one of the greatest delicacies
of the vegetable kingdom.
they must be quite young; it is
equally indispensable that they be
fresh gathered, and cooked as soon
as they are shelled, for they soon
lose both their colour and sweetness.
of course they should never
be purchased ready shelled. to[]
have them in perfection, they must
be gathered the same day that they
are dressed, and be put on to boil
within half an hour after they are
shelled. as large and small peas
cannot be boiled together, the small
ones should be separated from the
rest, by being passed through a riddle
or coarse sieve. for a peck of young
peas, which will not be more than
sufficient for two or three persons,
after they are shelled, set on a
saucepan with a gallon of water.
when it boils, put in the peas with
a table-spoonful of salt. skim it
well, keep them quickly boiling from
twenty to thirty minutes, according
to their age and size. to judge
whether they are done enough, take
some out with a spoon and taste them,
but be careful not to boil them beyond
the point of perfection. when
slightly indented, and done enough,
drain them on a hair sieve. put
them into a pie dish, and lay some
small bits of butter on the peas; put
another dish over them, and turn
them over and over, in order to diffuse
the butter equally among them.
or send them to table plain from the
saucepan, with melted butter in a
sauce tureen. garnish the dish with
a few sprigs of mint, boiled by themselves.
peas and bacon. cut a
piece of nice streaked bacon, lay it
in water to take out some of the salt,
and boil it with some dried peas, in
a little water. add two carrots or
parsnips, two onions, and a bunch
of sweet herbs. when the peas are
done enough, pulp them through a
cullender or sieve, and serve them
over the bacon.
peas cultivated. instead
of sowing peas in straight rows, they
should be formed into circles of three
or four feet diameter, with a space
of two feet between each circle. by
this means they will blossom nearer
the ground, than when enclosed in
long rows, and will ripen much sooner.
or if set in straight rows, a bed
of ten or twelve feet wide should be
left between, for onions and carrots,
or any crops which do not grow tall.
the peas will not be drawn up so
much, but will grow stronger, and
be more productive. scarlet beans
should be treated in the same manner.
peas and pork. two pounds
of the belly part of pickled pork will
make very good broth for peas soup,
if the pork be not too salt. if it has
been in salt several days, it must be
laid in water the night before it is
used. put on three quarts of soft
water, or liquor in which meat has
been boiled, with a quart of peas,
and let it boil gently for two hours.
then put in the pork, and let it simmer
for an hour or more, till it is
quite tender. when done, wash the
pork clean in hot water, send it up
in a dish, or cut into small pieces
and put with the soup into the tureen.
peas porridge. boil the
peas, and pulp them through a cullender.
heat them up in a saucepan
with some butter, chopped parsley
and chives, and season with pepper
and salt.
peas pudding. soak the
peas an hour or two before they are
boiled; and when nearly done, beat
them up with salt and pepper, an
egg, and a bit of butter. tie it up
in a cloth, and boil it half an hour.
peas soup. save the liquor
of boiled pork or beef: if too salt,
dilute it with water, or use fresh water
only, adding the bones of roast
beef, a ham or gammon bone, or
an anchovy or two. simmer these
with some good whole or split peas;
the smaller the quantity of water at
first the better. continue to simmer
till the peas will pulp through
a cullender; then set on the pulp to
stew, with more of the liquor that
boiled the peas, two carrots, a turnip,
a leek, and a stick of chopped
celery, till all is quite tender. the
last requires less time, an hour will[]
do it. when ready, put into a tureen
some fried bread cut into dice,
dried mint rubbed fine, pepper and
salt if needed, and pour in the soup.
when there is plenty of vegetables,
no meat is necessary; but if meat
be preferred, a pig's foot or ham
bone may be boiled with the peas,
which is called the stock. more
butter than is above mentioned will
be necessary, if the soup is required
to be very rich.
pencil drawings. to prevent
chalk or pencil drawings from
rubbing out, it is only necessary to
lay them on the surface of some
skim milk, free from cream and
grease; and then taking off the
drawing expeditiously, and hanging
it up by one corner to dry. a thin
wash of isinglass will also answer
the same purpose.
pepper pot. to three quarts
of water, put any approved vegetables;
in summer, peas, lettuce,
spinach, and two or three onions;
in winter, carrot, turnip, onions, and
celery. cut them very small, and
stew them with two pounds of neck
of mutton, and a pound of pickled
pork. half an hour before serving,
clear a lobster or crab from the
shell, and put it into the stew, adding
a little salt and cayenne. some
people choose very small suet dumplings,
boiled in the above, or fowl
may be used instead of mutton.
a pepper pot may indeed be made
of various things, and is understood
to consist of a proper mixture of
fish, flesh, fowl, vegetables, and
pulse. a small quantity of rice
should be boiled with the whole.
peppermint drops. pound
and sift four ounces of double-refined
sugar, and beat it with the
whites of two eggs till perfectly
smooth. then add sixty drops of
oil of peppermint; beat it well,
drop it on white paper, and dry it
at a distance from the fire.
perch. when of a good size,
as in holland, they are a remarkably
fine fresh-water fish, though
not so delicate as carp or tench.
clean them carefully, and if to be
boiled, put them into a fish-kettle,
with as much cold spring water as
will cover them, and add a handful
of salt. set them on a quick fire
till they boil, and then place them
on one side to boil gently for about
ten minutes, according to their size.
if to be fried, wipe them on a dry
cloth, after they have been well
cleaned and washed, and flour them
lightly all over. fry them about ten
minutes in hot lard or dripping, lay
them on a hair sieve to drain, and
send them up on a hot dish. garnish
with sprigs of green parsley,
and serve them with anchovy sauce.
perfumery. oil of lavender
and other essences are frequently
adulterated with a mixture of the
oil of turpentine, which may be discovered
by dipping a piece of paper
or rag into the oil to be tried,
and holding it to the fire. the fine
scented oil will quickly evaporate,
and leave the smell of the turpentine
distinguishable, if the essence
has been adulterated with this ingredient.
permanent ink. this useful
article for marking linen is composed
of nitrate of silver, or lunar
caustic, and the tincture or infusion
of galls; in the proportion of one
dram of the former in a dry state,
to two drams of the latter. the
linen, cotton, or other fabric, must
be first wetted with the following
liquid; namely, an ounce of the
salt of tartar, dissolved in an ounce
and a half of water; and must be
perfectly dry before any attempt is
made to write upon it.
pettitoes. boil them very
gently in a small quantity of water,
along with the liver and the heart.
then cut the meat fine, split the
feet, and simmer them till they are
quite tender. thicken with a bit
of butter, a little flour, a spoonful
of cream, and a little pepper and[]
salt. give it a boil up, pour the liquor
over a sippets of bread, and
place the feet on the mince.
pewter and tin. dish covers
and pewter requisites should be
wiped dry immediately after being
used, and kept free from steam or
damp, which would prevent much of
the trouble in cleaning them. where
the polish is gone off, let the articles
be first rubbed on the outside with a
little sweet oil laid on a piece of soft
linen cloth. then clear it off with
pure whitening on linen cloths, which
will restore the polish.
pheasants. the cock bird is
reckoned the best, except when the
hen is with egg. if young, its spurs
are short and blunt; but if old, they
are long and sharp. a large pheasant
will require three quarters of an
hour to boil; if small, half an hour.
if for roasting, it should be done the
same as a turkey. serve it up with
a fine gravy, including a very small
piece of garlic, and bread sauce or
fried bread crumbs instead. when
cold the meat may be made into excellent
patties, but its flavour should
not be overpowered with lemon. for
the manner of trussing a pheasant or
partridge, see plate.
two thirds of calcined oyster
shells, and one third of sulphur, put
into a hot crucible for an hour, and
afterwards exposed to the air for half
an hour, become phosphorus. this
is put into a bottle, and when used
to procure a light, a very small quantity
is taken out on the point of a
common match, and rubbed upon a
cork, which produces an immediate
flame. if a small piece of phosphorus
be put into a vial, and a little boiling
oil poured upon it, a luminous bottle
will be formed; for on taking out the
cork, to admit the atmospheric air,
the empty space in the vial will become
luminous; and if the bottle be
well closed, it will preserve its illuminative
power for several months.
pickle. for hams, tongues, or
beef, a pickle may be made that will
keep for years, if boiled and skimmed
as often as it is used. provide
a deep earthen glazed pan that will
hold four gallons, having a cover that
will fit close. put into it two gallons
of spring water, two pounds of coarse
sugar, two pounds of bay salt, two
pounds and a half of common salt,
and half a pound of salt petre. keep
the beef or hams as long as they will
bear, before they are put into the
pickle; sprinkle them with coarse
sugar in a pan, and let them drain.
then rub them well with the pickle,
and pack them in close, putting as
much as the pan will hold, so that the
pickle may cover them. the pickle
is not to be boiled at first. a small
ham may be fourteen days, a large
one three weeks, a tongue twelve
days, and beef in proportion to its
size. they will eat well out of the
pickle without drying. when they
are to be dried, let each be drained
over the pan; and when it will drop no
longer, take a clean sponge and dry
it thoroughly. six or eight hours
will smoke them, and there should
be only a little saw-dust and wet
straw used for this purpose; but if
put into a baker's chimney, they
should be sown up in a coarse cloth,
and hang a week.
pickles. the free or frequent
use of pickles is by no means to be
recommended, where any regard is
paid to health. in general they are
the mere vehicles for taking a certain
portion of vinegar and spice, and in
the crisp state in which they are most
admired are often indigestible, and
of course pernicious. the pickle
made to preserve cucumbers and
mangoes, is generally so strongly impregnated
with garlic, mustard, and
spice, that the original flavour of the
vegetable, is quite overpowered, and
the vegetable itself becomes the mere
absorbent of these foreign ingredients.
but if pickles must still be
regarded for the sake of the palate,
whatever becomes of the stomach,[]
it will be necessary to watch carefully
the proper season for gathering
and preparing the various articles
intended to be preserved. frequently
it happens, after the first
week that walnuts come in season,
that they become hard and shelled,
especially if the weather be hot and
dry; it is therefore necessary to
purchase them as soon as they first
appear at market; or in the course
of a few months after being pickled,
the nuts may be found incased in
an impenetrable shell. the middle
of july is generally the proper time
to look for green walnuts. nasturtiums
are to be had about the same.
garlic and shalots, from midsummer
to michaelmas. onions of various
kinds for pickling, are in season
by the middle of july, and for
a month after. gherkins, cucumbers,
melons, and mangoes, are to
be had by the middle of july, and
for a month after. green, red, and
yellow capsicums, the end of july,
and following month. chilies, tomatas,
cauliflowers, and artichokes,
towards the end of july, and throughout
august. jerusalem artichokes
for pickling, july and august, and
for three months after. french
beans and radish pods, in july.
mushrooms, for pickling and for
ketchup, in september. red cabbage,
and samphire, in august.
white cabbage, in september and
october. horseradish, november
and december.—pickles, when put
down, require to be kept with great
care, closely covered. when wanted
for use they should be taken out
of the jar with a wooden spoon,
pierced with holes, the use of metal
in this case being highly improper.
pickles should be well kept from
the air, and seldom opened. small
jars should be kept for those more
frequently in use, that what is not
eaten may be returned into the jar,
and the top kept closely covered.
in preparing vinegar for pickles, it
should not be boiled in metal saucepans,
but in a stone jar, on a hot
hearth, as the acid will dissolve or
corrode the metal, and infuse into
the pickle an unwholesome ingredient.
for the same reason pickles
should never be put into glazed
jars, as salt and vinegar will penetrate
the glaze, and render it poisonous.
pickled asparagus. cut
some asparagus, and lay it in an
earthen pot. make a brine of salt
and water, strong enough to bear an
egg; pour it hot on the asparagus,
and let it be closely covered. when
it is to be used, lay it for two hours
in cold water; boil and serve it up
on a toast, with melted butter over
it. if to be used as a pickle, boil
it as it comes out of the brine, and
lay it in vinegar.
pickled bacon. for two
tolerable flitches, dry a stone of salt
over the fire, till it is scalding hot.
beat fine two ounces of saltpetre,
and two pounds of bay salt well
dried, and mix them with some of
the heated salt. rub the bacon
first with that, and then with the
rest; put it into a tub, and keep it
close from the air.
pickled beet root. boil
the roots till three parts done, or
set them into a cool oven till they
are softened. cut them into slices
of an inch thick, cover them with
vinegar, adding some allspice, a few
cloves, a little mace, black pepper,
horseradish sliced, some onions,
shalots, a little pounded ginger, and
some salt. boil these ingredients
together twenty minutes, and when
cold, add to them a little bruised
cochineal. put the slices of beet
into jars, pour the pickle upon
them, and tie the jars down close.
pickled cabbage. slice a
hard red cabbage into a cullender,
and sprinkle each layer with
salt. let it drain two days, then
put it into a jar, cover it with boiling
vinegar, and add a few slices
of red beet-root. the purple red[]
cabbage makes the finest colour.
those who like the flavour of spice,
will boil some with the vinegar.
cauliflower cut in branches, and
thrown in after being salted, will
look of a beautiful red.
pickled carrots. half boil
some middle sized yellowish carrots,
cut them into any shape, and let
them cool. take as much vinegar
as will cover them, boil it with a
little salt, and a pennyworth of
saffron tied in a piece of muslin.
put the carrots into a jar; when the
pickle is cold, pour it upon them,
and cover the jar close. let it
stand all night, then pour off the
pickle, and boil it with jamaica pepper,
mace, cloves, and a little salt.
when cold, pour it upon the carrots,
and tie them up for use.
pickled cucumbers. cut
them into thick slices, and sprinkle
salt over them. next day drain
them for five or six hours, then put
them into a stone jar, pour boiling
vinegar over them, and keep them in
a warm place. repeat the boiling
vinegar, and stop them up again instantly,
and so on till quite green.
then add peppercorns and ginger,
and keep them in small stone jars.
cucumbers are best pickled with
sliced onions.
pickled gherkins. select
some sound young cucumbers, spread
them on dishes, salt and let them lie
a week. drain and put them in a
jar, pouring boiling vinegar over
them. set them near the fire, covered
with plenty of vine leaves.
if they do not come to a tolerably
good green, pour the vinegar into
another jar, set it on a hot hearth,
and when the vinegar boils, pour
it over them again, and cover them
with fresh leaves. repeat this
operation as often as is necessary,
to bring the pickle to a good colour.
too many persons have made pickles
of a very fine green, by using brass
or bellmetal kettles; but as this is
highly poisonous, the practice ought
never to be attempted.
pickled ham. after it has
been a week in the pickle, boil a
pint of vinegar, with two ounces of
bay salt. pour it hot on the ham,
and baste it every day; it may then
remain in the brine two or three
weeks.
pickled herring. procure
them as fresh as possible, split them
open, take off the heads, and trim
off all the thin parts. put them into
salt and water for one hour, drain
and wipe the fish, and put them into
jars, with the following preparation,
which is enough for six dozen herrings.
take salt and bay salt one
pound each, saltpetre and lump sugar
two ounces each, and powder
and mix the whole together. put a
layer of the mixture at the bottom
of the jar, then a layer of fish with
the skin side downwards; so continue
alternately till the jar is full.
press it down, and cover it close:
in two or three months they will be
fit for use.
pickled lemons. they
should be small, and with thick rinds.
rub them with a piece of flannel,
and slit them half down in four quarters,
but not through to the pulp.
fill the openings with salt hard
pressed in, set them upright in a
pan for four or five days, until the
salt melts, and turn them thrice a
day in their own liquor till quite
tender. make enough pickle to
cover them, of rape vinegar, the
brine of the lemons, peppercorns,
and ginger. boil and skim it; when
cold put it to the lemons, with two
ounces of mustard seed, and two
cloves of garlic to six lemons. when
the lemons are to be used, the pickle
will be useful in fish or other sauces.
pickled mackarel. clean
and divide the fish, and cut each
side into three; or leave them undivided,
and cut each side into five
or six pieces. to six large mackarel,[]
take nearly an ounce of pepper, two
nutmegs, a little mace, four cloves,
and a handful of salt, all finely powdered.
mix them together, make
holes in each bit of fish, put the seasoning
into them, and rub some of it
over each piece. fry them brown in
oil, and when cold put them into a
stone jar, and cover them with vinegar.
thus prepared, they will keep
for months; and if to be kept longer,
pour oil on the top. mackarel preserved
this way are called caveach.
a more common way is to boil the
mackarel after they are cleaned, and
then to boil up some of the liquor
with a few peppercorns, bay leaves,
and a little vinegar; and when the
fish is cold, the liquor is poured over
them. collared mackarel are prepared
the same way as collared eel.
pickled melons. take six
melons, cut a slice out of them, and
scrape out the seeds and pulp quite
clean. put them into a tin stewpan
with as much water as will cover
them; add a small handful of salt,
and boil them over a quick fire.
when they boil take them off the fire,
put them into an earthen pan with
the water, and let them stand till the
next day. the melons must then be
taken out and wiped dry, both within
and without. put two small cloves
of garlic into each, a little bit of ginger,
and bruised mustard seed, enough
to fill them. replace the slice that
was cut out, and tie it on with a
thread. boil some cloves, mace,
ginger, pepper, and mustard seed, all
bruised, and some garlic, in as much
vinegar as will cover them. after a
little boiling, pour the whole, boiling-hot,
upon the melons. they must
be quite covered with the pickle, and
tied down close, when cold, with a
bladder and leather. they will not
be fit for use in less than three or
four months, and will keep two or
three years.
pickled mushrooms. rub
the buttons with a piece of flannel, and
salt. take out the red inside of the
larger ones, and when old and black
they will do for pickling. throw
some salt over, and put them into a
stewpan with mace and pepper. as
the liquor comes out, shake them
well, and keep them over a gentle
fire till all of it be dried into them
again. then put as much vinegar
into the pan as will cover them, give
it one warm, and turn all into a glass
or stone jar. mushrooms pickled in
this way will preserve their flavour,
and keep for two years.
take the buds fresh off the plants
when they are pretty large, but before
they grow hard, and put them
into some of the best white wine vinegar,
boiled up with such spices as
are most agreeable. keep them in
a bottle closely stopped, and they
will be fit for use in a week or ten
days.
pickled onions. in the
month of september, choose the
small white round onions, take off
the brown skin, have ready a very
nice tin stewpan of boiling water,
and throw in as many onions as will
cover the top. as soon as they look
clear on the outside, take them up
with a slice as quick as possible, and
lay them on a clean cloth. cover
them close with another cloth, and
scald some more, and so on. let
them lie to be cold, then put them in
a jar or wide-mouthed glass bottles,
and pour over them the best white-wine
vinegar, just hot, but not boiling,
and cover them when cold. they
must look quite clear; and if the
outer skin be shriveled, peel it off.
pickled oysters. open
four dozen large oysters, wash them
in their own liquor, wipe them dry,
and strain off the liquor. add a dessert-spoonful
of pepper, two blades
of mace, a table-spoonful of salt, if
the liquor require it; then add three
spoonfuls of white wine, and four of
vinegar. simmer the oysters a few[]
minutes in the liquor, then put them
into small jars, boil up the pickle,
and skim it. when cold, pour the
liquor over the oysters, and cover
them close.—another way. open
the oysters, put them into a saucepan
with their own liquor for ten
minutes, and simmer them very gently.
put them into a jar one by one,
that none of the grit may stick to
them; and when cold, cover them
with the pickle thus made. boil the
liquor with a bit of mace, lemon peel,
and black peppers; and to every
hundred of these corns, put two
spoonfuls of the best undistilled vinegar.
the pickle should be kept
in small jars, and tied close with
bladder, for the air will spoil them.
pickled pigeons. bone
them, turn the inside out, and lard
it. season with a little salt and allspice
in fine powder; then turn them
again, and tie the neck and rump
with thread. put them into boiling
water; when they have boiled a
minute or two to make them plump,
take them out and dry them well.
then put them boiling hot into the
pickle, which must be made of equal
quantities of white wine and white-wine
vinegar, with white pepper and
allspice, sliced ginger and nutmeg,
and two or three bay leaves. when
it boils up, put in the pigeons. if
they are small, a quarter of an hour
will do them; if large, twenty minutes.
then take them out, wipe
them, and let them cool. when
the pickle is cold, take the fat from
it, and put them in again. keep
them in a stone jar, tied down with
a bladder to keep out the air. instead
of larding, put into some a
stuffing made of yolks of eggs boiled
hard, and marrow in equal quantities,
with sweet herbs, pepper,
salt, and mace.
pickled pork. the hams
and shoulders being cut off, take for
pickling the quantities proportioned
to the middlings of a pretty large
hog. mix and pound fine, four ounces
of salt petre, a pound of coarse
sugar, an ounce of salprunel, and
a little common salt. sprinkle the
pork with salt, drain it twenty four
hours, and then rub it with the above
mixture. pack the pieces tight in
a small deep tub, filling up the spaces
with common salt. place large pebbles
on the pork, to prevent it from
swimming in the pickle which the
salt will produce. if kept from the
air it will continue very fine for two
years.
pickled roses. take two
pecks of damask rose buds, pick off
the green part, and strew in the
bottom of a jar a handful of large
bay salt. put in half the roses, and
strew a little more bay salt upon
them. strip from the stalk a handful
of knotted marjoram, a handful
of lemon thyme, and as much common
thyme. take six pennyworth
of benjamin, as much of storax, six
orris roots, and a little suet; beat
and bruise them all together, and
mix them with the stripped herbs.
add twenty cloves, a grated nutmeg,
the peel of two seville oranges
pared thin, and of one lemon shred
fine. mix them with the herbs and
spices, strew all on the roses, and
stir them once in two days till the
jar is full. more sweets need not
be added, but only roses, orange
flowers, or single pinks.
pickled salmon. after
scaling and cleaning, split the salmon,
and divide it into convenient
pieces. lay it in the kettle to fill
the bottom, and as much water as
will cover it. to three quarts add
a pint of vinegar, a handful of salt,
twelve bay-leaves, six blades of
mace, and a quarter of an ounce of
black pepper. when the salmon
is boiled enough, drain and lay it
on a clean cloth; then put more
salmon into the kettle, and pour the
liquor upon it, and so on till all is
done. after this, if the pickle be
not smartly flavoured with the vinegar
and salt, add more, and boil it[]
quick three quarters of an hour.
when all is cold, pack the dish in a
deep pot, well covered with the pickle,
and kept from the air. the liquor
must be drained from the fish,
and occasionally boiled and skimmed.
pickled samphire. clear
the branches of the samphire from the
dead leaves, and lay them into a large
jar, or small cask. make a strong
brine of white or bay salt, skim it
clean while it is boiling, and when
done let it cool. take the samphire
out of the water, and put it into
a bottle with a broad mouth. add
some strong white-wine vinegar, and
keep it well covered down.
pickled sturgeon. the
following is an excellent imitation of
pickled sturgeon. take a fine large
turkey, but not old; pick it very nicely,
singe, and make it extremely clean.
bone and wash it, and tie it across
and across with a piece of mat string
washed clean. put into a very nice
tin saucepan a quart of water, a quart
of vinegar, a quart of white wine, not
sweet, and a large handful of salt.
boil and skim it well, and then boil
the turkey. when done enough,
tighten the strings, and lay upon it
a dish with a weight of two pounds
over it. boil the liquor half an hour;
and when both are cold, put the turkey
into it. this will keep some
months, and eats more delicately
than sturgeon. vinegar, oil, and sugar,
are usually eaten with it. if
more vinegar or salt should be wanted,
add them when cold. garnish
with fennel.
pickled tongues. to prepare
neats' tongues for boiling, cut
off the roots, but leave a little of the
kernel and fat. sprinkle some salt,
and let it drain from the slime till
next day. then for each tongue mix
a large spoonful of common salt, the
same of coarse sugar and about half
as much of salt petre; rub it in well,
and do so every day. in a week add
another spoonful of salt. if rubbed
every day, a tongue will be ready in
a fortnight; but if only turned in the
pickle daily, it will keep four or five
weeks without being too salt. when
tongues are to be dried, write the
date on a parchment, and tie it on.
tongues may either be smoked, or
dried plain. when a tongue is to be
dressed, boil it five hours till it is
quite tender. if done sooner, it is
easily kept hot for the table. the
longer it is kept after drying, the
higher it will be; and if hard, it may
require soaking three or four hours.—another
way. clean and prepare as
above; and for two tongues allow an
ounce of salt petre, and an ounce of
salprunella, and rub them in well.
in two days after well rubbing, cover
them with common salt, turn them
every day for three weeks, then dey
them, rub bran over, and smoke them.
keep them in a cool dry place, and
in ten days they will be fit to eat.
pickled walnuts. when
they will bear a pin to go into them,
boil a brine of salt and water, strong
enough to swim an egg, and skim it
well. when the brine is quite cold,
pour it on the walnuts, and let them
soak for six days. change the brine,
and let them stand six more; then
drain and put them into a jar, pouring
over them a sufficient quantity of
the best vinegar. add plenty of
black pepper, pimento, ginger, mace,
cloves, mustard seed, and horseradish,
all boiled together, but put on
cold. to every hundred of walnuts
put six spoonfuls of mustard seed,
and two or three heads of garlic or
shalot, but the latter is the mildest.
the walnuts will be fit for use in
about six months; but if closely covered,
they will be good for several
years: the air will soften them. the
pickle will be equal to ketchup, when
the walnuts are used.—another way.
put the walnuts into a jar, cover them
with the best vinegar cold, and let
them stand four months. then,
pour off the pickle, and boil as much
fresh vinegar as will cover the walnuts,[]
adding to every three quarts
of vinegar a quarter of a pound of
the best mustard, a stick of horseradish
sliced, half an ounce of black
pepper, half an ounce of allspice,
and a good handful of salt. pour
the whole boiling hot upon the walnuts,
and cover them close: they
will be fit for use in three or four
months. two ounces of garlic or
shalot may be added, but must not
be boiled in the vinegar. the pickle
in which the walnuts stood the first
four months, may be used as ketchup.
pictures. the following simple
method of preventing flies from
sitting on pictures, or any other furniture,
is well experienced, and if
generally adopted, would prevent
much trouble and damage. soak a
large bunch of leeks five or six days
in a pail of water, and wash the pictures
with it, or any other piece of
furniture. the flies will never come
near any thing that is so washed.
pie sauce. mix some gravy
with an anchovy, a sprig of sweet
herbs, an onion, and a little mushroom
liquor. boil and thicken it
with butter rolled in flour, add a
little red wine, and pour the sauce
into the pie. this serves for mutton,
lamb, veal, or beef pies, when
such an addition is required.
pies and tarts. attention
should be paid to the heat of the
oven for all kinds of pies and tarts.
light paste should be put into a
moderate oven: if too hot the crust
will not rise, but burn: if too slack,
the paste will be heavy, and not of
a good colour. raised paste should
have a quick oven, and well closed.
iced tarts should be done in a slack
oven, or the iceing will become
brown before the tarts are baked.
pigeons. in order to breed
pigeons, it is best to take two young
ones at a time; and if well looked
after, and plentifully fed, they will
breed every month. they should
be kept very clean, and the bottom
of the dove-cote be strewed with
sand once a month or oftener. tares
and white peas are their proper
food, and they should be provided
with plenty of fresh water. starlings
and other birds are apt to
come among them, and suck the
eggs. vermin likewise are their
enemies, and frequently destroy
them. if the brood should be too
small, put among them a few tame
pigeons of their own colour. observe
not to have too large a proportion
of cock birds, for they are quarrelsome,
and will soon thin the dove-cote.
pigeons are fond of salt, and
it keeps them in health. lay a large
piece of clay near their dwelling,
and pour upon it any of the salt
brine that may be useless in the
family. bay salt and cummin seeds
mixed together, is a universal remedy
for the diseases of pigeons. the
backs and breasts are sometimes
scabby, but may be cured in the following
manner. take a quarter of
a pound of bay salt, and as much
common salt; a pound of fennel
seed, a pound of dill seed, as much
cummin seed, and an ounce of assafœtida;
mix all with a little wheat
flour, and some fine wrought clay.
when all are well beaten together,
put it into two earthen pots, and
bake them in the oven. when the
pots are cold, put them on the table
in the dove-cote; the pigeons will
eat the mixture and get well.
pigeons dressed. these
birds are particularly useful, as they
may be dressed in so many ways.
the good flavour of them depends
very much on their being cropped
and drawn as soon as killed. no
other bird requires so much washing.
pigeons left from dinner the
day before may be stewed, or made
into a pie. in either case, care must
be taken not to overdo them, which
will make them stringy. they need
only be heated up in gravy ready
prepared; and forcemeat balls may
be fried and added, instead of putting
a stuffing into them. if for a[]
pie, let beef steaks be stewed in
a little water, and put cold under
them. cover each pigeon with a
piece of fat bacon to keep them
moist, season as usual, and put in
some eggs.—in purchasing pigeons,
be careful to see that they are quite
fresh: if they look flabby about the
vent, and that part is discoloured,
they are stale. the feet should be
supple: if old the feet are harsh.
the tame ones are larger than the
wild, and by some they are thought
to be the best. they should be fat
and tender; but many are deceived
in their size, because a full crop is as
large as the whole body of a small
pigeon. the wood-pigeon is large,
and the flesh dark coloured: if properly
kept, and not over roasted, the
flavour is equal to teal.
pigeons in disguise. draw
the pigeons, take out the craw very
carefully, wash them clean, cut off
the pinions, and turn their legs under
their wings. season them with pepper
and salt, roll each pigeon in a
puff paste, close them well, tie them
in separate cloths, and boil them an
hour and a half. when they are untied
be careful they do not break; put
them in a dish, and pour a little good
gravy over them.
pigeons in a hole. truss
four young pigeons, as for boiling,
and season them with pepper, salt,
and mace. put into the belly of each
a small piece of butter, lay them in
a pie dish, and pour batter over them,
made of three eggs, two spoonfuls of
flour, and half a pint of milk. bake
them in a moderate oven, and send
them to table in the same dish.
pigeons in jelly. save
some of the liquor in which a knuckle
of veal has been boiled, or boil a
calf's or a neat's foot; put the broth
into a pan with a blade of mace, a
bunch of sweet herbs, some white
pepper, lemon peel, a slice of lean bacon,
and the pigeons. bake them, and
let them stand to be cold; but season
them before baking. when done,
take them out of the liquor, cover
them close to preserve the colour,
and clear the jelly by boiling it with
the whites of two eggs. strain it
through a thick cloth dipped in boiling
water, and put into a sieve. the
fat must be all removed, before it be
cleared. put the jelly roughly over
and round the pigeons.—a beautiful
dish may be made in the following
manner. pick two very nice pigeons,
and make them look as well as possible
by singeing, washing, and cleaning
the heads well. leave the heads
and the feet on, but the nails must
be clipped close to the claws. roast
them of a very nice brown; and when
done, put a small sprig of myrtle into
the bill of each. prepare a savoury
jelly, and with it half fill a bowl of
such a size as shall be proper to turn
down on the dish intended for serving
in. when the jelly and the birds are
cold, see that no gravy hangs to the
birds, and then lay them upside down
in the jelly. before the rest of it
begins to set, pour it over the birds,
so as to be three inches above the
feet. this should be done full twenty
four hours before serving. the
dish thus prepared will have a very
handsome appearance in the mid
range of a second coarse; or when
served with the jelly roughed large,
it makes a side or corner dish, being
then of a smaller size. the head
of the pigeons should be kept up, as
if alive, by tying the neck with some
thread, and the legs bent as if the
birds sat upon them.
pigeon pie. rub the pigeons
with pepper and salt, inside and out.
put in a bit of butter, and if approved,
some parsley chopped with the
livers, and a little of the same seasoning.
lay a beef steak at the bottom
of the dish, and the birds on it; between
every two, a hard egg. put
a cup of water in the dish; and if a
thin slice or two of ham be added,
it will greatly improve the flavour.
when ham is cut for gravy or pies,
the under part should be taken,[]
rather than the prime. season the
gizzards, and two joints of the
wings, and place them in the centre
of the pie. over them, in a hole
made in the crust, put three of the
feet nicely cleaned, to show what
pie it is.
pig's cheek. to prepare a
pig's cheek for boiling, cut off the
snout, and clean the head. divide
it, take out the eyes and the brains,
sprinkle the head with salt, and let
it drain twenty-four hours. salt it
with common salt and saltpetre;
and if to be dressed without being
stewed with peas, let it lie eight or
ten days, but less if to be dressed
with peas. it must first be washed,
and then simmered till all is
tender.
pig's feet and ears. clean
them carefully, soak them some
hours, and boil them quite tender.
then take them out, and boil a little
salt and vinegar with some of the
liquor, and pour it over them when
cold. when to be dressed, dry
them, cut the feet in two, and slice
the ears. fry them, and serve with
butter, mustard, and vinegar. they
may be either done in batter, or only
floured.
if to be dressed with
cream, put no vinegar into the pickle.
cut the feet and ears into neat
bits, and boil them in a little milk.
pour the liquor from them, and
simmer in a little veal broth, with a
bit of onion, mace, and lemon peel.
before the dish is served up, add a
little cream, flour, butter, and salt.
pig's feet jelly. clean the
feet and ears very carefully, and
soak them some hours. then boil
them in a very small quantity of
water, till every bone can be taken
out. throw in half a handful of
chopped sage, the same of parsley,
and a seasoning of pepper, salt, and
mace in fine powder. simmer till
the herbs are scalded, and then pour
the whole into a melon form.
pig's harslet. wash and
dry some liver, sweetbreads, and fat
and lean bits of pork, beating the
latter with a rolling-pin to make it
tender. season with pepper, salt,
sage, and a little onion shred fine.
when mixed, put all into a cawl,
and fasten it up tight with a needle
and thread. roast it on a hanging
jack, or by a string. serve with a
sauce of port wine and water, and
mustard, just boiled up, and put into
the dish. or serve it in slices
with parsley for a fry.
scour the head and ears nicely, take
off the hair and snout, and remove
the eyes and the brain. lay the
head into water one night, then
drain it, salt it extremely well with
common salt and saltpetre, and let
it lie five days. boil it enough to
take out the bones, then lay it on a
dresser, turning the thick end of one
side of the head towards the thin
end of the other, to make the roll
of equal size. sprinkle it well with
salt and white pepper, and roll it
with the ears. the pig's feet may
also be placed round the outside
when boned, or the thin parts of two
cow heels, if approved. put it in a
cloth, bind it with a broad tape, and
boil it till quite tender. place a
good weight upon it, and do not
remove the covering till the meat is
cold. if the collar is to be more
like brawn, salt it longer, add a
larger proportion of saltpetre, and
put in also some pieces of lean pork.
then cover it with cow heel to make
it look like the horn. this may be
kept in a pickle of boiled salt and
water, or out of pickle with vinegar:
it will be found a very convenient
article to have in the house. if likely
to spoil, slice and fry it, either with
or without batter.
pig sauce. take a tea-spoonful
of white gravy, a small piece of
anchovy, with the gravy from the
roasting of the pig, and mix the
brains with it when chopped. add[]
a quarter of a pound of butter, a little
flour to thicken it, a slice of lemon,
and a little salt. shake it over
the fire, and put it hot into the dish.
good sauce may also be made by
putting some of the bread and sage,
which has been roasted in the pig,
into good beef gravy, and adding
the brains to it.
pilau. stew a pound of rice
in white gravy till it is tender. half
boil a well grown fowl, then lay it
into a baking dish with some pepper
and salt strewed over it. lay truffles,
morels, mushrooms, hard eggs,
or forcemeat balls, any or all of
them round it at pleasure; put a
little gravy into the dish, and spread
the rice over the whole like a paste.
bake it gently, till the fowl is done
enough. if it seem dry, cut a hole
carefully at the top, and pour in
some white gravy, made pretty warm,
before it is sent to table. partridges
or pheasants are very nice, dressed
the same way.
pilchard pie. soak two or
three salted pilchards for some
hours, the day before they are to be
dressed. clean and skin the white
part of some large leeks, scald them
in milk and water, and put them in
layers into a dish, with the pilchards.
cover the whole with a good plain
crust. when the pie is taken out
of the oven, lift up the side crust
with a knife, and empty out all the
liquor: then pour in half a pint of
scalded cream.
pile ointment. cut some
green shoots of elder early in the
spring, clear away the bark, and
put two good handfuls into a quart
of thick cream. boil it till it comes
to an ointment, and as it rises take
it off with a spoon, and be careful
to prevent its burning. strain the
ointment through a fine cloth, and
keep it for use.
piles. if this complaint be occasioned
by costiveness, proper attention
must be paid to that circumstance;
but if it originate from
weakness, strong purgatives must
be avoided. the part affected should
be bathed twice a day with a sponge
dipped in cold water, and the bowels
regulated by the mildest laxatives.
an electuary, consisting of one ounce
of sulphur, and half an ounce of
cream of tartar, mixed with a sufficient
quantity of treacle, may be
taken three or four times a day.
the patient would also find relief by
sitting over the steam of warm water.
a useful liniment for this disorder
may be made of two ounces
of emollient ointment, and half an
ounce of laudanum. mix them with
the yolk of an egg, and work them
well together.
pills. opening pills may be made
of two drams of castile soap, and two
drams of succotrine aloes, mixed
with a sufficient quantity of common
syrup. or when aloes will not
agree with the patient, take two
drams of the extract of jalap, two
drams of vitriolated tartar, and as
much syrup of ginger as will form
them of a proper consistence for
pills. four or five of these pills
will generally prove a sufficient
purge; and for keeping the body
gently open, one may be taken night
and morning.—composing pills may
consist of ten grains of purified
opium, and half a dram of castile
soap, beaten together, and formed
into twenty parts. when a quieting
draught will not sit upon the
stomach, one or two of these pills
may be taken to great advantage.—pills
for the jaundice may be made
of one dram each of castile soap,
succotrine aloes, and rhubarb, mixed
up with a sufficient quantity of
syrup. five or six of these pills
taken twice a day, more or less, to
keep the body open, with the assistance
of a proper diet, will often
effect a cure.
pipers. boil or bake them with
a pudding well seasoned. if baked,
put a large cup of rich broth into
the dish; and when done, boil up[]
together for sauce, the broth, some
essence of anchovy, and a squeeze of
lemon.
pippin pudding. coddle six
pippins in vine leaves covered with
water, very gently, that the inside
may be done without breaking the
skins. when soft, take off the skin,
and with a tea-spoon take the pulp
from the core. press it through a
cullender, add two spoonfuls of
orange-flower water, three eggs beaten,
a glass of raisin wine, a pint of
scalding cream, sugar and nutmeg to
taste. lay a thin puff paste at the
bottom and sides of the dish; shred
some very thin lemon peel as fine as
possible, and put it into the dish;
likewise lemon, orange, and citron,
in small slices, but not so thin as to
dissolve in the baking.
pippin tarts. pare two seville
or china oranges quite thin, boil
the peel tender and shred it fine.
pare and core twenty pippins, put
them in a stewpan, with as little water
as possible. when half done, add
half a pound of sugar, the orange peel
and juice, and boil all together till it
is pretty thick. when cold, put it
in a shallow dish, or pattipans lined
with paste, to turn out, and be eaten
cold.
pistachio cream. blanch
four ounces of pistachio nuts, beat
them fine with a little rose-water, and
add the paste to a pint of cream.
sweeten it, let it just boil, and then
put it into glasses.
pistachio tart. shell and
peel half a pound of pistachio nuts,
beat them very fine in a marble
mortar, and work into them a piece
of fresh butter. add to this a quarter
of a pint of cream, or of the juice
of beet leaves, extracted by pounding
them in a marble mortar, and then
draining off the juice through a piece
of muslin. grate in two macarones,
add the yolks of two eggs, a little
salt, and sugar to the taste. bake
it lightly with a puff crust under it,
and some little ornaments on the top.
sift some fine sugar over, before it is
sent to table.
plaice. the following is an excellent
way of dressing a large plaice,
especially if there be a roe. sprinkle
it with salt, and keep it twenty four
hours. then wash, and wipe it dry,
smear it over with egg, and cover it
with crumbs of bread. boil up some
lard or fine dripping, with two large
spoonfuls of vinegar; lay in the fish,
and fry it of a fine colour. drain off
the fat, serve it with fried parsley laid
round, and anchovy sauce. the fish
may be dipped in vinegar, instead of
putting vinegar in the pan.
prepare five ounces of bread crumbs,
put them in a basin, pour three quarters
of a pint of boiling milk over
them, put a plate over the top to keep
in the steam, and let it stand twenty
minutes. then beat it up quite
smooth, with two ounces of sugar,
and a little nutmeg. break four eggs
on a plate, leaving out one white, beat
them well, and add them to the pudding.
stir it all well together, put it
into a mould that has been well buttered
and floured, tie a cloth tight
over it, and boil it an hour.
plain cheesecakes. three
quarters of a pound of cheese curd,
and a quarter of a pound of butter,
beat together in a mortar. add a
quarter of a pound of fine bread
soaked in milk, three eggs, six ounces
of currants well washed and picked,
sugar to the taste, a little candied
orange peel, and a little sack. bake
them in a puff crust in a quick oven.
plain fritters. grate a fine
penny loaf into a pint of milk, beat it
smooth, add the yolks of five eggs,
three ounces of fine sugar, and a little
nutmeg. fry them in hog's lard,
and serve them up with melted butter
and sugar.
plain peas soup. the receipts
too generally given for peas
are so much crowded with ingredients,
that they entirely overpower the
flavour of the peas. nothing more is[]
necessary to plain good soup, than
a quart of split peas, two heads of
celery, and an onion. boil all together
in three quarts of broth or
soft water; let them simmer gently
on a trivet over a slow fire for three
hours, and keep them stirring, to
prevent burning at the bottom of
the kettle. if the water boils away,
and the soup gets too thick, add
some boiling water to it. when
the peas are well softened, work
them through a coarse sieve, and
then through a tammis. wash out
the stewpan, return the soup into it,
and give it a boil up; take off any
scum that rises, and the soup is
ready. prepare some fried bread
and dried mint, and send them up
with it on two side dishes. this is
an excellent family soup, produced
with very little trouble or expense,
the two quarts not exceeding the
charge of one shilling. half a dram
of bruised celery seed, and a little
sugar, added just before finishing
the soup, will give it as much flavour
as two heads of the fresh vegetable.
plain rice pudding. wash
and pick some rice, scatter among
it some pimento finely powdered,
but not too much. tie up the rice
in a cloth, and leave plenty of room
for it to swell. boil it in a good
quantity of water for an hour or
two, and serve it with butter and
sugar, or milk. lemon peel may
be added to the pudding, but it is
very good without spice, and may
be eaten with butter and salt.
planting. in rendering
swampy ground useful, nothing is
so well adapted as planting it with
birch or alder, which grows spontaneously
on bogs and swamps, a
kind of soil which otherwise would
produce nothing but weeds and
rushes. the wood of the alder is
particularly useful for all kinds of
machinery, for pipes, drains, and
pump trees, as it possesses the
peculiar quality of resisting injury
from wet and weather. the bark
is also highly valuable to black
dyers, who purchase it at a good
price; and it is much to be lamented
that the properties of this useful
tree are not duly appreciated.
plantations. young plantations
are liable to great injury, by
being barked in the winter season.
to prevent this, take a quantity of
grease, scent it with a little tar, and
mix them well together. brush it
round the stems of young trees, as
high at least as hares and rabbits
can reach, and it will effectually
prevent their being barked by these
animals. tar must not be used
alone, for when exposed to the sun
and air, it becomes hard and binding,
and hinders the growth of the
plantation. grease will not have this
effect, and the scent of the tar is highly
obnoxious to hares and rabbits.
plasters. common plaster is
made of six pints of olive oil, and
two pounds and a half of litharge
finely powdered. a smaller quantity
may of course be made of equal
proportions. boil them together
over a gentle fire, in about a gallon
of water, and keep the ingredients
constantly stirring. after
they have boiled about three hours,
a little of the salve may be taken
out, and put into cold water. when
of a proper consistence, the whole
may be suffered to cool, and the
water pressed out of it with the
hands. this will serve as a basis
for other plasters, and is generally
applied in slight wounds and excoriations
of the skin. it keeps the
part warm and supple, and defends
it from the air, which is all that is
necessary in such cases.—adhesive
plaster, which is principally used
for keeping on other dressings, consists
of half a pound of common
plaster, and a quarter of a pound of
burgundy pitch melted together.—anodyne
plaster is as follows. melt
an ounce of the adhesive, and when
cooling, mix with it a dram of powdered
opium, and the same of camphor,[]
previously rubbing with a little
oil. this plaster generally gives ease
in acute pains, especially of the
nervous kind.—blistering plaster is
made in a variety of ways, but seldom
of a proper consistence. when compounded
of oils, and other greasy
substances, its effects are lessened,
and it is apt to run, while pitch and
rosin render it hard and inconvenient.
the following will be found the best
method. take six ounces of venice
turpentine, two ounces of yellow wax,
three ounces of spanish flies finely
powdered, and one ounce of the flour
of mustard. melt the wax, and while
it is warm, add the turpentine to it,
taking care not to evaporate it by too
much heat. after the turpentine and
wax are sufficiently incorporated,
sprinkle in the powders, and stir the
mass till it is cold. when the blistering
plaster is not at hand, mix with
any soft ointment a sufficient quantity
of powdered flies, or form them
into a plaster with flour and vinegar.
plate. the best way to clean
plate, is to boil an ounce of prepared
hartshorn powder in a quart of water;
and while on the fire, put in as
much plate as the vessel will hold.
let it boil a little, then take it out,
drain it over the saucepan, and dry
it before the fire. put in more, and
serve it the same, till all is done.
then soak some clean rags in the
water, and when dry they will serve
to clean the plate. cloths thus saturated
with hartshorn powder, are
also the best things for cleaning brass
locks, and the finger plates of doors.
when the plate is quite dry, it must
be rubbed bright with soft leather.
in many plate powders there is a
mixture of quicksilver, which is very
injurious; and among other disadvantages,
it makes silver so brittle
that it will break with a fall. in
common cases, whitening, properly
purified from sand, applied wet, and
rubbed till dry, is one of the cheapest
and best of all plate powders.
plating of glass. pour
some mercury on a tin foil, smoothly
laid on a flat table, and rub it gently
with a hare's foot. it soon unites
itself to the tin, which then becomes
very splendid, or is what they call
quickened. a plate of glass is then
cautiously, passed upon the tin leaf,
in such a manner as to sweep off the
redundant mercury, which is not incorporated
with the tin. leaden
weights are then to be placed on the
glass; and in a little time the quicksilvered
tin foil adheres, so firmly to
the glass, that the weights may be removed
without any danger of its falling
off. the glass thus coated is a
common looking-glass. about two
ounces of mercury are sufficient for
covering three square feet of glass.
plovers. in purchasing plovers,
choose those that feel hard at
the vent, which shows they are fat.
in other respects, choose them by
the same marks as other fowl. when
stale, the feet are harsh and dry.
they will keep a long time. there
are three sorts of these birds, the
grey, the green, and the bastard plover,
or lapwing. green plovers are
roasted in the same way as snipes
and woodcocks, without drawing,
and are served on toast. the grey
ones may be roasted, or stewed with
gravy, herbs, and spice.
plovers' eggs. boil them
ten minutes, and serve them either
hot or cold on a napkin. these make
a nice and fashionable dish.
plum cake. this is such a
favourite article in most families, and
is made in so many different ways,
that it will be necessary to give a
variety of receipts, in order that a
selection may be made agreeably to
the taste of the reader, or the quality
of the article to be preferred.—for
a good common plum cake, mix
five ounces of butter in three pounds
of fine dry flour, and five ounces of
the best moist sugar. add six ounces
of currants, washed and dried,
and some pimento finely powdered.
put three spoonfuls of yeast into a[]
pint of new milk warmed, and mix it
with the above into a light dough.—a
cake of a better sort. mix thoroughly
a quarter of a peck of fine
flour well dried, with a pound of
dry and sifted loaf sugar, three
pounds of currants washed and very
dry, half a pound of raisins stoned
and chopped, a quarter of an ounce
of mace and cloves, twenty peppercorns,
a grated nutmeg, the peel of
a lemon cut as fine as possible, and
half a pound of almonds blanched
and beaten with orange-flower water.
melt two pounds of butter in a pint
and a quarter of cream, but not too
hot; add a pint of sweet wine, a
glass of brandy, the whites and yolks
of twelve eggs beaten apart, and
half a pint of good yeast. strain
this liquid by degrees into the dry
ingredients, beating them together
a full hour; then butter the hoop
or pan, and bake it. when the batter
is put into the pan, throw in
plenty of citron, lemon, and orange
candy. if the cake is to be iced,
take half a pound of double refined
sugar sifted, and put a little with
the white of an egg; beat it well,
and by degrees pour in the remainder.
it must be whisked nearly
an hour, with the addition of a little
orange-flower water, but not too
much. when the cake is done,
pour the iceing over it, and return it
to the oven for fifteen minutes. but
if the oven be quite warm, keep it
near the mouth, and the door open,
lest the colour be spoiled.—another.
dried flour, currants washed and
picked, four pounds; sugar pounded
and sifted, a pound and a half; six
orange, lemon, and citron peels, cut
in slices. these are to be mixed
together. beat ten eggs, yolks and
whites separately. melt a pound
and a half of butter in a pint of
cream; when cold, put to it half a
pint of yeast, near half a pint of
sweet wine, and the eggs. then
strain the liquid to the dry ingredients,
beat them well, and add of
cloves, mace, cinnamon, and nutmeg,
half an ounce each. butter
the pan, and put it into a quick
oven. three hours will bake it.—another.
mix with a pound of well-dried
flour, a pound of loaf sugar,
and the eighth of an ounce of mace,
well beaten. beat up five eggs
with half the whites, a gill of rose
water, and a quarter of a pint of
yeast, and strain them. melt half
a pound of butter in a quarter of a
pint of cream, and when cool, mix
all together. beat up the batter
with a light hand, and set it to rise
half an hour. before it is put into
the oven, mix in a pound and a half
of currants, well washed and dried,
and bake it an hour and a quarter.—for
a rich cake, take three pounds
of well-dried flour, three pounds of
fresh butter, a pound and a half of
fine sugar dried and sifted, five
pounds of currants carefully cleaned
and dried, twenty-four eggs, three
grated nutmegs, a little pounded
mace and cloves, half a pound of
almonds, a glass of sack, and a
pound of citron or orange peel.
pound the almonds in rose water,
work up the butter to a thin cream,
put in the sugar, and work it well;
then the yolks of the eggs, the spices,
the almonds, and orange peel. beat
the whites of the eggs to a froth,
and put them into the batter as it
rises. keep working it with the
hand till the oven is ready, and the
scorching subsided; put it into a
hoop, but not full, and two hours
will bake it. the almonds should
be blanched in cold water. this
will make a large rich plum cake.—a
small common cake may be made
of a pound of dough, a quarter of a
pound of butter, two eggs, a quarter
of a pound of lump sugar, a quarter
of a pound of currants, and a little
nutmeg.—another. take a pound
and a half of fine white dough, roll
into it a pound of butter, as for pie
crust, and set it by the fire. beat
up the yolks of four eggs, with half[]
a pound of fine powdered sugar;
pour it upon the mass, and work it
well by the fire. add half a pound
of currants, well picked and washed,
and send it to the oven. half
the quantity of sugar, eggs, and butter,
will make a very pleasant cake.—another.
a pound and a half of
well-dried flour, a pound of butter,
a pound of sugar, and a pound of
currants, picked and washed. beat
up eight eggs, warm the butter,
mix all together, and beat it up for
an hour.—for little plum cakes, intended
to keep for some time, dry
a pound of fine flour, and mix it
with six ounces of finely pounded
sugar. beat six ounces of butter
to a cream, and add to three eggs
well beaten, half a pound of currants
nicely washed and dried, together
with the sugar and flour.
beat all for some time, then dredge
some flour on tin plates, and drop
the batter on them the size of a
walnut. if properly mixed, it will be
a stiff paste. bake in a brisk oven.
to make a rich plum cake, take four
pounds of flour well dried, mix with
it a pound and a half of fine sugar
powdered, a grated nutmeg, and
an ounce of mace pounded fine.
when they are well mixed, make a
hole in the middle, and pour in fifteen
eggs, but seven whites, well
beaten, with a pint of good yeast,
half a quarter of a pint of orange-flower
water, and the same quantity
of sack, or any other rich sweet
wine. then melt two pounds and
a half of butter in a pint and a half
of cream; and when it is about
the warmth of new milk, pour it into
the middle of the batter. throw
a little of the flour over the liquids,
but do not mix the whole together
till it is ready to go into the oven.
let it stand before the fire an hour
to rise, laying a cloth over it; then
have ready six pounds of currants
well washed, picked, and dried; a
pound of citron and a pound of
orange peel sliced, with a pound of
blanched almonds, half cut in slices
lengthways, and half finely pounded.
mix all well together, butter the tin
well, and bake it two hours and a
half. this will make a large cake.—another,
not quite so rich. three
pounds of flour well dried, half a
pound of sugar, and half an ounce
of spice, nutmeg, mace, and cinnamon,
well pounded. add ten
eggs, but only half the whites,
beaten with a pint of good yeast.
melt a pound of butter in a pint of
cream, add it to the yeast, and let
it stand an hour to rise before the
fire. then add three pounds of
currants well washed, picked and
dried. butter the tin, and bake it
an hour.—a common plum cake is
made of three pounds and a half of
flour, half a pound of sugar, a grated
nutmeg, eight eggs, a glass of brandy,
half a pint of yeast, a pound of
butter melted in a pint and half of
milk, put lukewarm to the other ingredients.
let it rise an hour before
the fire, then mix it well together,
add two pounds of currants carefully
cleaned, butter the tin, and bake it.
plum jam. cut some ripe
plums to pieces, put them into a
preserving pan, bruise them with a
spoon, warm them over the fire till
they are soft, and press them through
a cullender. boil the jam an hour,
stir it well, add six ounces of fine
powdered sugar to every pound of
jam, and take it off the fire to mix
it. then heat it ten minutes, put
it into jars, and sift some fine sugar
over it.
plum pudding. take six
ounces of suet chopped fine, six ounces
of malaga raisins stoned, eight
ounces of currants nicely washed and
picked, three ounces of bread crumbs,
three ounces of flour, and three eggs.
add the sixth part of a grated nutmeg,
a small blade of mace, the same
quantity of cinnamon, pounded as
fine as possible; half a tea-spoonful
of salt, nearly half a pint of milk,
four ounces of sugar, an ounce of[]
candied lemon, and half an ounce of
citron. beat the eggs and spice well
together, mix the milk with them by
degrees, and then the rest of the ingredients.
dip a fine close linen
cloth into boiling water, and put it
in a hair sieve, flour it a little, and
tie the pudding up close. put it into
a saucepan containing six quarts of
boiling water; keep a kettle of boiling
water near it, to fill up the pot as it
wastes, and keep it boiling six hours.
if the water ceases to boil, the pudding
will become heavy, and be
spoiled. plum puddings are best
when mixed an hour or two before
they are boiled, as the various ingredients
by that means incorporate, and
the whole becomes richer and fuller
of flavour, especially if the various
ingredients be thoroughly well stirred
together. a table-spoonful of treacle
will give the pudding a rich brown
colour.—another. beat up the
yolks and whites of three eggs,
strain them through a sieve, gradually
add to them a quarter of a pint of
milk, and stir it well together. rub
in a mortar two ounces of moist sugar,
with as much grated nutmeg as
will lie on a six-pence, and stir these
into the eggs and milk. then put in
four ounces of flour, and beat it into
a smooth batter; by degrees stir into
it seven ounces of suet, minced as fine
as possible, and three ounces of bread
crumbs. mix all thoroughly together,
at least half an hour before the
pudding is put into the pot. put it
into an earthenware pudding mould,
well buttered, tie a pudding cloth
tight over it, put it into boiling water,
and boil it three hours. half a pound
of raisins cut in halves, and added to
the above, will make a most admirable
plum pudding. this pudding
may also be baked, or put under
roast meat, like a yorkshire pudding.
in the latter case, half a pint more
milk must be added, and the batter
should be an inch and a quarter in
thickness. it will take full two hours,
and require careful watching; for if
the top get burned, an unpleasant
flavour will pervade the whole pudding.
or butter some saucers, and
fill them with batter; in a dutch oven
they will bake in about an hour.—another.
to three quarters of a
pound of flour, add the same weight
of stoned raisins, half a pound of
suet or marrow, cut small, a pint of
milk, two eggs, three spoonfuls of
moist sugar, and a little salt. boil
the pudding five hours.—to make a
small rich plum pudding, take three
quarters of a pound of suet finely
shred, half a pound of stoned raisins
a little chopped, three spoonfuls of
flour, three spoonfuls of moist sugar,
a little salt and nutmeg, three
yolks of eggs, and two whites. boil
the pudding four hours in a basin
of tin mould, well buttered. serve
it up with melted butter, white wine
and sugar, poured over it.—for a
large rich pudding, take three pounds
of suet chopped small, a pound and a
half of raisins stoned and chopped, a
pound and a half of currants, three
pounds of flour, sixteen eggs, and a
quart of milk. boil it in a cloth seven
hours. if for baking, put in only a
pint of milk, with two additional
eggs, and an hour and a half will
bake it.—a plum pudding without
eggs may be made of three quarters
of a pound of flour, three quarters
of a pound of suet chopped fine,
three quarters of a pound of stoned
raisins, three quarters of a pound of
currants well washed and dried, a
tea-spoonful of ground ginger, and
rather more of salt. stir all well together,
and add as little milk as will
just mix it up quite stiff. boil the
pudding four hours in a buttered basin.—another.
the same proportions
of flour and suet, and half the
quantity of fruit, with spice, lemon,
a glass of white wine, an egg and
milk, will make an excellent pudding,
but it must be well boiled.
poached eggs. set a stewpan
of water on the fire; when boiling,
slip an egg, previously broken[]
into a cup, into the water. when
the white looks done enough, slide
an egg-slice under the egg, and lay
it on toast and butter, or boiled
spinach. as soon as done enough,
serve them up hot. if the eggs be
not fresh laid, they will not poach
well, nor without breaking. trim
the ragged parts of the whites, and
make them look round.
poison. whenever a quantity
of arsenic has been swallowed, by
design or mistake, its effects may
be counteracted by immediately
drinking plenty of milk. the patient
should afterwards take a dram
of the liver of sulphur, in a pint of
warm water, a little at a time as he
can bear it; or he may substitute
some soap water, a quantity of common
ink, or any other acid, if other
things cannot be readily procured.—to
obviate the ill effects of opium,
taken either in a liquid or solid form,
emetics should be given as speedily
as possible. these should consist
of an ounce each of oxymel squills
and spearmint water, and half a
scruple of ipecacuanha, accompanied
with frequent draughts of water
gruel to assist the operation.—those
poisons which may be called culinary,
are generally the most destructive,
because the least suspected;
no vessels therefore made of copper
or brass should be used in cooking.
in cases where the poison of virdigris
has been recently swallowed,
emetics should first be given, and
then the patient should drink abundance
of cold water.—if any one
has eaten of the deadly nightshade,
he should take an emetic as soon as
possible, and drink a pint of vinegar
or lemon juice in an equal quantity
of water, a little at a time; and as
sleep would prove fatal, he should
keep walking about to prevent it.—for
the bite of the mad dog, or other
venomous animals, nothing is to be depended
on for a cure but immediately
cutting out the bitten part with a
lancet, or burning it out with a red-hot
iron.—to prevent the baneful
effects of burning charcoal, set an
open vessel of boiling water upon
the pan containing the charcoal, and
keep it boiling. the steam arising
from the water will counteract the
effects of the charcoal. painters,
glaziers, and other artificers, should
be careful to avoid the poisonous
effects of lead, by washing their
hands and face clean before meals,
and by never eating in the place
where they work, nor suffering any
food or drink to remain exposed to
the fumes or dust of the metal.
every business of this sort should
be performed as far as possible with
gloves on the hands, to prevent the
metal from working into the pores
of the skin, which is highly injurious,
and lead should never be touched
when it is hot.
poivrade sauce. pick the
skins of twelve shalots, chop them
small, mix with them a table-spoonful
of veal gravy, a gill and a half
of vinegar, half an anchovy pressed
through a fine sieve, and a little salt
and cayenne. if it is to be eaten
with hot game, serve it up boiling:
if with cold, the sauce is to be cold
likewise.—another way. put a
piece of butter the size of half an
egg into a saucepan, with two or
three sliced onions, some of the red
outward part, of carrots, and of the
part answering to it of parsnip, a
clove of garlic, two shalots, two
cloves, a bay leaf, with basil and
thyme. shake the whole over the
fire till it begins to colour, then add
a good pinch of flour, a glass of
red wine, a glass of water, and a
spoonful of vinegar. boil it half
an hour, take off the fat, pass the
sauce through a tammis, add some
salt and pepper, and use it with any
thing that requires a relishing sauce.
polished stoves. steel or
polished stoves may be well cleaned
in a few minutes, by using a piece
of fine-corned emery stone, and afterwards
polishing with flour of[]
emery or rottenstone. if stoves or
fire irons have acquired any rust,
pound some glass to fine powder;
and having nailed some strong woollen
cloth upon a board, lay upon it
a thick coat of gum water, and sift
the powdered glass upon it, and let
it dry. this may be repeated as
often as is necessary to form a sharp
surface, and with this the rust may
easily be rubbed off; but care must
be taken to have the glass finely
powdered, and the gum well dried,
or the polish on the irons will be injured.
fire arms, or similar articles,
may be kept clean for several months,
if rubbed with a mixture consisting
of one ounce of camphor dissolved in
two pounds of hog's lard, boiled and
skimmed, and coloured with a little
black lead. the mixture should be
left on twenty four hours to dry, and
then rubbed off with a linen cloth.
pomade divine. clear a
pound and a half of beef marrow from
the strings and bone, put it into an
earthen pan of fresh water from the
spring, and change the water night
and morning for ten days. then
steep it in rose water twenty four
hours, and drain it in a cloth till quite
dry. take an ounce of each of the
following articles, namely, storax,
gum benjamin, odoriferous cypress
powder, or of florence; half an ounce
of cinnamon, two drams of cloves,
and two drams of nutmeg, all finely
powdered. mix them with the marrow
above prepared, and put all the
ingredients into a pewter pot that
holds three quarts. make a paste
of flour and the white of an egg, and
lay it upon a piece of rag. over that
must be another piece of linen, to
cover the top of the pot very close,
that none of the steam may evaporate.
set the pot into a large copper
pot of water, observing to keep it
steady, that it may not reach to the
covering of the pot that holds the
marrow. as the water shrinks add
more, boiling hot, for it must boil
incessantly for four hours. strain
the ointment through a linen cloth
into small pots, and cover them when
cold. do not touch it with any thing
but silver, and it will keep many
years. a fine pomatum may also
be made by putting half a pound of
fresh marrow prepared as above, and
two ounces of fresh hog's lard, on the
ingredients; and then observing the
same process as above.
pomatum. to make soft pomatum,
beat half a pound of unsalted
fresh lard in common water, then
soak and beat in two different rose-waters.
drain it, and beat it, with
two spoonfuls of brandy. let it
drain from this, then add some essence
of lemon, and keep it in small
pots. or soak half a pound of clear
beef marrow, and a pound of unsalted
fresh lard, in water two of three
days, changing and beating it every
day. put it into a sieve; and when
dry, into a jar, and the jar, into a
saucepan of water. when melted,
pour it into a bason, and beat it with
two spoonfuls of brandy. drain off
the brandy, and add essence of lemon,
bergamot, or any other scent that is
preferred.—for hard pomatum, prepare
as before equal quantities of
beef marrow and mutton suet, using
the brandy to preserve it, and adding
the scent. then pour it into moulds,
or phials, of the size intended for the
rolls. when cold break the bottles,
clear away the glass carefully, and
put paper round the balls.
ponds. stagnant or running
water is often infected with weeds,
which become troublesome and injurious
to the occupier, but which
might easily be prevented by suffering
geese, or particularly swans, to
feed upon the surface. these water
fowls, by nibbling the young shoots
as fast as they arise, will prevent
their growth and appearance on the
surface of the water, and all the expense
which might otherwise be incurred
in clearing them away.
poor man's sauce. pick a
handful of parsley leaves from the[]
stalks, mince them very fine, and
strew over a little salt. shred fine
half a dozen young green onions,
add these to the parsley, and put
them into a sauce boat, with three
table-spoonfuls of oil, and five of
vinegar. add some ground black
pepper and salt, stir them together,
and it is ready. pickled french
beans or gherkins cut fine, may be
added, or a little grated horseradish.
this sauce is much esteemed in
france, where people of taste, weary
of rich dishes, occasionally order
the fare of the peasant.
pork. this is a strong fat
meat, and unless very nicely fed, it
is fit only for hard working people.
young pigs, like lamb and veal,
are fat and luscious, but afford very
little nutriment. pork fed by butchers,
or at distilleries, is very inferior,
and scarcely wholesome; it
is fat and spongy, and utterly unfit
for curing. dairy fed pork is
the best. to judge of pork, pinch
the lean; and if young and good,
it will easily part. if the rind is
tough, thick, and cannot easily be
impressed with the finger, it is old.
a thin rind denotes a good quality
in general. when fresh, the meat
will be smooth and cool: if clammy,
it is tainted. what is called in
some places measly pork, is very
unwholesome; and may be known
by the fat being full of kernels,
which in good pork is never the case.
bacon hogs and porkers are differently
cut up. hogs are kept to
a larger size; the chine or backbone
is cut down on each side, the
whole length, and is a prime part
either boiled or roasted. the sides
of the hog are made into bacon, and
the inside is cut out with very little
meat to the bone. on each side
there is a large sparerib, which is
usually divided into two, a sweet
bone and a blade bone. the bacon
is the whole outside, and contains a
fore leg and a ham; the last of these
is the hind leg, but if left with the
bacon it is called a gammon. hog's
lard is the inner fat of the bacon
hog, melted down. pickled pork is
made of the flesh of the hog, but
more frequently of smaller and
younger meat. porkers are not so
large as hogs, and are generally divided
into four quarters. the fore
quarter has the spring or fore leg,
the fore loin or neck, the sparerib,
and the griskin. the hind quarter
has the leg and the loin. pig's feet
and ears make various good dishes,
and should be cut off before the legs
and cheeks are cured. the bacon
hog is sometimes scalded, to take
off the hair, and sometimes singed.
the porker is always scalded.
pork chops. cut the chops
nearly half an inch thick, trim them
neatly, and beat them flat. put a
piece of butter into the fryingpan;
as soon as it is hot, put in the chops,
turn them often, and they will be
nicely browned in fifteen minutes.
take one upon a plate and try it;
if done, season it with a little finely
minced onion, powdered sage, pepper
and salt. or prepare some
sweet herbs, sage and onion chopped
fine, and put them into a stewpan
with a bit of butter. give them
one fry, beat two eggs on a plate
with a little salt, and the minced
herbs, and mix it all well together.
dip the chops in one at a time,
then cover them with bread crumbs,
and fry them in hot lard or drippings,
till they are of a light brown.
veal, lamb, or mutton chops, are
very good dressed in the same manner.
pork griskin. as this joint
is usually very hard, the best way
is to cover it with cold water, and
let it boil up. then take it out,
rub it over with butter, and set it
before the fire in a dutch oven; a
few minutes will do it.
pork jelly. take a leg of
well-fed pork, just as cut up, beat it,
and break the bone. set it over a
gentle fire, with three gallons of[]
water, and simmer it down to one.
stew with it half an ounce of mace,
and half an ounce of nutmegs, and
strain it through a fine sieve. when
cold, take off the fat, and flavour it
with salt. this jelly is reckoned a
fine restorative in consumptive cases,
and nervous debility, a chocolate-cupful
to be taken three times a
day.
pork as lamb. to dress
pork like lamb, kill a young pig four
or five months old, cut up the fore-quarter
for roasting as you do lamb,
and truss the shank close. the
other parts will make delicate pickled
pork, steaks, or pies.
pork pies. raise some boiled
crust into a round or oval form, and
have ready the trimming and small
bits of pork when a hog is killed.
if these be not sufficient, take the
meat of a sweet bone. beat it well
with a rolling-pin, season with pepper
and salt, and keep the fat and
lean separate. put it in layers, quite
up to the top; lay on the lid, cut the
edge smooth round, and pinch it together.
as the meat is very solid,
it must be baked in a slow soaking
oven. the pork may be put into a
common dish, with a very plain crust,
and be quite as good. observe to
put no bone or water into pork pie:
the outside pieces will be hard, unless
they are cut small, and pressed
close. pork pies in a raised crust,
are intended to be eaten cold.
pork sauce. take two ounces
of the leaves of green sage, an
ounce of lemon peel thinly pared, an
ounce of minced shalot, an ounce of
salt, half a dram of cayenne, and half
a dram of citric acid. steep them
for a fortnight in a pint of claret,
shake it often, and let it stand a day
to settle. decant the clear liquor,
and cork it up close. when wanted,
mix a table-spoonful in a quarter of
a pint of gravy, or melted butter.
this will give a fine relish to roast
pork, or roast goose.
pork sausages. chop fat
and lean pork together, season it with
pepper, salt, and sage. fill hogs'
guts that have been thoroughly soaked
and cleaned, and tie up the ends
carefully. or the minced meat may
be kept in a very small pan, closely
covered, and so rolled and dusted
with flour before it is fried. serve
them up with stewed red cabbage,
mashed potatoes, or poached eggs.
the sausages should be pricked with
a pin, before they are boiled or fried,
or they will be liable to burst.
pork steaks. cut them from
a loin or neck, and of middling thickness.
pepper and broil them, and
keep them turning. when nearly
done, put on salt, rub a bit of butter
over, and serve the moment they
are taken off the fire, a few at a time.
porker's head. choose a
fine young head of pork, clean it well,
and put bread and sage as for pig.
sow it up tight, roast it as a young
pig, on the hanging jack, and serve
it with the same kind of sauce.
portable soup. boil one
or two knuckles of veal, one or two
shins of beef, and three pounds of
beef, in as much water only as will
cover them. take the marrow out
of the bones, put in any kind of spice,
and three large onions. when the
meat is done to rags, strain it off,
and set it in a very cold place. take
off the cake of fat, which will do for
common pie crusts, and put the soup
into a double-bottomed tin saucepan.
set it on a pretty quick fire, but do
not let it burn. it must boil fast and
uncovered, and be stirred constantly
for eight hours. put it into a pan,
and let it stand in a cold place a day;
then pour it into a round soup-dish,
and set the dish into a stewpan of
boiling water on a stove, and let it
boil. stir it now and then, till the
soup is thick and ropy; then it is
enough. pour it into the little round
part at the bottom of cups and basons
turned upside down, to form
it into cakes; and when cold, turn
them out on flannel to dry. keep[]
them in tin canisters; and when to be
used, dissolve them in boiling water.
the flavour of herbs may be added,
by first boiling and straining off the
liquor, and melting the soup in it. this
preparation is convenient in travelling,
or at sea, where fresh meat is
not readily obtained, as by this means
a bason of soup may be made in five
minutes.
porter. this pleasant beverage
may be made with eight bushels
of malt to the hogshead, and eight
pounds of hops. while it is boiling
in the copper, add to it three pounds
of liquorice root bruised, a pound of
spanish liquorice, and twelve pounds
of coarse sugar or treacle.
portugal cakes. take a
pound of well-dried flour, a pound of
loaf sugar, a pound of butter well
washed in orange-flower water, and a
large blade of mace. take half the
flour, and fifteen eggs, leaving out
two of the whites, and work them
well together with the butter for half
an hour, shaking in the rest of the
flour with a dredger. put the cakes
into a cool oven, strewing over them a
little sugar and flour, and let them
bake gently half an hour.
portuguese soles. if the
fish be large, cut it in two: if small,
they need only be split open. the
bones being taken out, put the fish
into a pan with a bit of butter, and
some lemon juice. fry it lightly,
lay it on a dish, spread a forcemeat
over each piece, and roll it round,
fastening the roll with a few small
skewers. lay the rolls into a small
earthen pan, beat up an egg and
smear them, and strew some crumbs
over. put the remainder of the egg
into the bottom of the pan, with a
little meat gravy, a spoonful of caper
liquor, an anchovy chopped fine, and
some minced parsley. cover the
pan close, and bake in a slow oven
till the fish is done enough. place
the rolls in a dish for serving, and
cover it to keep them hot till the
baked gravy is skimmed. if not
enough, a little fresh gravy must be
prepared, flavoured as above, and
added to the fish. this is the portuguese
way of dressing soles.
pound lightly some cold beef, veal,
or mutton. add some fat bacon
lightly fried and cut small, some
onions, a little garlic or shalot, some
parsley, anchovy, pepper, salt, and
nutmeg. pound all fine with a few
crumbs, and bind it with two or
three yolks of eggs. this stuffing is
for baked soles, the heads of which
are to be left on one side of the split
part, and kept on the outer side of
the roll; and when served, the heads
are to be turned towards each other
in the dish. garnish with fried or
dried parsley.
pot herbs. as some of these
are very pungent, they require to be
used with discretion, particularly
basil, savoury, thyme, or knotted
marjoram. the other sorts are
milder, and may be used more freely.
pot pourri. put into a large
china jar the following ingredients
in layers, with bay salt strewed between.
two pecks of damask roses,
part in buds and part blown; violets,
orange flowers and jasmine,
a handful of each; orris root sliced,
benjamin and storax, two ounces
of each; a quarter of an ounce
of musk, a quarter of a pound of
angelica root sliced, a quart of the
red parts of clove gilliflowers, two
handfuls of lavender flowers, half a
handful of rosemary flowers, bay and
laurel leaves, half a handful of each;
three seville oranges, stuck as full
of cloves as possible, dried in a cool
oven and pounded, and two handfuls
of balm of gilead dried. cover all
quite close, and when the pot is uncovered
the perfume is very fine.
potatoe balls. mix some
mashed potatoes with the yolk of an
egg, roll the mass into balls, flour
them, or put on egg and bread
crumbs, and fry them in clean drippings,
or brown them in a dutch[]
oven.—potatoe balls ragout are made
by adding to a pound of potatoes, a
quarter of a pound of grated ham,
or some chopped parsley, or sweet
herbs; adding an onion or shalot,
salt and pepper, a little grated nutmeg
or other spice, and the yolks of
two eggs. they are then to be dressed
as potatoe balls.
potatoe bread. weigh half
a pound of mealy potatoes after they
are boiled or steamed, and rub them
while warm into a pound and a half
of fine flour, dried a little before the
fire. when thoroughly mixed, put
in a spoonful of good yeast, a little
salt, and warm milk and water sufficient
to work into dough. let it
stand by the fire to rise for an hour
and a half, then make it into a loaf,
and bake it in a tolerably brisk oven.
if baked in a tin the crust will be
more delicate, but the bread dries
sooner.—another. to two pounds
of well-boiled mealy potatoes, rubbed
between the hands till they are
as fine as flour, mix in thoroughly
two large double handfuls of wheat
flour, three good spoonfuls of yeast,
a little salt, and warm milk enough
to make it the usual stiffness of
dough. let it stand three or four
hours to rise, then mould it, make it
up, and bake it like common bread.
boil six ounces of potatoes, and four
ounces of lemon peel; beat the latter
in a marble mortar, with four
ounces of sugar. then add the
potatoes, beaten, and four ounces
of butter melted in a little cream.
when well mixed, let it stand to
grow cold. put crust in pattipans,
and rather more than half fill them.
this quantity will make a dozen
cheesecakes, which are to be baked
half an hour in a quick oven, with
some fine powdered sugar sifted
over them.
potatoe fritters. boil
two large potatoes, scrape them
fine; beat up four yolks and three
whites of eggs, and add a large
spoonful of cream, another of sweet
wine, a squeeze of lemon, and a
little nutmeg. beat this batter at
least half an hour, till it be extremely
light. put a good quantity of
fine lard into a stewpan, and drop a
spoonful of the batter at a time into
it, and fry the fritters. serve for
sauce a glass of white wine, the
juice of a lemon, one dessert spoonful
of peach leaf or almond water,
and some white sugar. warm them
together, but do not put the sauce
into the dish.—another way. slice
some potatoes thin, dip them in a
fine batter, and fry them. lemon
peel, and a spoonful of orange-flower
water, should be added to the batter.
serve up the fritters with white
sugar sifted over them.
potatoe paste. pound some
boiled potatoes very fine, and while
warm, add butter sufficient to make
the mash hold together. or mix it
with an egg; and before it gets cold,
flour the board pretty well to prevent
it from sticking, and roll the paste
to the thickness wanted. if suffered
to get quite cold before it be put
on the dish, it will be apt to crack.
potatoe pasty. boil, peel,
and mash some potatoes as fine as
possible. mix in some salt, pepper,
and a good piece of butter. make
a paste, roll it out thin like a large
puff, and put in the potatoe. fold
over one half, pinching the edges,
and bake it in a moderate oven.
potatoe pie. skin some
potatoes, cut them into slices, and
season them. add some mutton,
beef, pork, or veal, and put in alternate
layers of meat and potatoes.
potatoe pudding. to
make a plain potatoe pudding, take
eight ounces of boiled potatoes, two
ounces of butter, the yolks and
whites of two eggs, a quarter of a
pint of cream, a spoonful of white
wine, the juice and rind of a lemon,
and a little salt. beat all to a froth,
sweeten it to taste, make a crust to
it, or not, and bake it. if the pudding[]
is required to be richer, add three
ounces more of butter, another egg,
with sweetmeats and almonds. if
the pudding is to be baked with meat,
boil the potatoes and mash them.
rub the mass through a cullender,
and make it into a thick batter with
milk and two eggs. lay some seasoned
steaks in a dish, then some
batter; and over the last layer of
meat pour the remainder of the batter,
and bake it of a fine brown.—another.
mash some boiled potatoes
with a little milk, season it with
pepper and salt, and cut some fat
meat into small pieces. put a layer
of meat at the bottom of the dish,
and then a layer of potatoe till the
dish is full. smooth the potatoes
on the top, shake a little suet over
it, and bake it to a fine brown.
mashed potatoes may also be baked
as a pudding under meat, or placed
under meat while roasting, or they
may be mixed with batter instead
of flour.
potatoe rolls. boil three
pounds of potatoes, bruise and work
them with two ounces of butter, and
as much milk as will make them pass
through a cullender. take nearly
three quarters of a pint of yeast,
and half a pint of warm water; mix
them with the potatoes, pour the
whole upon five pounds of flour,
and add some salt. knead it well:
if not of a proper consistence, add
a little more warm milk and water.
let it stand before the fire an hour
to rise; work it well, and make it
into rolls. bake them about half
an hour, in an oven not quite so hot
as for bread. the rolls will eat
well, toasted and buttered.
potatoe snow. the whitest
sort of potatoes must be selected,
and free from spots. set them over
the fire in cold water; when they
begin to crack, strain off the water,
and put them into a clean stewpan
by the side of the fire till they are
quite dry, and fall to pieces. rub
them through a wire sieve on the
dish they are to be sent up in, and
do not disturb them afterwards.
potatoe soup. cut a pound
and a half of gravy beef into thin
slices, chop a pound of potatoes,
and an onion or two, and put them
into a kettle with three quarts of water,
half a pint of blue peas, and two
ounces of rice. stew these till the
gravy is quite drawn from the meat,
strain it off, take out the beef, and
pulp the other ingredients through
a coarse sieve. add the pulp to
the soup, cut in two or three roots
of celery, simmer in a clean saucepan
till this is tender, season with
pepper and salt, and serve it up with
fried bread cut into it.
potatoe starch. raw potatoes,
in whatever condition, constantly
afford starch, differing only
in quality. the round grey or red
produce the most, affording about
two ounces of starch to a pound of
pulp. the process is perfectly
easy. peel and wash a pound of
full grown potatoes, grate them on
a bread grater into a deep dish, containing
a quart of clear water. stir
it well up, then pour it through a
hair sieve, and leave it ten minutes
to settle, till the water is quite clear.
then pour off the water, and put a
quart of fresh water to it; stir it
up, let it settle, and repeat this till
the water is quite clear. a fine
white powder will at last be found
at the bottom of the vessel. the
criterion of this process being completed,
is the purity of the water
that comes from it after stirring it
up. lay the powder on a sheet of
paper in a hair sieve to dry, either
in the sun or before the fire, and it
is ready for use. put into a well
stopped bottle, it will keep good for
many months. if this be well made,
a table-spoonful of it mixed with
twice the quantity of cold water, and
stirred into a soup or sauce, just
before it is taken up, will thicken a
pint of it to the consistence of cream.
this preparation much resembles[]
the indian arrow root, and is a good
substitute for it. it gives a fulness
on the palate to gravies and sauces
at hardly any expense, and is often
used to thicken melted butter instead
of flour. being perfectly tasteless,
it will not alter the flavour of the
most delicate broth or gruel.
potatoes. the following is
allowed to be a superior method of
raising potatoes, and of obtaining a
larger and finer growth. dig the earth
twelve inches deep, if the soil will admit,
and afterwards open a hole about
six inches deep, and twelve wide.
fill it with horse dung, or long litter,
about three inches thick, and plant
a whole potatoe upon it; shake a
little more dung over it, and mould
up the earth. in this way the whole
plot of ground should be planted,
placing the potatoes at least sixteen
inches apart. when the young
shoots make their appearance, they
should have fresh mould drawn round
them with a hoe; and if the tender
shoots are covered, it will prevent the
frost from injuring them. they
should again be earthed, when the
roots make a second appearance, but
not covered, as in all probability the
season will be less severe. a plentiful
supply of mould should be given
them, and the person who performs
this business should never tread upon
the plant, or the hillock that is raised
round it, as the lighter the earth is
the more room the potatoe will have
to expand. in holland, the potatoes
are strangely cultivated, though there
are persons who give the preference
to dutch potatoes, supposing them
to be of a finer grain than others.
they are generally planted in the
fields, in rows, nearly as thick as
beans or peas, and are suffered to
grow up wild and uncultivated, the
object being to raise potatoes as
small as possible, while the large
ones, if such there happen to be, are
thrown out and given to the pigs.
the mode of cultivation in ireland,
where potatoes are found in the greatest
perfection, is far different, and
probably the best of all. the round
rough red are generally preferred,
and are esteemed the most genuine.
these are planted in rows, and only
just put in beneath the soil. these
rows are divided into beds about six
feet wide, a path or trench is left
between the beds, and as the plants
vegetate the earth is dug out of the
trench, and thrown lightly over the
potatoes. this practice is continued
all the summer, the plants are thus
nourished by the repeated accession
of fresh soil, and the trench as it
deepens serves the purpose of keeping
the beds dry, and of carrying off
the superfluous water. the potatoes
are always rich and mealy, containing
an unusual quantity of wholesome
flour.
potatoes boiled. the vegetable
kingdom scarcely affords any
food more wholesome, more easily
procured, easily prepared, or less
expensive than the potatoe; yet although
this most useful vegetable is
dressed almost every day, in almost
every family,—for one plate of potatoes
that comes to table as it should,
ten are spoiled. there is however a
great diversity in the colour, size,
shape, and quality of the potatoe,
and some are of a very inferior description.
the yellow are better than
the white, but the rough red are the
most mealy and nutritive. choose
those of a moderate size, free from
blemishes, and fresh. it is best to
buy them in the mould, as they come
from the bed, and they should not
be wetted till they are cleaned for
cooking. protect them from the air
and frost, by laying in heaps in a
dry place, covering them with mats,
or burying them in dry sand. if
the frost affects them, the life of the
vegetable is destroyed, and the potatoe
speedily rots. when they are to
be dressed, wash them, but do not
pare or cut them, unless they are very
large. fill a saucepan half full of
potatoes of an equal size, and add as[]
much cold water as will cover them
about an inch. most boiled things
are spoiled by having too little water,
but potatoes are often spoiled by too
much: they should merely be covered,
and a little allowed for waste in
boiling. set them on a moderate fire
till they boil, then take them off, and
place them on the side of the fire
to simmer slowly, till they are soft
enough to admit a fork. the usual
test of their skin cracking is not to
be depended on, for if they are boiled
fast this will happen when the potatoes
are not half done, and the inside
is quite hard. pour off the water
the minute the potatoes are done, or
they will become watery and sad;
uncover the saucepan, and set it at
such a distance from the fire as will
prevent its burning; the superfluous
moisture will then evaporate, and the
potatoes become perfectly dry and
mealy. this method is in every
respect equal to steaming, and the
potatoes are dressed in half the
time.
potatoes broiled. parboil,
then slice and broil them. or
parboil, and set them whole on the
gridiron over a very slow fire. when
thoroughly done, send them up with
their skins on. this method is practised
in many irish families.
potatoes in cream. half
boil some potatoes, drain and peel
them nicely, and cut into neat pieces.
put them into a stewpan with some
cream, fresh butter, and salt, of each
a proportion to the quantity of potatoes;
or instead of cream, put some
good gravy, with pepper and salt.
stew them very gently, and be careful
to prevent their breaking.
potatoes fried. if they
are whole potatoes, first boil them
nearly enough, and then put them
into a stewpan with a bit of butter,
or some nice clean beef drippings.
to prevent their burning, shake them
about till they are brown and crisp,
and then drain them from the fat. it
would be an elegant improvement, to
flour and dip them in the yolk of an
egg previous to frying, and then roll
them in fine sifted bread crumbs:
they would then deserve to be called
potatoes full dressed.—if to be fried
in slices or shavings, peel some large
potatoes, slice them about a quarter of
an inch thick, or cut them in shavings
round and round, as in peeling a
lemon. dry them well in a clean
cloth, and fry them in lard or dripping.
take care that the fat and the
fryingpan are both perfectly clean.
put the pan on a quick fire; as soon
as the lard boils, and is still, put in
the potatoe slices, and keep moving
them till they are crisp. take them
up and lay them to drain on a sieve,
and then send them to table with a
very little salt sprinkled over.—to
fry cold potatoes, put a bit of clean
dripping into a fryingpan. when
melted, slice in the potatoes with a
little pepper and salt; set them on
the fire, and keep them stirring.
when quite hot, they are ready.
this is a good way of re-dressing potatoes,
and making them palatable.
potatoes mashed. when
the potatoes are thoroughly boiled,
drain and dry them well, and pick
out every speck. rub them through
a cullender into a clean stewpan: to a
pound of potatoes allow half an ounce
of butter, and a spoonful of milk.
mix it up well, but do not make it
too moist. after lady day, when
potatoes are getting old and specked,
and also in frosty weather, this
is the best way of dressing them.
if potatoes are to be mashed with
onions, boil the onions, and pass
them through a sieve. mix them with
the potatoes, in such a proportion as
is most approved.
potatoes preserved. to
keep potatoes from the frost, lay
them up in a dry store room, and
cover them with straw, or a linen
cloth. if this be not convenient, dig
a trench three or four feet deep, and
put them in as they are taken up.
cover them with the earth taken out[]
of the trench, raise it up in the middle
like the roof of a house, and cover
it with straw so as to carry off
the rain. better still if laid above
ground, and covered with a sufficient
quantity of mould to protect them
from the frost, as in this case they
are less likely to be injured by the
wet. potatoes may also be preserved
by suffering them to remain
in the ground, and digging them up
in the spring of the year, as they
are wanted.
potatoes roasted. choose
them nearly of a size, wash and dry
the potatoes, and put them in a
dutch oven, or cheese toaster. take
care not to place them too near the
fire, or they will burn on the outside
before they are warmed through.
large potatoes will require two
hours to roast them properly, unless
they are previously half boiled.
when potatoes are to be roasted
under meat, they should first be
half boiled, drained from the water,
and placed in the pan under the
meat. baste them with some of the
dripping, and when they are browned
on one side, turn and brown them
on the other. send them up round
the meat, or in a small dish.
potatoes scalloped. having
boiled and mashed the potatoes,
butter some clean scallop shells, or
pattipans, and put in the potatoes.
smooth them on the top, cross a
knife over them, strew on a few fine
bread crumbs, sprinkle them a little
with melted butter from a paste
brush, and then set them in a dutch
oven. when they are browned on
the top, take them carefully out of
the shells, and brown the other
side.
potatoes steamed. the
potatoes must be well washed, but
not pared, and put into the steamer
when the water boils. moderate
sized potatoes will require three
quarters of an hour to do them properly.
they should be taken up as
soon as they are done enough, or
they will become watery: peel them
afterwards.
potted beef. take two
pounds of lean beef, rub it with saltpetre,
and let it lie one night. then
lay on common salt, and cover it
with water four days in a small pan.
dry it with a cloth, season it with
black pepper, lay it into as small a
pan as will hold it, cover it with
coarse paste, but put in no liquor,
and bake it five hours in a very cool
oven. when cold, pick out the
strings and fat. beat the meat very
fine, with a quarter of a pound of
fine butter just warm, but not oiled,
and as much of the gravy as will
make it into a paste. put it into
very small pots, and cover them with
clarified butter.—another way.
take beef that has been dressed,
either boiled or roasted; beat it in
a mortar with some pepper and salt,
a few cloves, grated nutmeg, and a
little fine butter just warm. this
eats as well as the former, but the
colour is not so fine. it is however
a good way for using the remains of
a large joint.
potted birds. having cleaned
them nicely, rub every part well
with a seasoning of white pepper
and salt, mace and allspice in fine
powder. put them in a pan, lay on
some butter, cover it with a paste
of coarse flour, and a paper tied
closely over. when baked and
grown cold, cut them into pieces
proper for helping, pack them close
into a large potting-pan, and leave
as little space as possible to receive
the butter. cover them with butter,
and one third less will be wanted
than when the birds are done whole.
potted cheese. cut and
pound four ounces of cheshire
cheese, one ounce and a half of fine
butter, a tea-spoonful of white powdered
sugar, a little bit of mace,
and a glass of white wine. press it
down in a deep pot.
potted damsons. weigh
the damsons, and wipe them dry[]
one by one, allowing one pound of
fine sugar to three pounds of fruit.
spread a little of the sugar at the
bottom of the jar, then a layer of
fruit, and so on till the jar is full.
then add three or four spoonfuls of
water, tie it down close, and put it
several times into a cool oven.
potted dripping. boil six
pounds of good beef dripping in soft
water, strain it into a pan, and let
it stand to cool. take off the hard
fat, scrape off the gravy, and repeat
it several times. when the fat is
cold and hard, put it into a saucepan
with six bay leaves, six cloves,
half a pound of salt, and a quarter
of a pound of whole pepper. let
the fat be entirely melted; and
when it has cooled a little, strain it
through a sieve into the pot, and tie
it down. turn the pot upside down,
that no rats or mice may get at it,
and it will keep a long time, and
make good puff paste, or crust for
puddings.
potted hare. an old hare
will do well for this purpose, likewise
for soup and pie. after seasoning
it, bake it with butter. when
cold, take the meat from the bones,
and beat it in a mortar. if not high
enough, add salt, mace, pepper, and
a piece of fresh butter melted in a
spoonful or two of gravy that came
from the hare. when well mixed,
put it into small pots, and cover it
with butter. the legs and back
should be baked at the bottom of
the jar, to keep them moist, and
the bones be put over them.
potted herrings. scale,
clean, and season them well. bake
them in a pan with spice, bay leaves,
and some butter. when cold, lay
them in a potting pot, and cover
them over with butter. they are
very fine for a supper dish.
potted lobsters. half
boil them, pick out the meat, cut it
into small pieces, season with mace,
white pepper, nutmeg, and salt.
press it close into a pot, and cover
it with butter; bake it half an hour,
and then put in the spawn. when
cold take out the lobster, and put
it into pots with a little of the butter.
beat the rest of the butter in
a mortar, with some of the spawn,
mix the coloured butter with as
much as will be sufficient to cover
the pots, and strain it. cayenne
may be added, if approved.—another
way. take out the meat as
whole as possible, split the tail, and
remove the gut; and if the inside
be not watery, it may be added.
season with mace, nutmeg, white
pepper, salt, and a clove or two, in
the finest powder. lay a little fine
butter at the bottom of the pan, and
the lobster smooth over it, with bay
leaves between; cover it with butter,
and bake it gently. when done,
pour the whole on the bottom of a
sieve; and with a fork lay the pieces
into potting pots, some of each sort,
with the seasoning about it. when
cold, pour clarified butter over, but
not hot. it will be good the next
day; but if highly seasoned, and
well covered with butter, it will keep
some time. potted lobster may be
used cold, or as a fricassee, with a
cream sauce. it then looks very
nicely, and eats well, especially if
there is spawn. mackarel, herrings,
and trout, are good potted in the
same way.
potted mackerel. clean,
season, and bake them in a pan with
spice, bay leaves, and some butter.
when cold, lay them in a pot for
potting, and cover them over with
butter.
potted moor game. pick,
singe, and wash the birds nicely.
dry and season them pretty high,
inside and out, with pepper, mace,
nutmeg, allspice, and salt. pack
them in as small a pot as will hold
them, cover them with butter, and
bake in a very slow oven. when
cold, take off the butter, dry them
from the gravy, and put one bird into
each pot, which should just fit. add[]
as much more butter as will cover
them, but take care that it be not
oiled. the best way to melt it is,
by warming it in a bason placed in
a bowl of hot water.
potted partridge. clean
them nicely, and season with mace,
allspice, white pepper, and salt, all
in fine powder. rub every part
well, then lay the breast downwards
in a pan, and pack the birds as close
as possible. put a good deal of
butter on them, cover the pan with
a paste of coarse flour and a paper
over, tie it close and bake it. when
cold, put the birds into pots, and
cover them with butter. the butter
that has covered potted things
will serve for basting, or for paste
for meat pies.
potted pigeons. let them
be quite fresh, clean them carefully,
and season them with salt and pepper.
lay them close in a small deep
pan; for the smaller the surface,
and the closer they are packed, the
less butter will be wanted. cover
them with butter, then with very
thick paper tied down, and bake
them. when cold, put them dry
into pots that will hold two or three
in each, and pour butter over them,
using that which was baked in part.
if they are to be kept, the butter
should be laid pretty thick over them.
if pigeons were boned, and then put
in an oval form into the pot, they
would lie closer, and require less
butter. they may be stuffed with
a fine forcemeat made with veal,
bacon, and the other ingredients,
and then they will eat very fine. if
a high flavour is preferred, add
mace, allspice, and a little cayenne,
before baking.
potted rabbits. cut up two
or three young but full-grown rabbits,
and take off the leg bones at
the thigh. pack them as closely as
possible in a small pan, after seasoning
them with pepper, salt, mace,
allspice, and cayenne, all in very
fine powder. make the top as
smooth as possible. keep out the
heads and the carcase bones, but
take off the meat about the neck.
put in a good deal of butter, and
bake the whole gently. keep it two
days in the pan, then shift it into
small pots, with some additional
butter. when a rabbit is to be
blanched, set it on the fire with a
small quantity of cold water, and let
it boil. it is then to be taken out
immediately, and put into cold water
for a few minutes.
potted salmon. scale and
wipe a large piece of salmon, but
do not wash it. salt it, and let it
lie till the salt is melted and drained
from it; then season it with pounded
mace, cloves, and whole pepper.
lay in a few bay leaves, put it close
into a pan, cover it over with butter,
and bake it. when well done, drain
it from the gravy, put it into pots to
keep, and when cold cover it with
clarified butter. any kind of firm
fish may be potted in the same
manner.
potted shrimps. when
boiled, take them out of the skins,
and season them with salt, white
pepper, and a very little mace and
cloves. press them into a pot, set
it in the oven ten minutes, and when
cold lay on butter.
potted trout. scale and
draw out the entrails of the fish
without opening the belly, give them
a wash, and let them drain from the
water. season the fish well with salt,
pepper, cloves, mace, and ginger.
lay them into a broad pan in two
layers, cover them with butter, and
then with paper. lay some sticks
across the pan to keep the paper up.
bake them moderately, then take
them out and drain them. put them
into pots in two layers, and fill up
the pots with clarified butter, as
cool as it can be to run properly.
any other fish may be potted in the
same way.
potted veal. cold fillet
makes the finest potted veal, or it[]
may be done as follows. season a
large slice of the fillet before it is
dressed, with some mace, peppercorns,
and two or three cloves. lay
it close into a potting pan that will
but just hold it, fill the pan up with
water, and bake it three hours.
then pound it in a mortar, and flavour
it with salt. in pounding, put
to it a little of the baked gravy, if
the meat is to be eaten soon; otherwise
only a little butter just melted.
when done, cover it over with butter.
to pot veal or chicken with
ham, pound some cold veal or the
white of a chicken, seasoned as
above, and place layers of it with
layers of ham pounded, or rather
shred. press down each, and cover
the whole with clarified butter.
potted venison. if the venison
be stale, rub it with vinegar,
dry it with a cloth, and rub it well
with red wine. season it with pepper,
salt, and mace, and put it into
a jar. pour over it half a pint of
red wine, lay in a pound of butter,
and bake it tender. when it is done,
clean it from the bones and skin,
and beat it in a marble mortar with
the fat and gravy. press it hard
into the pots, and pour clarified
butter over it.
poultices. common poultice
is best made of white bread, put into
boiling water till it is of a proper
thickness. then let it boil, and add
a bit of lard, or a little sweet oil.
water answers the purpose better
than milk, as the poultice thus made
will retain the moisture longer.—a
poultice to ripen tumours or
swellings, should consist of two
ounces of white lily roots, half a
pound of figs, and two ounces of
meal or bean flour. these are to be
boiled in water till it comes to a
proper consistence; the poultice is
then spread on a thick cloth, applied
warm, and shifted as often as it
grows dry.—carrot poultice is made
of clean grated carrots mixed with
water, so as to form a soft pulp.
this is an excellent poultice to ease
pain arising from a sore; it not only
cleanses it, but takes off the offensive
smell which generally attends
such complaints. it also affords
great relief in cancers, and should
be changed twice a day.
poultry. previously to their
being dressed, every description of
game and poultry requires to be
carefully picked, and neatly trussed;
every plug should be removed, and
the hair nicely singed with white
paper. in drawing poultry, care
must be taken not to break the gall
bag, for no washing will take off the
bitter where it has touched. in
dressing wild fowl, a brisk clear
fire must be kept up, that they may
be done of a fine yellow brown, but
so as to leave the gravy in: the fine
flavour is lost if done too much.
tame fowls require more roasting,
and are longer in heating through
than others. all sorts should be
continually basted, that they may
be served up with a froth, and appear
of a fine colour. a large fowl
will take three quarters of an hour,
a middling one half an hour, and a
small one, or a chicken, twenty minutes.
the fire must be very quick
and clear, before any fowls are put
down. a capon will take from half
an hour to thirty-five minutes, a
goose an hour, wild ducks a quarter
of an hour, pheasants twenty
minutes, a small stuffed turkey an
hour and a quarter, turkey poults
twenty minutes, grouse a quarter of
an hour, quails ten minutes, and partridges
about twenty-five minutes. a
hare will take nearly an hour, and the
hind part requires most heat. pigs
and geese require a brisk fire, and
quick turning. hares and rabbits
must be well attended to, and the
extremities brought to the quick
part of the fire, to be done equally
with the backs.
poultry yard. in the rearing
of poultry, care should be taken
to choose a fine large breed, or the[]
ends of good management may be
defeated. the dartford sort is
generally approved, but it is difficult
to say which is to be preferred, if
they be but healthy and vigorous.
the black sort are very juicy, but
as their legs are so much discoloured,
they are not well adapted for
boiling. those hens are usually
preferred for setting, which have
tufts of feathers on their head;
those that crow are not considered
so profitable. some fine young
fowls should be reared every year,
to keep up a stock of good breeders,
and bad layers and careless nurses
should be excluded. the best age
for a setting hen is from two to five
years, and it is necessary to remark
which among them are the best
breeders. hens set twenty days,
and convenient places should be
provided for their laying, which
will also serve for setting and hatching.
a hen house should be large
and high, should be frequently
cleaned out, and well secured from
the approach of vermin, or the eggs
will be sucked, and the fowls destroyed.
hens must not be disturbed
while sitting, for if frightened,
they are apt to forsake their
nests. wormwood and rue should
be planted about their houses; some
of the former should occasionally
be boiled, and sprinkled about the
floor, which should not be paved,
but formed of smooth earth. the
windows of the house should be
open to the rising sun, and a hole
left at the door to let in the smaller
fowls; the larger may be let in and
out by opening the door. there
should be a small sliding board to
shut down when the fowls are gone
to roost, to prevent the ravages of
vermin, and a strong door and lock
should be added, to secure the
poultry from thieves and robbers.
let the hens lay some time before
they are allowed to set, the proper
time for which will be from the end
of february to the beginning of
may. broods of chickens are hatched
all through the summer, but those
that come out very late require care
till they have gained sufficient
strength. feed the hens well during
the time of laying, and give
them oats occasionally. if the eggs
of any other sort are put under a
hen with some of her own, observe
to add her own as many days after
the others as there is a difference in
the length of their setting. a turkey
and duck set thirty days, the
hen only twenty. choose large
clear eggs to put her upon, and such
a number as she can properly cover;
about ten or twelve are quite
sufficient. if the eggs be very large,
they sometimes contain a double
yolk, and in that case neither will
be productive. when some of the
chickens are hatched, long before
the others, it may be necessary to
keep them in a basket of wool till
the others come forth. the day
after they are hatched, give them
some crumbs of white bread or grots
soaked in milk, which are very nourishing.
as soon as they have gained
a little strength, feed them with
curd, cheese parings cut small, or
any soft food, but nothing that is
sour, and provide them with clean
water twice a day. keep the hen
under a pen till the young have
strength to follow her about, which
will be in two or three weeks; and
be sure to feed the hen well. poultry
in general should be fed as nearly
as possible at the same hour of
the day, and in the same place, as
this will be the surest way of collecting
them together. potatoes boiled
in a little water, so as to be dry and
mealy, and then cut, and wetted
with skim milk that is not sour,
will form an agreeable food for
poultry, and young turkies will
thrive much on it. grain should
however be given occasionally, or
the constant use of potatoe food
will make their flesh soft and insipid.
the food of fowls goes first[]
into the crop, which softens it; it
then passes into the gizzard, which
by constant friction macerates it;
this is facilitated by small stones
which are generally found there,
and which help to digest the food.
if a setting hen be troubled with
vermin, let her be well washed with
a decoction of white lupins. the
pip in fowls is occasioned by drinking
dirty water, or taking filthy
food. the general symptom is a
white thin scale on the tongue, which
should be pulled off with the finger;
afterwards rub the tongue with a
little salt, and the disorder will be
removed.—geese require a somewhat
different management. they
generally breed once in a year; but
if well kept, they will frequently
hatch twice within that period.
three of these birds are usually allotted
to a gander; if there were
more, the eggs would be rendered
abortive. the quantity of eggs to
be placed under each goose while
setting, is about a dozen or thirteen.
while brooding, they should be well
fed with corn and water, which must
be placed near them, so that they
may eat at pleasure. the ganders
should never be excluded from their
company, because they are then
instinctively anxious to watch over
and guard their own geese. the
nests of geese should be made of
straw, and so confined that the eggs
may not roll out, as the geese turn
them every day. when they are
nearly hatched, it is proper to break
the shell near the back of the young
gosling, as well for the purpose of
admitting the air, as to enable it to
make its escape at the proper time.
to fatten young geese, the best way
is to coop them up in a dark narrow
place, where they are to be fed
with ground malt mixed with milk;
or if milk be scarce, with barley
meal mashed up with water. a
less expensive way will be to give
them boiled oats, with either duck's
meat or boiled carrots; and as they
are very fond of variety, these may
be given them alternately. they
will then become fat in a few weeks,
and their flesh will acquire a fine
flavour. in order to fatten stubble
geese at michaelmas time, the way
is to turn them out on the wheat
stubble, or those pastures that grow
after wheat has been harvested.
they are afterwards to be pent up,
and fed with ground malt mixed
with water. boiled oats or wheat
may occasionally be substituted.—ducks
are fattened in the same
manner, only they must be allowed
a large pan of water to dabble in.
those kept for breeders, should
have the convenience of a large
pond; and such as have their bills
a little turned up will generally be
found the most prolific. in the
spring of the year, an additional
number of ducks may be reared by
putting the eggs under the care of
the hen, who will hatch them as her
own brood.—turkies, early in the
spring, will often wander to a distance
in order to construct their
nest, where the hen deposits from
fourteen to seventeen eggs, but seldom
produces more than one brood
in a season. great numbers are
reared in the northern counties, and
driven by hundreds to the london
market by means of a shred of scarlet
cloth fastened to the end of a
pole, which from their antipathy to
this colour serves as a whip. turkies
being extremely delicate fowls,
are soon injured by the cold: hence
it is necessary, soon after they are
hatched, to force them to swallow
one whole peppercorn each, and
then restore them to the parent
bird. they are also liable to a peculiar
disorder, which often proves
fatal in a little time. on inspecting
the rump feathers, two or three of
their quills will be found to contain
blood; but on drawing them out,
the chickens soon recover, and afterwards
require no other care than
common poultry. young turkies[]
should be fed with crumbs of bread
and milk, eggs boiled hard and
chopped, or with common dock
leaves cut fine, and mixed with fresh
butter-milk. they also require to
be kept in the sunshine or a warm
place, and guarded from the rain,
or from running among the nettles.
they are very fond of the common
garden peppercress, or cut-leaved
cress, and should be supplied with
as much of it as they will eat, or
allowed to pick it off the bed. in
norfolk they are fed with curds and
chopped onions, also with buck
wheat, and are literally crammed
with boluses of barley meal till
their crops are full, which perhaps
may account for the superior excellence
of the turkies in that part of
the kingdom.
pounce. this article, used in
writing, is made of gum sandaric,
powdered and sifted very fine; or
an equal quantity of rosin, burnt
alum, and cuttle fishbone well dried,
and mixed together. this last is
of a superior quality.
pound cake. beat a pound
of butter to a cream, and mix with
it the whites and yolks of eight eggs
beaten apart. have ready warm
by the fire, a pound of flour, and
the same of sifted sugar. mix them
and a few cloves, a little nutmeg
and cinnamon, in fine powder together;
then by degrees work the dry
ingredients into the butter and eggs.
it must be well beaten for a full
hour, adding a glass of wine, and
some carraway seeds. butter a pan,
and bake it a full hour in a quick
oven. the above proportions, leaving
out four ounces of the butter, and
the same of sugar, make a less luscious
cake, but a very pleasant one.
pounded cheese. cut a
pound of good mellow cheese into
thin slices, add to it two or three
ounces of fresh butter, rub them
well together in a mortar till quite
smooth. when cheese is dry, and
for those whose digestion is feeble,
this is the best way of eating it;
and spread on bread, it makes an
excellent supper. the flavour of
this dish may be encreased by
pounding it with curry powder,
ground spice, black cayenne, and a
little made mustard; or it may be
moistened with a glass of sherry.
if pressed down hard in a jar, and
covered with clarified butter, it will
keep for several days in cool weather.
when fresh they have a sweet flavour,
are firm and stiff, and of a
bright colour. shrimps are of the
prawn kind, and may be judged by
the same rules.
prawn soup. boil six whitings
and a large eel, in as much water
as will cover them, after being
well cleaned. skim them clean,
and put in whole pepper, mace,
ginger, parsley, or onion, a little
thyme, and three cloves, and boil the
whole to a mash. pick fifty crawfish,
or a hundred prawns; pound
the shells, and a small roll. but
first boil them with a little water,
vinegar, salt, and herbs. put this
liquor over the shells in a sieve, and
then pour the soup, clear from the
sediment. chop a lobster, and add
this to it, with a quart of good beef
gravy. add also the tails of the
crawfish, or the prawns, with some
flour and butter. the seasoning
may be heightened, if approved.
preserves. these can never be
done to perfection, without plenty of
good sugar. fruits may be kept with
small quantities of sugar, but then
they must boil so long that there is
as much waste in the boiling away,
as some more sugar added at first
would have cost, and the quality of
the preserve will neither be so proper
for use, nor of so good an appearance,
as with a larger proportion
of sugar, and moderate boiling.
fruits are often put up without any
sugar at all, but if they do not ferment
and spoil, which is very common,[]
they must have a good deal of
sugar added to them when used, and
thus the risk of spoiling seems hardly
compensated by any saving. the
only real economy that can be exercised
in this case is, not to make any
preserves at all. the most perfect
state in which fruits in general can be
taken for preserving is, just when
they are full ripe. sooner than this
they have not acquired their best
qualities, and if they hang long after
it they begin to lose them. some
persons will delay the doing them,
under an idea that the longer they
hang the less sugar they require. but
it is a false economy that would lose
the perfection of the fruit to save
some of the sugar, and probably
quite unfounded in fact, as all things
will naturally keep the best that are
taken at their highest perfection, and
hence do with as little sugar then as
at any time.
choose such as are most free from
seed; some should be small to preserve
whole, and others large to cut
in pieces. put them into a jar, with
strong salt and water, and a cabbage
leaf to keep them down, and set them
in a warm place till they turn yellow.
then wash and set them over the fire
in fresh water, with a little salt, and
a fresh cabbage leaf over them;
cover the pan close, but they must
not be boiled. if not of a fine green,
change the water, cover them as before,
and make them hot; when of
a good green, take them off the fire,
and let them stand till cold. cut the
large cucumbers in quarters, and take
out the seeds and pulp; put them into
cold water for two days, and change
the water twice each day. place on
the fire a pound of refined sugar, with
half a pint of water; skim it clean,
put in the rind of a lemon, and an
ounce of ginger with the outside
scraped off. when the syrup is
pretty thick take it off, and when
cold wipe the cucumbers dry, and
put them in. boil the syrup every
two or three days, continuing to do
so for three weeks, and make it
stronger if necessary. be sure to
put the syrup to the cucumbers quite
cold, cover them close, and keep
them in a dry place.
preserved oysters. open
the oysters carefully, so as not to
cut them, except in dividing the
gristle which attaches the shells.
put them into a mortar, and add
about two drams of salt to a dozen
oysters. pound and then rub them
through the back of a hair sieve, and
put them into the mortar again, with
as much well-dried flour as will make
them into a paste. roll it out several
times, and at last flour and
roll it out the thickness of a half
crown, and divide it into pieces about
an inch square. lay them in a
dutch oven, that they may dry gently
without being burnt; turn them
every half hour, and when they begin
to dry, crumble them. they will
take about four hours to dry, then
pound them fine, sift and put them
into bottles, and seal them down.
to make half a pint of oyster sauce,
put one ounce of butter into a stewpan,
with three drams of oyster powder,
and six spoonfuls of milk. set
it on a slow fire, stir it till it boils,
and season it with salt. this powder,
if made of plump juicy natives,
will abound with the flavour of the
fish; and if closely corked, and
kept in a dry place, will remain good
for some time. it is also an agreeable
substitute when oysters are out
of season, and is a valuable addition
to the list of fish sauces. it is equally
good with boiled fowl, or rump
steak; and sprinkled on bread and
butter, it makes a very good sandwich.
preserved walnuts. put
the walnuts into cold water, let them
boil five minutes, strain off the water,
and change it three times. dry
the nuts in a cloth, and weigh them;
to every pound of nuts allow a pound
of sugar, and stick a clove in each.[]
put them into a jar with some rose
vinegar; boil up a syrup, with a
pint of water and half a pound of
sugar, and pour over them. let
them stand three or four days, and
boil up the syrup again. repeat
this three times, and at last give the
walnuts a good scald, and let them
remain in the syrup.
butter, as it is generally cured, does
not keep well for any length of time,
without spoiling or becoming rancid.
the following method of preserving
butter, supposing it to have been
previously well made, is recommended
as the best at present known.
reduce separately to fine powder in
a dry mortar, two pounds of the
whitest common salt, one pound of
saltpetre, and one pound of lump
sugar. sift these ingredients one
above another, on two sheets of paper
joined together, and then mix
them well with the hands, or with a
spatula. preserve the whole in a
covered jar, placed in a dry situation.
when required to be used, one ounce
of this composition is to be proportioned
to every pound of butter, and
the whole is to be well worked into
the mass: the butter is then to be
packed in casks in the usual way.
butter cured with this mixture will
be of a rich marrowy consistence,
and will never acquire that brittle
hardness so common to salt butter.
it has been known to keep for three
years, as sweet as it was at first; but
it must be observed, that butter thus
cured requires to stand at least three
weeks or a month before it is used.
if it be opened sooner, the salts are
not sufficiently blended with it, and
sometimes the coolness of the nitre
will then be perceived, which totally
disappears afterwards. cleanliness
in this article is indispensable, but
it is not generally suspected, that
butter made or kept in vessels or
troughs lined with lead, or put into
glazed earthenware pans, is too apt
to be contaminated with particles of
that deleterious metal. if the butter
is in the least degree rancid, this
can hardly fail to take place; and it
cannot be doubted, that during the
decomposition of the salts, the glazing
is acted upon. it is better therefore
to use tinned vessels for mixing
the preservative with the butter, and
to pack it either in wooden vessels,
or in stone jars which are vitrified
throughout, and do not require any
inside glazing.
pressed beef. salt a piece
of the brisket, a thin part of the
flank, or the tops of the ribs, with
salt and saltpetre five days. boil it
gently till extremely tender, put it
under a great weight, or in a cheesepress,
and let it remain till perfectly
cold. it is excellent for sandwiches,
or a cold dish.
primrose vinegar. boil
four pounds of moist sugar in ten
quarts of water for about a quarter
of an hour, and take off the scum.
then pour the liquor on six pints of
primroses, add some fresh yeast before
it is quite cold, and let it work
all night in a warm place. when
the fermentation is over, close up
the barrel, and still keep it in a warm
place.
put half a pound of loaf
sugar, and half a pound of fresh
butter, into a saucepan; set it over
the fire till both are melted, stirring
it well, as it is very liable to burn,
but do not let it boil. pour this into
an earthen pan, grate the rind of a
lemon into it, and leave it to cool.
have ready two sponge biscuits
soaked in a quarter of a pint of
cream, bruise them fine and stir them
into the sugar and butter. beat the
yolks of ten, and the whites of five
eggs well with a little salt; squeeze
and strain the juice of the lemon
into them, and mix these well in with
the other ingredients. lay a puff
paste into the dish, strew it with
pieces of candied lemon peel, put in
the pudding, and bake it three[]
quarters of an hour in a moderate
oven. sift fine sugar over it, before
it is sent to the table.
provisions. the first of all
requisites for human sustenance is
bread, which with great propriety
is denominated 'the staff of life.'
the next to this is meat, which
though not alike essential, is of great
importance in strengthening and invigorating
the human frame. the
former of these constituting the
principal food of great numbers,
and a part of the sustenance of all
people, it is highly necessary to attend
carefully to the ingredients of
which it is composed, and to the
manner in which it is prepared. a
person's health must inevitably be
injured by bad corn and flour, and
even by what is good, when improperly
prepared. the best flour is
often made into bad bread by not
suffering it to rise sufficiently; by
not kneading it well, by not baking
it enough, and by keeping it too
long. mixing other substances with
the flour also injures the quality of
the bread in a very high degree.
these faults have a bad effect on
those who generally eat such bread,
but the injury is still more serious
to children and weakly persons.
where the flour is corrupted, the
use of it in every other article of
food, will of course be as unwholesome
as in that of bread. the mere
exposure to the air will evaporate
and deaden all flour, though the
grain may never have passed through
any fermentation or digestion; as in
the instance of wheat flour, the
strongest and the best of any other.
for this reason, flour which has
been ground five or six weeks, or
longer, though it be kept close in
sacks or barrels, will not make so
sweet a loaf, nor one so moist and
pleasant, as that which is newly
ground. hence all bread made in
london eats drier and harsher than
bread in the country, which is made
within a few days after the grinding
of the wheat. all grains which are
ground, ought therefore to be used
as soon afterwards as possible. but
this is not the most profitable to the
dealers in meal, as meal newly
ground will not part so freely from
the bran, nor consequently yield so
much flour, as when it lies a certain
time after the grinding; for this disposes
the branny and floury parts
to give way from each other, and
thus they separate easier and more
completely than when dressed immediately.
the flour also then
looks finer, but the bread made of
such meal is not of so good a quality
as that made of meal fresh
ground. all sorts of grain kept
entire, will remain sound and good
for a long time: but flour will in a
comparatively short time, corrupt,
and generate worms. this therefore
requires peculiar attention, or
much loss and injury may be sustained.
the health of mankind depends
in great measure on the good
or bad preparation of food, and on
the purity of all sorts of provisions:
and grain being the most essential
article of sustenance, very much depends
on the conduct of millers,
bakers, and mealmen. those who
acquit themselves honestly in these
vocations are entitled to a fair profit,
and the goodwill of their fellow-men:
but such as betray the confidence
reposed in them, by corrupting
or withholding it when needed,
are undoubtedly amongst the
worst enemies of mankind. so
far as health is concerned, bread
made with leaven is preferable to
that made with yeast; the sour quality
of leaven is more agreeable to
the ferment of the stomach than
yeast; it is also easier of digestion,
and more cleansing. it opens the
vessels, and gives a healthy appetite;
and a little use will make it
familiar and pleasant to the eater.
this bread however seldom agrees
with weak stomachs, especially such
as are liable to acidity and heartburn.[]
one of the best kinds of
bread for sickly people, is made of
wheaten flour, the coarse or husky
bran being taken out, but not finely
dressed; otherwise it would be dry,
and obstructing to the stomach.
the inner skin or branny parts of
wheat contain a moisty quality,
which is opening and cleansing,
while the fine floury parts afford
more nourishment. bread therefore
of a middling quality is the wholesomest,
and the best. mixing in
much salt is injurious, from the
change it occasions in bread of
every description. finding no matter
liable to putrefaction to work on,
it acts upon the best qualities of the
flour, which it alters and corrupts.
hence, when bread is intended to
be kept a considerable time, as biscuits
for a long voyage, no salt is
put into it. but bread for common
use will admit of a moderate portion
of salt. it may be remarked however,
that bread, notwithstanding it
is so excellent with meat, milk, and
vegetables, is not so substantial and
nourishing as flour, when prepared
in porridges and other articles. to
have good bread, it should not be
baked in too close an oven, but a
free passage should be left for the
air. the best way is to make it
into thin cakes, and bake them on a
stone, which many in the northern
counties use for that purpose, making
a wood fire under it. this sort
of bread is sweeter, of a more innocent
taste, and far easier of digestion,
than bread baked the common
way in ovens. in the same manner
cakes may be made of any kind of
grain, such as rye, oats, or barley,
and will be found more wholesome
and nourishing, and more agreeable
to nature, than bread made in the
usual manner. oat cakes are often
preferred to those made of wheat
flour, as they tend to open the body,
and are rather warmer, to cold
and weak stomachs. barley is not
so nourishing, and requires more
preparation to render it digestible,
than the other kinds of grain. cakes,
biscuits, muffins, buns, crumpets,
and small bread, made with eggs,
butter, or sugar, seldom agree with
delicate persons. biscuits made
without leaven, yeast, butter, or
sugar, are more difficult of digestion,
than bread when it is fermented.
where bread is fixed to
a standard weight and price, bakers
are very apt to mix alum and pearlash
with it, for the purpose of hastening
its rising, and of encreasing
its weight, by causing it to retain its
moisture. if a piece of bread be
soaked in water, and turns the juice
of a red cabbage into a green colour,
it is a proof that it contains an alkali
or earthy substance, which is
most probably pearlash. it is said
that a compound salt is clandestinely
sold in london, under the name
of baker's salt, and is composed of
the above ingredients. when there
is reason to suspect that bread is
adulterated with alum, it may be
detected thus. cut about a pound
of bread into an earthen vessel, pour
upon it a quart of boiling water,
and let it stand till cold. strain the
liquor off gently through a piece of
fine linen, boil it down to about a
wine glass full, and set it by to cool.
if there be a mixture of alum, it will
form itself into crystals. the observance
of the following rules may
be considered as essential to the
making of good bread. the corn
must be sound and clean, and newly
ground, and not contaminated with
any extraneous mixtures. to make
it easy of digestion it should be
leavened, and moderately seasoned
with salt. let it rise for several
hours, and be well wrought and
kneaded with the hands. it must
be well baked, but neither over nor
under-done. if baked too little, the
bread will be heavy, clammy, and
unwholesome: if too much, its
strength and goodness will be consumed.
in general, bread should[]
not be eaten hot; it is then more
viscid, and harder of digestion.
bread is in its best state the first
and second day after it is baked.
economical bread, or bread of an
inferior quality, depraved by other
mixtures, has frequently been recommended
to poor people in times
of scarcity; but except where absolute
necessity exists, this is a kind
of policy that cannot be too severely
condemned. the labouring classes,
whose dependence is almost entirely
upon bread, ought to be provided
with what is of the purest and
most nutricious quality, and at a
reasonable price. they might then
live upon their labour, and in health
and activity would feel that labour
itself was sweet. if potatoes, rice,
or any other ingredients are to be
mixed with the bread, to lower its
nutricious qualities, let it not be
offered to the labourer; but if economy
of this kind be required, let
it be exercised by those whose eyes
are standing out with fatness, and
to whom a sparer diet might be beneficial.—meat
in general, as well
as all other kinds of food, is nourishing
or otherwise, according to
its quality, and the manner in which
it is prepared. there are peculiar
constitutions, or particular diseases
and periods of life, when animal
food is highly detrimental; and
others again, when it is essentially
necessary; but it is the general use
of it, and not these exceptions, that
will be the subject of the following
observations. as a part of our habitual
diet, the main points to be attended
to are, the kinds of animal
food, and the modes of dressing it,
which are most to be recommended.
a choice of meat is desirable, but if
the animals subject to this choice
be neither sound nor healthy, it is
of little consequence which kind is
preferred, for they, are alike unwholesome.
it is proper therefore
to avoid the flesh of all such as are
fatted in confinement, or upon pernicious
substances, which can never
make wholesome food. oil cakes
and rank vegetables, with want of
air and exercise, will produce such
sort of meat as will shew immediately
from its appearance, that it must
be unwholesome. animals may eat
rancid fulsome food, and grow fat
upon it, and yet the meat they produce
may be highly offensive. hunger
and custom will induce the eating
of revolting substances, both in
the brute and human species; and
growing fat is by no means a certain
sign of health. on the contrary, it
is frequently the symptom of a gross
habit, and a tendency to disease.
the distinct effects of various kinds
of food upon animals, are very obvious
in the instance of milch cows.
grass, hay, straw, grains, turnips,
and oil cakes, produce milk of such
different qualities as must be at
once distinguished; and the preference
to that where cows are fed
upon grass or hay, and next to them
straw, appears very decided. the
inference would be fair, that it must
be the same with respect to flesh,
even if it were less obvious than it
is. it is an unwise economy, in the
management of cows, that withholds
from them a sufficient quantity of
the best and most nourishing food.
if duly appreciated, the quality of
milk is even of superior importance
to that of flesh, from its general excellence
and utility as an article of
food. if milk was plentiful and
good, the want of meat would in
many instances not be felt, and in
others, the consumption of it might
be lessened with great advantage.
to confine cows with a view to increase
their supply of milk, is as
injurious to the quality of it, as the
confinement of animals is in other
instances. the over feeding them
also with a similar view, is an injurious
practice. cleanliness too
is no less essential to keeping them
in a wholesome state, than to animals
intended to be slaughtered.[]
it is no uncommon effect of confining
and cramming animals, that they
become diseased in the liver, besides
acquiring a general tendency to putridity
in their juices and muscular
substances, from want of air and
exercise, excess of feeding and bad
food, and the dirt in which they
live. a brute, no more than a human
being, can digest above a certain
quantity of food, to convert it
into actual nourishment; and good
chyle can only be produced from
wholesome food, cleanliness, air,
and exercise. to be well fleshed
rather than fat, is the desirable
state of animals destined for slaughter.
there will always be with this
a sufficient proportion of fat; and
labouring by artificial means to produce
more, is only encreasing that
part of animal substance, which
from its gross indigestible nature
is not proper for human diet, unless
in a very limited degree. venison,
which in its domestic state is never
fatted like other animals; game, and
every wild animal proper for food;
possess superior qualities to the
tame, from the total contrast in their
habits, more than from the food
they eat. they have an extensive
range in the open air, take much
exercise, and choose their own sustenance,
the good effects of which
are very evident in a short delicate
texture of flesh found only in them.
their juices and flavour are more
pure, and their fat is far more delicious
than that of home-bred animals.
the superiority of welch
mutton and scotch beef is owing to
a similar cause, and is still more in
point than the former, as a contrast
between animals of the same species
under different management. the
preferences just mentioned are not
a mere matter of taste, which might
readily be dispensed with, but are
founded on more important considerations.
a short delicate texture
renders the meat more digestible,
in a very high degree, than the
coarse, heavy, stringy kind of substance
produced by the misapplied
art of man. a pure animal juice
too, is something more than a luxury;
for if what we use as food is
not pure, neither can our blood nor
our juices be so. if we would but
be content with unadulterated luxuries,
we have them at our command;
and provided they are not
indulged to excess, are of decided
advantage to our health. supposing
all animal flesh to be good of its
kind, there is still abundant room
for selection and choice. mutton,
beef, venison, game, wild rabbits,
fowls, turkies, and various small
birds, are preferable to lamb, veal,
pork, young pigs, ducks, geese, and
tame rabbits. beef and mutton are
much easier of digestion and more
nutricious than veal and lamb, especially
if not slaughtered before
they come to proper maturity. nothing
arrives at perfection under a
stated period of growth, and till this
is attained it will afford only inferior
nutriment. if the flesh of mutton
and lamb, beef and veal, are compared,
they will be found of a different
texture, and the two young
meats of a more stringy indivisible
nature than the others, which makes
them harder of digestion. neither
are their juices so nourishing when
digested; as any one at all in the
habit of observing what is passing
within and about them will readily
perceive from their own experience.
lamb and veal leave a craving nausea
in the stomach, not perceived
after taking other kinds of animal
food. veal broth soon turns sour
by standing, owing to the sugar of
milk contained in the blood of a
calf; and the same change takes
place in a weak stomach. persons
in the habit of drinking strong liquors
with their meals, cannot competently
judge of such an effect; as
these liquors harden all kinds of
animal food, and therefore little distinction
can be perceived amongst[]
them. pork and young pigs are
liable to the same objections as lamb
and veal, but in a greater degree;
they are fat and luscious, but afford
no nutriment. ducks and geese are
of a coarse oily nature, and only fit
for very strong stomachs. tame
rabbits are of a closer heavier texture
than wild ones, and hence of
inferior quality. pigeons are of a
hot nature, and should therefore be
used sparingly. fowls and turkies
are of a mild proper nature for food,
but the fattening them in confinement
is equally prejudicial, as to
other animals already mentioned.
if left at large, well fed with good
barley, and with clean water to
drink, they will be little inferior to
game. barley is preferable to barley
meal, as retaining all the natural
qualities of the grain in greater perfection
than when ground; and as
these birds are provided with grinders
in the gizzard, the concocting
their own food is more nourishing
and wholesome for them. these,
like other animals, should be suffered
to attain their full growth, in
order to have them in the best state
for nutriment. some parts of birds,
and other animals, are hard and viscid,
as the head, neck, feet, and
tail; the parts about the wings,
back, and breast of birds, are in
general the most tender, and of the
finest flavour. in four-footed animals,
the upper part of the leg and
shoulder, the back, breast, and long
bones of the neck, are generally superior
to the rest. the heart and
other viscera are nutricious, but
hard of digestion, and improper for
weak stomachs. the larger an animal
is of its kind, the flesh of it
will be stronger, and more difficult
to digest; the juices also will be
more rank than those of smaller
ones of the same species, supposing
them to have arrived at the same
maturity. animals which abound
with fat and oily substances are
harder to digest, than those of a
drier and more fleshy nature; and
to persons who use but little exercise,
or have weak stomachs, this
kind of food is very improper. its
tendency is to weaken the tone and
force of the stomach, the fat and
oil being enclosed in little bladders,
which are with difficulty broken and
separated. hence fat meat is not
so digestible as that of well fed animals,
which do not abound with fat.
the flesh of very old animals is unwholesome,
being hard, dry, sinewy,
innutricious, and difficult to digest.
those which are the longest in coming
to maturity have the coarsest
juices, such as oxen, cows, and
boars. these are less tender and
digestible than sheep, venison, hares,
rabbits, poultry, game, and other
birds. in almost all cases, the
strong and pungent in flavour are
harder to digest than those of a
milder nature. the flesh of birds
is lighter, drier, and easier of digestion,
than that of four-footed
animals. a difference also arises
from the place of pasturage, from
food and exercise. animals living
in high places, refreshed with wholesome
winds, and cherished with the
warm beams of the sun, where there
are no marshes, lakes, or standing
waters, are preferable to those living
in pools, as ducks and geese,
and other kinds of fowl.—fish is
less nourishing than flesh, because it
is gross, phlegmatic, cold, and full of
watery superfluities: but under certain
restrictions, it may be safely
used as a part of our general diet.
it is unsuitable to cold phlegmatic
constitutions, but very well adapted
to such as are hot and choleric.
the white kinds of fish, which contain
neither fat nor oil, are preferable
to the rest; such as whitings,
turbot, soles, skate, haddock, flounders,
smelts, trout, and graylings.
these are easier of digestion than
salmon, mackarel, eels, lampreys,
herrings, or sprats, and therefore
more wholesome. shell-fish, such[]
as oysters, muscles, cockles, crabs,
and lobsters, are very far from being
easy of digestion, and are particularly
improper for invalids, though
too commonly imagined to be suitable
in such cases. in general it
may be observed, that those kinds
of fish which are well grown, nourish
better than the young and immature.
sea-fish are wholesomer
than fresh-water fish: they are of
a hotter nature, not so moist, and
more approaching to flesh meat.
of all sea and river fish, those are
the best which live in rocky places.
next to these, in gravelly or sandy
places, in sweet, clear, running water,
where there is nothing offensive.
those which live in pools, muddy
lakes, marshes, or stagnant water,
are bad. whether sea or river
fish, those are the best which are
not too large, whose flesh is not hard
and dry, but crisp and tender; which
taste and smell well, and have many
fins and scales. all fresh fish should
be eaten hot, and less in quantity
than fresh meat. fish should not
be eaten very often, and never after
great labour and exercise, nor after
eating other solid food. fish and
milk are not proper to be eaten at
the same meal, nor should eggs be
used with fish, except with salt fish,
and that should be well soaked in
water before it is dressed. it may
be eaten with carrots or parsnips,
instead of egg sauce. if salt fish
be eaten too often, or without this
precaution, it produces gross humours
and bad juices in the body;
occasions thirst, hoarseness, sharpness
in the blood, and other unfavourable
symptoms. it is therefore
a kind of food which should be used
very sparingly, and given only to
persons of a strong constitution.
all kinds of salted and dried fish
are innutricious and unwholesome,
and their injurious effects are often
visible in the habits of seafaring
people. even prawns and shrimps,
if eaten too freely, are known to produce
surfeits, which end in st. anthony's
fire.—if proper attention be
paid to health, every kind of sustenance
intended for the use of man,
must be provided in its season;
for to every thing there is both time
and season, which the wisdom and
goodness of providence have pointed
out. every production is the
most pure in quality, and of course
the most wholesome, when nature
has perfected her work, and prepared
it for human sustenance. to
anticipate her seasons, or to prolong
them, is a misapplication of labour,
and a perversion of the bounties of
providence into secret poisons, to
indulge the wanton cravings of a
depraved appetite. the properties
of animal food in general seem not
to restrict the use of it to any particular
season, but rather to admit
its common use at all times. the
only period in which it is less seasonable
than at any other, appears
to be in hot weather, when animal
substances of all kinds are very liable
to taint. the profuse supply of vegetables
too in the warmer months,
seems to lessen the occasion for animal
food. attention should be paid
however at all times to the proper
season for using the different kinds
of animal food, and to the various
circumstances that may contribute
to its being more or less wholesome.
the killing of animals by the easiest
means, and not previously abusing
them by over-driving, or in any other
way, materially affects their fitness
for food, and ought therefore to be
carefully attended to. the high
flavour, or taint in meat, which so
many english palates prefer, is in
fact the commencement of putrefaction;
and of course meat in this
state is very improper for food, particularly
for persons with any tendency
to putrid disorders. at a
time when bad fevers prevail, food
of this description ought to be generally
avoided, as it disposes the
blood and juices to receive infection.[]
with respect to grain, its adaptedness
to keep the whole year round,
evidently denotes that it was intended
for constant use. but the recurrence
of an annual supply seems
to be the voice of nature, forbidding
its being kept in ordinary cases
to a longer period, especially as
new corn is generally preferred to
the old. all other vegetables, including
fruits, seem designed only
for a transient season. roots, and
a few late fruits, have indeed the
property of keeping for some months,
and may thus provide a store for
the winter, when fresh vegetables
are less plentiful. other kinds will
not keep without undergoing a culinary
process, by which they are
rendered less wholesome, however
palatable they may be considered.
provisions of almost every description
may be preserved from putrefaction
by being partially dressed
and then closely stopped down, as
has been fully demonstrated by
messrs. donkin and gamble of bermondsey,
who by means of air-tight
canisters are in the habit of preparing
all kinds of meat, which will
keep perfectly sweet and fresh for a
considerable length of time in any
climate, and are incomparably better
than those preserved in the ordinary
way by salting or drying.
but however applicable these preserves
may be to the purposes of a
long voyage, or a foreign expedition,
where no fresh supplies can be obtained,
they are by no means to be
recommended to private families,
who enjoy the superior advantages
of going to market for fresh provisions.
time, which devours all
things, cannot fail to impair, though
not immediately, the flavour and
other properties of whatever is preserved,
in defiance of every precaution
against its influence. the appearance
and flavour of such articles
may not be revolting to us, but if
compared with the same things when
fresh and well dressed, their inferiority
is sufficiently obvious. pickled
salmon is a familiar instance of this
kind. it is very generally relished,
and often preferred to fresh salmon;
yet if brought into comparison, the
substance of the one is heavy, that
of the other light and elastic. the
flavour of the pickled salmon is sophisticated
and deadened, if not
vapid; that of the other is natural,
fresh, and delicate, the pure volatile
spirit not being destroyed by
improper cookery, or long keeping.
instances of violent surfeits often
occur from eating pickled salmon,
soused mackarel, and other rich
preserves, not from their being in a
state of decay, but from the unwholesomeness
of their preparation.
people acquire tastes indeed, that
reconcile them to any thing; that
even make them fond of corrupted
flavours, such as decayed cheese,
tainted meat, and other things of
a similar description. our taste
therefore is very likely to betray us
into error; and to guard against it,
it is necessary to be able to distinguish
between what is really wholesome
and what is otherwise, for this
is rather a matter of judgment than
of taste.—a few brief remarks may
very properly be added on the important
article of milk, which
forms, or ought to form, an essential
part of the food of every family,
in one shape or another. as far as
regards the general properties of
milk, it is in season at all times;
and by judicious management it
might always be supplied in sufficient
quantities to become a plentiful
source of human sustenance.
it is of the best quality however,
five or six months after a cow has
calved. when she becomes with
calf again, her milk will of course
fall off, both in quantity and in quality.
the impatient greediness of
cow-keepers would have calves and
milk at the same time, and on this
account they seldom allow their
dairies a fair interval for keeping up[]
a successive supply of the best milk.
to keep cows in the healthiest condition,
and their milk consequently
in the purest state, they should not
be confined in houses, nor in yards,
but suffered to go at large in the
open fields. they should also be
well fed with wholesome provender,
and have access to good water. if
kept quite clean, by occasionally
rubbing them down, and washing
their bag, and legs and feet, their
health would be promoted, and of
course the nutricious quality of the
milk. if the comfort and welfare
of society were consulted, the higher
classes would not slight their dairies
for studs of horses, kept more
for ostentation than for use. in reference
to the same subject, the
breaking up of small farms is deeply
to be regretted, not only as ruinous
to a numerous class of deserving
persons, but as depriving the
markets and the neighbourhoods of
those articles of necessity which
their industry produced. it was an
object to a small farmer to make the
most of his dairy and poultry yard,
which to an occupier on a larger
scale is regarded as a matter of indifference.
the consequence is,
there is neither so plentiful a supply
of these things, nor are they so
good in quality as formerly. the
wife of a small farmer attended to
her own business, her poultry was
brought up at the barn door, and
killed when it was sweet and wholesome,
while the produce of her dairy
redounded to her credit, and afforded
ample satisfaction to her customers.—the
most judicious choice
of food however will avail but little,
if the manner of preparing it is not
equally judicious. the principal
error in cooking lies in overdoing
what is intended for the table; the
qualities of the meat are then so entirely
changed, that it ceases to be
nourishing, and becomes hard of
digestion. it is literally put into the
stomach only to be pressed out of it
again by some unnatural exertion,
which at last throws the oppressive
load into the rest of the system, from
whence it will not pass off without
leaving some injury behind it. this,
frequently repeated, ends at last in
acute or chronic diseases, no less
certainly than constant friction upon
a stone will at length wear it
away, though it may be a long time
before any impression upon it is perceived.
similar effects arise from
drinking, but generally with a more
rapid progress, from the extension
and collapse of the vessels being
more sudden and violent. plain
cookery, in the exact medium between
under and over doing, is the
point to be attained to render our
food salutary. the mixture of a
great variety of ingredients should
be avoided, for if good in themselves
separately, they are often rendered
indigestible by being compounded
one with another. as we must eat
every day, there is opportunity
enough for all things in turn, without
attempting any unwholesome
composition. much seasoning with
spices, contributes to make animal
food indigestible. they are much
safer when used just before serving
up the dish, or by adding them at
the time of eating it. beef and pork
long salted, and hams, bacon,
tongues, and hung beef, are very
indigestible, and particularly improper
for weak stomachs, though
they will often crave them. boiled
meat is generally preferable to roast
meat, for nourishment and digestion.
boiling extracts more of the
rank strong juices, and renders it
lighter and more diluted. roasting
leaves it fuller of gravy, but it adds
to the rigidity of the fibres. the
flesh of young animals is best roasted.
fried and broiled meats are
difficult to be digested, though they
are very nourishing: weak stomachs
had better avoid them. meat pies
and puddings cannot be recommended,
but strong stomachs may[]
sustain but little inconvenience from
them. it is a confined mode of
cookery, and the meat therefore is
not at all purified of its grossness.
when meat pies and puddings are
used, they should be moderately
seasoned. baking meat, instead of
roasting it, is a worse manner of
dressing it, from the closeness of
the oven, and the great variety of
things often baking at the same
time. stewing is not a good way
of dressing meat, unless it is done
very carefully. if it is stewed till
all the juices are drawn from the
meat, the latter becomes quite unfit
for food: and if the stewpan be
kept close covered, there are the
same objections to it as meat pies
and puddings. hashing is a very
bad mode of cooking. it is doing
over again what has already been
done enough, and makes the meat
vapid and hard. what would have
been good nourishment in the cold
meat, is thus totally lost, as the
juices, which are all drawn into the
gravy, are spoiled by this second
cookery, which exposes them too
long to the fire.
prune pudding. mix four
spoonfuls of flour in a quart of milk;
add six eggs, two tea-spoonfuls of
powdered ginger, a little salt, and a
pound of prunes. tie it in a cloth,
and boil it an hour.
prune tart. scald some
prunes, take out the stones and break
them. put the kernels into a little
cranberry juice, with the prunes and
sugar; simmer them together, and
when cold, make a tart of the sweetmeat.
pruning. in pruning wall
fruit, care should be taken to cut off
all fresh shoots that will not readily
bind to the wall; for if any be twisted
or bruised in the binding, they
will in time decay, and the sap will
issue from the place. vines should
not be cut too close to please the
eye, as by that means they have
sometimes been rendered barren of
fruit. two knots should generally
be left on new shoots, which will
produce two bunches of grapes,
and which are to be cut off at the
next pruning. new branches are to
be left every year, and some of the
old ones must be removed, which will
increase the quantity of fruit.
puddings. the only puddings
which can with propriety be recommended,
as really wholesome diet,
are those of the simplest kind, such
as are seldom met with except in
families in the middle ranks of life.
the poor unfortunately cannot get
them, and the rich prefer those of a
more complex kind, of which the
best that can be hoped is, that they
will not do much harm. the principal
ingredients of common puddings
are so mild and salutary, that
unless they are over-cooked, or too
many of them mixed together, such
puddings are generally wholesome.
to make them of the best and most
nutricious quality, the materials
should all be fresh and good of their
kind; such as, flour newly ground,
new milk, fresh laid eggs, and fresh
suet. millet, sago, tapioca, whole
rice, will all keep a considerable
time, if put into a dry place. when
rice, millet, or sago, are wanted to
be used ground, they had better be
ground at home for the sake of having
them fresh, and the certainty of
having them pure. such a mill as
is used for grinding coffee, will grind
them extremely well. the whites of
eggs should never be used in puddings
for children, or persons of
weak stomachs, or for those who are
any way indisposed, on account of
their being indigestible. omitting
them altogether would indeed be attended
with no disadvantage. the
yolk of an egg alone answers the
same purpose, as when the white is
used with it. to prove this, let two
cups of batter pudding be made, one
with the yolk of an egg only, the
other with the yolk and white together,
and the result will be, that the[]
pudding with the yolk only is quite
as light, if not lighter, than the one
with the whole egg. in other instances
also, of several kinds of puddings,
where the whites of eggs have
been totally omitted, without at all
encreasing the number of eggs, the
result has been the same. there is
a species of economy practised by
good housewives, of making compositions
on purpose to use up the
whites of eggs which have been left
out of any preparation made with
eggs. but this is a false economy;
for surely it is far better to reject as
food what is known to be injurious,
and to find other uses for it, than to
make the human stomach the receptacle
for offal. economy would be
much more judiciously exerted in
retrenching superfluities, than exercised
in this manner. two or three
good dishes of their kind, and well
cooked, are infinitely preferable to
a whole course of indigestible compositions.
a soup might as well be
made of cabbage stalks and pea
shells, as any preparation of food
with whites of eggs, when there is
no doubt of their being positively
prejudicial. as cabbage stalks then
go to the dunghill, and pea shells to
the pigs, so let whites of eggs go to
the book-binder, or find some other
destination. there are also various
kinds of fruit that require to be used
with great caution. currants, raisins,
prunes, french plums, figs, and
all kinds of preserves, are prepared
either by the heat of the sun, or by
cookery to the full extent that they
will bear, and beyond which any application
of heat gives them a tendency
to putridity. they are therefore
certainly prejudicial to weak
stomachs when used in puddings,
and cannot be good for any; though
strong stomachs may not perceive
an immediate ill effect from them.
eaten without any farther preparation,
and especially with bread, these
things may be used in moderation.
for the reasons just given, spices
are better not put into puddings, they
are already in a sufficiently high
state of preparation. the warm climates
in which they grow, brings
them to a state of far greater maturity
than the general productions of
our northern latitude. when they
are used, it is better to add them
ground, at the time of eating what
is to be seasoned, or put in the last
thing before serving up the dish.
these are also better ground at
home, both to have them fresh, and
free from adulteration. almonds
used in puddings are liable to the
same objection. the danger of
using laurel leaves in cooking, cannot
be too frequently repeated. bay
leaves, bitter almonds, and fruit kernels,
if not equally dangerous, are
pernicious enough to make it very
advisable not to use them. fresh
fruits often become more unwholesome
from being cooked in puddings
and tarts, yet will in many cases
agree then with stomachs that cannot
take them raw; but unripe fruits
are not good, either dressed or in
any other state.—to prepare puddings
in the best manner, they should
boil briskly over a clear fire, with the
pot lid partly if not entirely off, as
the access of fresh air makes every
thing dress sweeter. as butter is
generally an expensive article, dripping,
nicely prepared, may on many
occasions be used as a substitute. it
will answer the purpose of rubbing
basins with, quite as well as butter,
and never gives any unpleasant flavour
to the pudding. it is also very
proper to dredge a basin with flour,
after it is rubbed with butter or dripping.
economy in eggs is both rational
and useful, as puddings with
a moderate number of eggs are more
wholesome, than when used extravagantly
or with profusion. pudding
cloths, and every utensil in making
puddings, should be quite clean, or
the food cannot be wholesome. the
outside of a boiled pudding often
tastes disagreeably, which arises from[]
the cloth not being nicely washed, and
kept in a dry place. it should be dipt
in boiling water, squeezed dry, and
floured, when to be used. a bread pudding
should be loosely tied, and a batter
pudding tight over. the water
should boil quick when the pudding
is put in, and it should be moved about
for a minute, lest the ingredients
should not mix. batter pudding
should be strained through a coarse
sieve, when all is mixed: in others,
the eggs should be strained separately.
pans and basins in which puddings
are to be boiled, should always
be buttered, or rubbed with clean
dripping. a pan of cold water should
be prepared, and the pudding dipped
in as soon as it comes out of the
pot, to prevent its adhering to the
cloth. good puddings may be made
without eggs; but they must have
as little milk as is sufficient to mix
the batter, and must boil three or
four hours. a few spoonfuls of
fresh small beer, or one of yeast,
will answer instead of eggs. snow
is also an excellent substitute for
eggs, either in puddings or pancakes.
two large spoonfuls will
supply the place of one egg, and the
article it is used in will be equally
good. this is a useful piece of information,
especially as snow often
falls when eggs are scarce and dear.
fresh small beer, or bottled malt
liquors, will likewise serve instead
of eggs. the yolks and whites
beaten long and separately, make
the article they are put into much
lighter.
pudding cakes. put four
yolks and two whites of eggs to a
pint of milk; mix with it half a pint
of bread crumbs grated fine, half a
nutmeg, six ounces of currants
washed and dried, a quarter of a
pound of beef suet chopped small,
a little salt, and flour sufficient to
make it of a moderate thickness.
fry these cakes in lard, of about
the usual size of a fritter.
pudding ketchup. steep
an ounce of thin-pared lemon peel,
and half an ounce of mace, in half
a pint of brandy, or a pint of sherry,
for fourteen days. then strain it,
and add a quarter of a pint of capillaire.
this will keep for years, and
being mixed with melted butter, it
is a delicious relish to puddings and
sweet dishes.
pudding with meat. make
a batter with flour, milk, and eggs.
pour a little into the bottom of a
pudding-dish; then put seasoned
meat of any kind into it, and a little
shred onion. pour the remainder
of the batter over, and bake it in a
slow oven. a loin of mutton baked
in batter, being first cleared of most
of the fat, makes a good dish.
puffs. they should be made
of light puff crust, rolled out and
cut into shapes according to the
fancy. then bake them, and lay
some sweetmeat in the middle. or
roll out the crust, cut it into pieces
of any shape, lay sweetmeats over
one half, and turn the other half of
the crust over; press them together
round the edge, and bake them.
puff crust. take a pound
and a half of flour, put it upon a
pie board with a little salt, and mix
in gradually just water sufficient to
make it into a paste, taking care
that it be neither too thin nor too
stiff. mould it lightly together, and
let it lie for two hours before it is
finished. roll out the paste, put a
pound of butter into the middle of
it, fold the two ends of the paste
over it, and roll it out; then fold
it together, and roll it out again.
repeat this six times in the winter,
and five in the summer. it should
be rolled rather less than half an
inch in thickness, dusting a little
flour lightly over and under it, to
prevent its sticking to the rolling-pin.
when finished, roll it out for
use as occasion requires. this
makes a very nice and delicate crust.—another.
to a pound and a half
of flour, allow a pound of butter,[]
and three quarters of an ounce of
salt. put the flour on a clean pie
board, make a hole in the middle,
and put in the salt with the butter
cut into small pieces. pour in the
water carefully, as it is of great
importance that the crust should
not be made too thin; there should
only be water enough just to make
it hold well together, and to roll
it out smooth. work the butter
and water up well together with
the hand, and then by degrees mix
in the flour. when the flour is all
mixed in, mould the paste till it is
quite smooth and free from lumps,
and then let it lie two hours before
it be used. this is a very nice crust
for putting round the dish for baked
puddings, tarts, or pies.
puff paste. puffs may be
made of any sort of fruit, but it
should be prepared first with sugar.
to make a rich paste, weigh
an equal quantity of butter with as
much fine flour as is necessary.
mix a little of the former with the
latter, and wet it with as little water
as will make it into a stiff paste.
roll it out, and put all the butter
over it in slices; turn in the ends,
and roll it thin. do this twice, and
tough it no more than can be avoided.
the butter may be added at
two different times; and to those
who are not accustomed to make
paste, it may be better to do so.
the oven must be rather quicker
than for a short crust.—a less rich
paste may be made of a pound of
flour, and a quarter of a pound of
butter, rubbed together. mix it
into a paste with a little water, and
an egg well beaten; of the former
as little as will suffice, or the paste
will be tough. roll it out, and fold
it three or four times. or rub extremely
fine, six ounces of butter
in one pound of dried flour, with
a spoonful of white sugar. work
up the whole into a stiff paste, with
as little hot water as possible.
puits d' amour. cut a fine
rich puff paste rolled thin, with tin
shapes made on purpose, one size
less than another, in a pyramidal
form, and lay them so. then bake
in a moderate form, that the paste
may be done sufficiently, but very
pale. lay different coloured sweetmeats
on the edges.
pulled chickens. take off
the skin, and pull the flesh off the
bones of a cold fowl, in large pieces.
dredge it with flour, and fry it of
a nice brown in butter. drain the
butter from it, simmer the flesh in
a good well-seasoned gravy, thickened
with a little butter and flour,
adding the juice of half a lemon.—another
way. cut off the legs, and
the whole back, of an underdone
chicken. pull all the white part
into little flakes free from skin, toss
it up with a little cream thickened
with a piece of butter rolled in flour,
half a blade of powdered mace,
some white pepper, salt, and the
squeeze of a lemon. cut off the
neck end of the chicken, broil the
back and sidesmen in one piece,
and the two legs seasoned. put the
hash in the middle of the dish, with
the back on it, and the two legs at
the end.
pulled turkey. divide the
meat of the breast by pulling instead
of cutting. then warm in a spoonful
or two of white gravy, and a little
cream, grated nutmeg, salt, and
a little flour and butter, but do not
let it boil. the leg should be seasoned,
scored, and broiled, and put
into the dish with the above round
it. cold chicken may be treated
in the same manner.
punch. in preparing this favourite
liquor, it is impossible to
take too much pains in the process
of mixing, that all the different articles
may be thoroughly incorporated
together. take then two large
fresh lemons with rough skins, quite
ripe, and some lumps of double-refined
sugar. rub the sugar over
the lemons, till it has absorbed all[]
the yellow part of the rinds. put
these lumps into a bowl, and as much
more as the juice of the lemons may
be supposed to require: no certain
weight or quantity can be mentioned,
as the acidity of a lemon cannot
be known till tried, and therefore
this must be determined by the taste.
then squeeze the lemon juice upon
the sugar, and with a bruiser press
the sugar and the juice particularly
well together, for a great deal of the
richness and fine flavour of the punch
depends on this rubbing and mixing
being thoroughly performed. having
well incorporated the juice and the
sugar, mix it up with boiling soft
water, and let it stand a little to cool.
when this mixture, which is now
called the sherbet, is made of a pleasant
flavour, take equal quantities
of rum and brandy and put into it,
mixing the whole well together. the
quantity of liquor must be according
to taste: two good lemons are generally
enough to make four quarts of
punch, including a quart of liquor,
with half a pound of sugar: but this
depends much on taste, and on the
strength of the spirit. as the pulp
of the lemon is disagreeable to some
persons, the sherbet may be strained
before the liquor is put in. some
strain the lemon before they put it
to the sugar, which is improper; as
when the pulp and sugar are well
mixed together, it adds much to the
richness of the punch. when only
rum is used, about half a pint of
porter will soften the punch; and
even when both rum and brandy are
used, the porter gives a richness,
and also a very pleasant flavour. a
shorter way is to keep ready prepared
a quarter of an ounce of citric
or crystallized lemon acid, pounded
with a few drops of the essence of
lemon peel, gradually mixed with a
pint of clarified syrup or capillaire.
brandy or rum flavoured with this
mixture, will produce good punch in
a minute.
punch royal. take thirty
seville oranges and thirty lemons
quite sound, pare them very thin,
and put the parings into an earthen
pan, with as much rum or brandy as
will cover them. take ten gallons
of water, and twelve pounds of lump
sugar, and boil them. when nearly
cold, put in the whites of thirty eggs
well beaten, stir it and boil it a quarter
of an hour, then strain it through
a hair sieve into an earthen pan, and
let it stand till the next day. then
put it into a cask, strain the spirit
from the parings, and add as much
more as will make it up five gallons.
put it into the cask with five quarts
of seville orange juice, and three
quarts of lemon juice. stir it all together
with a cleft stick, and repeat
the same once a day for three successive
days; then stop it down
close, and in six weeks it will be fit
to drink.
purple gloves. to dye
white gloves of a beautiful purple,
boil four ounces of logwood, and
two ounces of roche alum, in three
pints of soft water, till half wasted.
strain off the liquid, and let it stand
to be cold. mend the gloves neatly,
brush them over with the dye, and
when dry repeat it. twice is sufficient,
unless the colour is to be very
dark. when quite dry, rub off the
loose dye with a coarse cloth. beat
up the white of an egg, and with
a sponge rub it over the leather. the
dye will stain the hands, but wetting
them with vinegar will take it off before
they are washed.[]
quails. these are dressed in
the same manner as snipes and woodcocks.
they should be roasted
without drawing, served on toast,
and eaten with butter only.
quaking pudding. scald
a quart of cream; when almost
cold, put to it four eggs well beaten,
a spoonful and a half of flour, with
nutmeg and sugar. tie it close in
a buttered cloth, boil it an hour,
and turn it out carefully, without
cracking it. serve it with melted
butter, a little wine, and sugar.
quarter of lamb. a fore-quarter
may either be roasted whole,
or in separate parts. if left to be
cold, chopped parsley should be
sprinkled over it. the neck and
breast together are called a scoven.
queen cakes. mix a pound
of dried flour, a pound of sifted sugar,
and a pound of currants, picked
and cleaned. wash a pound of
butter in rose water, beat it well,
and mix with it eight eggs, yolks
and whites beaten separately. put
in the dry ingredients by degrees,
beat the whole an hour, butter little
tins, teacups or saucers, fill them
half full of batter, and bake them.
sift over them a little fine sugar,
just before they are put into the
oven.—another way. beat eight
ounces of butter, and mix it with
two eggs, well beaten and strained.
mix eight ounces of dried flour, the
same of lump sugar, and the grated
rind of a lemon. put the whole together,
and beat it full half an hour
with a silver spoon. butter small
pattipans, half fill them, and bake
twenty minutes in a quick oven.
a pound of flour well dried, half a
pound of fine sugar powdered and
sifted, a pound of currants well
washed and picked, and half a pound
of butter. rub the butter into the
flour, then mix in the sugar and currants;
add ten spoonfuls of cream,
the yolks of three eggs, three spoonfuls
of sack, and a little mace finely
pounded. when the paste is well
worked up, set it in a dish before
the fire till it be thoroughly warm.
make it up into cakes, place them
on a tin well buttered, prick them
full of holes on the top, and bake
them in a quick oven.
the economy of the royal kitchen a
century ago, though not equal perhaps
to the refinement of modern
times, was sufficiently sumptuous;
and what it wanted in delicacies,
was abundantly compensated by a
profusion of more substantial dishes
of truly english fare. the following
are only a few specimens of the stile
of cooking approved by queen anne,
sufficient to show in what manner
royalty was provided for in the days
of our forefathers. under the article
of roasting, a few particulars
will occur. when a turkey, capon,
or fowl was to be dressed, it was
laid down to the fire, at a proper
distance, till it became thoroughly
hot. it was then basted all over
with fresh butter, and afterwards
dredged thinly with flour. the heat
of the fire converted this into a thin
crust, to keep in the gravy; and no
more basting was allowed till the
roasting was nearly done, when it
was once more basted all over with
butter. as the meat began to brown,
it was sprinkled a little with large
salt, and the outside finished with a
fine brown. it was sometimes the
custom to baste such meats with the
yolks of fresh eggs beaten thin,
which was continued during the time
of roasting. the following directions
were given for roast veal.
chop some parsley and thyme very
small. beat up the yolks of five or[]
six eggs with some cream, add the
chopped herbs, some grated bread,
a few cloves, a little mace and nutmeg,
some currants and sugar. mix
these well together, raise the skin
of the breast of veal, put the stuffing
under it, and skewer it down close.
lay the veal before the fire, and
baste it with butter. when sufficiently
roasted, squeeze on the
juice of a lemon, and serve it up.
for roast pig, chop up some sage,
and sow it up in the belly of the
pig. roast and baste it with butter,
sprinkled with a little salt. when
roasted fine and crisp, serve it upon
a sauce made of chopped sage and
currants, well boiled in vinegar and
water, the gravy and brains of the
pig, a little grated bread, some barberries
and sugar, all well mixed together,
and heated over the fire.
another way. fill the belly of the
pig with a pudding made of grated
bread, a little minced beef suet, the
yolks of two or three raw eggs,
three or four spoonfuls of good
cream, and a little salt. sow it up
in the belly of the pig, lay it down
to roast, and baste it with yolks of
eggs beat thin. a few minutes before
it is taken up, squeeze on the
juice of a lemon, and strew it over
with bread crumbs, pepper, nutmeg,
ginger, and salt. make a sauce
with vinegar, butter, and the yolks
of eggs boiled hard and minced.
boil the whole together, with the
gravy of the pig, and then serve it
up in this sauce. when a hare is
to be dressed, wash it well, and dry
it in a cloth. sow up a pudding in
the belly, truss the hare as if it were
running, and roast it. make a sauce
of claret wine, grated bread, sugar,
ginger, barberries, and butter, boiled
all together, and serve it up with
the hare.—boiled dishes were prepared
in the following manner. if
a capon, pullet, or chicken, boil it
in good mutton broth. put in some
mace, a bunch of sweet herbs, a little
sage, spinage, marigold leaves
and flowers, white or green endive,
borage, bugloss, parsley, and sorrel.
serve it up on sippets of white
bread. if to be dressed with cauliflower,
cut the vegetable into small
heads, with about an inch and a half
of stalk to them. boil them in milk
with a little mace, till they are very
tender, and beat up the yolks of
two eggs with a quarter of a pint
of sack. melt some butter very
thick, with a little vinegar and sliced
lemon. pour this and the eggs to
and fro till they are well mixed, then
take the cauliflower out of the milk,
and put it into the sauce. having
boiled the chicken tender, serve it
upon sippets of white bread, finely
carved, and pour the sauce over it.
pigeons are to be put into a skillet
with some strong broth, or spring
water. boil and skim them, put in
some mace, a bunch of sweet herbs,
some white endive, marigold flowers,
and salt. when finely boiled,
serve them upon sippets of white
bread, and garnish the dish with
mace and white endive. small birds,
such as woodcocks, snipes, blackbirds,
thrushes, fieldfares, rails,
quails, wheatears, larks, martins,
and sparrows, are to be boiled in
strong broth, or in salt and water.
when boiled, take out the trails, and
chop them and the livers small. add
some crumb of grated bread, a little
of the liquor in which the birds
were boiled, some mace, and stew
them all together in some gravy.
beat up the yolks of two eggs, with
a little white wine vinegar and grated
nutmeg; and when ready to serve,
stir these into the sauce with a small
piece of butter. dish up the birds
upon sippets of white bread, and
pour the sauce over them with some
capers, lemon finely minced, and
barberries, or pickled grapes, whole.
carrots and onions boiled together
in broth, separately from the sauce,
are sometimes added to it. when
no onion is put in, rub the bottom
of the dish with a clove or two of[]
garlic. a goose, before it is boiled,
is to be salted for a day or two.
steep some oatmeal in warm milk,
or some other liquor, and mix it
with some shred beef suet, minced
apples and onions, sweet herbs
chopped, and a seasoning of cloves,
mace, and pepper. fill the belly
of the goose with this stuffing, and
tie it close at the neck and vent.
boil and serve it on slices of bread,
dipped in any kind of broth, with
cauliflowers, cabbage, turnips, and
barberries. pour melted butter over
it. a wild duck, being first drawn
and trussed, must be parboiled,
and then half roasted. having
carved it, put the gravy into a pipkin
with plenty of onion and parsley,
sliced ginger, mace, some washed
currants, barberries, and a quart
of claret. boil all together, skim
it clean, add some butter and sugar,
and serve up the duck with the
sauce poured over it. a rabbit is
to be boiled in salt and water.
chop some parsley and thyme together,
a handful of each, and boil
it in a little of the liquor in which
the rabbit is boiling. then add to
it three or four spoonfuls of verjuice,
a piece of butter, and two or three
eggs well beaten. stir the whole
together, thicken it over the fire,
and serve up the rabbit with this
sauce poured over it.—in the royal
kitchen, a florentine pie was made
of a leg of veal or mutton, cut into
thin slices, and seasoned with sweet
marjoram, thyme, savory, parsley,
rosemary, an onion and a clove of
garlic, all cut small. to these were
added, nutmeg and pepper beaten
fine, some grated manchet, a little
salt, and the yolks of three or four
raw eggs, to mix and make them
adhere together. the meat is laid
in a dish, with a crust under it, intermixed
with some thin slices of
streaked bacon. a few bay leaves and
some oyster liquor are added, the
dish covered with a crust, and baked.
for a veal pie, cut a fillet into pieces,
about the size of walnuts, and season
them with cinnamon, ginger,
sugar, and salt. use a raised crust
or dish, at pleasure, lay in the meat
with roasted chesnuts peeled and
quartered, dates sliced, and the
marrow from two beef bones. put
on the top crust, bake the pie; and
when done, serve it up with the following
sauce poured into it. beat
up the yolk of an egg with some
white wine, cinnamon, ginger, and
sugar. heat it over the fire till it
thickens a little, taking care not to
let the egg curdle. sauce for a loin
of veal was made of all kinds of
sweet herbs, with the yolks of two
or three hard eggs minced very fine.
they were then boiled up with some
currants, a little grated bread,
pounded cinnamon, sugar, and two
whole cloves. the sauce was poured
into the dish intended for the
veal, with two or three slices of an
orange. a cod's head was directed
to be dressed in the following manner.
cut the head large, and a good
piece of the shoulder with it, and
boil it in salt and water. have prepared
a quart of cockles, with the
shelled meat of two or three crabs.
put these into a pipkin with nearly
half a pint of white wine, a bunch
of sweet herbs, two onions, a little
mace, a little grated nutmeg, and
some oyster liquor. boil these till
the liquor is wasted, then add three
or four large spoonfuls of melted
butter. drain the cod's head well
over a chafing-dish of coals, and
serve it up with the above sauce,
taking out the bunch of herbs, and
adding more butter, if required.
serve up the liver and roe on the
sides of the dish.
quick hedges. a great variety
of different sorts of plants is
employed in forming and constructing
these hedges, as those of the
hawthorn, the black-thorn, the crab-tree,
the hazel, the willow, the
beech, the elder, the poplar, the
alder, and several other kinds, according[]
to particular circumstances
and situations. whatever sort of
plants may be employed for this
purpose, the work should constantly
be well performed in the first instance,
and the hedges and plants
be afterwards kept in due order and
regularity by suitable pruning, cutting
in, and other proper management.
excellent hawthorn hedges
are raised by planting one row only
at six inches asunder, rather than
two rows nine inches or a foot apart.
those planted six inches apart do
not require to be cut down to thicken
them at the bottom, and will
form a complete protection against
hogs, and in other respects form a
beautiful and effectual fence.
quicksilver, when rubbed
down and blended with unctuous
matters, forms a sort of ointment,
which is useful in the curing of different
diseases of the skin, as well
as in destroying lice and other vermin
that infest animals of different
kinds, which form the live stock of
the farmer. it has also been found
useful in its crude state in destroying
insects on fruit trees. take a small
awl, and pierce sloping, through the
rind, and into part of the wood of
the branch, but not to the heart or
pith of it; and pour in a small drop
or two of the quicksilver, and stop
it up with a small wooden plug
made to fit the orifice, and the insects
will drop off from that very
branch the next day; and in a day
or two more, from the other branches
of the trees without any other puncture,
and the tree will continue in
full vigour and thrive well through
the summer. honeysuckles and
other shrubs may be cleared of insects,
by scraping away the top of
the ground with a trowel, and running
an awl in the same sloping
manner, into the main stem just
above the roots; but with the same
caution as above, not quite to the
inner pith, and then applying the
quicksilver. the insects will drop
off the day after the experiment.
quills. to harden and prepare
them for use, dip them for a minute
in some boiling water in which alum
has been dissolved; or thrust them
into hot ashes till they become soft,
and afterwards press and scrape
them with the back of a knife. when
they are to be clarified, the barrels
must be scraped and cut at the end,
and then put into boiling water for
a quarter of an hour, with a quantity
of alum and salt. afterwards
they are dried in an oven, or in a
pan of hot sand.
quin's fish sauce. half a
pint of walnut pickle, the same of
mushroom pickle, six anchovies
pounded, six anchovies whole, and
half a tea-spoonful of cayenne.
shake it up well, when it is to be
used.
quince. the fruit of the quince
is astringent and stomachic; and its
expressed juice, in small quantities,
as a spoonful or two, is of considerable
service in nausea, vomitings,
eructations, &c. quince trees are
very apt to have rough bark, and to
be bark-bound; in these cases it
will be necessary to shave off the
rough bark with a draw-knife, and
to scarify them when bark-bound,
brushing them over with the composition.
it is also advised to plant
quince trees at a proper distance
from apple and pears, as bees and
the wind may mix the farina, and
occasion the apples and pears to
degenerate. these trees may be
raised from the kernels of the fruit
sown in autumn; but there is no
depending on having the same sort
of good fruit from seedlings, nor will
they soon become bearers. but the
several varieties may be continued
the same by cuttings and layers;
also by suckers from such trees as
grow upon their own roots, and likewise
be increased by grafting and
budding upon their own pear-stocks[]
raised from the kernels in the same
manner as for apples. standard
quinces, designed as fruit trees, may
be stationed in the garden or orchard,
and some by the sides of any water,
pond, watery ditch, &c. as they
delight in moisture.
quince jelly. when quinces
have been boiled for marmalade,
take the first liquor and pass it
through a jelly bag. to every pint
allow a pound of fine loaf sugar, and
boil it till it is quite clear and comes
to a jelly. the quince seeds should
be tied in a piece of muslin, and
boiled in it.
quince marmalade. pare
and quarter some quinces, and weigh
an equal quantity of sugar. to four
pounds of the latter put a quart of
water, boil and skim it well, by the
time the quinces are prepared. lay
the fruit in a stone jar, with a teacupful
of water at the bottom, and
pack them with a little sugar strewed
between. cover the jar close,
set it in a cool oven, or on a stove,
and let the quinces soften till they
become red. then pour the syrup
and a quart of quince juice into a
preserving pan, and boil all together
till the marmalade be completed,
breaking the lumps of fruit with the
ladle; otherwise the fruit is so hard,
that it will require a great deal of
time. stewing quinces in a jar,
and then squeezing them through a
cheese cloth, is the best method of
obtaining the juice; and in this case
the cloth should first be dipped in
boiling water, and then wrung out.
quince pudding. scald six
large quinces very tender, pare off
the thin rind, and scrape them to a
pulp. add powdered sugar enough
to make them very sweet, and a little
pounded ginger and cinnamon.
beat up the yolks of four eggs with
some salt, and stir in a pint of cream.
mix these with the quince, and bake
it in a dish, with a puff crust round
the edge. in a moderate oven, three
quarters of an hour will be sufficient.
sift powdered sugar over the pudding
before it is sent to table.
quince wine. gather the
quinces in a dry day, when they are
tolerably ripe; rub off the down with
a linen cloth, and lay them in hay or
straw for ten days to perspire. cut
them in quarters, take out the cores,
and bruise them well in a mashing
tub with a wooden pestle. squeeze
out the liquid part by degrees, by
pressing them in a hair bag in a
cider press. strain the liquor through
a fine sieve, then warm it gently over
a fire, and skim it, but do not suffer
it to boil. now sprinkle into it
some loaf sugar reduced to powder,
and boil a dozen or fourteen quinces
thinly sliced, in a gallon of water
mixed with a quart of white wine.
add two pounds of fine sugar, strain
off the liquor, and mingle it with
the natural juice of the quinces.
put this into a cask, but do not fill
it, and mix them well together. let
it stand to settle, put in two or three
whites of eggs, and draw it off. if
it be not sweet enough, add more
sugar, and a quart of the best
malmsey. to make it still better,
boil a quarter of a pound of stone
raisins, and half an ounce of cinnamon
bark, in a quart of the liquor,
till a third part is reduced. then
strain it, and put it into the cask
when the wine is fermenting.
quinces preserved. wipe
clean a quantity of golden pippins,
not pared but sliced, and put them
into two quarts of boiling water.
boil them very quick, and closely
covered, till the water is reduced to
a thick jelly, and then scald the
quinces, either whole or cut in
halves. to every pint of pippin jelly
add a pound of the finest sugar, boil
and skim it clear. put those quinces
that are to be done whole into the
syrup at once, and let it boil very
fast; and those that are to be in
halves by themselves. skim it carefully,[]
and when the fruit is clear,
put some of the syrup into a glass,
to try whether it jellies, before taking
it off the fire. a pound of
quinces is to be allowed to a pound
of sugar, and a pound of jelly already
boiled with the sugar.
quinsey. for a quinsey, or
inflammation of the throat, make a
volatile liniment, by shaking together
an ounce of florence oil, and
half an ounce of the spirit of hartshorn;
or an equal quantity of each,
if the patient be able to bear it.
moisten a piece of flannel with the
liniment, and apply it to the throat
every four or five hours. after
bleeding, it will seldom fail to lessen
or carry off the complaint.
rabbits. wild ones have the
finest flavour, and are by far the
best. tame rabbits are scarcely
eatable, unless kept delicately clean.
the doe brings forth every month,
and must be allowed to go with the
buck as soon as she has kindled.
the sweetest hay, oats, beans, sow-thistle,
parsley, carrot tops, cabbage
leaves, and bran, should be
given to the rabbits, fresh and fresh.
if not carefully attended, their own
stench will destroy them, and be
very unwholesome to those who live
near them. constant care is requisite
to prevent this inconvenience.—when
rabbits are to be dressed,
they may have gravy and stuffing
like hare; or they may be larded,
and roasted without stuffing. for
the manner of trussing a rabbit,
either for roasting or boiling, see
the plate. if boiled, it should be
smothered with onion sauce, the
butter to be melted with milk instead
of water. if fried in joints,
it must be dressed with dried or
fried parsley, and liver sauce made
for it, the same as for roasting.
chop up the liver with parsley, and
put it into melted butter, with pepper
and salt. if fricasseed, the
same as for chickens. young rabbits
are good in a pie, with forcemeat
as for chicken pie.—when
rabbits are to be purchased for cooking,
the following things must be
observed. if the claws are blunt
and rugged, the ears dry and tough,
and the haunch thick, it is old. but
if the claws are smooth and sharp,
the ears easily tear, and the cleft in
the lip is not much spread, it is
young. if fresh and newly killed,
the body will be stiff, and in hares
the flesh is pale. they keep a good
while by proper care, and are best
when rather beginning to turn, if
the inside is preserved from being
musty. to distinguish a real leveret
from a hare, a knob or small bone
will be discovered near the foot on
its fore leg.——tame rabbits may
be bred with much success and ornamental
effect in a small artificial
warren, in a lawn in the garden,
made in the following manner. pare
off the turf of a circle about forty
feet diameter, and lay it on the outside;
then dig a ditch within this
circle, the outside perpendicular,
the inner sloping, and throw earth
sufficient into the middle to form a
little hill, two or three feet higher
than the level of the lawn; the rest
must be carried away. then lay
down the turf on the hill, and beat
it well to settle. the ditch at bottom
should be about three feet wide,
and three and a half deep, with two
or three drains at the bottom, covered
with an iron grate, or a stone with
holes, to carry off the hasty rains,
in order to keep the rabbits dry.[]
in the outside bank should be six
alcoves, the sides and top supported,
either by boards or brick-work,
to give the rabbits their dry food in;
by their different situations some
will always be dry; six boxes or
old tea-chests, let into the bank will
do very well. if the ground be very
light, the outside circle should have
a wall built round it, or some stakes
driven into the ground, and boards
or hurdles nailed to them, within a
foot of the bottom, to prevent the
bank from falling in. the entrance
must either be by a board to turn
occasionally across the ditch, or by
a ladder. the turf being settled,
and the grass beginning to grow,
turn in the rabbits, and they will
immediately go to work to make
themselves burrows in the sides, and
in the hill. by way of inducing
them rather to build in the sides,
to keep the turf the neater, make a
score of holes about a foot deep,
and they will finish them to their
own mind; and if there be a brick
wall round it, it should be built on
pillars, with an arch from each, to
leave a vacancy for a burrow. lucern,
parsley and carrots are very
proper food for them; and they
should also be fed upon some of the
best upland pasture hay. rabbits
are subject to several diseases, as
the rot, which is caused by giving
them too large a quantity of green
food, or the giving it fresh gathered,
with the dew or rain hanging in
fresh drops upon it, as it is over-moisture
that always causes the
disease; the green food should
therefore always be given dry, and
a sufficient quantity of hay, or other
dry food, intermixed with it, to
counteract the bad effects of it.
and a sort of madness often seizes
them: this may be known by their
tumbling about; their heels upwards,
and hopping in an odd manner
into the boxes. this distemper
is supposed to be owing to the rankness
of their feeding; and the general
cure is the keeping them low
and giving them the prickly herb
called tare-thistle to eat as much
as possible. they are also subject
to a sort of scabby eruption, which
is seldom removed. these should,
however, be directly separated from
the rest of the stock.
rabbit like hare. choose
a full-grown young rabbit, and hang
it up three or four days. then skin
it, and without washing, lay it in a
seasoning of black pepper and allspice,
in very fine powder. add a
glass of port wine, and the same
quantity of vinegar. baste it occasionally
for forty hours, then stuff
and roast it as hare, and with the
same sauce. do not wash off the
liquor that it was soaked in.
radishes. these are raised
from seed by different sowings from
the end of october till april, or the
following month. they should have
a light fine mould, and the more
early sowings be made on borders,
under warm walls, or other similar
places, and in frames covered by
glasses. the common spindle-rooted,
short-topped sorts are mostly
made use of in these early sowings,
the seed being sown broadcast over
the beds after they have been prepared
by digging over and raking
the surface even, being covered in
with a slight raking. some sow
carrots with the early crops of radishes.
it is usual to protect the
early sown crops in the borders,
during frosty nights and bad weather,
by mats or dry wheat straw,
which should be carefully removed
every mild day. by this means they
are brought more forward, as well
as form better roots. when mats
are used, and supported by pegs or
hoops, they are readily applied and
removed. a second more general
sowing should be made in january
or february. when the crops have
got their rough leaf; they should be
thinned out, where they are too
thick, to the distance of two inches,[]
as there will be constantly more thinning
by the daily drawing of the
young radishes. when the weather
is dry in march, or the following
month, the crops should be occasionally
well watered, which not only
forwards the growth of the crops,
but increases the size of the roots,
and renders them more mild and
crisp in eating. and the sowings
should be continued at the distance
of a fortnight, till the latter end of
march, when they should be performed
every ten days, until the end
of april or beginning of the following
month. in sowing these later
crops, it is the practice of some
gardeners to sow coss-lettuces and
spinach with them, in order to have
the two crops coming forward at the
same time; but the practice is not
to be much recommended, where
there is sufficient room. but in
sowing the main general crops in
the open quarters, the market-gardeners
generally put them in on the
same ground where they plant out
their main crops of cauliflowers and
cabbages, mixing spinach with the
radish-seed as above, sowing the
seeds first, and raking them in, then
planting the cauliflowers or cabbages;
the radishes and spinach
come in for use before the other
plants begin to spread much, and as
soon as those crops are all cleared
off for use, hoe the ground all over
to kill weeds and loosen the soil,
drawing earth about the stems of
the cauliflowers and cabbages. the
turnip radish should not be sown
till the beginning of march, the
plants being allowed a greater distance
than for the common spindle-rooted
sort. the seeds of this sort
are apt to degenerate, unless they
are set at a distance from that kind.
the white and black spanish radishes
are usually sown about the
middle of july, or a little earlier, and
are fit for the table by the end of
august, or the beginning of september,
continuing good till frost spoils
them. these should be thinned to
a greater distance than the common
sort, as their roots grow as large as
turnips, and should not be left nearer
than six inches. to have these roots
in winter, they should be drawn before
hard frost comes on, and laid
in dry sand, as practised for carrots,
carefully guarding them from wet
and frost; as in this way they may
be kept till the spring. in regard
to the culture of the general crops,
they require very little, except occasional
thinning, where they are
too thick, when the plants are come
into the rough leaf, either by hoeing
or drawing them out by hand: though
for large quantities, small hoeing is
the most expeditious mode of thinning,
as well as most beneficial to
the crop by loosening the ground;
in either method thinning the plants
to about two or three inches distance,
clearing out the weakest, and leaving
the strongest to form the crop.
in order to save the seed, about the
beginning of may some ground
should be prepared by digging and
levelling; then drawing some of the
straightest and best coloured radishes,
plant them in rows three
feet distant, and two feet asunder in
the rows; observing, if the season
be dry, to water them until they have
taken root: after which they will
only require to have the weeds hoed
down between them, until they are
advanced so high as to overspread
the ground. when the seed begins
to ripen, it should be carefully
guarded against the birds. when it
is ripe, the pods will turn brown:
then it must be cut, and spread in
the sun to dry; after which it must
be thrashed, and laid up for use
where no mice can come at it. in
order to have the roots early, as in
january or the following month, the
method of raising them in hot-beds
is sometimes practised. they should
have eighteen inches depth of dung
to bring them up, and six or seven
inches depth of light rich mould.[]
the seed should be sown moderately
thick, covering it in half an inch
thick, and putting on the lights:
the plants usually come up in a week
or less; and when they appear, the
lights should be lifted or taken off
occasionally, according to the weather;
and in a fortnight thin the
plants to the distance of an inch
and half or two inches, when in six
weeks they will be fit to draw. where
there are no frames to spare, the
beds may be covered with mats over
hoops, and the sides secured by
boards and straw-bands. and when
in want of dung, if the beds be covered
with frames, and the lights
put on at night and in bad weather,
the plants may be raised for use a
fortnight sooner than in the open
borders.—to raise them in constant
succession, steep the seed in rain
water for twenty-four hours, tie it
up in a linen bag, and hang it in the
sun all day. the seed beginning
to shoot, is then to be sown in fresh
earth well exposed to the sun, and
covered with a tub. in three days
the radishes will be produced fit
for salad, and much more delicate
than those grown in the common
way. in the winter the seeds should
be steeped in warm water, and the
bag put in a place sufficiently hot
to make them sprout. then fill a
tub with rich mould, sow the seeds
in it, and cover them over closely
with another tub, taking care to
sprinkle them now and then with
warm water. the two tubs closely
joined should be set in a warm place,
and in about a fortnight some fine
salad will be produced. radishes
may be raised in this manner all the
year round, and by the quickness
of their growth they will be rendered
fine and delicate.
ragout of eggs. boil eight
eggs hard, then shell and cut them
into quarters. have ready a pint
of good gravy, well seasoned, and
thickened over the fire with two
ounces of butter rolled in flour.
when quite smooth and hot, pour
it over the eggs, and serve them up.
by using cream instead of gravy,
this will make a fricassee.
ragout of morels. cut
them in long slices, then wash and
drain them well. put them into a
stewpan with a piece of butter,
some chopped parsley, a bunch of
herbs, and some gravy. simmer
them over a gentle fire, and when
nearly done, add a little pepper,
salt, and flour. set them over the
fire, till the sauce is properly thickened.
stewed with a little water
and a blade of mace, and thickened
with cream, and yolks of eggs, they
make a white ragout. serve them
with sippets of bread toasted.
ragout of truffles. peel
the truffles, cut them in slices, wash
and drain them well. put them into
a saucepan with a little gravy, and
stew them gently over a slow fire.
when they are nearly done enough,
thicken them with a little butter and
flour. stewed in a little water, and
thickened with cream and yolk of
egg, they make a nice white ragout.
truffles, mushrooms, and morels,
are all of them very indigestible,
and therefore not to be recommended
to general use.
raised crust. for meat pies
or fowls, boil some water with a little
fine lard, and an equal quantity
of fresh dripping or butter, but not
much of either. while hot, mix
this with as much fine flour as is
necessary, making the paste as stiff
as possible, to be smooth. good
kneading will be required for this
purpose, and beating it with a rolling-pin.
when quite smooth, put
a part of it into a cloth, or under a
pan, to soak till nearly cold. those
who are not expert in raising a crust,
may roll the paste of a proper thickness,
and cut out the top and bottom
of the pie, then a long piece for
the sides. cement the bottom to
the sides with egg, bringing the former
rather farther out, and pinching[]
both together. put egg between
the edges of the paste, to make it
adhere at the sides. fill the pie,
put on the cover, and pinch it and
the side crust together. the same
mode of uniting the paste is to be
observed, if the sides are pressed
into a tin form, in which the paste
must be baked, after it is filled and
covered; but in the latter case, the
tin should be buttered, and carefully
taken off when done enough; and
as the form usually makes the sides
of a lighter colour than is proper,
the paste should be put into the
oven again for a quarter of an hour.
the crust should be egged over at
first with a feather.—another. put
four ounces of butter into a saucepan
with water; and when it boils,
pour it into a quantity of flour.
knead and beat it quite smooth,
cover it with small bits of butter,
and work it in. if for custard, put
a paper within to keep out the sides
till half done. mix up an egg with
a little warm milk, adding sugar,
a little peach water, lemon peel, or
nutmeg, and fill up the paste.—another
way. to four pounds of
flour, allow a pound of butter, and
an ounce of salt. heap the flour
on a pie board, and make a hole in
the middle of it, and put in the butter
and salt. pour in water nearly
boiling, but with caution, that the
crust be not too flimsey. work the
butter with the hand till it is melted
in the water, then mix in the flour,
mould it for a few minutes as
quick as possible, that it may be
free from lumps, and the stiffer it
is the better. let it be three hours
before it is used.
raisin wine. to every gallon
of spring water, allow eight
pounds of fresh smyrnas, and put
them together in a large tub. stir
it thoroughly every day for a month,
then press the raisins in a horse-hair
bag as dry as possible, and put
the liquor into a cask. when it has
done hissing, pour in a bottle of
the best brandy, stop it close for
twelve months, and then rack it off
free from the dregs. filter the dregs
through a bag of flannel of three or
four folds, add what is clear to the
general quantity, and pour on a
quart or two of brandy, according
to the size of the vessel. stop it
up, and at the end of three years it
may either be bottled, or drank from
the cask. if raisin wine be made
rich of the fruit, and well kept, the
flavour will be much improved.—to
make raisin wine with cider, put
two hundred-weight of malagas into
a cask, and pour upon them a hogshead
of good sound cider that is not
rough; stir it well two or three
days, stop it up, and let it stand six
months. then rack it into a cask
that it will fill, and add a gallon of
the best brandy. if raisin wine be
much used, it would answer well to
keep a cask always for it, and bottle
off one year's wine just in time to
make the next, which, allowing the
six months of infusion, would make
the wine to be eighteen months old.
in cider counties this way is found
to be economical; and if the wine
is not thought strong enough, the
addition of another stone or two of
raisins would be sufficient, and the
wine would still be very cheap.
when the raisins are pressed through
a horse-hair bag, they will either
produce a good spirit by distillation,
if sent to a chemist, or they will
make excellent vinegar.—raisin
wine without cider. on four hundred-weight
of malagas pour a hogshead
of spring water, stir it well
every day for a fortnight, then
squeeze the raisins in a horse-hair
bag in a press, and tun the liquor.
when it ceases to hiss, stop it close.
in six months rack it off into another
cask, or into a tub; and after
clearing out the sediment, return it
into the cask without washing it.
add a gallon of the best brandy,[]
stop it close, and bottle it off in six
months. the pressed fruit may be
reserved for making vinegar.
ramakins. scrape a quarter
of a pound of cheshire cheese, and
the same of gloucester cheese, and
add them to a quarter of a pound
of fresh butter. beat all in a mortar,
with the yolks of four eggs,
and the inside of a small french
roll boiled soft in cream. mix the
paste with the whites of the eggs
previously beaten, put it into small
paper pans made rather long than
square, and bake in a dutch oven
to a fine brown. they should be
eaten quite hot. some like the addition
of a glass of white wine.
the batter for ramakins is equally
good over macaroni, when boiled
tender; or on stewed brocoli, celery,
or cauliflower, a little of the
gravy they have been stewed in being
put in the dish with them, but
not enough to make the vegetable
swim.
raspberry brandy. pick
some fine dry fruit, put them into a
stone jar, and the jar into a kettle
of water, or on a hot hearth, till the
juice will run. after straining it,
add to every pint of juice, half a
pound of sugar; give it one boil,
and skim it. when cold, put equal
quantities of juice and brandy;
shake it well, and bottle it. some
persons prefer it stronger of the
brandy.
raspberry cakes. pick out
some fine ripe raspberries, weigh and
boil them. when mashed, and the
liquor is wasted, add sugar equal to
the first weight of the fruit. take
it off the fire, mix it well, until perfectly
dissolved, and then put it on
china plates to dry in the sun. as
soon as the top part dries, cut the
paste into small cakes with the cover
of a canister; then turn them on
fresh plates, and put them into boxes
when dry, with layers of white
paper.
raspberry cream. mash
the fruit gently, and let them drain;
sprinkle some sugar over, and that
will produce more juice. then put
the juice to some cream, and sweeten
it. after this it may be lowered
with milk; but if the milk be put in
before the cream, it will curdle it.
when fresh fruit cannot be obtained,
it is best made of raspberry jelly,
instead of jam.—another way. boil
an ounce of isinglass shavings in
three pints of cream and new milk
mixed, for fifteen minutes, or till the
shavings be melted. strain it through
a hair sieve into a bason; when
cool, add about half a pint of raspberry
juice or syrup, to the milk and
cream. stir it till it is well incorporated;
sweeten, and add a glass
of brandy. whisk it about till three
parts cold, and then put it into a
mould till it is quite cold. in summer,
use the fresh juice; in winter,
syrup of raspberries.
raspberry jam. weigh equal
quantities of fruit and sugar; put
the former into a preserving-pan,
boil and break it, stir it constantly,
and let it boil very quickly. when
most of the juice is wasted, add the
sugar, and simmer it half an hour.
by this mode of management the
jam is greatly superior in colour and
flavour, to that which is made by
putting the sugar in at first.—another
way. put the fruit in a jar, and
the jar in a kettle of water on a hot
hearth, and let it remain till the juice
will run from it. then take away
a quarter of a pint from every pound
of fruit, boil and bruise it half an
hour. put in the weight of the fruit
in sugar, add the same quantity of
currant juice, and boil it to a strong
jelly. the raspberry juice will serve
to put into brandy, or may be boiled
with its weight in sugar, for making
the jelly for raspberry ice or cream.
raspberry tarts. roll out
some thin puff paste, and lay it in
a pattipan. put in the raspberries,[]
strew some fine sugar over them,
cover with a thin lid, and bake the
tart. mix a pint of cream with the
yolks of two or three eggs well
beaten, and a little sugar. cut open
the tart, pour in the mixture, and
return it to the oven for five or six
minutes.—another. line the dish
with puff paste, put in sugar and
fruit, lay bars across, and bake them.
currant tarts are done in the same
way.
raspberry vinegar. put
a pound of fine fruit into a china
bowl, and pour upon it a quart of
the best white wine vinegar. next
day strain the liquor on a pound of
fresh raspberries, and the following
day do the same; but do not squeeze
the fruit, only drain the liquor as
dry as possible from it. the last
time pass it through a canvas, previously
moistened with vinegar, to
prevent waste. put it into a stone
jar, with a pound of sugar to every
pint of juice, broken into large
lumps. stir it when melted, then
put the jar into a saucepan of water,
or on a hot hearth; let it simmer,
and skim it clean. when cold, bottle
it up. this is one of the most
useful preparations that can be kept
in a house, not only as affording the
most refreshing beverage, but being
of singular efficacy in complaints
of the chest. a large spoonful or
two in this case is to be taken in a
tumbler of water. no glazed or
metal vessel of any kind should be
used in this preparation. the fruit,
with an equal quantity of sugar,
makes excellent raspberry cakes,
without boiling.
raspberry wine. to every
quart of well-picked raspberries put
a quart of water; bruise, and let
them stand two days. strain off
the liquor; and to every gallon add
three pounds of lump sugar. when
dissolved, put the liquor in a barrel;
and when fine, which will be in
about two months, bottle it off. to
each bottle put a spoonful of brandy,
or a glass of wine.
ratifia. blanch two ounces
of peach and apricot kernels, bruise
and put them into a bottle, and fill
it nearly up with brandy. dissolve
half a pound of white sugar-candy
in a cup of cold water, and add it
to the brandy after it has stood a
month on the kernels, and they are
strained off. then filter through
paper, and bottle it up for use. the
leaves of peaches and nectarines,
when the trees are cut in the spring,
being distilled, are an excellent substitute
for ratifia in puddings.
ratifia cakes. blanch and
beat fine in a mortar, four ounces
of bitter almonds, and two ounces
of sweet almonds. prepare a pound
and a half of loaf sugar, pounded
and sifted; beat up the whites of
four eggs to a froth, and add the
sugar to it a little at a time, till it
becomes of the stiffness of dough.
stir and beat it well together, and
put in the almonds. drop the paste
on paper or tins, and bake it in a
slow oven. try one of the cakes,
and if it rises out of shape, the oven
is too hot. the cakes must not be
handled in making, but a spoon or
a knife must be used.
ratifia cream. boil three
or four laurel, peach, or nectarine
leaves, in a full pint of cream, and
strain it. when cold, add the yolks
of three eggs beaten and strained,
sugar, and a large spoonful of brandy
stirred quick into it. scald and
stir it all the time, till it thickens.
or mix half a quarter of a pint of
ratifia, the same quantity of mountain
wine, the juice of two or three
lemons, a pint of rich cream, and
agreeably sweetened with sugar.
beat it with a whisk, and put it into
glasses. the cream will keep eight
or ten days.—another. blanch a
quarter of an ounce of bitter almonds,
and beat them with a tea-spoonful
of water in a marble mortar.[]
rub with the paste two ounces of
loaf sugar, simmer it ten minutes
with a tea-cupful of cream, and then
strain and ice it.
ratifia drops. blanch and
beat in a mortar four ounces of bitter
almonds, and two ounces of
sweet almonds, with a small part of
a pound of fine sugar sifted. add
the remainder of the sugar, and the
whites of two eggs, and make the
whole into a paste. divide the mass
into little balls the size of a nutmeg,
put them on wafer paper, and bake
them gently on tin plates.
rats. the first step taken by
rat-catchers, in order to clear a
house, &c. of those vermin, is to
allure them all together, to one proper
place, before they attempt to
destroy them; for there is such an
instinctive caution in these animals,
accompanied with a surprising sagacity
in discovering any cause of
danger, that if any of them be hurt,
or pursued, in an unusual manner,
the rest take the alarm, and become
so shy and wary, that they elude all
the devices and stratagems of their
pursuers for some time after. the
place where the rats are to be assembled,
should be some closet, or
small room, into which all the openings,
but one or two, may be secured;
and this place should be,
as near as may be, in the middle of
the house, or buildings. it is the
practice, therefore, to attempt to
bring them all together in some such
place before any attempt be made
to take them; and even then to
avoid any violence, hurt, or fright
to them, before the whole be in the
power of the operator. in respect
to the means used to allure them to
one place, they are various; one of
those most easily and efficaciously
practised is the trailing some piece
of their most favourite food, which
should be of the kind that has the
strongest scent, such as toasted
cheese, or broiled red-herring, from
the holes or entrances to their accesses
in every part of the house, or
contiguous buildings, whence it is
intended to allure them. at the
extremities, and in different parts of
the course of this trailed tract, small
quantities of meal, or any other kind
of their food, should be laid, to
bring the greater number into the
tracks, and to encourage them to
pursue it to the centre place, where
they are intended to be taken; at
that place, where time admits of it,
a more plentiful repast is laid for
them, and the trailing repeated for
two or three nights. but besides
this trailing, and way-baiting, some
of the most expert of the rat-catchers
have a shorter, and, perhaps, more
effectual method of bringing them
together, which is, the calling them,
by making such a kind of whistling
noise as resembles their own call,
and by this means, with the assistance
of the way-baits, they call them
out of their holes, and lead them to
the repast prepared for them at the
place designed for taking them. but
this is much more difficult to be
practised than the art of trailing;
for the learning the exact notes, or
cries, of any kind of beasts or
birds, so as to deceive them, is a peculiar
talent, not easily attained to
in other cases. and in practising
either of these methods, great caution
must be used by the operator
to suppress, and prevent, the scent
of his feet and body from being perceived;
which is done by overpowering
that scent by others of a
stronger nature. in order to this
the feet are to be covered with cloths
rubbed over with assafœtida, or
other strong smelling substances;
and even oil of rhodium is sometimes
used for this purpose, but
sparingly, on account of its dearness,
though it has a very alluring,
as well as disguising effect. if this
caution of avoiding the scent of the
operator's feet, near the track, and[]
in the place where the rats are proposed
to be collected, be not properly
observed, it will very much
obstruct the success of the attempt
to take them; for they are very shy
of coming where the scent of human
feet lies very fresh, and intimates,
to their sagacious instinct, the presence
of human creatures, whom
they naturally dread. to the above-mentioned
means of alluring by
trailing, way-baiting, and calling,
is added another of very material
efficacy, which is the use of the oil
of rhodium, which, like the marum
syriacum in the case of cats, has a
very extraordinary fascinating power
on these animals. the oil is extremely
dear, and therefore very
sparingly used. it is exhaled in a
small quantity in the place, and at
the entrance of it, where the rats
are intended to be taken, particularly
at the time when they are to be
last brought together in order to their
destruction; and it is used also, by
smearing it on the surface of some
of the implements used in taking
them, by the method before described,
and the effect it has in taking
off their caution and dread, by
the delight they appear to have in
it, is very extraordinary. it is usual,
likewise, for the operator to disguise
his figure as well as scent,
which is done by putting on a sort
of gown or cloak, of one colour,
that hides the natural form, and
makes him appear like a post, or
such inanimate thing; which habit
must likewise be scented as above,
to overpower the smell of his person;
and besides this he is to avoid
all motion, till he has secured his
point of having all the rats in his
power. when the rats are thus
enticed and collected, where time is
afforded, and the whole in any house
or outbuildings are intended to be
cleared away, they are suffered to
regale on what they most like, which
is ready prepared for them; and
then to go away quietly for two or
three nights; by which means those
which are not allured the first night
are brought afterwards, either by
their fellows, or the effects of the
trailing, &c. and will not fail to
come duly again, if they are not
disturbed or molested. but many
of the rat-catchers make shorter
work, and content themselves with
what can be brought together in one
night or two; but this is never effectual,
unless where the building
is small and entire, and the rats but
few in number. with respect to
the means of taking them when they
are brought together, they are various.
some entice them into a
very large bag, the mouth of which
is sufficiently capacious to cover
nearly the whole floor of the place
where they are collected; which is
done by smearing some vessel,
placed in the middle of the bag,
with oil of rhodium, and laying in
the bag baits of proper food. this
bag, which before laid flat on the
ground, with the mouth spread open,
is to be suddenly closed when the
rats are all in it. others drive or
frighten them, by slight noises or
motions, into a bag of a long form,
the mouth of which, after all the
rats are come in, is drawn up to the
opening of the place by which they
entered, all other ways of retreat
being secured. others, again, intoxicate
or poison them, by mixing
with the repast prepared for them
the cocculus indicus, or the nux
vomica. a receipt for this purpose
has appeared, which directs four
ounces of cocculus indicus, with
twelve ounces of oatmeal, and two
ounces of treacle or honey, to be
made up into a moist paste with
strong beer; but if the nux vomica
be used, a much less proportion
will serve than is here given of the
cocculus. any similar composition
of these drugs, with that kind of
food the rats are most fond of, and
which has a strong flavour, to hide
that of the drugs, will equally well[]
answer the end. if, indeed, the
cocculus indicus be well powdered,
and infused in strong beer for some
time, at least half the quantity here
directed will serve as well as the
quantity before mentioned. when
the rats appear to be thoroughly intoxicated
with the cocculus, or sick
with the nux vomica, they may be
taken with the hand, and put into a
bag or cage, the door of the place
being first drawn to, lest those
which have strength and sense remaining
should escape. by these
methods, when well conducted, a
very considerable part of the rats
in a farm, or other house, and the
contiguous buildings, may be taken
and destroyed. but various other
methods have been practised.—the
following compositions are advised
for destroying these mischievous
creatures, and which are stated to
have been attended with great success.
first, to a quart of oatmeal,
add six drops of oil of rhodium, one
grain of musk, and two or three of
the nuts of nux vomica finely powdered;
make them into pellets, and
put them into the rat-holes. this,
it is said, was at first greedily eaten,
and did great execution; but the
wise animals, after a time, ceased
to eat it. secondly; this consisted
of three parts of oatmeal and one of
stave's-acre, mixed well into a paste
with honey. pieces of this paste
were laid in their holes, and again
did great execution. thirdly; this
is a method of destroying them by
laying a large box down on its front
side, with the lid supported open by
a string over a pulley; and by trailing
toasted cheese and a red-herring
from their holes to this box, and
placing oatmeal and other food in
it, which they are for a few nights
to be permitted to eat unmolested;
and finally to watch them by moon-light,
the inside of the box being
painted white; and, when many of
them are seen, to let down the lid;
by which contrivance sixty of them
are stated to have been taken at one
time.—but though the usual ways
of destroying rats are by traps and
poison, it is advised never to use
arsenic, or corrosive sublimate, for
that purpose, except under particular
circumstances, as they are deadly
poisons: nux vomica will generally
answer the end as well, without
the danger. it is a very good plan,
to prevent accidents, to enclose the
traps in cases, having holes in the
ends of them large enough to admit
rats, but small enough to exclude
dogs, cats, &c. as a bait for rat-traps,
the following composition
may be made use of with advantage.
take a pound of good flour, three
ounces of treacle, and six drops of
the oil of carraways: put them all
in a dish, and rub them well together
till they are properly mixed:
then add a pound of crumb of bread.
the traps baited with this mixture
should be set as near their haunts
as possible; but, for two or three
days, so as not to fall or strike on
the rats going in, but letting them
have free liberty to go in and out at
pleasure, as this makes them fearless.
some of the bait should also
be laid at the rat-holes, and a little
of it scattered quite up to the traps,
and so on to the bridge of each
trap, where a handful may be placed.
it may also be proper to scent the
traps with the following mixture, for
the purpose of enticing the rats into
them. take twenty drops of the
oil of rhodium, six or seven grains
of musk, and half an ounce of oil of
aniseed; put them in a small phial,
and shake it well before using; then
dip a piece of twisted paper or rag
in the mixture, and rub each end of
the trap with it, if a box trap, and
put two or three drops on the bridge,
leaving the paper or rag in the trap.
of whatever kind the trap is, it
should be scented; but once in a
twelvemonth will be sufficient. then
throw some chaff mixed with a little
wheat about the bottom of the[]
trap, in order to deceive the rats;
for they are very sagacious, and will
not enter a suspicious place. this
will be necessary to be done only
at the first time of setting the traps;
for, after some rats have been
caught and have watered and dunged
in them, rats will enter boldly
when they find others have been
there before them: do not, therefore,
wash or clean out the trap, as
some people do before they set it
again, but let the dung and urine
remain in it. keep the places where
the traps are set as private as possible;
and when they are set for
catching, mix no bread with the
bait, as the rats will, in that case,
be apt to carry it away. and it is
useful, when the holes are found
quiet, and that no rats use them, to
stop them up with the following
composition. take a pint of common
tar, half an ounce of pearl-ashes,
an ounce of oil of vitriol, and
a good handful of common salt, mix
them all well together in an old pan
or pot. take some pieces of paper,
and lay some of the above mixture
very thick on them; then stop
the holes well up with them, and
build up the mouth of the holes with
brick or stone, and mortar; if this
be properly done, rats will no more
approach these while either smell
or taste remains in the composition.
but with a view to destroy rats in
places where traps cannot be set, it
is recommended to take a quart of
the above bait, then to rasp into it
three nuts of nux vomica, and add
a quarter of a pound of crumb of
bread, if there was none before;
mix them all well together, and lay
it into the mouth of their holes, and
in different places where they frequent;
but first give them of the
bait without nux vomica, for three
or four succeeding nights; and when
they find it agrees with them, they
will eat that mixed with the nut
with greediness. however, as it is
frequently found that rats are very
troublesome in sewers and drains,
in such cases arsenic may be used
with success in the following manner.
take some dead rats, and
having put some white arsenic, finely
powdered, into an old pepper-box,
shake a quantity of it on the foreparts
of the dead rats, and put them
down the holes, or avenues, by the
sides of the sewers at which they
come in; this puts a stop to the
live ones coming any further; for
when they perceive the arsenic, they
will retire immediately; whereas, if
they were put down without the
arsenic, the live ones would eat them.
it is by means of arsenic, notwithstanding
the above observations,
that the most certain method of
destroying these troublesome vermin,
(provided they can be made to
eat it,) takes place; which has
been found to answer best when it
is prepared by being finely levigated,
and mixed up with very strong old
cheese and oatmeal. but after all,
it is probable that this highly destructive
animal, and great pest to
the farmer, might be most readily
exterminated by parishes uniting
for the purpose, and raising certain
sums of money to be applied in
this way, under the direction of a
proper person who is fully acquainted
with the business.—in many
grain and other districts in the
kingdom these animals prevail very
much, especially the grey kind, particularly
in all those where there are
no regular raised staddles or stands
for the grain stacks to rest upon,
which is the case in a great number.
the mischief, injury, and destruction
of grain which is produced in
this way, is scarcely to be calculated;
and they are besides very mischievous,
troublesome, and inconvenient
in several others; so that they
should be every where extirpated as
much as possible. and in corn
tracts, stands or staddles should
every where be provided in order to
prevent mischief being done by them.[]
razor straps. nothing
makes a better razor strap than crocus
martis with a little sweet oil,
rubbed well on doe skin with a glass
bottle; and to keep it in perfect
order, it should not be left too long
dry.
red cabbage. slice a red
cabbage crossways, put it in an
earthen dish, and throw on it a
handful of salt. cover it over till
the next day, drain it in a cullender,
and put it into a jar. boil some
good vinegar, with cloves and allspice;
pour it hot on the cabbage
till the jar is full, and when cold tie
it down close.
red herrings. choose those
that are large and moist, cut them
open, and pour over them some boiling
small beer. let them soak half
an hour, then drain and dry them;
make them just hot through before
the fire, and rub them over with cold
butter. serve with egg sauce, or
buttered eggs; mashed potatoes
should also be sent up with them.
red ink. infuse a quarter of
a pound of brazil wood, rasped, in
two pints of vinegar, for three days.
then boil the liquid and the wood
over a gentle fire, for an hour, and
strain it off quite hot. put it again
over the fire, and dissolve in it, first,
half an ounce of gum arabic, and
afterwards, half an ounce of alum,
and the same quantity of white sugar.
when the alum is dissolved,
remove it from the fire, and preserve
it for use.
red mullet. this sort of
fish are in season in august; and
to be good, they should be quite
firm. sea mullets are preferred to
the river ones, and the red to the
grey. this fish is sometimes called
the sea woodcock. to dress mullets,
clean them, but leave the inside.
fold them in oiled paper,
and bake them gently in a small
dish. make a sauce of the liquor
that comes from the fish, with a
piece of butter, a little flour, a little
essence of anchovy, and a glass
of sherry. give it a boil, serve
in a boat, and the fish in the paper
cases.
regimen. it may be difficult
accurately to ascertain the predominant
qualities of particular constitutions,
or of the food that is best
adapted in particular instances;
yet it is certain, that health is dependent
on regimen and diet, more
than on any other cause. there
are things so decidedly injurious,
and so well known to be so, as to
require no admonition; the instincts
of nature will teach us to refrain;
and generally speaking, the best rule
for our practice is to observe by
experience, what it is that hurts or
does us good, and what our stomachs
are best able to digest. we must
at the same time keep our judgment
unbiassed, and not suffer it to become
a pander to the appetite; or
the stomach and the health will be
betrayed to the mere indulgence of
sensuality. the gratification of our
taste in the abundant supplies of nature,
converted by art to the purposes
of wholesome food, is perfectly
compatible with the necessary maintenance
of health; it is only the indiscriminate
or inordinate indulgence
of our appetites, regardless
of the consequences, that is the proper
object of censure. many of the
diseases to which we are subject
might be traced to this source; yet
we are generally so little aware of
it, that we impute them to the state
of the weather, to infection, or any
other imaginary cause, rather than
the true one. the weather has very
little serious effect upon a person in
health, unless exposed to it in some
unusual manner that suddenly checks
perspiration, or some of the ordinary
evacuations. infection, though
of formidable import, is almost divested
of its power over those whose
temperance in food and diet keeps
the blood and juices pure. the
closest attendance upon an infected[]
person has often been found perfectly
consistent with personal safety
under such circumstances. even
diseases, said to be hereditary, may
with great probability be assigned
to errors in domestic life, of which
the children partake, and fall into
the same disorders as their parents,
and remote progenitors. but even
if this be not exactly so, an originally
indifferent constitution may
certainly be much amended by proper
management. amongst a variety
of causes producing ill health,
there can be no doubt but bad air,
want of cleanliness, want of exercise,
excessive fatigue, and mental
uneasiness, must have an unfavourable
influence; yet none of these
have so immediate an effect as the
food we eat, which if not wholesome
and nutricious, tends directly
to contaminate the system. we derive
the renewal of our blood and
juices, which are constantly exhausting,
from the substances converted
into food. as our food therefore
is proper or improper, too much
or too little, so will our blood and
juices be good or bad, overcharged
or deficient, and our state of health
accordingly good or diseased. it
is not only necessary however, that
our aliment should be plain and
wholesome; it is requisite also that
it should contain active principles;
such as salts, oils, and spirits, which
have the property of stimulating the
solids, quickening the circulation,
and make the fluids thinner; thus
rendering them more suited to undergo
the necessary secretions of
the body. the art of preserving
health, and of prolonging life, consists
therefore in the use of a moderate
quantity of such diet as shall
neither encrease the salts and oils
so as to produce disease, nor to
diminish them so as to suffer the
solids to become relaxed. eating
too little is hurtful, as well as eating
too much. neither excess nor hunger,
nor any thing else that passes
the bounds of nature, can be good
for man. temperance and moderation
in eating and drinking, are nature's
great preservatives. 'the
throat has destroyed more than the
sword.' some people are apt to
think, the more plentifully they eat
and drink, the better they thrive,
and the stronger they grow. but
this is not the case: a little, well
digested, will render the body more
vigorous than when it is glutted with
superfluity, most of which is turned
to excrementitious, not alimentary,
fluid, and must soon be evacuated,
or sickness will follow. it is said
of the highly celebrated dr. boerhaäve,
that having long promised to
a friend the secret of preserving
health and long life, his friend became
impatient to obtain the secret,
when he perceived that the physician
was dying. to his repeated
solicitations, the doctor as frequently
replied, 'do not eat too much—do
not eat too much;' and left this
advice as his last legacy to his valued
friend. by loading the stomach,
digestion is impeded; for the natural
juice of the stomach, which is
the great medium of digestion, has
not then room to exert itself. the
stomach therefore nauseates its contents,
and is troubled with eructations;
the spirits are oppressed,
obstructions ensue, and disease is
the consequence. besides, when
thus overfilled, the stomach presses
on the diaphragm, prevents the proper
play of the lungs, and occasions
difficulty and uneasiness in breathing.
hence arise various bad symptoms
and effects, throughout the
whole of the animal economy; prostrating
the strength, impairing the
senses, hastening old age, and shortening
life. though these unhappy
consequences may not be immediately
perceived, yet they are the
certain attendants of intemperance;
and it has been generally observed
in great eaters, that though from
custom, a state of youth, and a[]
strong constitution, they suffer no
present inconvenience, but have digested
their food, and sustained the
surfeit; yet if they have not been
unexpectedly cut off, they have
found the symptoms of old age come
on early in life, attended with pains
and innumerable disorders. if health
is to be regarded, we must ever
make it a rule not to eat to satiety or
fulness, but desist while the stomach
feels quite easy. thus we shall be
refreshed, light, and cheerful; not
dull, heavy, or indisposed. should
we ever be tempted to eat too much
at one time, we should eat the less
at another: abstinence is the best
remedy for repletion. if our dinner
has been larger than usual, let our
supper be less, or rather, quite
omitted. with regard to the times
of eating, they must to a certain
degree be conformed to family convenience,
but ought to be quite independent
of the caprice of fashion,
instead of being as they are, governed
by it. this, and a want of punctuality
to the dinner hour, are the
cause of more real harm to the constitution
than thoughtless people of
fashion, and their more thoughtless
imitators, are apt to imagine. when
a dinner is dressed, nothing can prevent
its being injured by standing.
it may be kept hot, and this imposes
on those who think no farther upon
the subject; but the very means
made use of for this purpose, only
help to spoil it the more. if things
boiled are kept in the water after
they are done enough, they become
sodden, vapid, and heavy. the invention
of hot closets for keeping
other things hot, dry away the juices,
and make them strong and rancid.
from such dinners, indigestions will
ensue, frequent head-aches, nervousness,
and many other uneasy
sensations, which finally bring on
maladies of a more serious nature.
the great points to be guarded
against, respecting the times of eating,
are either eating too soon after
a former meal, or fasting too long.
the stomach should always have
time to empty itself, before it is
filled again. some stomachs digest
their contents sooner than others,
and if long empty it may destroy the
appetite, and greatly disturb both
the head and animal spirits; because
from the great profusion of
nerves spread over the stomach,
there is an immediate sympathy between
that and the head. hence
the head is sure to be affected by
whatever disorders the stomach,
whether from any particular aliment
that disagrees with it, or being
over filled, or too long empty.
hence also, too frequently, arise
apoplexy, or paralytic affections,
especially in aged people. such as
feel a gnawing in the stomach, as
it is called, should not wait till the
stated time of the next meal, but
take a small quantity of food, light,
and easy of digestion, that the
stomach may have something to
work on. children, with craving
appetites, do and may eat often,
allowing only a proper interval to
empty the stomach. young persons
in health, who use much exercise,
may eat three times a day.
but such as are in years, such as
are weak, as do no work, or lead a
sedentary life, eating twice in the
day is quite sufficient: or if in the
present habits of society it is found
to be difficult to arrange for two
meals only, let them take three very
moderate ones. weak and aged
persons may eat often, but then it
should be very little at a time. the
diseases to which we are liable often
require substances of more active
principles than what are found in
common aliment, and hence the
need of medicine, in order to, produce
sudden alterations. but where
such alterations are not immediately
necessary, the same effect may be
produced with much greater safety,
by a proper attention to diet only.
abstinence is in short, one of the[]
best remedies to which we can resort;
and if employed in time, will
entirely cure many disorders, and
check the violence of such as cannot
be entirely carried off by it. in all
cases where there is any inflammation,
and in stomach complaints, it
is particularly necessary, and may
be safely continued till the symptoms
of disease disappear. where
the digestion is habitually weak, a
day of abstinence once a week will
always be beneficial. the quality
of our food is a subject of greater
difficulty than the quantity. moderation
is an invariably safe guide
in the latter case; but though always
favourable to prevent ill effects
from any error in quality, it will
not always be effectual. to a person
in good health, with a strong
stomach, and whose constant beverage
is water, or some weak liquor,
the niceties in food and cooking
are less material, than to persons
with naturally weak stomachs, or to
those in sickness, or for children.
but all persons who would to a certainty
preserve their health and faculties,
and live out the natural
term of life, should use plain food,
as all high seasonings and compound
mixtures, have an injurious effect,
sooner or later, on the strongest
constitutions. if a few instances
can be shewn to the contrary, these,
like other anomalies in nature, cannot
constitute an exception to a well
established fact. a prevailing error
in the diet of this country is a too
great use of animal food. the disease
called the sea scurvy, often
occurs from this cause, in every
large town in england; and it is
probable that the frequency and
fatality of putrid and scarlet fevers
may justly be attributed to it also.
the prejudices of this country are
very strong in favour of animal food,
but the evidence of facts is equally
strong against its absolute necessity.
instances of this are seen in
the natives of hindostan, who live
upon rice, and who by way of opprobrium
call the inhabitants of this
country 'flesh eaters;' in the poor
of ireland, who live upon potatoes,
and in the poor of scotland, who
live upon oatmeal. after all, the
medium is in all probability the
best; neither animal nor vegetable
diet exclusively, but a reasonable
proportion of both. persons of indifferent
health should be particularly
cautious in their diet, and those
labouring under any particular malady
should carefully conform to the
regimen prescribed for them by their
medical advisers.—our beverage is
another very important article, in
reference to health. it is essential
to moisten and convey more solid
food into the stomach, and from
thence to the respective parts of the
system. also to allay thirst, to dilute
the blood, that it may circulate
through the minutest vessels, and to
dissolve and carry off by watery secretions
the superfluous salts taken
in with the food. no liquid is so
effectual for this purpose as pure
water; with the exception only of
a few cases. no other liquid circulates
so well, or mixes so immediately
with our fluids. other liquids
are impregnated with particles
which act strongly upon the solids
or fluids, or both; but water being
simple, operates only by diluting,
moistening, and cooling, which are
the great uses of drink pointed out
to us by nature. hence it is evident
that water in general is the
best and most wholesome drink;
but as some constitutions require
something to warm and stimulate
the stomach, fermented liquors may
be proper, if taken in moderation.
it is necessary however, that beer,
ale, cider, and wine, be taken in a
sound state and of proper age, or
they will be highly detrimental.
spirituous liquors, taken too freely,
or in a raw state, are attended with
direful effects, and are the destruction
of thousands. from the degree[]
of heat they have undergone in distillation,
they acquire a corrosive
and burning quality, which makes
them dangerous to the constitution.
they contract the fibres and smaller
vessels, especially where they are
tenderest, as in the brain, and thus
destroy the intellectual faculties.
they injure the coat of the stomach,
and so expose the nerves and relax
the fibres, till the whole stomach
becomes at last soft and flabby.
hence ensues loss of appetite, indigestion,
and diseases that generally
terminate in premature death. light
wines of a moderate strength, and
matured by age, are more wholesome
than strong, rich, and heavy
wines, and pass off the stomach
with less difficulty. red port is
strong and astringent, but white
port and spanish wines are stimulating
and attenuating. french
wines are lighter, and not so strong
as the portuguese and spanish wines,
which renders them wholesomer for
thin and dry constitutions. rhenish
and moselle wines are the most
wholesome of any, where acidity is
not hurtful. home made wines are
prejudicial to all constitutions, being
very windy and heady. the
notion that liquors of any kind assist
digestion, is quite erroneous,
as wine and all other strong liquors
are as hard to digest as strong solid
food. those who drink only water
or small beer at their meals, are able
to eat and digest almost double the
quantity of what they could, if they
drank strong liquors. when the
stomach is uneasy from too much
food, or such as is indigestible,
strong liquors produce a deceitful
glow in the stomach, which induces
a belief of their having the beneficial
effect of assisting digestion. the
fallacy of this conclusion is sufficiently
apparent from the state in
which cherries are found, after they
have been steeped in brandy: instead
of becoming more tender,
they are rendered as tough as leather.
similar effects are produced
on food in the stomach, as well as
out of it. strong liquors are plainly
improper at meals, as by their heat
and activity they hurry the food undigested
into the habit, and so lay
the foundation for various distempers,
such as the gout, rheumatism,
apoplexy, and palsy.
rennet. this article, so necessary
in making of cheese, is prepared
as follows. take out the
stomach of a calf as soon as killed,
and scour it inside and out with salt,
after it is cleared of the curd always
found in it. let it drain a few hours,
then sow it up with two good handfuls
of salt in it, or stretch it on a
stick well salted, and hang it up to
dry.—another way. clean the maw
as above, and let it drain a day.
then put into two quarts of fresh
spring-water a handful of hawthorn
tops, a handful of sweet briar, a
handful of rose leaves, a stick of
cinnamon, forty cloves, four blades
of mace, a sprig of knotted marjoram,
and two large spoonfuls of salt.
let them boil gently till the liquor
is reduced to three pints, and strain
it off; when only milk warm, pour
it on the maw. slice a lemon into
it, let it stand two days, strain it
again, and bottle it for use. it will
keep good at least for twelve months,
and has a very fine flavour. sweet
aromatic herbs may also be added.
the liquor must be pretty salt, but
not made into brine: a little of it
will turn the milk. salt the maw
again for a week or two, and dry it
stretched on cross sticks, and it will
be nearly as strong as before. the
rennet when dried must be kept in
a cool place.
resentment. this is a dangerous
passion, and often fatal to
health. anger disorders the whole
frame, hurries on the circulation of
the blood, occasions fevers and
other acute disorders, and sometimes
ends in sudden death. resentment
also preys upon the mind, and[]
occasions the most obstinate disorders,
which gradually waste the
constitution. those who value
health therefore, will guard against
indulging this malignant propensity,
and endeavour to preserve a happy
degree of tranquillity.
rheumatism. in this complaint
the diet should be nourishing,
with a little generous wine; costiveness
must be carefully avoided.
the painful part should be kept
warm with flannel, should be frequently
rubbed, occasionally electrified,
and supplied with the volatile
liniment. blisters, cataplasms of
mustard or horseradish, may be
applied with advantage. if these
be not effectual, take a pint of the
spirits of turpentine, and add half
an ounce of camphor. let it stand
till the camphor is dissolved, then
rub it on the part affected night and
morning, and it will seldom fail to
afford effectual relief. this mixture
is also very proper for sprains and
bruises, and should be kept for family
use. but several of our own
domestic plants as above may be
used with advantage in the rheumatism.
one of the best is the white
mustard. a table-spoonful of the
seed of this plant may be taken
twice or thrice a day, in a glass
of water or small wine. the water
trefoil is likewise of great use
in this complaint. it may be infused
in wine or ale, or drunk in the
form of tea. the ground-ivy, camomile,
and several other bitters,
are also beneficial, and may be used
in the same manner. no benefit,
however, is to be expected from
these, unless they be taken for a
considerable time. cold bathing,
especially in salt water, often cures
the rheumatism. it is also advisable
to take exercise, and wear flannel
next the skin. issues are likewise
very proper, especially in chronic
cases. if the pain affects the shoulders,
an issue may be made in the
arm; but if it affects the loins, it
should be put into the leg or thigh.
such as are subject to frequent attacks
of the rheumatism ought to
make choice of a dry, warm situation,
to avoid the night air, wet
clothes, and wet feet, as much as
possible. their clothing should be
warm, and they should wear flannel
next their skin, and make frequent
use of the flesh brush. one of the
best articles of dress, not only for
the prevention of rheumatism, but
for powerful co-operation in its
cure, is fleecy hosiery. in low
marshy situations, the introduction
of that manufacture has prevented
more rheumatisms, colds, and agues,
than all the medicines ever used
there. such of the inhabitants of
marshy counties as are in easy circumstances,
could not, perhaps, direct
their charity and humanity to a
better object than to the supplying
their poor neighbours with so cheap
and simple a preservative.
rhubarb. by proper attention
in the growth and preparation of
this root, it may be obtained here
nearly in equal goodness to the foreign.
the plants are all increased
by seeds, which should be sown in
autumn soon after they are ripe,
where the plants are designed to
remain, as their roots being large
and fleshy when they are removed,
they do not recover it soon; nor do
the roots of such removed plants
ever grow so large and fair as those
which remain where they were sown.
when the plants appear in the spring,
the ground should be well hoed over,
to cut up the weeds; and where
they are too close, some should be
cut up, leaving them at the first hoeing
six or eight inches asunder; but
at the second they may be separated
to a foot and a half distance, and
more. when any weeds appear,
the ground should be scuffled over
with a dutch hoe in dry weather;
but after the plants cover the ground
with their broad leaves, they keep
down the weeds without any farther[]
trouble. the ground should be
cleaned in autumn when the leaves
decay, and in the spring, before the
plants begin to put up their new
leaves, be dug well between them.
in the second year, many of the
strongest plants will produce flowers
and seeds, and in the third year
most of them. it is advised, that
the seeds be carefully gathered when
ripe, and not permitted to scatter,
lest they grow and injure the old
plants. the roots continue many
years without decaying, and the old
roots of the true rhubarb are much
preferable to the young ones. the
roots may be generally taken up
after four years, but if they remain
longer it is so much the better.
these plants delight in a rich soil,
which is not too dry nor over moist:
and where there is depth in such
land for their roots to run down,
they attain a great size, both in the
leaves and roots.
rhubarb pie. peel the stalks
of the plant, cut them about an inch
long, put them into a dish with moist
sugar, a little water and lemon peel.
put on the crust, and bake it in a
moderate oven.
rhubarb pudding. put
four dozen clean sticks of rhubarb
into a stewpan, with the peel of a
lemon, a bit of cinnamon, two cloves,
and as much moist sugar as will
sweeten it. set it over the fire, and
reduce it to a marmalade. pass it
through a hair sieve, then add the
peel of a lemon, half a nutmeg grated,
a quarter of a pound of good butter,
the yolks of four eggs, and one white,
and mix all well together. line a
pie dish with good puff paste, put
in the mixture, and bake it half an
hour. this will make a good spring
pudding.
rhubarb sauce. to make
a mock gooseberry-sauce for mackarel,
reduce three dozen sticks of
rhubarb to a marmalade, and sweeten
it with moist sugar. pass it
through a hair sieve, and serve it up
in a boat.—mock gooseberry-fool is
made of rhubarb marmalade, prepared
as for a pudding. add a pint
of good thick cream, serve it up in
glasses, or in a deep dish. if wanted
in a shape, dissolve two ounces
of isinglass in a little water, strain
it through a tammis, and when nearly
cold put it to the cream. pour
it into a jelly mould, and when set,
turn it out into a dish, and serve it
up plain.
rhubarb sherbet. boil six
or eight sticks of clean rhubarb in a
quart of water, ten minutes. strain
the liquor through a tammis into a
jug, with the peel of a lemon cut
very thin, and two table-spoonfuls
of clarified sugar. let it stand five
or six hours, and it will be fit to
drink.
rhubarb soup. there are
various ways of dressing garden
rhubarb, which serves as an excellent
substitute for spring fruit. peel
and well wash four dozen sticks of
rhubarb, blanch it in water three or
four minutes, drain it on a sieve, and
put it into a stewpan with two sliced
onions, a carrot, an ounce of lean
ham, and a good bit of butter. let
it stew gently over a slow fire till
tender, then put in two quarts of
rich soup, to which add two or three
ounces of bread crumbs, and boil it
about fifteen minutes. skim off all
the fat, season with salt and cayenne,
pass it through a tammis, and
serve it up with fried bread.
rhubarb tart. cut the
stalks in lengths of four or five inches,
and take off the thin skin. lay
them in a dish, pour on a thin syrup
of sugar and water, cover them with
another dish, and let it simmer very
slowly for an hour on a hot hearth;
or put the rhubarb into a block-tin
saucepan, and simmer it over the
fire. when cold, make it into a
tart; the baking of the crust will
be sufficient, if the rhubarb be quite
tender.
ribs of beef. the following[]
is an excellent way of dressing this
rich and valuable joint. hang up
three ribs three or four days, take
out the bones from the whole length,
sprinkle it with salt, roll the meat
tight, and roast it. if done with
spices, and baked as hunter's beef,
it is excellent, and nothing can look
nicer.
rice broth. put a quarter of
a pound of whole rice into a gallon
of water. let it simmer till it is
quite soft, then put in a knuckle of
veal, or the scrag end of a leg of
mutton, with two or three pounds
of gravy beef. stew this very gently
for two hours, then put in turnips,
carrots, celery, leeks, or any other
vegetables. continue to stew slowly,
and when the whole is sufficiently
done, season it with salt, and serve
it up.
rice cake. mix ten ounces
of ground rice, three ounces of flour,
and eight ounces of pounded sugar.
sift the composition by degrees into
eight yolks and six whites of eggs,
and the peel of a lemon shred so fine
that it is quite mashed. mix the
whole well in a tin stewpan with a
whisk, over a very slow fire. put
it immediately into the oven in the
same, and bake it forty minutes.—another.
beat twelve yolks and
six whites of eggs, with the peels of
two lemons grated. mix one pound
of rice flour, eight ounces of fine
flour, and a pound of sugar pounded
and sifted. beat it well with the
eggs by degrees, for an hour, with
a wooden spoon. butter a pan well,
and put it in at the oven mouth.
a gentle oven will bake it in an hour
and a half.
rice caudle. when the water
boils, pour into it some grated
rice, with a little cold water. when
of a proper consistence, add sugar,
lemon peel, cinnamon, and a spoonful
of brandy, and boil all smooth.—another
way. soak in water
some fine rice for an hour, strain it,
and put two spoonfuls of the rice
into a pint and a quarter of milk.
simmer till it will pulp through a
sieve, then put the pulp and milk
into the saucepan, with a bruised
clove, and a bit of lump sugar.
simmer all together ten minutes; if
too thick, add a spoonful or two of
milk, and serve with thin toast.
rice cheesecakes. boil
four ounces of ground rice in milk,
with a blade of cinnamon: put it
into a pot, and let it stand till the
next day. mash it fine with half a
pound of butter; add to it four eggs,
half a pint of cream, a grated nutmeg,
a glass of brandy, and a little
sugar. or the butter may be stirred
and melted in the rice while it
is hot, and left in the pot till the
next day.
rice custard. boil three
pints of new milk with a little cinnamon,
lemon peel, and sugar. mix
the yolks of two eggs well beaten,
with a large spoonful of rice flour,
smothered in a cup of cold milk.
take a basin of the boiling milk, mix
it with the cold that has the rice in
it, and add it to the remainder of
the boiling milk, stirring it one way
till it begins to thicken. pour it into
a pan, stir it till it is cool, and add
a spoonful of brandy or orange water.
this is a good imitation of
cream custard, and considerably
cheaper.
rice edging. after soaking
and picking some fine carolina rice,
boil it in salt and water, until sufficiently
tender, but not to mash.
drain, and put it round the inner
edge of the dish, to the height of
two inches. smooth it with the back
of a spoon, wash it over with the
yolk of an egg, and put it into the
oven for three or four minutes. this
forms an agreeable edging for currie
or fricassee, with the meat served in
the middle.
rice flummery. boil with
a pint of new milk, a bit of lemon
peel and cinnamon. mix with a little
cold milk as much rice flour as[]
will make the whole of a good consistence,
add a little sugar, and a
spoonful of peach water, or a bitter
almond beaten. boil it, but do not
let it burn; pour it into a shape or
pint basin, taking out the spice.
when cold, turn the flummery into
a dish, and serve with cream, milk,
or custard round. or put a tea-cupful
of cream into half a pint of
new milk, a glass of white wine, half
a lemon squeezed, and sugar.
rice milk. boil half a pound
of rice in a quart of water, with a
bit of cinnamon, till the water is
wasted. add three pints of milk,
an egg beaten up with a spoonful
of flour, and stir it till it boils.
then pour it out, sweeten it, and put
in currants and nutmeg.
rice pancakes. boil half a
pound of rice to a jelly in a small
quantity of water; when cold, mix
it with a pint of cream, eight eggs,
a little salt and nutmeg. stir in
eight ounces of butter just warmed,
and add flour sufficient to thicken
the batter. fry in as little lard or
dripping as possible.
rice paste. to make a rice
paste for sweets, boil a quarter of a
pound of ground rice in the smallest
quantity of water. strain from it
all the moisture possible, beat it in
a mortar with half an ounce of butter,
and one egg well beaten. it
will make an excellent paste for
tarts, and other sweet dishes.—to
make a rich paste for relishing
things, clean some rice, and put it
into a saucepan. add a little milk
and water, or milk only, and an
onion, and simmer it over the fire
till it swells. put some seasoned
chops into a dish, and cover it with
the rice. the addition of an egg
will make the rice bind the better.
rabbits fricasseed, and covered with
rice paste, are very good.
rice pudding. if for family
use, swell the rice with a very little
milk over the fire. then add more
milk, an egg, some sugar, allspice,
and lemon peel; and bake it in a
deep dish. or put into a deep pan
half a pound of rice washed and
picked, two ounces of butter, four
ounces of sugar, a little pounded allspice,
and two quarts of milk. less
butter will do, or some suet: bake
the pudding in a slow oven. another.
boil a quarter of a pound of
rice in a quart of milk, with a stick
of cinnamon, till it is thick; stir it
often, that it does not burn; pour
it into a pan, stir in a quarter of a
pound of butter, and grate half a
nutmeg; add sugar to your taste,
and a small tea-cup of rose-water;
stir all together till cold; beat up
eight eggs, (leave out half the whites)
stir all well together, lay a thin puff
paste at the bottom of the dish, and
nip the edge; then pour in the pudding
and bake it.—another. to
make a plain rice pudding, put half
a pound of rice well picked, into
three quarts of milk; add half a
pound of sugar, a small nutmeg
grated, and half a pound of butter;
butter the dish with part, and break
the rest into the milk and rice; stir
all well together, pour it into a dish,
and bake it.—another. to make a
boiled rice pudding, take a quarter
of a pound of rice well picked and
washed, tie it in a cloth, leaving
room for it to swell; boil it for an
hour; take it up and stir in a quarter
of a pound of butter, some nutmeg
and sugar; tie it up again
very tight, and boil it an hour more.
when you send it to table, pour
butter and sugar over it.—another.
to make a ground rice pudding.
to a pint of milk put four ounces of
ground rice; boil it for some time,
keeping it stirring, lest it should
burn; pour it into a pan, and stir in
a quarter of a pound of butter;
then beat up six eggs, leaving out
half the whites, a little lemon peel
finely shred, a little nutmeg grated,
a quarter of a pound of sugar, a gill
of cream, a little rose-water, and as
much salt as you can take up between[]
your thumb and finger; mix
all well together, make a puff paste,
lay it round the rim of the dish,
and bake it.—lay citron or orange
cut very thin, on the top, and strew
a few currants on.—another. to
make rice pudding with fruit. swell
half a pound of rice with a very
little milk over the fire, and then
mix with it any kind of fruit; such
as currants, scalded gooseberries,
pared and quartered apples, raisins,
or black currants. put an egg into
the pudding to bind it, boil it well,
and serve it up with sugar.
rice sauce. steep a quarter
of a pound of rice in a pint of milk,
with an onion, a dozen pepper corns
or allspice, and a little mace. when
the rice is quite tender, take out the
spice, and rub the rice through a
sieve into a clean stewpan: if too
thick, put a little milk or cream to
it. this makes a very delicate
white sauce; and at elegant tables,
is frequently used instead of bread
sauce.
rice souffle. blanch some
carolina rice, strain and boil it
in milk, with lemon peel and a bit
of cinnamon. let it boil till the
rice is dry; then cool it, and raise
a rim three inches high round the
dish, having egged the dish where
it is put, to make it stick. then
egg the rice all over. fill the
dish half way up with a marmalade
of apples; have ready the
whites of four eggs beaten to a
fine froth, and put them over the
marmalade. sift fine sugar over,
and set it in the oven, which should
be warm enough to give it a beautiful
colour.
rice soup. boil a pound of
rice with a little cinnamon, in two
quarts of water. take out the cinnamon,
add a little sugar and nutmeg,
and let it stand to cool. then
beat up the yolks of three eggs in a
little white wine, and mix it with
the rice. set it on a slow fire, stir
it well, and take it up as soon as it
has boiled to a proper thickness.
rich giblet soup. take
four pounds of gravy beef, two
pounds of scrag of mutton, two
pounds of scrag of veal; stew them
well down together in a sufficient
quantity of water for a strong broth,
let it stand till it is quite cold, then
skim the fat clean off. take two
pair of giblets well scalded and
cleaned, put them into your broth,
and let them simmer till they are
stewed tender; then take out your
giblets, and run the soup through a
fine sieve to catch the small bones;
then take an ounce of butter and
put it into a stew-pan, mixing a proper
quantity of flour, which make of
a fine light brown. take a small
handful of chives, the same of parsley,
a very little penny-royal, and
a very little sweet marjoram; chop
all these herbs together excessive
small, put your soup over a slow
fire, put in your giblets, butter and
flour, and small herbs; then take a
pint of madeira wine, some cayenne
pepper, and salt to your palate.
let them all simmer together, till
the herbs are tender, and the soup
is finished. send it to the table
with the giblets in it. let the
livers be stewed in a saucepan by
themselves, and put in when you
dish.
rich gravy. cut lean beef
into small slices, according to the
quantity wanted; slice some onions
thin, and flour them both. fry them
of a light pale brown, but do not suffer
them on any account to get
black. put them into a stewpan,
pour boiling water on the browning
in the fryingpan, boil it up, and pour
it on the meat. add a bunch of parsley,
thyme, and savoury, a small
piece of marjoram, the same of taragon,
some mace, berries of allspice,
whole black pepper, a clove or two,
and a bit of ham, or gammon of bacon.
simmer till the juice of the[]
meat is extracted, and skim it the
moment it boils. if for a hare, or
stewed fish, anchovy should be
added.
rich gravy soup. take a
pound of lean beef, two pounds of
veal, and a pound of mutton cut in
pieces; put them into a pot, with
six quarts of water, a large faggot of
sweet herbs, an onion stuck with
cloves, some whole pepper, a little
mace, and the upper crust of bread
toasted brown. put in an ox palate
well cleaned and blanched
whole; set it over a slow fire, and
let it stew till half is wasted;
strain it off, and put it into a clean
saucepan. take off the ox palate,
shred small, some cock's combs
blanched, an ounce of morels cut in
pieces, four large heads of celery
well washed, and cut small, with the
heart of four or five savoys, about as
big as a turkey's egg, put in whole;
cover it close, and let it stew softly
for an hour and a half. if it want
any more seasoning, add it; cut some
french bread toasts thin, and crisp
them before the fire. when your
soup is ready, lay your bread in the
dish, and put in your soup.
rich home-made wine.—take
new cider from the press, mix
it with as much honey as will support
an egg, boil it gently fifteen minutes,
but not in an iron, brass, or
copper pot. skim it well, and tun
it when cool, but the cask must not
be quite full. bottle it in the following
march, and it will be fit to drink
in six weeks, but it will be less sweet
if kept longer in the cask. this will
make a rich and strong wine, suitable
for culinary purposes, where milk
or sweet wine is to be employed.
honey, besides its other valuable
uses, is a fine ingredient to assist and
render palatable, new or harsh cider.
rich plum pudding. to
make a small, but very rich plum
pudding, shred fine three quarters
of a pound of suet, and half a pound
of stoned raisins, chopped a little.
add three spoonfuls of flour, as much
moist sugar, a little salt and nutmeg,
the yolks of three, and the whites of
two eggs. let it boil four hours in
a basin or tin mould, well buttered.
when the pudding is served up, pour
over it some melted butter, with
white wine and sugar.—for a larger
pudding of the same description,
shred three pounds of suet; add a
pound and a half of raisins stoned
and chopped, a pound and a half of
currants, three pounds of good flour,
sixteen eggs, and a quart of milk.
boil it in a cloth seven hours.
rich rice pudding. boil
half a pound of rice in water, till it
is quite tender, adding a little salt.
drain it dry, mix it with four eggs,
a quarter of a pint of cream, and
two ounces of fresh butter melted in
the cream. add four ounces of beef
suet or marrow, or veal suet taken
from the fillet, finely shred; three
quarters of a pound of currants, two
spoonfuls of brandy, a spoonful of
peach water or ratifia, nutmeg, and
grated lemon peel. when well mixed,
put a paste round the edge, fill
the dish, and bake it in a moderate
oven. slices of candied orange,
lemon, and citron, may be added.
rickets. this disease generally
attacks children between the
age of nine months and two years;
and as it is always attended with
evident signs of weakness and relaxation,
the chief aim in the cure
must be to brace and strengthen
the solids, and to promote digestion
and the due preparation of the fluids.
these important ends will be best
answered by wholesome nourishing
diet, suited to the age and strength
of the patient, open dry air, and sufficient
exercise. the limbs should
be rubbed frequently with a warm
hand, and the child kept as cheerful
as possible. biscuit is generally
reckoned the best bread; and pigeons,
pullet, veal, rabbits, or mutton[]
roasted or minced, are the most
proper meat. if the child be too
young for animal food, he may have
rice, millet, or pearl barley, boiled
with raisins, to which may be added
a little wine and spice. his
drink may be good claret, mixed
with an equal quantity of water.
those who cannot afford claret,
may give the child now and then a
wine glass of mild ale, or good
porter. the disease may often be
cured by the nurse, but seldom by
the physician. in children of a
gross habit, gentle vomits and repeated
purges of rhubarb may sometimes
be of use, but they will seldom
carry off the disease; that
must depend chiefly upon such
things as brace and strengthen the
system; for which purpose, besides
the regimen mentioned above, the
cold bath, especially in the warm
season, is highly recommended. it
must, however, be used with prudence,
as some ricketty children
cannot bear it. the best time for
using the cold bath is in the morning,
and the child should be well
rubbed with a dry cloth immediately
after he comes out of it.
ring worm. this eruption,
which generally appears on the head,
in a circular form, attended with
painful itching, is sometimes removed
by rubbing it with black ink, or
mushroom ketchup. the following
preparation is also recommended.
wash some roots of sorrel quite clean,
bruise them in a mortar, and steep
them in white wine vinegar for two
or three days. then rub the liquor
on the ring worm three or four times
a day, till it begin to disappear.
roasting. the first requisite
for roasting is to have a clear brisk
fire, proportioned to the joint that
is to be roasted; without this every
attempt must prove abortive. next
to see that the spit is properly
cleaned before it enters the meat,
and the less it passes through it the
better. neck and loins require to
be carefully jointed before they are
put on the spit, that the carver may
separate them easily and neatly.
the joint should be balanced evenly
on the spit, that its motion may be
regular, and the fire operate equally
on every part; for this purpose
cook-holds and balancing skewers
are necessary. all roasting should
be done open to the air, to ventilate
the meat from its own fumes, and
by the radiant heat of a glowing
fire; otherwise it is in fact baked,
and rendered less wholesome.
hence what are called rumford
roasters, and the machines invented
by economical gratemakers, are utterly
to be rejected. if they save
any thing in fuel, which is doubtful,
they are highly injurious to the flavour
and best qualities of the meat.
for the same reason, when a joint
is dressed, it is better to keep it hot
by the fire, than to put it under a
cover, that the exhalations may
freely escape. in making up the
fire for roasting, it should be three
or four inches longer at each end
than the article on the spit, or the
ends of the meat cannot be done
nice and brown. half an hour at
least before the roasting begins,
prepare the fire, by putting on a
few coals so as to be sufficiently
lighted by the time the fire is wanted.
put some of them between the
bars, and small coals or cinders
wetted at the back of the fire; and
never put down meat to a burnt up
fire. in small families, not provided
with a jack or spit, a bottle
jack, sold by the ironmongers, is a
valuable instrument for roasting;
and where this cannot be had, a
skewer and a string, or rather a
quantity of coarse yarn loosely
twisted, is as philosophical as any
of them, and will answer the purpose
as well. do not put meat too
near the fire at first. the larger
the joint, the farther it must be
kept from the fire: if once it gets
scorched, the outside will become[]
hard, and acquire a disagreeable
taste. if the fire is prevented from
penetrating into it, the meat will
appear done, before it is little more
than half ready, besides losing the
pale brown colour which is the
beauty of roast meat. from ten
to fourteen inches is the usual distance
at which it is put from the
grate, when first laid down; and
afterwards it should be brought
nearer by degrees. if the joint is
thicker at one end than the other,
lay the spit slanting, with the thickest
part nearest the fire. when the
article is thin and tender, the fire
should be small and brisk; but for
a large joint the fire should be
strong, and equally good in every
part of the grate, or the meat cannot
be equally roasted, nor possess
that uniform colour which is the
test of good cooking. give the fire
a good stirring before the meat is
laid down, keep it clear at the bottom,
and take care that there are no
smoky coals in the front, to spoil
the look and taste of the meat. if
a jack be used, it should be carefully
oiled and kept clean, and covered
from the dust, or it will never
go well. the dripping pan should
be placed at such a distance from
the fire as just to catch the drippings;
if it be too near, the ashes
will fall into it, and spoil the drippings.
if too far from the fire to
catch them, the drippings will not
only be lost, but the meat will be
blackened, and spoiled by the fetid
smoke, which will arise when the
fat falls on the live cinders. the
meat must be well basted, to keep
it moist. when it does not supply
dripping enough for this purpose,
add some that has been saved on
former occasions, and nicely prepared,
which answers as well or
better than butter. meat should
not be sprinkled with salt till nearly
done, as it tends to draw out the
gravy. basting with a little salt
and water, when the meat is first
laid down, is often done, but the
practice is not good. where the
fat is very fine and delicate, it is
best to cover it with writing paper
to prevent its wasting; but in general
it is as well to expose it to the
action of the fire, and let it fall into
the dripping pan. half an hour before
the meat is done, prepare some
gravy if necessary; and just before
it is taken up, put it nearer the fire
to brown it. if it is to be frothed,
baste and dredge it carefully with
flour. the common fault is that of
using too much flour; the meat
should have a fine light varnish of
froth, not the appearance of being
covered with a paste; and those
who are particular about the froth,
use butter instead of dripping.
when the roast is quite done, it is
best to take it up directly, as every
moment beyond doing it enough
does it an injury. if it cannot be
sent to table immediately, which is
most desirable, it should be kept
hot, but so as to suffer the fumes to
escape. with respect to the time
required for roasting, the general
rule of a quarter of an hour to a
pound of meat, is a pretty fair one,
but it will not do for all kinds of
joints. the use of a meat screen
must also be considered, as it tends
materially to assist the operation,
by concentrating the heat, and excluding
the cold drafts of air. attention
must be paid to the nature
of the joint, whether thick or thin,
the strength of the fire, the nearness
of the meat to it, and the frequency
with which it is basted. the more
it is basted the less time it will take,
as it keeps the meat soft and mellow
on the outside, and the fire acts
upon it with greater force. much
will depend on the time the meat
has been kept, and on the temperature
of the weather. the same
weight will be twenty minutes or
half an hour longer in cold weather,
than it will be in warm weather;
and when the meat is fresh slain,[]
than when it has been kept till it is
tender. if meat get frozen, it should
be thawed by lying some time in
cold water; and then be well dried
in a clean cloth, before it is laid
down to the fire. a sirloin of beef,
weighing from twenty-five to thirty
pounds, will generally take four
hours; a part of it, from twelve to
fifteen pounds, two hours and three
quarters, or three hours. a piece
of ribs of the same weight, much
the same time, and a rump four
hours. a sheet of paper should be
tied over the thin part, or it will
burn before the thick part is done
enough. a leg of mutton, weighing
eight or nine pounds, will require
two hours and a quarter; a shoulder
of seven pounds, an hour and
three quarters; a chine of ten or
eleven pounds, two hours and a
half; a loin, rather more than an
hour and a half; a neck, the same;
a breast, an hour. a haunch of
mutton should be dressed like venison,
only in proportion as it may
be less, it must not roast quite so
long. a fillet of veal, from twelve
to fourteen pounds weight, requires
three hours and twenty minutes.
this is usually stuffed, either in the
place of the bone, when that is
taken out, or under the flap. a loin
takes two hours and a half, a shoulder
two hours and twenty minutes,
a neck nearly two hours, and a
breast an hour and a half. these
directions suppose the joints to be
of a common size. if they are very
thick, a little more time must be allowed.
when veal is quite small,
the time must be reduced accordingly.
a quarter of lamb, of a
moderate size, will require two
hours; a leg, an hour and forty minutes;
a shoulder, an hour and
twenty minutes; a loin, the same;
a neck, an hour and ten minutes;
a breast, three quarters of
an hour; and ribs, an hour and a
half. a leg of pork, weighing seven
pounds, will require nearly
two hours; a loin of five pounds,
an hour and twenty minutes. both
these should be scored across in
narrow stripes, before they are laid
down to the fire. a sparerib of
eight or nine pounds, will take an
hour and three quarters; a griskin
of six or seven pounds, an hour and
a quarter; a chine, if parted down
the back-bone so as to have but one
side, two hours; if not parted, it
will take four hours.—the bastings
proper for roast meat, are
fresh butter, clarified suet, salt and
water, yolks of eggs, grated biscuit,
and orange juice. for mutton and
lamb, minced sweet herbs, butter
and claret; and for roast pig, melted
butter and cream. the dredgings,
are flour mixed with grated
bread; sweet herbs dried and powdered,
and mixed with grated bread;
lemon peel dried and pounded, or
orange peel mixed with flour; sugar
finely powdered, and mixed with
pounded cinnamon, and flour, or
grated bread; fennel seeds, corianders,
cinnamon, sugar finely powdered,
and mixed with grated bread
or flour; sugar, bread, and salt
mixed. for young pigs, grated
bread or flour mixed with pounded
nutmeg, ginger, pepper, sugar, and
yolks of eggs.
roast beef. take care that
your spit and dripping-pan be very
clean; and to prepare your fire according
to the size of the joint you
have to dress. if it be a sirloin or
chump, butter a piece of writing
paper, and fasten it on to the back
of your meat, with small skewers,
and lay it down to a good clear fire,
at a proper distance. as soon as
your meat is warm, dust on some
flour, and baste it with butter; then
sprinkle some salt, and at times
baste with what drips from it. about
a quarter of an hour before you
take it up, remove the paper, dust
on a little flour, and baste with a
piece of butter, that it may go to
table with a good froth, but not[]
look greasy. a piece of ten pounds
requires about two hours and a half,
and others in proportion. salad
and vegetables are eaten with it,
also mustard and horseradish.
roast calf's head. wash
the head very clean, take out the
brains, and dry it well with a cloth.
make a seasoning of pepper, salt,
nutmeg, and cloves; add a slice of
bacon finely minced, and some
grated bread. strew the seasoning
over the head, roll it up, skewer and
tie it close with tape. roast and
baste it with butter. make veal
gravy thickened with butter rolled
in flour, and garnish the edge of the
dish with fried brains.
roast calf's liver. cut
a hole in the liver, and stuff it with
crumbs of bread, mixed with chopped
onions and herbs, salt, pepper,
butter, and an egg. sew up the
liver, wrap it up in a veal caul, and
roast it. serve it up with brown
gravy, and currant jelly.
roast cheese. grate three
ounces of fat cheshire cheese, mix
it with the yolks of two eggs, four
ounces of grated bread, and three
ounces of butter. beat the whole
well in a mortar, with a dessert-spoonful
of mustard, and a little salt
and pepper. toast some bread, cut
it into proper pieces, lay the above
paste thick upon them, and lay them
into a dutch oven covered with a
dish till they are hot through. remove
the dish, to let the paste brown
a little, and serve it up as hot as
possible, immediately after dinner.
roast chickens. being
cleaned and trussed, put them down
to a good fire. singe them, dust
them with flour, and baste them well
with butter. make gravy of their
necks and gizzards, or of beef.
strain the gravy, and pour it into
the dish, adding parsley and butter,
or egg sauce.
take out the inside meat from a sirloin
of beef, sprinkle it with vinegar,
and let it hang till the next day.
prepare a stuffing as for a hare, put
this at one end of the meat, roll the
rest round it, bind it very close, and
roast it gently for an hour and three
quarters, or a little more or less,
proportioned to the thickness. serve
it up with gravy the same as for
hare, and with currant jelly.
if a loin of mutton has been
collared, take off the fat from the
upper side, and the meat from the
under side. bone the joint, season
it with pepper and salt, and some
shalot or sweet herbs, chopped very
small. let it be rolled up very
tight, well tied round, and roasted
gently. about an hour and a half
will do it. while this is roasting,
half boil the meat taken from the
under side, then mince it small, put
it into half a pint of gravy; and
against the time that the mutton is
ready, heat this and pour it into the
dish when it is served up.
when a neck of pork has been collared,
and is intended for roasting,
the bones must be taken out. strew
the inside with bread crumbs, chopped
sage, a very little pounded allspice,
some pepper and salt, all
mixed together. roll it up very
close, bind it tight, and roast it
gently. an hour and a half or little
more, according to the thickness,
will roast it enough. a loin of pork
with the fat and kidney taken out
and boned, and a forehand of pork
boned, are very nice dressed in the
same way.
roast duck. if two are
dressed, let one of them be unseasoned,
in order to suit the company.
stuff the other with sage and onion,
a dessert-spoonful of crumbs, a bit
of butter, with pepper and salt.
serve them up with a fine gravy.
roast eel. take a good large
silver eel, draw and skin it, and cut
it in pieces of four inches long.
spit them crossways on a small spit,[]
with bay leaves, or large sage leaves
between each piece. when roasted,
serve up the fish with butter
beaten with orange or lemon juice,
and some grated nutmeg. or serve
it with venison sauce, and dredge it
with pounded carraway seeds, cinnamon,
or grated bread.
roast fowl. a large barn-door
fowl, well hung, should be
stuffed in the crop with sausage
meat. the head should be turned
under the wing, as a turkey. serve
with gravy in the dish, and bread
sauce. roast fowl in general may
be garnished with sausages, or
scalded parsley. egg sauce or bread
sauce are equally proper.
roast goose. after the fowl
is picked, the plugs of the feathers
pulled out, and the hairs carefully
singed, let it be well washed and
dried. put in a seasoning of shred
onion and sage, pepper and salt.
fasten it tight at the neck and rump,
and then roast it. put it first at a
distance from the fire, and by degrees
draw it nearer, and baste it
well. a slip of paper should be
skewered on the breast-bone; when
the breast is rising, take off the paper,
and be careful to serve it before
the breast falls, or it will be spoiled
by coming flat to the table. send
up a good gravy in the dish, with
apple and gravy sauce. for a green
goose, gooseberry sauce.
roast griskin. put a piece
of pork griskin into a stewpan, with
very little more water than will just
cover it. let it boil gradually, and
when it has fairly boiled up, take it
out. rub it over with a piece of
butter, strew it with a little chopped
sage and a few bread crumbs, and
roast it in a dutch oven. it will
require doing but a little while.
roast hare. after it is skinned,
let it be extremely well washed,
and then soaked an hour or two
in water. if an old hare, lard it,
which will make it tender, as also
will letting it lie in vinegar. but if
put into vinegar, it should be very
carefully washed in water afterwards.
make a stuffing of the liver,
with an anchovy, some fat bacon,
a little suet, all finely minced; adding
pepper, salt, nutmeg, a little
onion, some sweet herbs, crumbs of
bread, and an egg to bind it all.
then put the stuffing, a pretty large
one, into the belly of the hare, and
sew it up. baste it well with milk
till half done, and afterwards with
butter. if the blood has settled in
the neck, soaking the part in warm
water, and putting it to the fire,
will remove it, especially if the skin
be nicked a little with a small knife
to let it out. the hare should be
kept at a distance from the fire at
first. serve it up with a fine froth,
some melted butter, currant-jelly
sauce, and a rich gravy in the dish.
the ears being reckoned a dainty,
should be nicely cleaned and singed.
for the manner of trussing a hare or
rabbit, see plate.
roast heart. take some
suet, parsley, and sweet marjoram,
chopped fine. add some bread
crumbs, grated lemon peel, pepper,
salt, mustard, and an egg. mix
these into a paste, and stuff the
heart with it. whether baked or
roasted, serve it up with gravy and
melted butter. baking is best, if it
be done carefully, as it will be more
regularly done than it can be by
roasting. calf's or bullock's heart
are both dressed in the same way.
roast lamb. lay the joint
down to a good clear fire, that will
want little stirring; then baste it
with butter, and dust on a little flour;
after that, baste it with what falls
from it; and a little before you take
it up baste it again with butter, and
sprinkle on a little salt.
roast larks. put a dozen
larks on a skewer, and tie both ends
of the skewer to the spit. dredge
and baste them, and let them roast
ten minutes. take the crumb of a
penny loaf, grate it, and put it into[]
a fryingpan, with a little bit of butter.
shake it over a gentle fire till
it becomes brown; lay it between
the birds on a dish, and pour melted
butter over it.
roast leg of pork. choose
a small leg of fine young pork, cut
a slit in the knuckle with a sharp
knife, fill the space with chopped
sage and onion, mixed together
with a little pepper and salt. when
half roasted, score the skin in slices,
but do not cut deeper than the outer
rind. eat it with potatoes and apple
sauce.
roast lobster. when the
lobster is half boiled, take it out of
the water; and while hot, rub it
with butter, and lay it before the
fire. continue basting it with butter
till it has a fine froth.
these require to be well roasted,
before a quick clear fire. a small
fore quarter of lamb will take an
hour and a half. baste the joint as
soon as it is laid down, and sprinkle
on a little salt. when nearly done,
dredge it with flour. in dressing a
loin or saddle of mutton, the skin
must be loosened, and then skewered
on; but it should be removed before
the meat is done, and the joint
basted and made to froth up. when
a fore quarter is sent to table, the
shoulder may be taken off, the ribs
a little seasoned with pepper and
salt, and a lemon squeezed over
them. serve up the joint with vegetables
and mint sauce. for a
breast of mutton, make a savoury
forcemeat, if the bones are taken
out, and wash it over with egg.
spread the forcemeat upon it, roll
it up, bind it with packthread, and
serve it up with gravy sauce. or
roast it with the bones in, without
the forcemeat.
roast onions. they should
be roasted with all the skins on.
they eat well alone, with only salt
and cold butter; or with beet root,
or roast potatoes.
roast pheasants. dust
them with flour, baste them often
with butter, and keep them at a good
distance from the fire. make the
gravy of a scrag of mutton, a tea-spoonful
of lemon pickle, a large
spoonful of ketchup, and the same
of browning. strain it, and put a
little of it into the dish. serve them
up with bread sauce in a basin, and
fix one of the principal feathers of
the pheasant in its tail. a good
fire will roast them in half an hour.
guinea and pea fowls eat much like
pheasants, and are to be dressed in
the same way.
roast partridges. partridges
will take full twenty minutes.
before they are quite done, dredge
them with flour, and baste them
with fresh butter; let them go to
table with a fine froth, and gravy
sauce in the dish, and bread sauce
in a tureen. the bread sauce should
be made as follows. take a good
piece of stale bread, and put it into
a pint of water, with some whole
pepper, a blade of mace, and a bit
of onion: let it boil till the bread
is soft; then take out the spice and
onion; pour out the water, and
beat the bread with a spoon till it
is like pap; put in a good piece of
butter, and a little salt; set it over
the fire for two or three minutes.
roast pig. a sucking pig for
roasting, should be put into cold
water for a few minutes, as soon as
it is killed. then rub it over with a
little rosin finely powdered, and put
it into a pail of scalding water half
a minute. take it out, lay it on a
table, and pull off the hair as quickly
as possible: if any part does not
come off, put it in again. when
quite clean from hair, wash it well
in warm water, and then in two or
three cold waters, that no flavour
of the rosin may remain. take off
all the feet at the first joint, make
a slit down the belly, and take out
the entrails: put the liver, heart,
and lights to the feet. wash the[]
pig well in cold water, dry it thoroughly,
and fold it in a wet cloth
to keep it from the air. when thus
scalded and prepared for roasting,
put into the belly a mixture of chopped
sage, bread crumbs, salt and
pepper, and sow it up. lay it down
to a brisk fire till thoroughly dry;
then have ready some butter in a
dry cloth, and rub the pig with it
in every part. dredge over it as
much flour as will lie on, and do
not touch it again till it is ready for
the table. then scrape off the flour
very carefully with a blunt knife,
rub it well with the buttered cloth,
and take off the head while it is at
the fire. take out the brains, and
mix them with the gravy that comes
from the pig. the legs should be
skewered back before roasting, or
the under part will not be crisp.
take it up when done, and without
drawing the spit, cut it down the
back and belly, lay it into the dish,
mince the sage and bread very fine,
and mix them with a large quantity
of good melted butter that has very
little flour. pour the sauce into the
dish after the pig has been split
down the back, and garnish with the
ears and the two jaws: take off the
upper part of the head down to the
snout. in devonshire it is served
up whole, if very small; the head
only being cut off to garnish the
dish.—another way. spit your
pig, and lay it down to a clear fire,
kept good at both ends: put into
the belly a few sage leaves, a little
pepper and salt, a little crust of
bread, and a bit of butter, then sew
up the belly; flour him all over very
well, and do so till the eyes begin to
start. when you find the skin is
tight and crisp, and the eyes are
dropped, put two plates into the
dripping pan, to save what gravy
comes from him: put a quarter of
a pound of butter into a clean coarse
cloth, and rub all over him, till the
flour is clean taken off; then take
it up into your dish, take the sage,
&c. out of the belly, and chop it
small; cut off the head, open it,
and take out the brains, which chop,
and put the sage and brains into
half a pint of good gravy, with a
piece of butter rolled in flour; then
cut your pig down the back, and
lay him flat in the dish: cut off the
two ears, and lay one upon each
shoulder; take off the under jaw,
cut it in two, and lay one on each
side; put the head between the
shoulders, pour the gravy out of the
plates into your sauce, and then into
the dish. send it to table garnished
with a lemon.
roast pigeons. stuff them
with parsley, either cut or whole,
and put in a seasoning of pepper
and salt. serve with parsley and
butter. peas or asparagus should
be dressed to eat with them.
roast pike. clean the fish
well, and sew up in it the following
stuffing. grated bread crumbs,
sweet herbs and parsley chopped,
capers and anchovies, pepper, salt,
a little fresh butter, and an egg.
turn it round with the tail in its
mouth, and roast it gently till it is
done of a fine brown. it may be
baked, if preferred. serve it up
with a good gravy sauce.
roast plovers. green plovers
should be roasted like woodcocks,
without drawing, and served
on a toast. grey plovers may either
be roasted, or stewed with gravy,
herbs, and spice.
roast pork. pork requires
more doing than any other meat;
and it is best to sprinkle it with a
little salt the night before you use
it, and hang it up; by that means
it will take off the faint, sickly taste.
when you roast a chine of pork,
lay it down to a good fire, and at a
proper distance, that it may be well
soaked, otherwise it eats greasy and
disagreeable. a spare-rib is to be
roasted with a fire that is not too
strong, but clear; when you lay it
down, dust on some flour and baste[]
it with butter: a quarter of an hour
before you take it up, shred some
sage small; baste your pork; strew
on the sage; dust on a little flour,
and sprinkle a little salt just before
you take it up. a loin must be cut
on the skin in small streaks, and
then basted; but put no flour on,
which would make the skin blister;
and see that it is jointed before you
lay it down to the fire. a leg of
pork is often roasted with sage and
onion shred fine, with a little pepper
and salt, and stuffed at the knuckle,
with gravy in the dish; but a leg of
pork done in this manner, parboil
it first, and take off the skin; lay
it down to a good clear fire; baste
it with butter, then shred some sage
fine, and mix it with pepper, salt,
nutmeg, and bread crumbs; strew
this over it the time it is roasting;
baste it again with butter, just before
you take it up, that it may be
of a fine brown, and have a good
froth; send up some good gravy in
the dish; a griskin roasted in this
manner eats finely.
clean it well, put bread and sage
into it as for a young pig, sew it up
tight, and put it on a hanging jack.
roast it in the same manner as a
pig, and serve it up the same.
roast potatoes. half boil
them first, then take off the thin
peel, and roast them of a beautiful
brown.
roast pullet. to roast a
small hen turkey or a pullet with
batter, the bird must first be boned,
and filled with forcemeat or stuffing.
then paper it round, and lay it
down to roast. when nearly half
done, drop off the paper, and baste
the bird with a very smooth light
batter. when the first basting is
dry, baste it again, and repeat this
till the bird is nicely crusted over,
and sufficiently done. it will require
ten minutes or a quarter of an
hour longer roasting than a bird of
the same size in the common way,
on account of its being stuffed with
forcemeat. serve it up with white
gravy, or mushroom sauce.
roast quails. quails may
be dressed and served up like woodcocks;
or dressed with the insides
stuffed with sweet herbs and beef
suet chopped fine, and mixed with a
little spice. they must roast rather
a shorter time than woodcocks.
roast rump of beef. let
it lie in salt for two days, then wash
it, and soak it an hour in a quart of
claret, and a pint of elder vinegar.
baste it well with the liquor while
roasting. make a gravy of two beef
palates cut thin and boiled, and
thickened with burnt butter. add
to it mushrooms and oysters, and
serve it up hot.
roast sirloin. when a sirloin
of beef is about three parts
roasted, take out the meat from the
under side, and mince it nicely.
season it with pepper and salt, and
some shalot chopped very small.
by the time the beef is roasted, heat
this with gravy just sufficient to
moisten it. dish up the beef with
the upper side downwards, put the
mince in the inside, and strew it
with bread crumbs ready prepared.
brown them of a fine colour on a
hot salamander over the fire, and
then serve up the beef with scraped
horseradish laid round it.
roast snipes. snipes and
land rails are dressed exactly in the
same manner as woodcocks, but
only require a shorter time in roasting.
roast sturgeon. put the
fish on a lark spit, then tie it on a
large spit, and baste it constantly
with butter. serve it with a good
gravy, an anchovy, a squeeze of
seville orange or lemon, and a glass
of sherry.—another way is, to put
into a stewpan a piece of butter
rolled in flour, with four cloves, a
bunch of sweet herbs, two onions,
pepper and salt, half a pint of water,
and a glass of vinegar. stir it[]
over the fire till hot, then let it become
lukewarm, and steep the fish
in it an hour or two. butter a paper
well, tie it round, and roast it
without letting the spit run through.
serve it with sorrel and anchovy
sauce.
roast sweetbreads. parboil
two large ones, and then roast
them in a dutch oven. use gravy
sauce, or plain butter, with mushroom
ketchup.
roast tongue. after well
cleaning a neat's tongue, salt it for
three days with common salt and
saltpetre. this makes an excellent
dish, with the addition of a young
udder, having some fat to it, and
boiled till tolerably tender. then
tie the thick part of one to the thin
part of the other, and roast the
tongue and udder together. a few
cloves should be stuck in the udder.
serve them with good gravy, and
currant-jelly sauce. some people
like neats' tongues cured with the
root, in which case they look much
larger; but otherwise the root must
be cut off close to the gullet, next
to the tongue, but without taking
away the fat under the tongue. the
root must be soaked in salt and water,
and extremely well cleaned, before
it is dressed; and the tongue
should be laid in salt a day and a
night before it is pickled.
roast turkey. the sinews
of the leg should be drawn, whichever
way it is dressed. the head
should be twisted under the wing;
and in drawing it, take care not to
tear the liver, nor let the gall touch
it. put a stuffing of sausage meat;
or if sausages are to be served in the
dish, a bread stuffing. as this
makes a large addition to the size
of the fowl, observe that the heat of
the fire is constantly to that part,
for the breast is often not done
enough. a little strip of paper
should be put on the bone, to prevent
its being scorched while the
other parts are roasting. baste it
well, and froth it up. serve with
gravy in the dish, and plenty of bread
sauce in a sauce tureen. add a few
crumbs and a beaten egg to the
stuffing of sausage meat. another
way. bone your turkey very nicely,
leaving on the pinions, rump, and
legs; then take the flesh of a nice
fowl, the same weight of bread
grated, and half a pound of beef
suet, nicely picked; beat these in a
marble mortar, season with mace,
one clove, pepper, nutmeg, salt beat
fine, a little lemon peel shred very
small, and the yolks of two eggs;
mix all up together very well; then
fill all the parts that the bones came
out of, and raise the breast to the
form it was before the bone was
taken out; sew up the skin of the
back, and skewer down the legs
close as you do a chicken for roasting;
spit it and let it be nicely roasted: send
good gravy in the dish.
roast veal. veal must be
well done before a good fire. cover
the fat of the loin and fillet with
paper. stuff the fillet and shoulder
in the following manner. take a
quarter of a pound of suet, parsley,
and sweet herbs, and chop them
fine. add grated bread, lemon
peel, pepper, salt, nutmeg, and an
egg. mix all well together, and put
the stuffing safely into the veal.
roast the breast with the caul on:
when nearly done, take it off, and
baste and dredge the meat. lay it
in the dish, pour a little melted butter
over it, and serve it up with salad,
boiled vegetables, or stewed celery.
roast venison. after a
haunch of venison is spitted, take a
piece of butter and rub all over the
fat, dust on a little flour, and sprinkle
a little salt: then take a sheet
of writing paper, butter it well, and
lay over the fat part; put two sheets
over that, and tie the paper on with
small twine: keep it well basting,
and let there be a good soaking fire.
if a large haunch, it will take full
three hours to do it. five minutes[]
before you send it to table take off
the paper, dust it over with a little
flour, and baste it with butter; let
it go up with a good froth; put no
gravy in the dish, but send it in one
boat; and currant jelly melted, in
another; or if you have no currant
jelly, boil half a pint of red wine
with a quarter of a pound of lump
sugar, a stick of cinnamon, and a
piece of lemon peel in it, to a syrup.
the neck and shoulder are dressed
the same way; and as to the time,
it depends entirely on the weight,
and the goodness of your fire: if
you allow a quarter of an hour to
each pound, and the fire be tolerably
kept up, you cannot well err.
a breast of venison is excellent
dressed in the following way: flour
it, and fry it brown on both sides
in fresh butter: keep it hot in a
dish, dust flour into the butter it
was fried in, till it is thick and
brown. keep it stirring that it may
not burn; pour in half a pint of red
wine, and a quarter of a pound of
powdered sugar: stir it and let it
boil to a proper thickness. squeeze
in the juice of a lemon, take off the
scum very clean, and pour it over
your venison, then send it to table.
roast wheat-ears. these
birds should be spitted sideways,
with a vine leaf between each. baste
them with butter, and cover them
with bread crumbs while roasting.
ten or twelve minutes will do them.
serve them up with fried bread
crumbs in the dish, and gravy in a
tureen.
roast wild duck. a wild
duck or a widgeon will require
twenty or twenty-five minutes roasting,
according to the size. a teal,
from fifteen to twenty minutes; and
other birds of this kind, in proportion
to their size, a longer or a
shorter time. serve them up with
gravy, and lemons cut in quarters,
to be used at pleasure.
roast woodcocks. whether
for woodcocks or snipes, put a
toast of fine bread under the birds
while at the fire; and as they are
not to be drawn before they are
spitted, let the tail drop on the toast
while roasting, and baste them with
butter. when done, lay the birds
on the toast in a dish, and send it
warm to the table. a woodcock
takes twenty minutes roasting, and
a snipe fifteen.
robert sauce. put an ounce
of butter into a pint stewpan, and
when melted, add to it half an ounce
of onion minced very fine. turn it
with a wooden spoon till it takes a
light brown colour, and then stir
into it a table-spoonful of flour, a
table-spoonful of mushroom ketchup,
the like quantity of port wine, half
a pint of weak broth, and half a tea-spoonful
of pepper and salt mixed
together. give them a boil, then
add a tea-spoonful of mustard, the
juice of half a lemon, and one or
two tea-spoonfuls of vinegar, basil,
taragon, or burnet vinegar. this
sauce is in high repute, and is adapted
for roast pork or roast goose.
rolls. warm an ounce of butter
in half a pint of milk, put to it
a spoonful or more of small beer
yeast, and a little salt. mix in two
pounds of flour, let it rise an hour,
and knead it well. make the paste
into seven rolls, and bake them in a
quick oven. if a little saffron,
boiled in half a tea-cupful of milk,
be added, it will be a great improvement.
rolled beef. soak the inside
of a large sirloin in a glass of
port wine and a glass of vinegar
mixed, for eight and forty hours:
have ready a very fine stuffing, and
bind it up tight. roast it on a
hanging spit, baste it with a glass
of port wine, the same quantity of
vinegar, and a tea-spoonful of
pounded allspice. larding it improves
the flavour and appearance:
serve it with a rich gravy in the dish,
with currant jelly and melted butter[]
in tureens. this article will be
found very much to resemble a hare.
bone it, take off the thick skin and
gristle, and beat the meat with a
rolling-pin. season it with herbs
chopped very fine, mixed with salt,
pepper, and mace. roll the meat
in some thick slices of fine ham, or
in two or three calves' tongues of a
fine red, first boiled an hour or two
and peeled. bind the meat up tight
in a cloth, and tie it round with tape.
simmer it over the fire for some
hours, in a small quantity of water,
till it is quite tender. lay it on the
dresser with a board and weight
upon it till quite cold. then take
off the tape, and pour over it the liquor,
which must be boiled up twice
a week, or it will not keep. pigs'
or calves' feet boiled and taken from
the bones, may be put in or round
the veal. the different colours
placed in layers look well when cut.
boiled yolks of eggs, beet root,
grated ham, and chopped parsley,
may be laid in different parts to encrease
the variety, and improve the
general appearance.
hang the joint up till tender, and
then bone it. lay on a seasoning
of pepper, allspice, mace, nutmeg,
and a few cloves, all in fine powder.
next day prepare a stuffing as for
hare, beat the meat with a rolling-pin,
cover it with the stuffing, roll
it up tight and tie it. half bake it
in a slow oven, let it grow cold, take
off the fat, and put the gravy into
a stewpan. flour the meat, and put
it in likewise. stew it till almost
ready, and add a glass of port, an
anchovy, some ketchup, and a little
lemon pickle. serve it in the gravy,
and with jelly sauce. a few mushrooms
are a great improvement;
but if to eat like hare, these must
not be added, nor the lemon pickle.
bone it first, then put over the
inside a forcemeat of chopped sage,
a very few crumbs of bread, salt,
pepper, and two or three berries of
allspice. then roll the meat up
very tight, place it at a good distance
from the fire, and roast it
slowly.
rolled steaks. cut a large
steak from a round of beef, spread
over it a forcemeat, such as is made
for veal, roll it up like collared eel,
and tie it up in a cloth. boil it an
hour and a half, and when done
enough, cut it into slices. prepare
a rich gravy, a little thickened, and
pour over the steaks.
roman cement. to make
a mortar for outside plastering, or
brick-work, or to line reservoirs, so
as no water can penetrate it, mix
together eighty-four pounds of drifted
sand, twelve pounds of unslaked
lime, and four pounds of the poorest
cheese grated through an iron grater.
when well mixed, add enough hot
water, not boiling, to make it into a
proper consistence for plastering,
such a quantity of the above as is
wanted. it requires very good and
quick working. one hod of this
mortar will go a great way, as it is
to be laid on in a thin smooth coat,
without the least space being left
uncovered. the wall or lath work
should be first covered with common
hair mortar well dried. suffolk
cheese will be found to make the best
cement.
rook pie. skin and draw
some young rooks, cut out the backbones,
and season with pepper and
salt. lay them in a dish with a little
water, strew some bits of butter over
them, cover the dish with a thick
crust, and bake it well.
rose water. when the roses
are full blown, pick off the leaves
carefully, and allow a peck of them
to a quart of water. put them in a
cold still over a slow fire, and distil
it very gradually. bottle the water,
and cork it up in two or three days.
rot in sheep. when sheep
are newly brought in, it will preserve[]
their health to give them a table-spoonful
of the juice of rue leaves,
mixed with a little salt. if they are
in danger of the rot, this mixture
may be repeated every week or oftener,
as the case requires.
round of beef. cut out
the bone first, then skewer and tie
up the beef to make it quite round.
salt it carefully, and moisten it with
the pickle for eight or ten days. it
may be stuffed with parsley, if approved;
in which case the holes to
admit the parsley must be made with
a sharp-pointed knife, and the parsley
coarsely cut and stuffed in tight.
when dressed it should be carefully
skimmed as soon as it boils, and afterwards
kept boiling very gently.
rout cakes. to make rout
drop-cakes, mix two pounds of flour
with one pound of butter, one pound
of sugar, and one pound of currants,
cleaned and dried. moisten it into
a stiff paste with two eggs, a large
spoonful of orange-flower water, as
much rose water, sweet wine, and
brandy. drop the paste on a tin
plate floured, and a short time will
bake them.
royal cakes. put into a
saucepan a quarter of a pint of water,
a piece of butter half the size
of an egg, two ounces of fine sugar,
a little grated lemon peel, and a
little salt. when it has boiled about
half a minute, stir in by degrees
four spoonfuls of flour, keeping it
constantly stirring all the time, till
it becomes a smooth paste, pretty
stiff, and begins to adhere to the
saucepan. then take it off the fire,
and add three eggs well beaten,
putting them in by degrees, and stirring
the paste all the time to prevent
its being lumpy. add a little orange-flower
water, and a few almonds
pounded fine. make it into little
cakes, and bake them upon a sheet
of tin well buttered. half an hour
will bake them in a moderate oven.
royal punch. take thirty
seville oranges and thirty lemons,
quite sound, and pare them very
thin. put the parings into an earthen
pan, with as much rum or brandy
as will cover them. cover up the
pan, and let them stand four days.
take ten gallons of water, and
twelve pounds of lump sugar, and
boil them. when nearly cold, put
in the whites of thirty eggs well
beaten, and stir it and boil it a
quarter of an hour. strain it through
a hair sieve into an earthen pan,
and let it stand till next day. then
put it into a cask, strain the spirit
from the parings of the oranges and
lemons, and add as much more to
it as will make it up five gallons.
put it into the cask with five quarts
of seville orange juice and three
quarts of lemon juice. stir it all
together with a cleft stick, and repeat
the same once a day for three
successive days: then stop it down
close, and in six weeks it will be fit
to drink.
ruffs and reeves. these
are to be trussed and skewered the
same as snipes and quails. place
bars of bacon over them, roast them
in about ten minutes, and serve with
a good gravy in the dish.
rump of beef. take a rump
of beef, or about eight pounds of
the brisket, and stew it till it is
quite tender, in as much water as
will cover it. when sufficiently
done, take out the bones, and skim
off the fat very clean. to a pint of
the liquor, add the third part of a
pint of port wine, a little walnut or
mushroom ketchup, and some salt.
tie up some whole white pepper
and mace in a piece of muslin, and
stew all together for a short time.
have ready some carrots and turnips
boiled tender and cut into
squares, strew them upon the beef,
putting a few into the dish. truffles
and morels may be added, or artichoke
bottoms.
rump soup. two or three
rumps of beef will make a stronger
soup, and of a far more nourishing[]
quality, than a larger quantity of
meat without them. it may be made
like gravy soup, and thickened and
flavoured in any way that is most
approved.
rump steaks. the best
steaks are those cut from the middle
of a rump of beef, that has been
killed at least four days in moderate
weather, and much longer in cold
weather, when they can be cut about
six inches long, four inches wide,
and half an inch thick. do not beat
them, unless you suspect they will
not be tender. take care to have
a very clear brisk fire, throw on it
a little salt, make the gridiron hot,
and set it slanting, to prevent the
fat from dropping into the fire, and
making a smoke. it requires more
practice and care than is generally
supposed to do steaks to a nicety;
and for want of these little attentions,
this very common dish, which
every body is supposed capable of
dressing, seldom comes to table in
perfection. it may be underdone
or thoroughly done, as happens to
be preferred. it is usual to put a
table-spoonful of ketchup into a dish
before the fire, with a little minced
shalot. in broiling, turn the steak
with a pair of meat tongs, and it
will be done in about ten or fifteen
minutes. rub a bit of butter over
it, and send it up quite hot, garnished
with pickles, and scraped horseradish.—if
onion gravy is to be
added, prepare it in the following
manner. peel and slice two large
onions, put them into a stewpan
with two table-spoonfuls of water,
cover the stewpan close, and set it
on a slow fire till the water has boiled
away, and the onions have got a
little browned. then add half a
pint of good broth, or water with a
large spoonful of ketchup, and boil
the onions till they are quite tender.
strain off the liquor, and chop them
very fine. thicken the broth with
butter rolled in flour, and season
it with mushroom ketchup, pepper
and salt. put the onion into it, let
it boil gently for five minutes, and
pour it over the broiled steak. good
beef gravy, instead of broth, will
make the sauce superlative.—if a
cold rump steak is to be warmed
up, lay it in a stewpan, with a large
onion cut in quarters, six berries of
allspice, and six of black pepper.
cover the steak with boiling water,
let it stew gently for an hour,
thicken the liquor with butter rolled
in flour, shake it well over the fire
for five minutes, and it is ready.
lay the steaks and onion on a dish,
and pour the gravy over them
through a sieve.
rusks. beat seven eggs well,
and mix them with half a pint of
new milk, in which four ounces of
butter have been previously melted.
add a quarter of a pint of yeast, and
three ounces of sugar, and put them
by degrees into as much flour as
will make a very light paste, rather
like a batter, and let it rise before
the fire half an hour. then add
some more flour, to make it a little
stiffer, but not much. work it well,
and divide it into small loaves, or
cakes, about five or six inches wide,
and flatten them. when baked and
cold, slice them the thickness of
rusks, and put them into the oven
to brown a little. the cakes when
first baked, eat deliciously buttered
for tea; or made with carraways,
they eat well cold.
russian sauce. to four
spoonfuls of grated horseradish, put
two tea-spoonfuls of patent mustard,
a little salt, one tea-spoonful of sugar,
and a sufficient quantity of vinegar
to cover the ingredients. this
sauce is used for cold meat, but
makes a good fish sauce, with the
addition of melted butter.
rust. to prevent iron and steel
from rusting, mix with fat oil varnish,
at least half, or at most four
fifths of its quantity of highly rectified
spirits of turpentine. this varnish
must be lightly and evenly[]
applied with a sponge; after which
the article is left to dry in some situation
not exposed to dust. articles
thus varnished retain their
metallic lustre, and do not contract
any spots of rust. this varnish
may also be applied to copper, of
which it preserves the polish and
heightens the colour.
sack cream. boil a pint of
raw cream, the yolk of an egg well
beaten, two or three spoonfuls of
white wine, sugar, and lemon peel.
stir it over a gentle fire till it be as
thick as rich cream, and afterwards
till it becomes cold. then serve it
in glasses, with long pieces of dry
toast.
sack dumplins. grate the
crumb of two penny rolls, add three
quarters of a pound of suet cut
small, three quarters of a pound of
currants washed clean, a grated nutmeg,
a little sugar, the yolks of
eight eggs, and two wine glasses of
sack. make the paste into dumplins
of a moderate size, tie them in cloths,
and boil them two hours. melted
butter for sauce, with white wine
and sugar.
sack mead. to every gallon
of water put four pounds of honey,
and boil it three quarters of an hour,
taking care to skim it. to every
gallon add an ounce of hops; then
boil it half an hour, and let it stand
till the next day. put it into a
cask, and to thirteen gallons of the
liquor add a quart of brandy. stop
it lightly till the fermentation is
over, and then bung it up close. a
large cask should be suffered to
stand a year.
sacks of corn. seeds, and
various kinds of grain, are liable to
damage when kept in sacks or bins,
from the want of being sufficiently
aired. make a small wooden tube
nearly the length of the sack, closed
and pointed at one end, and perforated
with holes about an inch
asunder, nearly two thirds of its
length from the point end. then
at the other end fasten a leather
tube, and thrust it into the corn to
the bottom of the sack. put the
pipe of a pair of bellows into the
leather tube, and blow into it, so
that the air may be diffused among
the corn throughout the holes of
the wooden tube. if corn be thus
treated every other day after it is
first put into sacks, it will prevent
the damp sweats which would otherwise
injure it, and it will afterwards
keep sweet with very little airing.
saddle of mutton. when
it has been well kept, raise the skin,
and then skewer it on again. take
it off a quarter of an hour before
serving, sprinkle on some salt,
baste and dredge it well with flour.
the rump should be split, and
skewered back on each side. the
joint may be cut large or small, according
to the company: the latter
is the most elegant. being broad,
it requires a high and strong fire.
saffron cake. take a quarter
of a peck of fine flour, a pound
and a half of fresh butter, a quarter
of an ounce of mace and cinnamon
together, beat fine, and mix the
spice in the flour. set on a quart
of milk to boil, break the butter in,
and stir it till the milk boils; take
off all the butter, and a little of
the milk; mix with the flour a pound
of sugar beat fine, a penny-worth
of saffron made into a tincture; take
a pint of yeast that is not bitter,[]
and stir it well into the remainder
of the milk; beat up six eggs very
well, and put to the yeast and milk,
strain it to the flour, with some rose-water,
and the tincture of saffron; beat
up all together with your hands
lightly, and put it into a hoop or
pan well buttered. it will take an
hour and a half in a quick oven.
you may make the tincture of saffron
with the rose-water.
sage is raised from seed, or
from slips. to have it at hand for
winter it is necessary to dry it; and
it ought to be cut for this purpose
before it comes out into bloom, as
indeed is the case with all other
herbs.
sage cheese. to make this
kind of cheese, bruise the tops of
young red sage in a mortar, with
some leaves of spinach, and squeeze
out the juice. mix it with the rennet
in the milk, more or less, according
as the taste and colour may
be preferred. when the curd is
come, break it gently, and put it in
with the skimmer, till it is pressed
two inches above one vat. press it
eight or ten hours, salt and turn it
every day.
sago. to prevent the earthy
taste, soak it an hour in cold water;
pour off the water, and wash
it well. then add more, and simmer
it gently till the berries are
clear, with lemon peel and spice,
if approved. add wine and sugar,
and boil all up together.—if intended
for the sick, or those whom disease
has left very feeble, boil a teacupful
of washed, sago in a quart of
water, and a taste of lemon peel.
when thickened, grate in some ginger,
and add half a pint of raisin
wine, some brown sugar, and two
spoonfuls of geneva: boil all up
together.
sago milk. cleanse the sago
as in the former article, and boil it
slowly in new milk. it swells so
much, that a small quantity will be
sufficient for a quart; and when
done, it will be diminished to about
a pint. it requires no sugar or flavouring.
sago pudding. boil a pint
and a half of new milk, with four
spoonfuls of sago nicely washed and
picked; then add lemon peel, cinnamon,
and nutmeg. sweeten the
pudding, mix in four eggs, put a paste
round the dish, and bake it slowly.
sail cloth. the old mode
of painting canvas was to wet it,
and prime it with spanish brown.
then to give it a second coat of a
chocolate colour, made by mixing
spanish brown and black paint;
and lastly, to finish it with black.
this was found to harden to such
a degree as to crack, and eventually
to break, the canvas, and so to render
it unserviceable in a short time.
the new method, which is greatly
superior, is to grind ninety-six
pounds of english ochre with boiled
oil, and to add sixteen pounds of
black paint, which mixture forms
an indifferent black. a pound of
yellow soap, dissolved in six pints
of water over the fire, is mixed while
hot, with the paint. this composition
is then laid upon the canvas,
without being wetted as formerly,
and as stiff as can conveniently be
done with a brush, so as to form a
smooth surface. two days afterwards,
a second coat of ochre and
black is laid on, with a very small
portion of soap; and allowing this
coat an intermediate day for drying,
the canvas is then finished with
black paint as usual. three days
being then allowed for it to dry and
harden, it does not stick together
when taken down, and folded in
cloths of sixty or seventy yards
each.
salad mixture. salad herbs
should be gathered in the morning,
as fresh as possible, or they must
be put into cold spring water for an
hour. carefully wash and pick
them, trim off all the dry or cankered
leaves, put them into a cullender to[]
drain, and swing them dry in a
coarse clean napkin. then pound
together the yolks of two hard eggs,
an ounce of scraped horseradish,
half an ounce of salt, a table-spoonful
of made mustard, four drams of
minced shalots, one dram of celery
seed, one dram of cress seed, and
half a dram of cayenne. add by
degrees a wine glass of salad oil,
three glasses of burnet, and three
of tarragon vinegar. when thoroughly
incorporated, set it over a
very gentle fire, and stir it with a
wooden spoon till it has simmered
to the consistence of cream. then
pass it through a tammis or fine
sieve, and add it to the salad.
salad sauce. mix two yolks
of eggs boiled hard, as much grated
parmesan cheese as will fill a dessert-spoon,
a little patent mustard,
a small spoonful of tarragon vinegar,
and a large one of ketchup. stir
them well together, then put in four
spoonfuls of salad oil, and one
spoonful of elder vinegar, and beat
them up very smooth.
salads. cold salads are proper
to be eaten at all seasons of the
year, but are particularly to be recommended
from the beginning of
february to the end of june. they
are in greater perfection, and consequently
more powerful, during
this period, than at any other, in
opening obstructions, sweetening
and purifying the blood. the habit
of eating salad herbs tends considerably
to prevent that pernicious
and almost general disease the scurvy,
and all windy humours which
offend the stomach. also from the
middle of september till december,
and during the winter, if the weather
be mild and open, all green
herbs are wholesome, and highly
beneficial. it is true that they have
not so much vigour in the winter
season, nor are they so medicinal
as in the spring of the year; yet
those which continue fresh and
green, will retain a considerable
portion of their natural qualities;
and being eaten as salads, with proper
seasoning, they will operate
much in the same way as at other
periods of the year. it is a necessary
consequence of cold weather,
that the heat of the body is driven
more inward than in warm weather,
as the cold of the atmosphere repels
it from the surface. hence arises
an appetite for strong and solid
food, and strong drinks, which for
want of temperance and care, lays
the foundation for diseases that
commonly make their appearance
in the summer following. eating
freely of salads and other vegetables
in the winter, will prevent in a great
treasure these ill effects; and if
properly seasoned and prepared,
they will warm the stomach, and
be found exhilarating. the effect
produced is in unison with all the
operations of the human constitution,
while the use of strong stimulants
excites to unnatural action,
which is soon succeeded by a cold
and chilling languor. green herbs
in winter are much more beneficial
than is generally imagined; they are
particularly salutary to aged persons,
and such as are subject to
stoppages, or shortness of breath.
in this case, instead of an onion, a
clove of garlic may be put into the
salad, which is a preferable way of
eating it. this will open and warm
the stomach, and give a general
glow to the whole system.—the
following are the principal herbs
used as salads. basil, balm, borage,
burnet, celery, chervil, colewort,
coriander, corn-salad, cresses, endive,
french fennel, lettuce, mint,
mustard, nasturtiums, nettle-tops,
parsley, pennyroyal, radishes, rape,
sage, sorrel, spinage, tarragon, and
water-cresses. onions, both young
and full grown, shalots, garlic, and
chives, are all used as seasoning to
salads. red beet-root, boiled and
cold, is often sliced into them. several
of these herbs are very little[]
in use as salads, but there are none
of them that may not be recommended
as good for the purpose.
the usual salads are too much limited
to what is specifically called
small salading, lettuce, celery, and
endive. these are all excellent in
their kind, but to prefer them to
the exclusion of every thing else,
is a mere prejudice. with a wish
therefore to counteract it, and to
provide a larger assortment of wholesome
salads, the following particulars
are given, with directions for
preparing several different dishes of
this description. in general it may
be proper to observe, that salads of
all kinds should be very fresh; or
if not immediately procured in this
state, they may be refreshed by being
put into cold spring water.
they should be very carefully washed
and picked, and drained quite
dry in a clean cloth. in dressing
lettuce, or small herbs, it is best to
arrange them, properly picked and
cut, in the salad dish; then to mix
the sauce in something else, and
pour it to the salad down the side
of the dish, so as to let it run to the
bottom, and not to stir it up till used
at table. this preserves the crispness
of the salad, which is one of
its principal delicacies. with celery
and endive the sauce should be
poured upon them, and the whole
well stirred together to mix it equally.
lettuce, endive, and celery,
may be eaten with salt only; and
if well chewed, as all salads ought
to be, they often agree better than
when mixed with seasonings. if
mustard in salad sauces occasion
sickness, or otherwise disagrees,
cayenne pepper will often prove an
excellent substitute.—the following
salads are remarkably wholesome,
and have a cooling and salutary effect
upon the bowels. . take
spinage, parsley, sorrel, lettuce,
and a few onions. then add oil,
vinegar, and salt, to give it a high
taste and relish, but let the salt
rather predominate above the other
ingredients. the wholesomest way
of eating salads is with bread only,
in preference to bread and butter,
bread and cheese, or meat and
bread; though any of these may be
eaten with it, when the salad is seasoned
only with salt and vinegar.
it is not advisable to eat butter,
cheese, or meat with salads, or any
thing in which there is a mixture of
oil. all fat substances are heavy
of digestion, and to mix such as disagree
in their nature, is to encrease
this evil to a degree that the stomach
can hardly overcome. . prepare
some lettuce, spinage tops, pennyroyal,
sorrel, a few onions, and some
parsley. then season them with
oil, vinegar, and salt. . another
salad may be made of lettuce, sorrel,
spinage, tops of mint, and onions,
seasoned as before. . take spinage,
lettuce, tarragon, and parsley, with
some leaves of balm. or sorrel,
tarragon, spinage, lettuce, onions,
and parsley. or tops of pennyroyal,
mint, lettuce, spinage, sorrel, and
parsley. or lettuce, spinage, onions,
pennyroyal, balm, and sorrel. or
sage, lettuce, spinage, sorrel, onions,
and parsley; seasoned with salt,
oil, and vinegar. . make a salad
of pennyroyal, sage, mint, balm,
a little lettuce, and sorrel; seasoned
with oil, vinegar, and salt. this is
an excellent warming salad, though
the above are all of an exhilarating
tendency. . mix some lettuce,
sorrel, endive, celery, spinage, and
onions, seasoned as above. . take
the fresh tender leaves of cole wort,
or cabbage plants, with lettuce, sorrel,
parsley, tarragon, nettle tops,
mint, and pennyroyal; and season
them with salt, oil, and vinegar.
if highly seasoned, this is a very
warm and relishing salad. . for
winter salad, take some tender
plants of colewort, sorrel, lettuce,
endive, celery, parsley, and sliced
onions; and season them as before.
. another winter salad may be[]
made of lettuce, spinage, endive,
celery, and half a clove of garlic.
season it well with oil, vinegar, and
salt. this salad is very warming
and wholesome. all these aromatic
herbs are particularly proper for
phlegmatic and weakly persons, as
they have the property of warming
the stomach, and improving the
blood. to supply the want of oil
in salads, make some thick melted
butter, and use it in the same proportion
as oil. some sweet thick
cream is a still better substitute,
and will do as well as oil, especially
as some persons have an aversion to
oil. cream also looks well in salads.
a good salad sauce may be made of
two yolks of eggs boiled hard, mixed
with a spoonful of parmesan
cheese grated, a little patent mustard,
a spoonful of tarragon vinegar,
and a larger one of ketchup. when
stirred well together, add four spoonfuls
of salad oil, and one of elder
vinegar, and beat them up very
smooth. it is very common in
france, amongst all classes of people,
to dress cauliflowers and french
beans to eat cold, as salads, with a
sauce of oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper.
in some parts of france, raw
salads, composed entirely of herbs
growing wild in the fields, are in
frequent use; and for distinction
sake, are called rural salads. the
english, who are not so fond of pungent
flavours, are in the habit of
substituting sugar instead of pepper
and salt, where oil is not used, in
order to soften the asperity of the
vinegar.
salmagundy. this is a beautiful
small dish, if in a nice shape,
and the colours of the ingredients
be properly varied. for this purpose
chop separately the white part
of cold chicken or veal, yolks of
eggs boiled hard, the whites of eggs,
beet root, parsley, half a dozen anchovies,
red pickled cabbage, ham
and grated tongue, or any thing well
flavoured and of a good colour.
some people like a small proportion
of onion, but it may be better omitted.
a saucer, large teacup, or
any other base, must be put into a
small dish; then make rows round
it wide at the bottom, and growing
smaller towards the top, choosing
such ingredients for each row as
will most vary the colours. at the
top, a little sprig of curled parsley
may be stuck in; or without any
thing on the dish, the salmagundy
may be laid in rows, or put into the
half-whites of eggs, which may be
made to stand upright by cutting
off a little bit at the round end. in
the latter case, each half egg receives
but one ingredient. curled
butter and parsley may be put as
garnish between.
salmon. if fresh and good,
the flesh will be of a fine red, the
gills particularly; the scales very
bright, and the whole fish stiff.
when just killed there is a whiteness
between the flakes, which gives great
firmness; by keeping, this melts
down, and the fish is more rich.
the thames salmon bears the highest
price; that caught in the severn
is next in goodness, and by some it
is preferred. those with small
heads, and thick in the neck, are
best.
scale and clean a fresh
salmon very well, score the sides
deep, to take the seasoning; take
of mace and cloves, and white pepper,
a quarter of an ounce each,
a small nutmeg, and an ounce of
salt; beat these very fine in a mortar;
cut a little lemon peel fine,
and shred some parsley, mix all together,
and season the fish inside
and out; then work up near a pound
of butter in flour, and fill up the
notches; the rest put into the belly
of the fish; lay it in a clean cloth or
napkin, roll it up, and bind it round
with packthread, lay it into a fish-kettle,
and put to it as much white
wine vinegar, and water in an equal[]
quantity, as will be sufficient to boil
it in. set it over a good charcoal
fire, and when you think it is enough,
draw it off your stove, so that it may
but just simmer. fold a clean napkin
the length of your dish the fish
is to go up in; take up the fish, unbind
it, and lay it on the napkin.
garnish your dish with picked raw
parsley, and horseradish. send
plain butter in a bason, and shalots
chopped fine, and simmered in vinegar
in a boat.
salmon a la braise. clean
a middling salmon, take the flesh of
a tench, or a large eel, and chop it
very fine, with two anchovies, a
little lemon peel shred, pepper, salt,
nutmeg, and a little thyme and parsley; mix
all together with a good
piece of butter, put into the belly
of the fish, and sew it up; put it
into an oval stew-pan that will just
hold it; brown about half a pound
of fresh butter, and put to it a pint
of fish broth, and a pint and a half
of white wine; pour this over your
fish; if it does not cover it, add
some more wine and broth; put in
a bundle of sweet herbs, and an
onion, a little mace, two or three
cloves, and some whole pepper tied
up in a piece of muslin: cover it
close, and let it stew gently over a
slow fire. before it is quite done,
take out your onion, herbs, and
spice; then put in some mushrooms,
truffles, and morels, cut in pieces;
let them stew all together, till the
salmon is enough; take it up carefully,
take off all the scum, and
pour your sauce over. garnish with
horseradish, barberries, and lemon.
either of these is a fine dish for a
first course.
salmon pie. make puff paste,
and lay over your dish; clean and
scale a middling piece of salmon;
cut it into three or four pieces, according
to the size of your dish,
and season it pretty high with mace,
cloves, pepper, and salt; put some
butter at the bottom, and lay in the
salmon; take the meat of a lobster
cut small, and bruise the body with
an anchovy; melt as much butter
as you think proper, stir the lobster
into it, with a glass of white wine,
and a little nutmeg; pour this over
the salmon, lay on the top crust,
and let it be well baked.
saloop. boil together a little
water, wine, lemon peel, and sugar.
mix in a small quantity of saloop
powder, previously rubbed smooth
with a little cold water. stir it all
together, and boil it a few minutes.
salt. the properties of common
salt are such as to render it an
article of the greatest importance in
the preparation of food, and in the
preservation of health. if salt be
withheld for any length of time, diseases
of the stomach become general,
and worms are gendered in the
bowels, which are removed with
great difficulty. in ireland, salt is
a well-known common remedy for
bots in the horse; and among the
poor people, a dose of common salt
is esteemed a sufficient cure for the
worms. it is supposed by some
medical men, that salt furnishes
soda to be mixed with the bile:
without this necessary addition, the
bile would be deprived of the qualities
necessary to assist in the operation
of digestion. one of the
greatest grievances of which the poor
man can complain is the want of
salt. many of the insurrections and
commotions among the hindoos,
have been occasioned by the cruel
and unjust monopolies of certain
unworthy servants of the east india
company, who to aggrandize their
own fortunes have oftentimes bought
up, on speculation, all the salt in
the different ports and markets,
and thus have deprived the ingenious
but wretched natives of their only
remaining comfort, salt being the
only addition they are usually enabled
to make to their poor pittance
of rice. many of the poor in england,
previously to the late reduction[]
especially, have loudly lamented the
high price of salt, which thousands
are in the habit of using as the only
seasoning to their meal of potatoes.
salt is also of the greatest use in
agriculture. from one to two bushels
makes fine manure for an acre of
land, varied according to the quality
of the soil. this answers better
than almost any other compost.
the chinese have for ages been accustomed
to manure their fields by
sprinkling them with sea water.
the persians sprinkle the timber of
their buildings with salt, to prevent
them from rotting. it is used in
abyssinia instead of money, where
it passes from hand to hand, under
the shape of a brick, worth about
eighteen pence. in feeding of cattle,
it is also found to be highly beneficial.
a nobleman who purchased
two hundred merino sheep
in spain, attributes the health of
his flock principally to the constant
use of salt. these sheep having
been accustomed to that article in
their native land, it was thought necessary
to supply them with it, especially
in this damp climate, and
in the rich pastures of some parts
of this country. a ton of salt is
used annually for every thousand
sheep: a handful is put in the morning
on a flat stone or slate, ten of
which, set a few yards apart, are
sufficient for a hundred sheep. this
quantity is given twice a week. out
of a flock of nearly a thousand, there
were not ten old sheep that did not
readily take it, and not a single lamb
which did not consume it greedily.
salt is likewise a preventive of disorders
in stock fed with rank green
food, as clover or turnips, and it is
deemed a specific for the rot.
horses and horned cattle are also
very fond of salt: the cow gives
more milk, and richer in quality,
when salt is mixed with her food.
the wild beasts of the american
forests leave their haunts at certain
seasons, and travel in company to
various places where salt is to be
found. there they lick the ground
on which the salt lies, or which is
strongly impregnated by it. cattle
fed on grass which grows on the sea
shore, are always fatter and in better
condition, than those which
graze on in land-pastures. considering
its various uses in agriculture,
as an article of food, and as a
preservative from putrefaction, salt
may be pronounced one of the most
generally useful and necessary of
all the minerals; and it is truly lamentable,
that in almost all ages
and countries, particularly in those
where despotism prevails, this
should be one of those necessaries
of life, on which the most heavy
taxes are imposed. bay salt is a
kind of brownish impure salt, obtained
in france, italy, and other
countries, by evaporating sea water
in pits. the principal part of bay
salt sold in this country is however
of home manufacture, being a coarse
grained chrystalized salt, made dirty
by powdered turkey umber, or
some such colouring material, to
give it the appearance of a foreign
article. the only utility which this
salt appears to possess, beyond that
of the common fine-grained salt
usually found in the shops, is that
it dissolves more slowly by moisture,
and therefore is better calculated
for salting of fish, and other animal
substances, which cannot be wholly
covered with brine. basket salt is
made from the water of the salt
springs in cheshire and other places.
it differs from the common brine
salt in the fineness of the grain, as
well as on account of its whiteness
and purity. it is principally used
at table.
salt beef. great attention is
requisite in salting meat; and in the
country, where large quantities are
often cured, this is of particular importance.
beef and pork should
be well sprinkled, and a few hours
afterwards hung to drain, before it[]
is rubbed with the salt. this method,
by cleansing the meat from
the blood, serves to keep it from
tasting strong. it should be turned
every day; and if wanted soon, it
should be rubbed daily. a salting
tub or lead may be used, and a cover
to fit close. those who use a
good deal of salt meat will find it
answer well to boil up the pickle,
and skim it clean; and when cold,
pour it over meat that has been
sprinkled and drained.—to salt
beef red, which is extremely good
to eat fresh from the pickle, or to
hang to dry, choose a piece of the
flank, or any part that has but little
bone. sprinkle it, and let it drain
a day. then rub it with common
salt, bay salt, and a small proportion
of saltpetre, all in fine powder. a
few grains of cochineal may be added.
rub the pickle into the meat
every day for a week, and afterwards
turning it only will be sufficient.
it will be excellent in about
eight days; and in sixteen days it
may be drained from the pickle.
smoke it at the mouth of the oven,
when heated with wood, or send it
to the baker's; a few days will be
sufficient to smoke it. a little of
the coarsest sugar added to the salt,
will be an improvement. red beef
boiled tender, eats well with greens
or carrots. if it is to be grated as
dutch beef, then cut a lean bit, boil
it extremely tender, and put it hot
under a press. when cold fold it
in a sheet of paper, and it will keep
in a dry place two or three months,
ready for serving on bread and butter.—if
a piece of beef is to be prepared
for eating immediately, it
should not weigh more than five or
six pounds. salt it thoroughly before
it is to be put into the pot,
take a coarse cloth, flour it well,
put the meat into it, and fold it up
close. put it into a pot of boiling
water, and boil it as another piece
of salt meat of the same size, and
it will be as salt as if it had been in
pickle four or five days.
salt cod. soak and clean
the piece intended to be dressed,
and lay it all night in water, with a
glass of vinegar. boil it enough,
then break it into flakes on the dish;
pour over it parsnips boiled, beaten
in a mortar, and boiled up with
cream. add to it a large piece of
butter, rubbed in a little flour. egg
sauce may be sent up instead, or the
parsnip root whole. the fish may
also be boiled without flaking, and
served with either of the sauces as
above.
salt fish. backlio, old ling,
and tusk, are reckoned the best salt
fish. old ling and backlio, must
be laid in water for ten or twelve
hours, then taken out, and scaled
very clean; wash the fish, and let
it lay out of water till you want to
use it; if it is the next day, it will
be the better. when you dress it,
put it into cold water, and let it do
as gently as possible; let it be boiled
so tender, that you may put a
fork into any part of it without
sticking, then it is enough. lay a
clean napkin over your dish, take up
the fish, lay it upon the napkin, and
throw the corners over each other.
send it to table with egg sauce in a
basin, parsnips sliced, and butter
and mustard in a boat.
soak and boil some good barrel cod,
till about three parts done. divide
it into flakes, put them into a saucepan
with some cream, a little pepper,
and a handful of parsley scalded
and chopped. stew it gently till
tender, thicken the sauce with two
or three yolks of eggs, and serve it
up.
salt fish pie. boil a side of
salt fish as you would for eating;
cut a square bit out of the middle,
about the bigness of your hand;
take the skin off the other, and take
out all the bones; mince this very[]
small with six eggs boiled hard;
season it with pepper, nutmeg, and
beaten mace, then slice the crumb
of french rolls thin into a pan, pour
over it a quart of boiling milk, and
let it stand to soak; in the mean
time, make a good puff paste, and
sheet the dish all over; have in
readiness the quantity of two spoonfuls
of parsley shred very fine, beat
the bread well together, then put in
the fish and eggs, and chopped
parsley; stir all well together;
melt about three quarters of a pound
of butter, and stir it into the ingredients,
with a gill of mountain; pour
this into the dish, lay the square
piece of fish in the middle; lay on
the lid, and bake it an hour, or a
little more.—you may make ling,
or stock-fish pie in this manner;
but you are to observe, that all the
skin is to be taken off, and not to
put a piece whole into the pie, according
to this receipt; but mince
all the fish with the yolks of hard
eggs, leaving out the whites, and
adding a large spoonful of made
mustard when you stir the ingredients
together, before you put them
into the pie.
salt pork. to a hundred
weight of pork or beef, take ten
pounds of common salt, and half a
pound of saltpetre. let the meat
be well cleaned from those particles
of blood which hang about it when
cut into four pound pieces: this
is best done by washing it in salt
and water, or brine that has been
used, provided it be sweet. lay
the meat in rows, and rub the upper
side moderately with salt; then
place another layer of meat, and repeat
the operation as on the first
layer. in this manner continue the
same proportion of salt and saltpetre,
till the whole quantity is
heaped up in a tub, or some other
vessel, not of lead, in order to preserve
the pickle from issuing from
it. in this state it must remain for
three days, then turn it into another
tub, sprinkling it with salt in the act
of turning the meat. when all is
turned and salted, let the pickle
procured by the first salting, be
slowly poured about the meat. in
this state let it remain for a week,
and it will be excellent for home
use. if wanted for exportation,
pack it in this state into casks. but
as the greatest care is required for
its preservation, when sent abroad,
a layer of salt must first be put into
the barrel, and then a layer of meat,
till the cask is full, taking care to
use the hand only in packing in the
pieces. when the barrel is headed,
the pickle must be filtered through
a coarse cloth; and when perfectly
fine, fill up the cask with the pickle
to the bung hole. let it remain in
this state till the next day, in order
to ascertain whether the cask be
quite tight, and then bung it up.
beef or pork cured in this manner
will not fail to keep any reasonable
length of time. the too great rubbing
of meat will not keep it the better,
it frequently retards the operation
of the salt by filling the outward
pores of the meat only to the destruction
of the middle of the piece,
which frequently perishes.
salting of butter. after
the butter is well worked up and
cleared from the milk, it is ready
for salting. the tub in which it is
to be preserved being perfectly clean,
should be rubbed in the whole inside
with common salt; and a little
melted butter should be poured into
the cavity between the bottom and
the sides, before the butter is put
in. although common salt is generally
employed on this occasion,
yet the following composition not
only preserves the butter more effectually
from taint, but also makes
it look better, taste sweeter, richer,
and more marrowy, than if it had
been cured with common salt only.
take of best common salt two parts,[]
saltpetre one part, lump sugar one
part, and beat them up together in
a mortar, so that they may be completely
blended. to every pound
of butter, add one ounce of this
composition: mix it well in the
mass, and close it up for use. butter
prepared in this manner will
keep good for three years, and cannot
be distinguished from that which
is recently salted; but it does not
taste well till it has stood a fortnight
or three weeks. to preserve
butter for winter use, take some that
is fresh and good in the month of
august or september, and put it into
an unglazed jar, in layers about
two inches thick, till the jar is full,
within three inches of the top.
make a strong brine of salt and water,
boil and skim it; and when it
is quite cold, pour a sufficient
quantity over the butter, so that the
brine may be an inch deep. tie
paper over it, and set it in a cool
place. when wanted for use, cut
it no deeper than the first layer till
that is all used. then cut the second
in the same manner, and so
on to the bottom of the tub or jar.
by this means there will be no more
than a part of one layer that is not
covered with the brine. to make
it eat like fresh butter, dip each
piece into water when it is cut out
of the jar; or work it over again in
fresh buttermilk or milk, and make
it into shapes like fresh butter. it
will eat much better with toast,
than most of the fresh butter that is
made in winter. it is a false idea,
that butter, to be preserved for winter
use, requires a greater quantity
of salt: experience has proved the
contrary. butter salted in the common
way, and put in pots with brine
over the top, retains its flavour, and
is better preserved than by an additional
quantity of salt. one more
observation on the preservation of
butter is necessary. it is universally
allowed that cleanliness is indispensible,
but it is not generally
suspected, that butter from being
made in vessels or troughs lined
with lead, or in glazed earthenware
pans, which glaze is principally
composed of lead, is too apt to be
contaminated by particles of that
deleterious metal. if the butter is
in the least degree rancid, this can
hardly fail to take place, and it cannot
be doubted, that during the decomposition
of the salts, the glazing
is acted on. it is better therefore
to use tinned vessels for mixing the
preservative with the butter, and to
pack it either in wooden vessels, or
in jars of the vauxhall ware, which
being vitrified throughout, do not
require an inside glazing.
samphire. this should be
boiled in plenty of water, with a
good deal of salt in it. put it in
when the water boils, and let it boil
till quite tender. serve it up with
melted butter.
sandwiches. properly prepared,
these form an elegant and
convenient luncheon; but they have
got much out of fashion, from the
bad manner in which they are commonly
made. they have consisted
of any offal or odd ends, that cannot
be sent to table in any other form,
merely laid between slices of bread
and butter. whatever kind of meat
is used however, it must be carefully
trimmed from every bit of skin and
gristle, and nothing introduced but
what is relishing and acceptable.
sandwiches may be made of any of
the following materials. cold meat,
poultry, potted meat, potted shrimps
or lobsters, potted cheese; grated
ham, beef, or tongue; anchovy,
sausages, cold pork; hard eggs,
pounded with a little butter and
cheese; forcemeats, and curry powder.
mustard, pepper, and salt,
are to be added, as occasion requires.
savoury beef. the tongue
side of a round of beef is best adapted
for the purpose; and if it weighs
about fifteen pounds, let it hang[]
two or three days. then take three
ounces of saltpetre, one ounce of
coarse sugar, a quarter of an ounce
of black pepper, some minced herbs,
and three quarters of a pound of
salt. incorporate these ingredients
by pounding them together in a
mortar; and if approved, add a
quarter of an ounce of ginger. take
out the bone, and rub the meat well
with the above mixture, turning it
and rubbing it every day for a fortnight.
when it is to be dressed,
put it into a pan with a quart of water.
cover the meat with about
three pounds of mutton suet chopped,
and an onion or two minced
small. put the whole into a pan,
cover it with a flour crust, and bake
it in a moderate oven for six hours.
instead of baking it may be covered
with water, and stewed very gently
for about five hours; and when sent
to table, cover the top of it with
finely chopped parsley. the gravy
will be excellent for sauce or soup,
or making of soy, or browning; and
being impregnated with salt, it will
keep several days. that the suet
may not be wasted, when the dish
comes from the oven, take out the
beef, and strain the contents of the
pan through a sieve. clarify the
fat when cold, and it will do for
frying. the meat should not be
cut till it is cold, and then with a
sharp knife to prevent waste, and
keep it smooth and even. this is
a most excellent way of preparing
savoury beef for sandwiches, and
for other elegant and economical
purposes.
savoury jelly. if to put
over cold pies, make it of a small
bare knuckle of veal, or of a scrag
of mutton. if the pie be of fowl or
rabbit, the carcases, necks, and
heads, added to any piece of meat,
will be sufficient, observing to give
it a consistence by adding cow heel,
or shanks of mutton. put the meat
into a stewpan that shuts very close,
adding a slice of lean ham or bacon,
a faggot of different herbs, two blades
of mace, an onion or two, a small
bit of lemon peel, a tea-spoonful of
jamaica pepper bruised, and the
same of whole pepper, with three
pints of water. as soon as it boils
skim it well, let it simmer very
slowly till it is quite strong, and
then strain it. when cold take off
the fat with a spoon first, and then,
to remove every particle of grease,
lay on it a clean piece of blotting
paper. if not clear, after being cold,
boil it a few minutes with the whites
of two eggs, but do not add the sediment.
pour it through a clean
sieve, with a napkin in it, which has
been dipped in boiling water, to
prevent waste.
savoury pies. few articles
of cookery are more generally approved
than relishing pies, if properly
made; and there are various
things adapted to this purpose.
some eat best cold, and in that case,
no suet should be put into the forcemeat
that is used with them. if the
pie is either made of meat that will
take more dressing, to make it quite
tender, than the baking of the crust
will allow; or if it is to be served in
an earthen pie-form, the following
preparation must be observed. for
instance, take three pounds of a
veiny piece of beef, that has fat and
lean; wash it, and season it with
salt, pepper, mace, and allspice, in
fine powder, rubbing them in well.
set it by the side of a slow fire, in a
stewpot that will just hold it. add
about two ounces of butter, cover it
quite close, and let it just simmer in
its own steam till it begins to shrink.
when it is cold, add more seasoning,
forcemeat, and eggs. if in a dish,
put some gravy to it before baking:
if in a crust only, the gravy must not
be added till after it is cold, and in
a jelly. forcemeat may be put
both under and over the meat, if
preferred to balls.
savoury rice. wash and
pick some rice quite clean, stew it[]
very gently in a small quantity of
veal or rich mutton broth, with an
onion, a blade of mace, pepper and
salt. when swelled, but not boiled
to a mash, dry it on the shallow
part of a sieve before the fire, and
either serve it dry, or put it in the
middle of a dish, and pour hot gravy
round it.
savoury veal pie. make
a good puff-paste, and sheet your
dish; cut the veal into pieces, season
it with pepper, mace, and nutmeg,
finely beat, and a little salt;
lay it into the crust, with lambstones,
sweetbreads, the yolks of
hard eggs, an artichoke bottom boiled,
and cut in dice, and the tops of
asparagus; put in about half a pint
of water, lay pieces of butter over
the top, put on the lid, and ornament
it to your fancy. in a quick oven
about an hour and an half will bake
it. make a caudle for it thus: take
half a pint of strong veal broth, a
gill of white wine, and the yolks of
three eggs; set this over the stove,
and keep it stirring; put in some
grated nutmeg, and a little salt;
when it boils, if there is any scum,
take it off; pour in a gill of cream,
keep it stirring till it simmers, then
take the lid of your pie off carefully,
and pour the caudle over it, shake
it round, lay on the lid as exact as
you can, and send it to table. you
may do lamb this way.
wash a dish with the white of eggs.
make several divisions with mashed
potatoes and yolks of eggs mixed together
and put on the dish, and
bake it of a nice colour. in the
first division put stewed spinach, in
the second mashed turnips, in the
third slices of carrots, in the fourth
some button onions stewed in gravy,
or any other kind of vegetables to
make a variety.
savoy biscuits. take six
eggs, separate the yolks and whites,
mix the yolks with six ounces of
sugar finely powdered, and the rind
of a grated lemon. beat them together
for a quarter of an hour,
then whisk the whites up in a broad
dish till they are well frothed, and
mix them with the yolks, adding five
ounces of flour well dried. stir the
whole well together; then, with a
piece of flat ivory, take out the batter,
and draw it along clean white
paper to the proper size of the biscuit.
sift some sugar over them,
and bake them in a very hot oven.
they must however be carefully
watched, for they are soon done,
and a few seconds over the proper
time will scorch and spoil them.
savoy cake. put four eggs
into a scale, and then take their
weight in fine sugar, powdered and
sifted, with the weight of seven eggs
in flour well dried. break the eggs,
putting the yolks into one basin,
and the whites into another. mix
with the yolks the sugar that has
been weighed, a little grated lemon
peel, and a little orange-flower water.
beat them well together for
half an hour, then add the whites
whipped to a froth, and mix in the
flour by degrees, continuing to beat
them all the time. then put the
batter into a tin well buttered, and
bake it an hour and a half. this
is a very delicate light cake for
serving at table, or in a dessert, and
is pretty when baked in a melon
mould, or any other kind of shape.
it may be iced at pleasure.
the sauces usually sent to table with
boiled meat, not poured over the
dish, but put into boats, are the following.
gravy, parsley and butter,
chervil, caper, oyster, liver and
parsley, onion, celery, shalot, and
curry. the ingredients for compound
sauces should be so nicely
proportioned, that no one may be
predominant, but that there may be
an equal union of the combined flavours.
all sauces should be sent
to table as hot as possible, for nothing
is more unsightly than the[]
surface of a sauce in a frozen state,
or garnished with grease on the top.
sauce for brawn. take
a peck of bran, seven gallons of
water, a pound of salt, a sprig of
bay and rosemary. boil the whole
half an hour, strain it off, let it
stand till it is cold, and then put it
in the brawn.
sauce for carp. rub half
a pound of butter with a tea-spoonful
of flour, melt it in a little water,
and add nearly a quarter of a pint
of thick cream. put in half an anchovy
chopped fine, but not washed;
set it over the fire, and as it
boils up, add a large spoonful of
real india soy. if that does not
give it a fine colour, add a little
more. turn it into the sauce tureen,
and put in some salt and half
a lemon. stir it well to keep it from
curdling.
sauce for chickens. an
anchovy or two boned and chopped,
some parsley and onion chopped,
adding pepper, oil, vinegar, mustard,
and walnut or mushroom
ketchup. these mixed together
will make a good sauce for cold
chicken, partridge, or veal.
sauce for chops. to make
a relishing sauce for steaks or chops,
pound an ounce of black pepper,
and half an ounce of allspice, with
an ounce of salt, and half an ounce
of scraped horseradish, and the
same of shalot peeled and quartered.
put these ingredients into a pint of
mushroom ketchup, or walnut pickle;
let them steep for a fortnight, and
then strain off the liquor. a tea-spoonful
or two mixed with the gravy
usually sent up for chops and
steaks, or added to thick melted
butter, will be found an agreeable
addition.
sauce for fish. simmer
very gently a quarter of a pint of
vinegar, and half a pint of soft water,
with an onion, a little horseradish,
and the following spices
lightly bruised: four cloves, two
blades of mace, and half a tea-spoonful
of black pepper. when the
onion becomes tender, chop it small,
with two anchovies, and boil it for
a few minutes with a spoonful of
ketchup. beat the yolks of three
eggs, strain them, and mix the liquor
with them by degrees. when well
mixed, set the saucepan over a gentle
fire, keeping the basin in one
hand, into which toss the sauce to
and fro, and shake the saucepan
over the fire that the eggs may not
curdle. the sauce must not be
boiled, but made hot enough to give
it the thickness of melted butter.—the
following sauces for fish will
be found excellent.—lobster sauce.
take a lobster, bruise the body and
spawn, that is in the inside, very
fine, with the back of a spoon, mince
the meat of the tail and claws small,
melt your butter of a good thickness,
put in the bruised part, and
shake it well together, then put in
the minced meat with a very little
nutmeg grated, and a spoonful of
white wine; let it just boil up, and
pour it into boats, or over your fish.—shrimp
sauce. put half a pint
of shrimps, clean picked, into a gill
of good gravy; let it boil up with
a lump of butter rolled in flour, and
a spoonful of red wine.—oyster
sauce. take a pint of oysters that
are tolerably large; put them into
a saucepan with their own liquor, a
blade of mace, a little whole pepper,
and a bit of lemon peel; let
them stew over the fire till the
oysters are plump; pour all into a
clean pan, and wash them carefully,
one by one, out of the liquor; strain
about a gill of the liquor through a
fine sieve, add the same quantity of
good gravy, cut half a pound of
fresh butter in pieces, roll up some
in flour, and then put all to your
oysters; set it over a clear fire,
shake it round often till it boils, and
add a spoonful of white wine: let it
just boil, and pour it into your
bason or boat.—anchovy sauce.[]
strip an anchovy, bruise it very fine,
put it into half a pint of gravy, a
quarter of a pound of butter rolled
in flour, a spoonful of red wine, and
a tea-spoonful of ketchup; boil all
together till it is properly thick, and
serve it up.—another. half a pint
of water, two anchovies split, a
clove, a bit of mace, a little lemon
peel, a few peppercorns, and a large
spoonful of red wine; boil all together,
till your anchovy is dissolved;
then strain it off, and thicken
it with butter rolled in flour. this
is the best sauce for skate, maid, or
thornback.
sauce for fish pies. take
equal quantities of white wine, not
sweet; of vinegar, oyster liquor,
and mushroom ketchup. boil them
up with an anchovy, strain the liquor,
and pour it through a funnel
into the pie after it is baked. or
chop an anchovy small, and boil it
up with three spoonfuls of gravy, a
quarter of a pint of cream, and a
little butter and flour.
sauce for fowls. cut up
the livers, add slices of lemon in
dice, scalded parsley, some hard
eggs, and a little salt. mix them
with butter, boil them up, and pour
the sauce over the fowls. this will
be found an excellent sauce for rabbit
or fowl, especially to hide the
bad colour of fowls. or boil some
veal gravy, with pepper and salt,
the juice of a seville orange and a
lemon, and a little port wine. pour
it into the dish, or send it up in a
boat.
sauce for goose. mix a
table-spoonful of made mustard,
and half a tea-spoonful of cayenne,
in a glass and a half of port wine.
heat and pour it hot into the inside
of a roast goose when it is taken up,
by a slit made in the apron. what
is sauce for a goose will not make
bad sauce for a duck. it must be
understood that this is not adapted
to green geese or ducklings.
sauce for hashes. chop
the bones and fragments of the joint,
put them into a stewpan, and cover
them with boiling water. add six
peppercorns, the same of allspice,
a handful of parsley, half a head of
celery cut in pieces, and a small sprig
of savoury, lemon thyme, or sweet
marjoram. cover it up, and let it
simmer gently for half an hour. slice
half an ounce of onion, put it into
a stewpan with an ounce of butter,
and fry it over a quick fire for two
or three minutes, till it takes a little
colour. thicken it with flour, and
mix with it by degrees the gravy
made from the bones. let it boil
very gently for a quarter of an hour,
till it acquires the consistence of
cream, and strain it through a fine
sieve into a basin. return it to the
stewpan, season it a little, and cut
in a few pickled onions, walnuts, or
gherkins. add a table-spoonful of
ketchup or walnut pickle, or some
capers and caper liquor, or a table-spoonful
of ale, a little shalot, or
tarragon vinegar. cover the bottom
of the dish with sippets of bread,
to retain the gravy, and garnish with
fried sippets. to hash meat in perfection,
it should be laid in this gravy
only just long enough to get properly
warmed through.
sauce for lent. melt some
butter in a saucepan, shake in a
little flour, and brown it by degrees.
stir in half a pint of water, half a
pint of ale, an onion, a piece of
lemon peel, two cloves, a blade of
mace, some whole pepper, a spoonful
of ketchup, and an anchovy.
boil it all together a quarter of an
hour, strain it, and it will make good
sauce for various dishes.
sauce for lobster. bruise
the yolks of two hard boiled eggs
with the back of a wooden spoon,
or pound them in a marble mortar,
with a tea-spoonful of water, and
the soft inside and the spawn of the
lobster. rub them quite smooth
with a tea-spoonful of made mustard,
two table-spoonfuls of salad[]
oil, and five of vinegar. season it
with a very little cayenne, and some
salt. tarragon vinegar, or essence of
anchovy, may be added occasionally.
take the bones of cold roast or
boiled veal, dredge them well with
flour, and put them into a stewpan.
add a pint and a half of weak broth,
a small onion, a little grated or
finely minced lemon peel, half a tea-spoonful
of salt, and a blade of
pounded mace. thicken it with a
table-spoonful of flour rubbed into
half an ounce of butter, stir it into
the broth, and let it boil gently for
about half an hour. strain it through
a tammis or sieve, and it is ready
to put to the veal to warm up, which
is to be done by placing the stewpan
by the side of the fire. squeeze
in half a lemon, cover the bottom
of the dish with sippets of toasted
bread cut into triangles, and garnish
the dish with slices of ham or bacon.
a little basil wine gives an agreeable
vegetable relish to minced veal.
rub down in a mortar the yolks of
two eggs boiled hard, an anchovy,
two dessert-spoonfuls of oil, three
of vinegar, a shalot, cayenne if approved,
and a tea-spoonful of mustard.
all should be pounded before
the oil is added, and strained
when done. shalot vinegar is preferable
to the shalot.
sauce for poultry. wash
and pick some chervil very carefully,
put a tea-spoonful of salt into half
a pint of boiling water, boil the chervil
about ten minutes, drain it on a
sieve, mince it quite fine, and bruise
it to a pulp. mix it by degrees
with some good melted butter, and
send it up in a sauce boat. this
makes a fine sauce for either fish or
fowl. the flavour of chervil is a
strong concentration of the combined
taste of parsley and fennel,
but is more aromatic and agreeable
than either.
sauce for quails. shred
two or three shalots, and boil them
a few minutes in a gill of water, and
half a gill of vinegar. add to this
a quarter of a pint of good gravy,
and a piece of butter rolled in flour.
shake it over the fire till it thickens,
and then serve it in the dish with
roast quails, or any other small
birds.
sauce robart. this is a
favourite sauce for rump steaks,
and is made in the following manner.
put a piece of butter, the size
of an egg, into a saucepan; and
while browning over the fire, throw
in a handful of sliced onions cut
small. fry them brown, but do
not let them burn. add half a
spoonful of flour, shake the onions
in it, and give it another fry. then
put four spoonfuls of gravy, some
pepper and salt, and boil it gently
ten minutes. skim off the fat, add
a tea-spoonful of made mustard, a
spoonful of vinegar, and the juice of
half a lemon. boil it all together,
and pour it round the steaks, which
should be of a fine yellow brown,
and garnished with fried parsley
and lemon.
sauce for steaks. when
the steaks are taken out of the fryingpan,
keep back a spoonful of the
fat, or put in an ounce of butter.
add flour to thicken it, and rub it
well over the fire till it is a little
browned. then add as much boiling
water as will reduce it to the
consistence of cream, and a table-spoonful
of ketchup or walnut pickle.
let it boil a few minutes, and pour
it through a sieve upon the steaks.
to this may be added a sliced onion,
or a minced shalot, with a glass of
port wine. broiled mushrooms are
favourite relishes to beef steaks.
garnish with finely scraped horseradish,
pickled walnuts, or gherkins.
sauce for veal. mince any
kind of sweet herbs with the yolks
of two or three hard eggs. boil
them together with some currants,
a little grated bread, pounded cinnamon,[]
sugar, and two whole cloves.
pour the sauce into the dish intended
for the veal, with two or three
slices of orange.
simmer a tea-cupful of port wine,
the same quantity of good meat gravy,
a little shalot, a little pepper
and salt, a grate of nutmeg, and a
bit of mace, for ten minutes. put
in a piece of butter, and flour; give
it all one boil, and pour it through
the birds. in general they are not
stuffed as tame fowl, but may be
done so if approved.
sausages. chop fat and lean
pork together, season it with sage,
pepper, salt, and two or three berries
of allspice. half fill some hog's
guts that have been soaked and made
extremely clean; or the meat may
be kept in a very small pan closely
covered, and so rolled and dusted
with a very little flour before it is
fried. the sausages must be pricked
with a fork before they are dressed,
or they will burst in the frying.
serve them on stewed red cabbage,
or mashed potatoes put in a form,
and browned with a salamander.—the
following is the way of making
excellent sausages to eat cold. season
some fat and lean pork with salt,
saltpetre, black pepper, and allspice,
all in fine powder. rub the
mixture into the meat, and let it lie
in pickle for six days. then cut
it small, and mix with it some shred
shalot or garlic, as fine as possible.
have ready an ox-gut that has been
scoured, salted, and well soaked,
and fill it with the above stuffing.
tie up the ends, and hang it to
smoke as you would hams, but first
wrap it in a fold or two of old muslin.
it must be high dried. some
choose to boil it, but others eat it
without boiling. the skin should
be tied in different places, so as to
make each link about eight or nine
inches long.
fry some sliced apples with the sausages,
till they are of a light brown.
lay the sausages in the middle of
the dish, and the apples round them.
or fry them without apples, and
serve them up on fried bread, with
mashed potatoes. or put the sausages
into boiling water, simmer
them about five minutes, and serve
them up with poached eggs, or roasted
potatoes.
scalds. when a burn or scald
is trifling, and occasions no blister,
it is sufficient to put a compress of
several folds of soft linen upon it,
dipped in cold water, and to renew
it every quarter of an hour till the
pain is entirely removed. when a
burn or scald blisters, a compress
of fine linen spread over with soft
pomatum should be applied to it,
and changed twice a day. if the
skin is burnt through, and the flesh
under it injured, the same pomatum
may be applied; but instead of a
compress of linen, it should be spread
upon a piece of soft lint, applied directly
over it, and this cover with a
slip of simple adhesive plaster. for
an extensive burn or scald, skilful
advice should immediately be obtained,
as it always endangers the
life of the sufferer. a linen rag
dipped in laudanum, or spread thick
with honey, will be sufficient in ordinary
cases. the pomatum proper,
where any serious injury has
been sustained, is made in the following
manner. take an ounce of
the ointment called nutritum, the yolk
of a small egg, or the half of a large
one, and mix them well together.
the nutritum may easily be made
by rubbing two drains of cerus, or
white lead, with half an ounce of
vinegar, and three ounces of common
oil, and mixing them well together.
if the ingredients for making
nutritum are not at hand, to make
the pomatum, one part of wax should
be melted with eight parts of oil,
and the yolk of an egg added to
two ounces of this mixture. a still
more simple application, and sooner[]
prepared, is to beat up a whole egg
with two spoonfuls of sweet oil, free
from any rankness. when the pain
of the burn and all its other symptoms
have nearly subsided, it will
be sufficient to apply the following
plaster. boil together to a proper
consistence, half a pound of oil of
roses, a quarter of a pound of red
lead, and two ounces of vinegar.
dissolve in the mixture three quarters
of an ounce of yellow wax, and
one dram of camphor, stirring the
whole well together. take it off
the fire, and spread it upon sheets
or slips of paper, of any size that
may be most convenient. for an
adhesive plaster, melt four ounces
of white wax, and add one or two
spoonfuls of oil. dip into this mixture,
slips of moderately thin linen,
and let them dry; or spread it thin
and evenly over them.—the following
is a highly esteemed method of
curing scalds or burns. take half
a pound of alum in powder, dissolve
it in a quart of water; bathe the
burn or scald with a linen rag wet
in this mixture; then bind the wet
rag thereon with a slip of linen, and
moisten the bandage with the alum
water frequently, without removing
it, in the course of two or three
days. a workman who fell into a
copper of boiling liquor, where he
remained three minutes before taken
out, was immediately put into a tub
containing a saturated solution of
alum in water, where he was kept
two hours; his sores were then
dressed with cloths and bandages,
wet in the above mixture, and kept
constantly moistened for twenty-four
hours, and in a few days he
was able to return to business.—the
application of vinegar to burns
and scalds is to be strongly recommended.
it possesses active powers,
and is a great antiseptic and corrector
of putrescence and mortification.
the progressive tendency of
burns of the unfavourable kind, or
ill-treated, is to putrescence and
mortification. where the outward
skin is not broken, it may be freely
used every hour or two; where the
skin is broken, and if it gives pain,
it must be gently used. but equal
parts of vinegar and water, in a tepid
state, used freely every three or four
hours, are generally the best application,
and the best rule to be directed
by.—house-leek, either applied
by itself, or mixed with cream,
gives present relief in burns, and
other external inflammations.
scald head. this disorder
is chiefly incident to children, and
is seated in the roots of the hair.
it is frequently cured by changing
the nurse, weaning the child, and
removing it to a dry and airy situation.
if the itching of the head becomes
very troublesome, it may be
allayed by gently rubbing it with
equal parts of the oil of sweet almonds,
and the juice expressed from
the leaves of the common burdock,
simmered together till they form a
soapy liniment, adding a few grains
only of pearlash. if this treatment
be not sufficient, cut off the hair, or
apply an adhesive plaster made of
bees' wax, pitch, and mutton suet.
after it is removed, the head should
be washed with warm soapy water,
and the whole body cleansed in a
lukewarm bath.
scalded codlins. wrap
each in a vine leaf, and pack them
close in a nice saucepan: when full,
pour in as much water as will cover
them. set the saucepan over a gentle
fire, and let them simmer slowly
till done enough to take the thin
skin off when cold. place them in
a dish, with or without milk, cream
or custard: if the latter, there should
be no ratafia. dust some fine sugar
over the apples.
scalded cream. let the
milk stand twenty-four hours in winter,
and twelve at least in summer.
place the milk pan on a hot
hearth, or in a wide brass kettle of
water, large enough to receive the[]
pan. it must remain on the fire till
quite hot, but on no account boil,
or there will be a skim instead of
cream upon the milk. when it is
done enough, the undulations on the
surface will begin to look thick, and
a ring will appear round the pan,
the size of the bottom. the time
required to scald cream depends on
the size of the pan, and the heat of
the fire; but the slower it is done
the better. when the cream is
scalded, remove the pan into the
dairy, and skim it the next day. in
cold weather it may stand thirty-six
hours, and never less than two meals.
in the west of england, butter is
usually made of cream thus prepared; and
if made properly it is
very firm.
scalding fruit. the best
way of scalding any kind of fruit,
is to do it in a stone jar on a hot
iron hearth; or by putting the vessel
into a saucepan of water, called
a water-bath. vinegar also is best
boiled in the same manner.
scalding pudding. from
a pint of new milk take out enough
to mix three large spoonfuls of flour
into a smooth batter. set the remainder
of the milk on the fire, and
when it is scalding hot, pour in the
batter, and keep it on the fire till it
thickens. stir it all the time to
prevent its burning, but do not let
it boil. when of a proper thickness,
pour it into a basin, and let it stand
to cool. then put in, six eggs, a
little sugar, and some nutmeg. boil
it an hour in a basin well buttered.
scalloped oysters. having
opened the oysters, and washed
them from the grit, put them into
scallop shells or saucers, and bake
them before the fire in a dutch oven.
add to them some crumbs of bread,
pepper, salt, nutmeg, and a bit of
butter, before they are set to the
fire.—another way. to fill four
scallop shells, have a pint and a half
of oysters, put them on the fire, in
their own liquor, with a blade of
mace, a little salt, and some whole
pepper; (put a salamander in the
fire to be red hot,) grate some
crumbs of bread sufficient for your
shells; butter the inside of the shells
very well, and strew bread crumbs
thereon; take your oysters off the
fire, pour them into a pan, take off
the beards, and fill the shells; grate
a little nutmeg into every shell, put
a spoonful or two of the liquor upon
the oysters, and fill up the shells
quite full with bread crumbs; set
them before the fire, and baste them
with butter all over the bread, then
set them upon a gridiron over a
clear fire, for about half an hour;
hold your salamander over them,
till they are of a fine brown, then
send them to table for a side-dish.
in the same manner do shrimps,
muscles, or cockles.
when boiled, mash them with milk,
pepper, salt, and butter. fill some
scallop shells, smooth the tops, set
them in a dutch oven to brown before
the fire; or add the yolk of an egg,
and mash them with cream, butter,
salt, and pepper. score the top with
a knife, and put thin slices over, before
they are put into the oven.
scalloped veal. mince it
fine, set it over the fire a few minutes,
with pepper and salt, a little
nutmeg and cream. put it into
scallop shells, and fill them up with
grated bread; over which put a little
butter, and brown them before
the fire.
scarlet dye. wool may be
dyed scarlet, the most splendid of
all colours, by first boiling it in a
solution of muris-sulphate of tin;
then dying it a pale yellow with
quercitron bark, and afterwards
crimson with cochineal.
scorched linen. boil to a
good consistency, in half a pint of
vinegar, two ounces of fuller's earth,
an ounce of hen's dung, half an
ounce of cake soap, and the juice
of two onions. spread this composition[]
over the whole of the damaged
part; and, if the scorching
were not quite through, and the
threads actually consumed, after
suffering it to dry on, and letting it
receive a subsequent good washing
or two, the place will appear full as
white and perfect as any other part
of the linen.
cut a leg of beef into pieces, and
boil it in three gallons of water,
with a sliced carrot and crust of
bread, till reduced to half the quantity.
strain it off, and put it again
into the pot. boil it an hour, with
half a pound of scotch barley, a
few heads of celery cut small, a
sprig of sweet herbs, an onion, a
little minced parsley, and a few
marigolds. put in a large fowl, and
boil it till the broth is good. season
it with salt, take out the onion
and herbs, and serve it up with the
fowl in the middle. broth may be
made with a sheep's head chopped
in pieces, or six pounds of thick
flank of beef, boiled in six quarts of
water. put the barley in with the
meat, and boil it gently for an hour,
keeping it clear from scum. the
articles before-mentioned may then
be added, with sliced turnips and
carrots, and boiled together till the
broth is good. season it, take it
up, pour the broth into a tureen,
with the meat in the middle, and
carrots and turnips round the dish.
scotch burgoo. this is a
sort of oatmeal hasty pudding without
milk, much used by the scotch
peasantry; and as an example of
economy, is worthy of being occasionally
adopted by all who have
large families and small incomes.
it is made in the following easy and
expeditious manner. to a quart of
oatmeal, add gradually two quarts
of water, so that the whole may
mix smoothly. stir it continually
over the fire, and boil it for a quarter
of an hour. take it up, and stir
in a little salt and butter, with or
without pepper. this quantity will
provide five or six persons with a
tolerable meal.
scotch collops. cut veal
into thin round slices, about three
inches over, and beat them with a
rolling-pin. grate a little nutmeg
over, dip them into the yolk of an
egg, and fry them in a little butter
of a fine brown. pour off the butter,
and have ready warmed half a
pint of gravy, with a little butter
and flour in it, the yolk of an egg,
two large spoonfuls of cream, and a
dust of salt. do not boil the sauce,
but stir it till it comes to a fine
thickness, and pour it over the collops.—another
way. take what
quantity of veal you want, cut into
collops, and beat it with the back
of a knife; season as above, and
fry them in butter of a fine brown;
pour off the butter, and put in half
a pint of good gravy, and a small
glass of white wine: you may add
what other ingredients you please.
roll a piece of butter as big as a
walnut in flour, toss it up, and when
it boils, take off the scum very clean:
let your sauce be thick enough to
hang; dish it up, and garnish to
your fancy.—another way: dressed
white. take three or four pounds
of a fillet of veal, cut in small thin
slices; then take a clean stewpan,
butter it on the inside; season your
collops with beaten mace, nutmeg,
and salt; dust them over with flour,
and lay them into your stewpan,
piece by piece, till all your meat is
in: set it over the stove, and toss
it up together, till all your meat be
white. put in half a pint of strong
veal broth; let them boil, and take
off all the scum clean; beat up the
yolks of two eggs in a gill of cream,
and put it to your collops, and keep
it tossing all the while, till it just
boils up; then squeeze in a little
lemon, toss it round, and dish it up.
garnish your dish with sliced lemon.
if you would make a fine dish of it,
when you put in your veal broth,[]
you must add morels, truffles, mushrooms,
artichoke bottoms cut in small
dice, force-meat balls boiled, not
fried, and a few cock's combs; then
garnish your dish with fried oysters,
petit-pasties, lemon, and barberries.
remember when you make a made
dish, and are obliged to use cream,
that it should be the last thing; for
it is apt to curdle if it boils at any
time.
scotch eggs. boil five pullet's
eggs, quite hard; and without
removing the white, cover them completely
with a fine relishing forcemeat,
in which, let scraped ham, or
chopped anchovy, bear a due proportion.
fry of a beautiful yellow
brown, and serve with good gravy in
the dish.
scotch leek soup. prepare
a sheep's head, either by cleaning
the skin very nicely, or taking it off,
as preferred. split the head in two,
take out the brains, and put it into
a kettle with plenty of water. add
a large quantity of leeks cut small,
with pepper and salt. stew these
very slowly for three hours. mix as
much oatmeal as will make the soup
pretty thick, and make it very smooth
with cold water. pour it into the
soup, continue stirring it till the
whole is smooth and well done, and
then serve it up.
scotch pancakes. to a
pint of cream beat up eight eggs,
leaving out two whites, a quarter of
a pound of butter melted, one spoon-full
of flour, a nutmeg grated, three
spoonfuls of sack, and a little sugar.
when the butter is cool, mix all together
into a batter; have ready a
stove with charcoal, and a small fryingpan
no bigger than a plate, tie a
piece of butter in a clean cloth; when
the pan is hot rub this round it, and
put in the batter with a spoon, run it
round the pan very thin and fry them
only on one side; put a saucer into
the middle of the dish, and lay pancakes
over it, till it is like a little
pyramid; strew pounded sugar between
every pancake, and garnish
the dish with seville oranges cut in
small quarters.
scouring balls. portable
balls for removing spots from clothes,
may be thus prepared. dry some
fuller's-earth, so that it crumbles into
a powder; then moisten it with
the clear juice of lemons, and add a
small quantity of pure pearl-ash.
knead the whole carefully together,
till it acquires the consistence of a
thick elastic paste: form it into convenient
small balls, and dry them in
the sun. to be used, first moisten
the spot on the clothes with water,
then rub it with the ball, and let the
spot dry in the sun. after having
washed it with pure water, the spot
will entirely disappear.
scrophula. the principal difficulty
in curing the scrophula, or
king's evil, arises from the circumstance,
that it may remain concealed
for a long time, and thus become
deeply rooted in the constitution
before its effects are evident. the
system requires to be strengthened
by the free use of peruvian bark,
sea water and sea bathing, and moderate
exercise in the open air.
hemlock plasters applied to the
swellings, and drinking of milk whey,
have also been found useful. but in
the progress of the disorder, medical
advice will be necessary.
scurvy. when the scurvy proceeds
chiefly from the long-continued
use of salt provisions, it will be necessary
to take large portions of the
juice of lemons, oranges, or tamarinds;
to eat water cresses, scurvy
grass, and fresh vegetables of every
description. but where these cannot
be procured, pickled cabbage, cucumber,
onions, and other fruits, as
well as horseradish and mustard, may
be taken with considerable advantage.
take also a pound of water-dock
roots, and boil them in six pints
of water, adding an ounce or two of
chrystals of tartar, till one third part
of the liquor be evaporated; and[]
drink half a pint or more of it every
day. raw carrots eaten are also very
good for the scurvy; and during a
voyage, they should be packed up in
casks of sand and kept for use. if
the limbs be swelled, or joints stiff,
it will be proper to foment them with
warm vinegar, or bathe them in lukewarm
water. a valuable ointment
may be made of a pound of fresh
lard, and as much cliver or goose-grass
as the lard will moisten. boil
them together over a slow fire, stir
the mixture till it turns brown, and
strain it through a cloth. take the
ointment from the water, and rub it
on the parts affected.
scurvy grass ale. brew
it as for other ale, omitting the hops;
and when the liquor boils, put in
half a bushel of fine wormwood, a
bushel of scurvy grass, and twelve
pounds of sugar. this quantity of
ingredients is sufficient for a hogshead.
sea-kale is a highly nutritious
and palatable culinary vegetable.
it is an early esculent plant, the
young shoots of which are used somewhat
in the manner of asparagus, and
may, it is said, be grown by the method
of cultivation which is given
hereafter, to a size and of a delicacy
of flavour greatly superior to that
which is commonly brought to the
table. in the cultivation of it in the
garden, the improved method which
has lately been advised, is that of
preparing the ground for it by trenching
it two feet and a half deep, about
the close of the year or in the beginning
of it: when not that depth naturally,
and of a light quality, it is
to be made so by artificial means,
such as the applying of a suitable
proportion of fine white sand, and
very rotten vegetable mould: if the
ground be wet in the winter season,
it should be completely drained, that
no water may stagnate in it near the
bottom of the cultivated mould, as
the strength of the plants depends
upon the dryness and richness of
the bottom soil. after which the
ground is to be divided into beds,
four feet in width, with alleys of
eighteen inches between them; then,
at the distance of every two feet each
way, five or six seeds are to be sown,
in a circle of about four inches diameter,
to the depth of two inches.
this business should be performed
in a strictly regular and exact manner,
as the plants are afterwards to
be covered by means of pots for
blanching them, and the health and
beauty of the crops equally depend
upon their standing at regular distances.
if the seeds which were
sown were sound and perfect, they
will come up and shew themselves
in the last spring or beginning summer
months; which as soon as they
have made three or four leaves, all
but three of the strongest and best
plants should be taken away from
each circle; planting out those
which are pulled up, which, when
done by a careful hand, may be
performed so as for them to have the
whole of their tap-root in a spare
bed for extra forcing, or the repairs
of accidents. the turnip fly and
wire worm are to be carefully guarded
against, the latter by picking
them by the hand from out of the
ground, and the former by the use
of lime laid round the young plants
in a circle. when the summer
months prove dry, the beds should
be plentifully watered. as soon as
the leaves decay in the autumn they
should be cleared away, and the
beds be covered with light fresh
earth and sand to the thickness of
an inch; the compost thus used
having laid some time in a heap,
and been turned several times, so as
to be free from weeds, and the ova
of insects as well as grubs. upon
the sandy loam dressing, about six
inches in depth of light stable litter
is to be applied, which completes
the work of the first year. in the
spring of the second, when the
plants are beginning to push, the[]
stable litter is to be raked off, a little
of the most rotten being dug into
the alleys, and another inch
depth of loam and sand applied.
cutting this year is to be refrained
from, notwithstanding some of the
plants may rise strong, and the beds
managed exactly as before during
this winter season. in the third
season, a little before the plants
begin to stir, the covering laid on
for the winter is to be raked off, and
an inch in depth of pure dry sand
or fine gravel now laid on. then
each circle of plants is to be covered
with one of the blanching-pots
already alluded to, pressing it firmly
into the ground, so as to exclude all
light and air, as the colour and flavour
of the shoots are greatly injured
by exposure to either of them.
when the beds are twenty-six feet
long, and four wide, they will hold
twenty-four blanching-pots, with
three plants under each, making
seventy-two plants in a bed. they
are to be examined from time to
time, the young stems being cut,
when about three inches above the
ground, care being taken not to injure
any of the remaining buds below,
some of which will immediately
begin to swell. in this way a succession
of gatherings may be continued
for the space of six weeks,
after which period the plants are to
be uncovered, and their leaves suffered
to grow, that they may acquire
and return nutriment to the root for
the next year's buds. when seeds
are not wanted, the flowers should
be pinched off by the finger and
thumb, as long as they appear.
where the expence of blanching-pots
is objected to, the beds must
be covered with a large portion of
loose gravel and mats; but the
saving is trifling, when the time and
trouble of removing and replacing
the gravel, for the cutting of the
crop and securing the plant, are
considered. by this mode of management,
sea-kale is said to have
been cut which measured ten, eleven,
and even twelve inches in circumference,
and that each blanching-pot
on the average afforded a dish
of it twice in the season. the
blanching-pots for this use are somewhat
of the same shape and size as
the large bell-glasses commonly employed
in market gardens for raising
tender vegetable crops, but made
of the same materials as the common
earthenware, having a handle
at the top. they may be about a
foot and a half in diameter at the
rim where they apply to the ground.
forcing sea-kale.—it is supposed
that no vegetable can be so easily
and cheaply forced as this, or require
so little trouble; as the dung
is in the finest state possible for
spring hot-beds, after the common
crop has been cut and gathered.
the principal circumstance necessary
in this business, is that of being
very attentive and particular in
guarding against too great a heat.
the temperature under the blanching-pots
should constantly be kept
as near fifty-five degrees of fahrenheit's
scale as possible, and on no
account higher than sixty at any
time. in this intention, in either of
the two concluding months of the
year, as the sea-kale may be wanted
more early or late, a suitable
quantity of fresh stable dung should
be collected and prepared, to cover
both the beds and the alleys from
two to three feet in height; as in
the quantity to be laid on, a great
deal must always be left to the
judgment of the gardener, as well
as to the state of the season as to
mildness or severity. it should invariably
be well pressed down between
the blanching-pots, heat-sticks
being placed at proper intervals,
by the occasional examination
of which the heat below will be
readily shewn. when the dung has
remained in this situation four or
five days, the pots should be examined
to see the state of the shoots[]
it not unfrequently happens that
worms spring above the surface, and
spoil the delicacy of flavour in the
young shoots. in order to prevent
this, it is best to cover it with dry
sea-coal ashes, which have been
sifted neither very small nor very
large. salt has also the power of
destroying them in an effectual
manner, without injuring the sea-kale.
the crop, it is said, will be
ready to cut and gather in three
weeks or a month from the first application
of the heat; but as much
danger and mischief are the consequence
when this is violent, it is advised
to begin soon enough, and to
force slowly, rather than in too
quick a manner. it is likewise necessary
to cut the leaves off a fortnight
or three weeks before they
decay, in those plants which are intended
to be forced at a very early
period. it is also suggested that
the blanching-pots used in forcing
should be made in two pieces, the
uppermost of which should fit like
a cap upon the lower; as the crop
might then be examined at all times
without disturbing the hot dung.
sea-kale is cooked, and sent to the
table in the same manner as asparagus.
sea sickness. this disorder
may in a great measure be prevented,
by taking a few drops of vitriolic
æther on a bit of sugar dissolved in
the mouth, or drinking a few drops
of æther in water, with a little sugar.
sea water. to render salt
water fit for washing linen at sea,
a quantity of soda should be kept at
hand, and used for that purpose, as
often as occasion requires. as much
soda should be put into sea water
as will render it turbid, and completely
precipitate the lime and magnesia
which it contains. the water
will then become sufficiently alkaline
for the purpose of washing.
shaving soap. cut half a
pound of fine white soap in thin
slices, add half an ounce of salt of
tartar, and mix them with full half
a pint of spirits of wine. put the
ingredients into a quart bottle, tie
it down with a bladder, digest it in
a gentle heat till the soap is dissolved,
and let the air escape through
a pinhole in the bladder. filter the
mixture through paper, and scent it
with a little bergamot, or essence of
lemon. it will have the appearance
of fine oil. a small quantity mixed
with water will produce an excellent
lather, and is much superior to any
other composition in washing or
shaving.
sealing of letters. to
secure letters from being opened,
beat up some fine bean flour with
the white of an egg, and make it into
a paste. use a little of it in the
form of a wafer, close the letters
with it, and hold the sealed part
to the spout of a tea-pot of boiling
water. the steam will harden the
cement so that the letter cannot be
opened without tearing, and will render
it more secure than either wax
or wafer.
seasoning. though general
rules may be given for stuffings and
seasoning, yet much must be left
to common discretion. the different
tastes of people require more or
less of the flavour of spices, salt,
garlic, butter, and other ingredients;
and the proportions must of course
be regulated accordingly, taking
care that a variety of flavour be
given to the different dishes served
at the same time. the proper articles
should be kept ready for use;
but if suet or bacon be not at hand,
butter must be used instead, and
fish gravy instead of stock or meat
gravy. more depends on judgment
and care than on the ingredients
merely, of which the dish is composed.
having provided a steam-tight
wooden box, capable of holding such
pieces of mahogany as are wanted[]
for chairs or other purposes, a pipe
from a boiler must be adapted to it,
by means of which the box is to be
filled with steam, to a temperature
about equal to that of boiling water.
the time required for wood
an inch and a half thick, is about
two hours; and pieces of this thickness
become sufficiently dry to
work, after being placed in a warm
room for twenty-four hours. by
this treatment the wood is something
improved in colour, and the
blemishes of green veins are entirely
removed. the eggs also of any insect
contained in the wood, will be
destroyed by the heat of the steam.
by this process, two important advantages
are gained. there is a
saving of capital, vested in wood
lying to season during several
months; and the warping of small
pieces of wood is entirely prevented.
seed cake. mix a quarter of
a peck of flour with half a pound of
sugar, a quarter of an ounce of allspice,
and a little ginger. melt
three quarters of a pound of butter,
with half a pint of milk; when just
warm, put to it a quarter of a pint
of yeast, and work it up to a good
dough. add seeds or currants, let
it stand before the fire a few minutes
before it goes to the oven, and bake
it an hour and a half.—another
way is to mix a pound and a half of
flour, a pound of lump sugar, eight
eggs beaten separately, an ounce of
seeds, two spoonfuls of yeast, and
the same of milk and water. milk
alone soon causes cake and bread
to get dry.—another. break eighteen
eggs into a large pan, and leave
out eight of the whites; add to them
two pounds of fresh butter, and with
your hand work the butter and eggs
till they are well mixed, and like
thick barme; put in two or three
spoonfuls of sack, two pounds of
lump sugar sifted, two pounds of
fine flour, and two ounces of carraway
seeds, mix the sugar, flour, and
seeds, well together, and set it before
the fire for half an hour, covering
it with a cloth, and remember to
put the flour, &c. in by degrees.
tin pudding pans are the best things
to bake it in, and take care it be
not over-done; they will rise very
high in the oven, and when they
begin to sink again, they are baked
enough.—a cheap seed cake. take
half a peck of flour, set a pint of
milk on the fire, and break in a
pound and a half of butter; when
all the butter is melted, stir in half
a pint of ale yeast that is not bitter.
take half an ounce of allspice beat
fine, and a pound of sugar sifted;
mix these with the flour first, then
make a hole in the middle of the
flour, and pour in the butter, milk,
and yeast. while you are working
it, strew in some carraway seeds,
and set it before the fire to rise;
bake it an hour and a half in a quick
oven. it is best baked in two cakes;
if you make it in two, put currants
in one, and carraway seeds in the
other.—seed cake the nun's way.
to four pounds of the finest flour,
add three pounds of double-refined
sugar beat and sifted; mix this with
the flour, and set it before the fire
to dry; beat up four pounds of nice
fresh butter to a cream, break three
dozen of eggs (leaving out sixteen
whites) and beat them up very well,
with a tea-cupful of orange-flower
water, strain them into the butter,
and beat them well therewith; take
the flour and sugar, and mix in six
ounces of carraway seeds; put these
ingredients to the butter and eggs
by degrees, and beating all continually
for two hours: butter a hoop,
and bake it three hours in a moderate
oven. if you please, you
may add two or three grains of ambergris.
seed water. bruise a spoonful
of coriander seeds, and half a
spoonful of carraway. boil them in
a pint of water, strain them, beat[]
up the yolk of an egg and mix with
the water, add a little sweet wine
and lump sugar.
seeds. to discover when seeds
of any kind are fully ripe and good,
throw them into a basin of water.
if not sufficiently ripe, they will
swim on the surface; but when arrived
at full maturity, they will be
found uniformly to sink to the bottom;
a fact that is said to hold
equally true of all seeds, from the
cocoa nut to the orchis.—seeds of
plants may be preserved, for many
months at least, by causing them
to be packed, either in husks, pods,
&c. in absorbent paper, with raisins
or brown moist sugar; or a good
way, practised by gardeners, is to
wrap the seed in brown paper or
cartridge paper, pasted down, and
then varnished over.—to preserve
seeds, when sown, from vermin.
steep the grain or seed three or four
hours, or a sufficient time for it to
penetrate the skin, or husk, in a
strong solution of liver of sulphur.
shads. they must be scaled
very clean, then gut and wash them,
dry them in a cloth, score them on
the sides, rub them with butter,
sprinkle salt over them, and broil
them of a fine brown; boil sorrel,
chervil, onion and parsley, chop it
fine; melt a piece of butter in cream
sufficient for your sauce, then put
in your herbs, season it with salt,
pepper, and a little nutmeg, toss it
up together, and pour over your
fish; or you may serve it with a
ragout of mushrooms, or a brown
sauce with capers, garnished with
lemon.
squeeze seville orange or lemon
juice into a glass dish, or mix them
together if preferred, and sweeten it
well with fine sugar. then warm
some cream over the fire, but do
not let it boil. put it into a teapot
and pour it into the juice, holding
the teapot up very high, that it may
froth and curdle the better. instead
of cream, milk thickened with one
or two yolks of eggs may be used,
if more convenient.
shalot. as the habits of
growth in roots of this nature differ
greatly in the different sorts, some
requiring to be nearly or quite on
the surface of the ground, while
others stand in need of being a considerable
depth below it, which has
not been well attended to in the garden
culture of such roots; it may
be readily supposed that these have
considerable influence and effect on
the growth of such root crops. in
consequence of finding that crops
of this root generally became mouldy
and perished, and that they were
usually planted, from the directions
of garden cultivators, at the depth
of two or three inches from the surface;
the injury, failure, and destruction
of such crops, were naturally
ascribed to this cause. a few
bulbs or bunches of this root were
consequently divided, as far as possible,
into single buds or bulbs, and
planted upon or rather above the
surface of the ground, some very
rich soil being placed underneath
them, and the mould on each side
raised to support them, until they
became firmly rooted. this mould
was then removed by means of a
hoe, and the use of the watering-pot,
and the bulbs of course left wholly
out of the ground. the growth of
the plants had now so near a resemblance
to that of the common onion,
as not readily to be distinguished
from it, until their irregularity of
form, the consequence of the numerous
germs within each bulb, became
evident. the forms of the
bulbs, however, continued constantly
different from all those raised in
the ordinary method, being much
more broad, but of less length. the
crop was a great deal better in quality,
and at the same time much more
abundant in quantity. it may consequently[]
not be unworthy of the
gardener's attention.—garlic, rocambole,
and shalot are chiefly used
in ragouts and sauces which require
to be highly flavoured, unless a separate
sauce is made of them only;
and indeed, the mixing of animal
juices in preparations of vegetables
is by no means to be recommended,
where the health is to be consulted.
the substitution of butter and flour,
yolks of eggs and cream, mushroom
or walnut ketchup, is greatly to be
preferred to rich gravies, in dressing
of vegetables.
shalot sauce. put a few
chopped shalots into a little gravy
boiled clear, and nearly half as
much vinegar. season with pepper
and salt, and boil it half an hour.
shalot vinegar. split six
or eight shalots; put them into a
wide-mouthed quart bottle, and fill
it up with vinegar. stop it close;
and in a month the vinegar will be fit
for use.
shalot wine. peel, mince,
and pound in a mortar, three ounces
of shalots, and infuse them in a
pint of sherry for ten days. pour
off the clear liquor on three ounces
more of shalots, and let the wine
stand on them ten days longer. an
ounce of scraped horseradish may
be added to the above, and a little
lemon peel cut thin. this is rather
the most expensive, but by far the
most elegant preparation of shalot.
it imparts the onion flavour to soups
and sauces, for chops, steaks, hashes,
or boiled meats, more agreeably
than any other, without leaving any
unpleasant taste in the mouth.
shank jelly. boil fifteen
shanks of mutton in three quarts of
water. two cow heels, three calf's
feet, or five sheep's feet, will answer
the same purpose. let them
stew no longer than to extract a good
jelly, and when cold take off the fat,
and clear it from the settlement at
the bottom. the jelly may be cleared
with whites of eggs, and running
it through a jelly bag. orange or
lemon juice, or wine, and sugar, may
be added, as is suitable for the patient.
wine however should never
be given to any invalid, without the
express permission of the medical
attendant, as it may do more harm
than good, unless used with great
discretion. much less should any
kind of spirits be allowed, as they
are of a much more dangerous nature
than wine in such cases.
sharp sauce. put into a silver
saucepan, or one that is very
clean and well tinned, half a pint of
the best white wine vinegar, and a
quarter of a pound of pounded loaf
sugar. simmer it gently over the
fire, skim it well, pour it through a
tammis or fine sieve, and send it up
in a basin. this sauce is adapted
for venison, and is often preferred
to the sweet wine sauces.
sheep's ears. take a dozen
and a half of sheep's ears, scald
and clean them very well; then make
a forcemeat of veal, suet, crumbs of
bread, a little nutmeg, pepper, salt,
and beaten mace, parsley and thyme
shred fine; mix these ingredients
with the yolk of an egg; fill the
ears, and lay one over the other,
press them close, flour them, and
fry them in clean beef dripping, of
a fine brown; serve them up with
gravy sauce in the dish, garnished
with lemon. this is a pretty side
dish.
shelford pudding. mix
three quarters of a pound of currants
or raisins, one pound of suet,
a pound of flour, six eggs, some good
milk, lemon peel, and a little salt.
boil it in a melon shape six hours.
sherbet. this liquor is a species
of negus without the wine. it
consists of water, lemon, or orange
juice, and sugar, in which are dissolved
perfumed cakes, made of the
best damascus fruit, and containing
also an infusion of some drops
of rose-water: another kind is made
of violets, honey, juice of raisins, []&c.
it is well calculated for assuaging
thirst, as the acidity is agreeably
blended with sweetness. it resembles,
indeed, those fruits which we
find so grateful when one is thirsty.
shin of beef. a shin or leg
of beef, weighing full six pounds,
will make a large tureen of excellent
soup. cut half a pound of bacon
into slices about half an inch thick,
lay it at the bottom of a soup kettle
or deep stewpan, and place the meat
on this, after having first chopped
the bone in two or three places. add
two carrots, two turnips, a head of
celery, two large onions with two or
three cloves stuck in them, a dozen
black peppercorns, the same of jamaica
pepper, and a bundle of lemon
thyme, winter savoury, and
parsley. just cover the meat with
cold water, boil it over a quick fire,
skim it well, and then let it stew very
gently by the side of the fire for four
hours till it is quite tender. take
out all the meat, strain off the soup,
and remove the fat from the surface
when cold. cut the meat into small
pieces, and put them into the soup,
when it is to be warmed up for the
table. a knuckle of veal may be
dressed in the same way.
shingles. this disorder, of
the same nature as st. anthony's
fire, and requiring a similar mode
of treatment, attacks various parts
of the body, but chiefly the waist,
around which it appears in numerous
pimples of a livid hue, and seldom
attended with fever. no attempt
should be made to repel the
eruption; the body should be kept
gently open, and the part affected
rubbed with a little warm wheaten
flour. then linen bags of oatmeal,
camomile flowers, and a little bruised
camphor may also be applied, which
will effectually relieve the inflammation.
shoe blacking. in three
pints of small beer, put two ounces
of ivory black, and one pennyworth
of brown sugar. as soon as they
boil, put a dessert-spoonful of sweet
oil, and then boil slowly till reduced
to a quart. stir it up with a stick
every time it is used; and put it on
the shoe with a brush when wanted.—another.
two ounces of ivory
black; one tea-spoonful of oil of
vitriol, one table-spoonful of sweet
oil; and two ounces of brown sugar;
roll the same into a ball, and
to dissolve it add half a pint of vinegar.—another.
take ivory black
and brown sugar candy, of each
two ounces; of sweet oil a table-spoonful;
add gradually thereto
a pint of vinegar, cold, and stir the
whole till gradually incorporated.—another.
to one pint of vinegar
add half an ounce of vitriolic acid,
half an ounce of copperas, two
ounces of sugar candy, and two
ounces and a half of ivory black:
mix the whole well together.—another.
sweet oil, half an ounce;
ivory black and treacle, of each half
a pound; gum arabic half an ounce;
vinegar, three pints; boil the vinegar,
and pour it hot on the other ingredients.—another.
three ounces
of ivory black, one ounce of sugar
candy, one ounce of oil of vitriol,
one ounce of spirits of salts, one
lemon, one table-spoonful of sweet
oil, and one pint of vinegar.—first
mix the ivory black and sweet oil
together, then the lemon and sugar
candy, with a little vinegar to qualify
the blacking, then add your
spirits of salts and vitriol, and mix
them all well together. n. b. the
last ingredients prevent the vitriol
and salts from injuring the leather,
and add to the lustre of the blacking.—another.
ivory black, two
ounces; brown sugar, one ounce
and a half; sweet oil, half a table-spoonful.
mix them well, and then
gradually add half a pint of small
beer.—another. a quarter of a
pound of ivory black, a quarter of
a pound of moist sugar, a table-spoonful
of flour, a piece of tallow
about the size of a walnut, and a[]
small piece of gum arabic.—make a
paste of the flour, and while hot put
in the tallow, then the sugar, and
afterwards mix the whole well together
in a quart of water, and you
will have a beautiful shining blacking.
shoes. the best way of cleaning
shoes in the winter time is to
scrape off the dirt with the back of
a knife, or with a wooden knife made
for that purpose, while the shoes
are wet, and wipe off the remainder
with a wet sponge, or piece of flannel.
set them to dry at a distance
from the fire, and they will afterwards
take a fine polish. this will
save much of the trouble in cleaning,
when the dirt is suffered to dry
on; and by applying a little sweet
oil occasionally, the leather will be
prevented from growing hard. to
secure the soles of shoes or boots
from being penetrated with rain or
snow, melt a little bees' wax and
mutton suet, and rub it slightly over
the edges of the sole where the
stitches are; this will be sufficient
to repel the wet. occasionally rubbing
the soles with hot tar, and
dusting over it a small quantity of
iron filings, will tend to fill up the
pores of the leather, and preserve
the feet dry and warm in winter.
the practice of pouring brandy or
spirits into shoes or boots, with a
view to prevent the effects of wet or
cold, is very pernicious, and often
brings on inflammation of the bowels.
the best remedy for damp feet is
to bathe them in warm water; and
if they become sore or blistered,
rub them with a little mutton suet.
as many evils and inconveniences
arise from wearing improper shoes,
it may be necessary to observe, that
an easy shoe, adapted to the size
and shape of the foot, is of considerable
consequence. the soles
should be thick, and their extremities
round rather than pointed, in
order to protect the toes from being
injured by sharp stones, or other
rough substances, that may occur
in walking. persons wearing narrow
or fashionable shoes, merely for
the sake of appearance, not only
suffer immediate fatigue and languor
when walking only a short distance,
but are exposed to the pain and inconvenience
of warts and corns, and
numerous other maladies; while
the want of dry easy shoes checks
the necessary perspiration, which
extends its influence to other parts
of the body. for children, a kind
of half boots, such as may be laced
above the ancles, are superior to
shoes, as they not only have the advantage
of fitting the leg, but are
likewise not easily trodden down at
the heels, and children can walk
more firmly in them than in shoes.
short biscuits. beat half
a pound of butter to a cream, then
add half a pound of loaf sugar
finely powdered and sifted, the
yolks of two eggs, and a few carraways.
mix in a pound of flour well
dried, and add as much cream as
will make it a proper stiffness for
rolling. roll it out on a clean board,
and cut the paste into cakes with
the top of a glass or cup. bake
them on tins for about half an hour.—another
way. a quarter of a
pound of butter beat to a cream,
six ounces of fine sugar powdered
and sifted, four yolks of eggs, three
quarters of a pound of flour, a little
mace, and a little grated lemon peel.
make them into a paste, roll it out,
and cut it into cakes with the top
of a wine glass. currants or carraways
may be added if agreeable.
short cakes. rub into a
pound of dried flour, four ounces of
butter, four ounces of powdered
sugar, one egg, and a spoonful or
two of thin cream to make it into
a paste. when mixed, put currants
into one half, and carraways
into the rest. cut them into little
cakes with the top of a wine glass,
or canister lid, and bake them a few
minutes on floured tins.[]
short crust. dry two ounces
of white sugar; after it has been
pounded and sifted. mix it with a
pound of flour well dried, and rub
into it three ounces of butter, so
fine as not to be seen. put the
yolks of two eggs well beaten into
some cream, mix it with the above
into a smooth paste, roll it out thin,
and bake it in a moderate oven.—another.
mix with a pound of fine
flour dried, an ounce of sugar pounded
and sifted. crumble three ounces
of butter into it, till it looks all like
flour; and with a glass of boiling
cream, work it up to a fine paste.—to
make a richer crust, but not
sweet, rub six ounces of butter into
eight ounces of fine flour. mix it
into a stiffish paste, with as little
water as possible; beat it well, and
roll it thin. this, as well as the
former, is proper for tarts of fresh
or preserved fruit.—another. to a
pound of flour allow six ounces of
butter, and a little salt. rub the
butter well into the flour with the
hand, till the whole is well united,
and then put in a small quantity of
cold water, just enough to mix it to
a paste. mould it quite smooth
with the hand, and roll it out for use.
short paste. rub a quarter
of a pound of butter into a pound of
flour, mixed with water and two
eggs. work it up to a good stiffness,
and roll it out. if for sweet
tarts, two table-spoonfuls of sugar
should be added.
forced. bone a shoulder of
lamb, and fill it up with forcemeat;
braise it two hours over a slow stove.
take it up and glaze it, or it may
be glazed only, and not braised.
serve with sorrel sauce under the
lamb.
roast a shoulder of lamb till
about three parts done, score it
both ways into squares about an
inch large, rub it over with yolks
of egg, season it with pepper and
salt, and strew it over with bread
crumbs and chopped parsley. set
it before the fire, brown it with a salamander,
and serve it up with gravy,
mushroom ketchup, lemon juice,
and a piece of butter rolled in flour.
heat it over the fire till it is well
thickened.
if intended to be boiled with oysters,
hang it up some days, and then salt
it well for two days. bone it, sprinkle
it with pepper, and a little pounded
mace. lay some oysters over it,
and roll the meat up tight and tie
it. stew it in a small quantity of
water, with an onion and a few peppercorns,
till it is quite tender.
prepare a little good gravy, and
some oysters stewed in it; thicken
this with flour and butter, and pour
it over the mutton when the tape is
taken off. the stewpan should be
kept close covered. if the shoulder
is to be roasted, serve it up with
onion sauce. the blade-bone may
be broiled.
shoulder or a breast of pork is best
put into pickle. salt the shoulder
as a leg; and when very nice it may
be roasted, instead of being boiled.
shoulder of veal. cut
off the knuckle for a stew or gravy,
and roast the other part with stuffing.
it may be larded, and served
with melted butter. the blade-bone,
with a good deal of meat left
on it, eats extremely well with mushroom
or oyster sauce, or with mushroom
ketchup in butter.
shoulder of venison. the
neck and shoulder are roasted the
same as the haunch, and served with
the same sauce. but if the shoulder
is to be stewed, take out the bone,
and beat the meat with a rolling-pin.
lay amongst it some slices of
mutton fat, that have lain a few
hours in a little port wine; sprinkle
a little pepper and allspice over it
in fine powder, roll and tie it up
tight. set it in a stewpan that will[]
just hold it, with mutton or beef
gravy, half a pint of port wine, with
pepper and allspice. simmer it
close covered, and very slowly, for
three or four hours. when quite
tender, take off the tape, set the
meat on a dish, and strain the gravy
over it. serve with currant-jelly
sauce. this is the best way of
dressing a shoulder of venison, unless
it be very fat, and then it should
be roasted. the bone should be
stewed with it.
shrewsbury cakes. sift
one pound of sugar, some pounded
cinnamon, and nutmeg grated, into
three pounds of fine flour. add a
little rose water to three eggs well
beaten, and mix with the flour; then
pour into it as much melted butter
as will make it a good thickness to
roll out. mould it well, roll it thin,
and cut it into any shape you please.
shrimp pie. pick a quart of
shrimps; if they be very salt, season
them only with mace and a clove
or two. mince two or three anchovies,
mix them with the spice,
and then season the shrimps. put
some butter at the bottom of the
dish, and over the shrimps, with a
glass of sharp white wine. the pie
will not take long in baking, and
the paste must be light and thin.
shrimp sauce. if the shrimps
be not ready picked pour over a little
water to wash them. put them
to butter melted thick and smooth,
give them one boil, and add the juice
of a lemon.
shrub. to a gallon of rum,
put a quart of the juice of seville
oranges, and two pounds and a half
of loaf sugar beaten fine, and then
barrel it. steep the rinds of half
a dozen oranges in a little rum, the
next day strain it into the vessel,
and make it up ten gallons with water
that has been boiled. stir the
liquor twice a day for a fortnight,
or the shrub will be spoiled.
sick rooms. to purify sick
rooms from noxious vapours, exhalations,
and all kinds of infected air,
put half an ounce of finely pulverized
black oxide of manganese into a
saucer, and pour upon it nearly an
ounce of muriatic acid. place the
saucer on the floor of the infected
apartment, leave it and shut the door,
and the contagion will be completely
destroyed. muriatic acid with red
oxide of lead will have a similar effect.
sulphur burnt for the same
purpose, has the power of overcoming
the effects of noxious vapours.
shallow vessels filled with lime water
are of great use in absorbing carbonic
acid gas, especially in workshops
where charcoal is burnt.
newly prepared charcoal will absorb
various kinds of noxious effluvia,
and might be used with considerable
advantage for the purification
of privies, if small pieces of it
are strewed upon the floor. never
venture into a sick room if you are
in a violent perspiration (if circumstances
require your continuance
there for any time,) for the moment
your body becomes cold, it is in a
state likely to absorb the infection,
and give you the disease. nor visit
a sick person, (especially if the complaint
be of a contagious nature)
with an empty stomach; as this disposes
the system more readily to
receive the contagion. in attending
a sick person, place yourself where
the air passes from the door or window
to the bed of the diseased, not
betwixt the diseased person and any
fire that is in the room, as the heat
of the fire will draw the infectious
vapour in that direction, and you
would run much danger from breathing
in it.
silk dyes. silk is usually
dyed red with cochineal, or carthamus,
and sometimes with brazil
wood. archil is employed to give
silk a bloom, but it is seldom used
by itself, unless when the colour
wanted is lilac. silk may be dyed
crimson, by steeping it in a solution
of alum, and then dyeing it in the[]
usual way in a cochineal bath. poppy
colour, cherry, rose, and flesh
colour, are given to silk by means
of carthamus. the process consists
merely in keeping the silk as
long as it extracts any colour, in an
alkaline solution of carthamus, into
which as much lemon juice has been
poured, as is sufficient to give it a
fine cherry red colour. silk cannot
be dyed a full scarlet; but a colour
approaching to scarlet may be given
to it, by first impregnating the stuff
with murio-sulphate of tin, and afterwards
dyeing it in equal parts of
cochineal and quercitron bark.
silk stockings. to clean
silk stockings properly, it is necessary
first to wash them in a lukewarm
liquor of white soap, then to
rinse them in clean water, and wash
them again as before. they are to
be washed a third time in a stronger
soap liquor, made hot and tinged
with blueing, and rinsed in clean
water. before they are quite dry,
they are to be stoved with brimstone,
and afterwards polished with
glass upon a wooden leg. gauzes
are whitened in the same manner,
only a little gum is put in the soap
liquor before they are stoved.
silks cleaned. the best
method of cleaning silks, woollens,
and cottons, without damage to their
texture and colour, is to grate some
raw potatoes to a fine pulp in clean
water, and pass the liquid matter
through a coarse sieve into another
vessel of water. let the mixture
stand till the fine white particles of
the potatoes are precipitated; then
pour off the liquor, and preserve it
for use. the article to be cleaned
should then be laid upon a linen
cloth on a table; and having provided
a clean sponge, dip it into the
potatoe liquor, and apply it to the
article to be cleaned, till the dirt
is made to disappear; then wash it
in clean water several times. two
middle-sized potatoes will be sufficient
for a pint of water. the
coarse pulp, which does not pass
through the sieve, is of great use in
cleaning worsted curtains, tapestry,
carpets, and other coarse articles.
the mucilaginous liquor will clean
all sorts of silk, cotton or woollen
goods, without hurting or spoiling
the colour. it may also be used in
cleaning oil paintings, or furniture
that is soiled. dirtied painted
wainscots may be cleaned by wetting
a sponge in the liquor, then dipping
it in a little fine clean sand, and afterwards
rubbing the wainscot with
it.
silvering. for silvering glass
globes, and such kind of articles,
one part of mercury, and four of tin,
are generally used. but if two parts
of mercury, one of tin, one of lead,
and one of bismuth, are melted together,
the compound which they
form will answer the purpose better.
either of them must be made
in an iron ladle, over a clear fire,
and be frequently stirred. the glass
to be silvered must be very clean and
dry. the alloy is poured in at the
top, and shaken till the whole internal
surface is covered.
silvering of ivory. prepare
a diluted solution of nitrate of
silver, and immerse in it an ivory
paper knife. when the ivory has
become yellow, in that part where
it is in contact with the fluid, take
it out and immerse it in an ale glass
containing distilled water, placed in
a window. in a short time, by exposure
to the rays of the sun, it will
become intensely black. take it
out of the water, wipe it dry, and
rub it with a piece of leather. the
silver will now appear on the ivory
in a metallic state, and the knife
will retain its silvery coat for a long
time.
silvering on silk. paint
flowers or figures of any kind on a
white silk ribbon, with a camel hair
pencil, dipped in a solution of nitrate
of silver. immerse this whilst
wet in a jar of sulphurous acid gas,[]
by burning sulphur under a jar of
atmospheric air. the penciling will
then assume a beautiful metallic
brilliance.
sinapisms. the sinapism is a
poultice made of vinegar instead of
milk, and rendered warm and stimulating
by the addition of mustard,
horseradish, or garlic. the
common sinapism is made of equal
quantities of bread crumbs and mustard,
a sufficient quantity of strong
vinegar, and mixing all together into
a poultice. when a sinapism is
required to be more stimulating, a
little bruised garlic may be added.
sinapisms are employed to recal the
blood and spirits to a weak part,
as in the case of palsy; they are
also of service in deep-seated pains,
as in the case of sciatica. when the
gout seizes the head or stomach,
they are applied to the feet to bring
the disorder down, and are likewise
applied to the soles of the feet in a
low state of fever. they should
not be suffered to lie on till they
have raised blisters, but till the parts
become red, and will continue so
when pressed with the finger.
sippets. when the stomach is
too weak to receive meat, put on a
very hot plate two or three sippets
of bread, and pour over them some
beef, mutton, or veal gravy. flavour
with a little salt.
simple waters. the most
expeditious method of distilling waters
is to tie a piece of muslin or
gauze, over a glazed earthen pot,
whose mouth is just large enough to
receive the bottom of a warming
pan; on this lay your herb, clipped,
whether mint, lavender, or whatever
else you please; then place upon
them the hot warming-pan, with
live coals in it, to cause heat just
enough to prevent burning, by which
means, as the steam issuing out of
the herb cannot mount upwards, by
reason of the bottom of the pan just
fitting the brim of the vessel below
it, it must necessarily descend, and
collect into water at the bottom of
the receiver, and that strongly impregnated
with the essential oil and
salt of the vegetable thus distilled;
which, if you want to make spirituous,
or compound water of, is easily
done, by simply adding some good
spirits, or french brandy to it, which
will keep good for a long time, and
be much better than if the spirits
had passed through a still, which
must of necessity waste some of
their strength. care should be
taken not to let the fire be too strong,
lest it scorch the plants; and to be
made of charcoal, for continuance
and better regulation, which must
be managed by lifting up and laying
down the lid, as you want to increase
or decrease the degrees of
heat. the cooler the season, the
deeper the earthen pan; and the less
fire at first (afterwards to be gradually
raised) in the greater perfection
will the distilled water be obtained.—as
the more moveable, or
volatile parts of vegetables, are the
aqueous, the oily, the gummy, the
resinous, and the saline, these are
to be expected in the waters of this
process; the heat here employed
being so great as to burst the vessels
of the plants, some of which
contain so large a quantity of oil,
that it may be seen swimming on
the surface of the water.—medical
waters thus procured will afford us
nearly all the native virtues of vegetables,
and give us a mixture of
their several principles, whence they
in a manner come up to the expressed
juice, or extract gained therefrom:
and if brandy be at the same
time added to these distilled waters,
so strong of oil and salt, a compound,
or spirituous water, may be
likewise procured, at a cheap and
easy rate.—although a small quantity
only of distilled water can be
obtained at a time by this confined
operation, yet it compensates in
strength what is deficient in quantity.
such liquors, if well corked[]
up from the air, will keep good a
long time, especially if about a twentieth
part of any spirits be added,
in order to preserve the same more
effectually.
size from potatoes. one
of the beneficial uses of potatoes,
not perhaps generally known, is,
that the starch of them, quite fresh,
and washed only once, may be employed
to make size, which, mixed
with chalk, and diluted in a little
water, forms a very beautiful and
good white for ceilings. this size
has no smell, while animal size,
which putrefies so readily, always
exhales a very disagreeable odour.
that of potatoes, as it is very little
subject to putrefaction, appears,
from experience, to be more durable
in tenacity and whiteness; and, for
white-washing, should be preferred
to animal size, the decomposition of
which is always accompanied with
unhealthy exhalations.
skate. in the purchase of this
article, observe that it be very white
and thick. it requires to be hung
up one day at least before it is dressed;
if too fresh, it eats tough.
skate may either be boiled, or fried
in crumbs, being first dipped in egg.
crimp skate should be boiled and
sent up in a napkin, or it may be
fried as above.
skate soup. this is made of
the stock fish for soup, with an
ounce of vermicelli boiled in it, a
little before it is served. then add
half a pint of cream, beaten with
the yolks of two eggs. stir it by
the side of the fire, but not on it.
serve it up with a small french roll
warmed in a dutch oven, and then
soaked an hour in the soup.
skirrets. hamburgh parsley,
scorzonera, and skirrets, are much
esteemed for their roots, the only
part which is eaten. they should
be boiled like young carrots, and
they will eat very well with meat,
or alone, or in soups. the shoots
of salsify in the spring, from the
roots of a year old, gathered green
and tender, will eat very nice, if
boiled in the same manner as asparagus.
slate, a well-known, neat, convenient,
and durable material, for
the covering of the roofs of buildings.
there are great varieties of
this substance; and it likewise differs
very greatly in its qualities and
colours. in some places it is found
in thick laminæ, or flakes; while in
others it is thin and light. the colours
are white, brown, and blue.
it is so durable, in some cases, as
to have been known to continue
sound and good for centuries. however,
unless it should be brought
from a quarry of well reputed goodness,
it is necessary to try its properties,
which may be done by
striking the slate sharply against a
large stone, and if it produce a complete
sound, it is a mark of goodness;
but if in hewing it does not
shatter before the edge of the sect,
or instrument commonly used for
that purpose, the criterion is decisive.
the goodness of slate may
be farther estimated by its colour:
the deep black hue is apt to imbibe
moisture, but the lighter is always
the least penetrable: the touch also
may be in some degree a guide, for
a good firm stone feels somewhat
hard and rough, whereas an open
slate feels very smooth, and as it
were, greasy. and another method
of trying the goodness of slate, is to
place the slate-stone lengthwise and
perpendicularly in a tub of water,
about half a foot deep, care being
taken that the upper or unimmersed
part of the slate be not accidentally
wetted by the hand, or otherwise;
let it remain in this state twenty-four
hours; if good and firm stone,
it will not draw water more than
half an inch above the surface of
the water, and that perhaps at the
edges only, those parts having been
a little loosened in the hewing; but
a spongy defective stone will draw[]
water to the very top. there is still
another mode, held to be infallible.
first, weigh two or three of the most
suspected slates, noting the weight;
then immerge them in a vessel of
water twelve hours; take them out,
and wipe them as clean as possible
with a linen cloth; and if they
weigh more than at first, it denotes
that quality of slate which imbibes
water: a drachm is allowable in a
dozen pounds, and no more. it may
be noticed, that in laying of this
material, a bushel and a half of lime,
and three bushels of fresh-water
sand, will be sufficient for a square
of work; but if it be pin plastered,
it will take above as much more:
but good slate, well laid and plastered
to the pin, will lie an hundred
years; and on good timber a much
longer time. it has been common
to lay the slates dry, or on moss
only, but they are much better when
laid with plaster. when they are
to be plastered to the pin, then about
the first quantity of lime and sand
will be sufficient for the purpose,
when well mixed and blended together,
by properly working them.
slates differ very much in thickness
as well as colour, which suits them for
different situations and purposes.
a great deal of good slate of various
kinds is raised in different
parts of wales, and much excellent
blue and other coloured sorts is
procured from the northern parts
of lancashire, and other neighbouring
places, as well as from different
other counties throughout the kingdom.
in some parts the slate is distributed
into three kinds, as the best,
the middling, and the waste or common
sort.
sleep. 'tired nature's sweet
restorer, balmy sleep,' is indispensible
to the continuance of health
and life; and the night is appropriated
for the recovery of that strength
which is expended on the various
exercises of the day. but sleep, as
well as diet and exercise, ought to
be duly regulated; for too little of
it, as well as too much, is alike injurious.
a medium ought therefore
to be observed, though the real proportion
cannot be ascertained by
any given time, as one person will
be more refreshed by five or six
hours sleep, than another by eight
or ten. children may be allowed
to take as much as they please;
but for adults, six hours is generally
sufficient, and no one ought to exceed
eight. to make sleep refreshing,
it is necessary to take sufficient
exercise in the open air. too much
exertion will prevent sleep, as well
as too little; yet we seldom hear
the active and laborious complain
of restless nights, for they generally
enjoy the luxury of undisturbed repose.
refreshing sleep is often
prevented by the use of strong tea,
or heavy suppers; and the stomach
being loaded, occasions frightful
dreams, and broken and interrupted
rest. it is also necessary to guard
against anxiety and corroding grief:
many by indulging these, have banished
sleep so long that they could
never afterwards enjoy it. sleep
taken in the forepart of the night
is most refreshing, and nothing more
effectually undermines and ruins the
constitution than night watching.
how quickly the want of rest in due
season will destroy the most blooming
complexion, or best state of
health, may be seen in the ghastly
countenances of those who turn the
day into night, and the night into
day.
sliced cucumbers. cut
some cucumbers into thick slices,
drain them in a cullender, and add
some sliced onions. use some strong
vinegar, and pickle them in the same
manner as gherkins and french
beans.
slices of beef. to prepare
red beef for slices, cut off a piece
of thin flank, and remove the skin.
rub the beef well with a mixture
made of two pounds of common[]
salt, two ounces of bay salt, two
ounces of saltpetre, and half a pound
of moist sugar, pounded together in
a marble mortar. put it into an
earthen pan, and turn and rub it
daily for a week. then take it out
of the brine and wipe it, strew over
it pounded mace, cloves, pepper,
a little allspice, plenty of chopped
parsley, and a few shalots. roll it
up, bind it round with tape, boil it
quite tender, and press it. when
cold cut it into slices, and garnish
it with pickled barberries, fresh
parsley, or any other approved article.
slices of cod. to boil slices
of codfish, put plenty of salt into
some spring water. boil it up quick,
and then put in the fish. keep it
boiling, and skim it very clean. it
will be done sufficiently in eight or
ten minutes. some small pieces may
be fried and served round it. oyster,
shrimp, or anchovy sauce, should
be served with it.
slices of ham. bacon or
ham may be fried, broiled on a gridiron
over a clear fire, or toasted with
a fork. the slices should be of the
same thickness in every part. to
have it curled, the slices should be
cut about two inches long, then rolled
up, and a little wooden skewer
passed through them. put them into
a cheese toaster or dutch oven,
for eight or ten minutes, turning the
slices as they crisp. this is considered
the handsomest way of
dressing rashers of bacon, but it is
best uncurled, because it is crisper,
and more equally done. slices of
ham or bacon should not be more
than half a quarter of an inch thick,
and will eat much more mellow if
soaked in hot water for a quarter of
an hour, and then dried in a cloth,
before they are toasted.
slices of salmon. when
washed, wipe the salmon quite dry.
rub the slices over with a soft brush
dipped in sweet oil, season with
pepper and salt, fold them neatly
in clean white paper, and broil them
over a clear fire.
slight wounds. when
fresh wounds bleed much, lint dipped
in vinegar or spirits of turpentine,
may be pressed upon the surface
for a few minutes, and retained
by a moderately tight bandage; but
if the blood spirts out violently, it
shows that an artery is wounded,
and it must be held very firmly till
a surgeon arrives. but when the
blood seems to flow equally from
every part of the wound, and there
is no reason therefore to suppose
that any considerable vessel is
wounded, it may be permitted to
bleed while the dressings are preparing.
the edges of the wound
are then to be gently pressed together,
and retained by straps of sticking
plaster. these may remain on
for three or four days, unless the
sore becomes painful, or the matter
smells offensive, in which case the
straps of plaster must be taken off,
the parts washed clean with warm
water, and fresh slips of plaster applied,
nicely adjusted to keep the
wound closed. the slips must be
laid over the wound crossways, and
reach several inches beyond each
side of it, in order to hold the parts
firmly together. by keeping the
limb or part very still, abstaining
from strong liquors, taking only
light mild food, and keeping the
bowels open, all simple wounds may
easily be healed in this manner.
but poultices, greasy salves, or filling
the wound with lint, will have
an opposite effect. even ragged or
torn wounds may be drawn together
and healed by sticking plaster, without
any other salves or medicines.
a broken shin, or slight ruffling of
the skin, may be covered with lint
dipped in equal parts of vinegar and
brandy, and left to stick on, unless
the place inflames; and then weak
goulard is the best remedy. common
cuts may be kept together by
sticking plaster, or with only a piece[]
of fine linen rag, or thread bound
round them. the rag applied next
to a cut or wound of any kind, should
always be of white linen; but calico,
or coloured rags, will do quite
as well for outward bandages. important
wounds should always be
committed to the care of a skilful
surgeon.
slugs. these reptiles do great
damage in fields and gardens, especially
to crops of lettuces, cabbages,
or turnips. their track is perceived
by the shining and slimy substance
which they leave behind them.
there are several kinds of these little
animals. the white and brown
leathery kind often even destroy the
strong stems of young cabbage, and
other similar plants. the destruction
of them has been suggested to
be effected by the use of tar-water,
sprinkled over the ground; and also
by having recourse to lime, in the
preparation of the land for such
crops. they conceal themselves in
the holes and crevices, only making
their appearance early in mornings
and late in the evenings. the white
slug or snail is likewise very destructive
to young turnip crops, by rising
out of the holes of the soils, on wet
and dewy mornings and evenings.
rolling the ground with a heavy
implement, before the sun rises, has
been advised as a means of destroying
them in these cases. slugs of
this sort are likewise very destructive,
in some districts, to the roots
of corn crops, during the day-time,
in the early spring months, while
they lie concealed in the ground, by
eating and devouring them; and by
coming out in the evenings, and
during the night-time, to commit
ravages on the blades, and other
parts above the ground. numbers
of them are sometimes met with upon
the same plant, and they may
easily be extirpated and removed
from the land by the above practice,
while they are at work, especially
in moon-light seasons, and any further
injury to the crops be guarded
against. warm moist weather is
always a great encouragement to
their coming out of their hiding-places;
and advantage should constantly
be taken of it for their extermination,
as they suddenly retire
under ground during the time of
cold. the strong lands of other
places are occasionally much infested
with them in the pea, bean,
and rye crops and stubbles, as well
as clover roots, when a wheat crop
is put in upon them. the slugs, in
some cases, are of about half an
inch in length, having their backs
of a blueish cast in the skin part,
and their under parts wholly of a
white appearance. a mixture of
sulphur and lime, made so as to be
conveniently applied, has been found
to be highly destructive of them in
general.—the use of lime-water has
lately been advised as an excellent
and cheap mode of destroying slugs
in gardens, as well as fields, in the
second volume of the transactions
of the horticultural society of london.
it is found to be far preferable,
in this intention, to quicklime,
which is liable to become too
soon saturated with moisture, and
rendered ineffectual. the manner
of employing the water is after it
has been newly made from stone
lime, by means of hot water poured
upon it, to pour it through the fine
rose of a watering-pot over the
slugs, which have been collected by
means of pea-haulm, or some other
similar substance, laid down on the
ground in portions, at the distance
of about a pole from each other.
in proper weather, the slugs soon
collect in this way, in great numbers,
for shelter as well as to get food.
when a boy takes up the substance,
and by a gentle shake leaves the
whole of the slugs on the ground,
another person then pours a small
quantity of lime-water on them, and
the boy removes the haulmy material
to some intermediate place,[]
in order that the same practice may
be repeated. by persevering in this
method for a little while, the whole
of the slugs may be destroyed, as
the least drop of the water speedily
kills them. this practice, it is supposed,
will be found highly beneficial
in the flower-garden, as by
watering the edgings of box, thrift,
or other kinds, the slugs will be killed
with certainty, even when the
weather is moist. the application
is considered simple, the effect certain,
and the expence trifling, whether
in the garden or the field; a
few pots only being required, in the
latter case, to the acre, which can
be made with a very small quantity
of lime. and the labour is not of
any material consequence, so that
the whole charge will not, it is imagined,
exceed five shillings the acre.—to
prevent slugs from getting into
fruit trees. if the trees are standards,
tie a coarse horse-hair rope
about them, two or three feet from
the ground. if they are against the
wall, nail a narrow slip of coarse
horse-hair cloth against the wall,
about half a foot from the ground,
and they will never get over it, for
if they attempt it, it will kill them,
as their bellies are soft, and the
horse-hair will wound them.
small coal. there is generally
a great waste in the article
of coal, owing to the quantity of
dust found amongst it; but this if
wetted makes the strongest fire for
the back of the grate, where it should
remain untouched till it is formed
into a cake. cinders lightly wetted
give a great degree of heat, and are
better than coal for furnaces, ironing
stoves, and ovens. they should
be carefully preserved and sifted in
a covered tin bucket, which prevents
the dispersion of the dust.
small pox. previous to the
appearance of the eruption, the patient
should be kept in a cool dry
apartment, and abstain from all
animal food, cheese, and pastry.
the diet should consist of cooling
vegetables, ripe fruit, pearl barley,
and sago. the drink may be barley
water, with a few drops of vinegar
or cream of tartar, or lukewarm
milk and water; but neither beer
nor wine must be allowed. in case
of an obstruction of the bowels,
mild laxatives or clysters may be
given; and if the throat be affected,
it should be gargled with vinegar
and water. warm fomentations
should be applied to the neck, and
mustard poultices to the feet. after
the eruption has made its appearance,
the recovery of the patient
may be chiefly entrusted to nature,
while proper attention is paid to
diet and regimen. but if the pustules
begin to disappear, blisters
ought to be immediately applied to
the calves of the legs, and parsley-root
boiled in milk should frequently
be eaten, in order to encourage the
eruption. when the pustules suddenly
sink in, it denotes danger, and
medical assistance should speedily
be procured. in case of inoculation,
which introduces the disease in a
milder form, and has been the means
of saving the lives of many thousands,
a similar mode of treatment
is required. for about a week or
ten days previous to inoculation, the
patient should adhere to a regular
diet; avoiding all animal food, seasoned
dishes, wine and spirits, and
should live sparingly on fruit pies,
puddings, and vegetables. the same
regimen must be observed as in the
former instance, during the progress
of the disease, and then, but little
medicine will be required.
wash two large spoonfuls of rice,
and simmer it with half a pint of
milk till it is thick. put in a piece
of butter the size of an egg, and
nearly half a pint of thick cream,
and give it one boil. when cold,
mix four yolks and two whites of
eggs well beaten, sugar and nutmeg
to taste. add grated lemon, and a[]
little cinnamon. butter some small
cups, and fill them three parts full,
putting at bottom some orange or
citron. bake them three quarters
of an hour in a slowish oven. serve
them up the moment they are to be
eaten, with sweet sauce in the dish,
or in a boat.
smell of paint. when a
room is newly painted, place three
or four tubs full of water near the
wainscot, and renew the water daily.
in two or three days it will absorb
all the offensive effluvia arising from
the paint, and render the room
wholesome. the smell of paint may
also be prevented, by dissolving some
frankincense in spirits of turpentine
over a slow fire, and mixing it with
the paint before it be laid on.
smelling bottle. reduce
to powder an equal quantity of sal-ammoniac
and quicklime separately,
put two or three drops of the essence
of bergamot into a small bottle,
then add the other ingredients,
and cork it close. a drop or two
of æther will improve it.
smelts. this delicate fish is
caught in the thames, and some
other large rivers. when good and
in season, they have a fine silvery
hue, are very firm, and have a refreshing
smell like cucumbers newly
cut. they should not be washed
more than is necessary merely to
clean them. dry them in a cloth,
lightly flour them, and shake it off.
dip them in plenty of eggs, then into
bread crumbs grated fine, and
plunge them into a good pan of
boiling lard. let them continue
gently boiling, and a few minutes
will make them a bright yellow-brown.
take care not to take off
the light roughness of the crumbs,
or their beauty will be lost.
smoked herrings. clean
and lay them in salt one night, with
saltpetre; then hang them on a
stick, through the eyes, in a row.
have ready an old cask, in which
put some saw-dust, and in the midst
of it a heater red-hot. fix the stick
over the smoke, and let them remain
twenty-four hours.
smoky chimnies. the
plague of a smoking chimney is proverbial,
and has engaged considerable
attention from observers of various
descriptions. smoky chimnies
in a new house, are such, frequently,
for want of air. the workmanship
of the rooms being all good
and just out of the workman's hands,
the joints of the flooring and of the
pannels of the wainscoting are all
true and tight; the more so as the
walls, perhaps not yet thoroughly
dry, preserve a dampness in the air
of the room which keeps the woodwork
swelled and close: the doors
and the sashes too being worked
with truth, shut with exactness, so
that the room is perfectly tight, no
passage being left open for the air
to enter except the key-hole, and
even that is frequently closed by
a little dropping shutter. in this
case it is evident that there can be
no regular current through the flue
of the chimney, as any air escaping
from its aperture would cause an
exhaustion in the air of the room
similar to that in the receiver of an
air-pump, and therefore an equal
quantity of air would rush down the
flue to restore the equilibrium; accordingly
the smoke, if it ever ascended
to the top, would be beat
down again into the room. those,
therefore, who stop every crevice in
a room to prevent the admission of
fresh air, and yet would have their
chimney carry up the smoke, require
inconsistencies and expect impossibilities.
the obvious remedy in
this case is, to admit more air, and
the question will be how and where
this necessary quantity of air from
without is to be admitted, so as to
produce the least inconvenience;
for if the door or window be left so
much open, it causes a cold draft
of air to the fire-place, to the great
discomfort of those who sit there.[]
various have been the contrivances
to avoid this, such as bringing in
fresh air through pipes in the jambs
of the chimney, which, pointing upwards,
should blow the smoke up
the funnel; opening passages in the
funnel above to let in air for the
same purpose; but these produce
an effect contrary to that intended,
for as it is the constant current of
air passing from the room through
the opening of the chimney into the
flue, which prevents the smoke coming
out into the room, if the funnel
is supplied by other means with the
air it wants, and especially if that
air be cold, the force of that current
is diminished, and the smoke in its
efforts to enter the room finds less
resistance. the wanted air must
then indispensably be admitted into
the room to supply what goes off
through the opening of the chimney,
and it is advisable to make the aperture
for this purpose as near the
ceiling as possible, because the heated
air will naturally ascend and occupy
the highest part of the room,
thus causing a great difference of
climate at different heights, a defect
which will be in some measure obviated
by the admission of cold air
near the ceiling, which descending,
will beat down and mingle the air
more effectually. another cause of
smoky chimnies is too short a funnel,
as, in this case, the ascending
current will not always have sufficient
power to direct the smoke up the
flue. this defect is frequently
found in low buildings, or the upper
stories of high ones, and is unavoidable,
for if the flue be raised high
above the roof to strengthen its
draft, it is then in danger of being
blown down and crushing the roof
in its fall. the remedy in this case
is to contract the opening of the
chimney so as to oblige all the
entering air to pass through or very
near the fire, by which means it will
be considerably heated, and by its
great rarefaction, cause a powerful
draft, and compensate for the shortness
of its column. the case of too
short a funnel is more general than
would be imagined, and often found
where one would not expect it; for
it is not uncommon in ill-contrived
buildings, instead of having a separate
funnel for each fire-place, to bend
and turn the funnel of an upper
room so as to make it enter the side of
another flue that comes from below.
by this means the funnel of the upper
room is made short, of course,
since its length can only be reckoned
from the place where it enters the
lower funnel, and that flue is also
shortened by all the distance between
the entrance of the second
funnel and the top of the stack; for
all that part being readily supplied
with air through the second flue,
adds no strength to the draft, especially
as that air is cold when there
is no fire in the second chimney.
the only easy remedy here, is to
keep the opening shut of that flue
in which there is no fire. another
very common cause of the smoking
of chimnies is, their overpowering
one another. for instance, if there
be two chimnies in one large room,
and you make fires in both of them,
you will find that the greater and
stronger fire shall overpower the
weaker, and draw air down its funnel
to supply its own demand, which
air descending in the weaker funnel
will drive down its smoke, and force
it into the room. if, instead of being
in one room, the two chimnies
are in two different rooms communicating
by a door, the case is the
same whenever that door is open.
the remedy is, to take care that
every room have the means of supplying
itself from without, with the
air its chimney may require, so that
no one of them may be obliged to
borrow from another, nor under the
necessity of lending. another cause
of smoking is, when the tops of
chimnies are commanded by higher
buildings, or by a hill, so that the[]
wind blowing over such eminences
falls like water over a dam, sometimes
almost perpendicularly on the
tops of the chimnies that lie in its
way, and beats down the smoke
contained in them. the remedy
commonly applied in this case is,
a turn-cap, made of tin or plate-iron,
covering the chimney above,
and on three sides, open on one side,
turning on a spindle, and which
being guided or governed by a vane,
always presents its back to the wind.
this method will generally be found
effectual, but if not, raising the flues,
where practicable, so as their tops
may be on a level with or higher
than the commanding eminence, is
more to be depended on. there is
another case of command, the reverse
of that last mentioned; it is
where the commanding eminence is
farther from the wind than the chimney
commanded. for instance,
suppose the chimney of a building
to be so situated as that its top is
below the level of the ridge of the
roof, which, when the wind blows
against it, forms a kind of dam
against its progress. in this case,
the wind being obstructed by this
dam, will, like water, press and
search for passages through it, and
finding the top of the chimney below
the top of the dam, it will force
itself down that funnel in order to
get through by some door or window
open on the other side of the
building, and if there be a fire in
such chimney, its smoke is of course
beat down and fills the room. the
only remedy for this inconvenience
is, to raise the funnel higher than
the roof, supporting it, if necessary,
by iron bars; for a turn-cap in this
case has no effect, the dammed up
air pressing down through it in
whatever position the wind may
have placed its opening. chimnies
otherwise drawing well are sometimes
made to smoke by the improper
and inconvenient situation of a
door. when the door and chimney
are placed on the same side of a
room, if the door is made to open
from the chimney, it follows, that
when only partly opened, a current
of air is admitted and directed across
the opening of the chimney, which
is apt to draw out some of the smoke.
chimnies which generally draw well,
do, nevertheless, sometimes give
smoke into the room, it being driven
down by strong winds passing over
the tops of their flues, though not
descending from any commanding
eminence. to understand this, it
may be considered that the rising
light air, to obtain a free issue from
the funnel, must push out of its way,
or oblige the air that is over it to
rise. in a time of calm, or of little
wind, this is done visibly; for we
see the smoke that is brought up by
that air rise in a column above the
chimney. but when a violent current
of wind passes over the top of
a chimney, its particles have received
so much force, which keeps
them in a horizontal direction,
and follow each other so rapidly,
that the rising light air has not
strength sufficient to oblige them to
quit that direction, and move upwards
to permit its issue. add to
this, that some of the air may impinge
on that part of the inside of
the funnel which is opposed to its
progress, and be thence reflected
downwards from side to side, driving
the smoke before it into the
room. the simplest and best remedy
in this case is the application
of a chimney-pot, which is a hollow
truncated cone of earthenware placed
upon the top of the flue. the intention
of this contrivance is, that
the wind and eddies which strike
against the oblique surface of these
covers may be reflected upwards instead
of blowing down the chimney.
the bad construction of fire-places
is another cause of smoking chimneys;
and this case will lead us to
the consideration of the methods of
increasing the heat and diminishing[]
the consumption of fuel; for it will
be found that the improvements necessary
to produce the last-mentioned
end will also have a general
tendency to cure smoky chimnies.
on this subject the meritorious labours
of count rumford are conspicuous,
and we shall proceed to
give an abridged account of his method.
in investigating the best
form of a fire-place, it will be necessary
to consider, first, what are
the objects which ought principally
to be had in view in the construction
of a fire-place; and, secondly, to
consider how these objects can best
be attained. now the design of a
chimney-fire being simply to warm
a room, it is essential to contrive so
that this end shall be actually attained,
and with the least possible
expence of fuel, and also that the
air of the room be preserved perfectly
pure and fit for respiration,
and free from smoke and all disagreeable
smells. to cause as many
as possible of the rays, as they are
sent off from the fire in straight lines,
to come directly into the room, it
will be necessary, in the first place,
to bring the fire as far forward, and
to leave the opening of the fire-place
as wide and high as can be done
without inconvenience; and secondly,
to make the sides and back
of the fire-place of such form, and
of such materials, as to cause the
direct rays from the fire which strike
against them, to be sent into the
room by reflection in the greatest
abundance. now, it will be found,
upon examination, that the best form
for the vertical sides of a fire-place,
or the covings, as they are called,
is that of an upright plane, making
an angle with the plane of the back
of the fire-place of about  degrees.
according to the old construction
of chimnies, this angle is
 degrees, or forms a right angle;
but, as in this case the two covings
are parallel to each other, it is evident
that they are very ill contrived
for throwing into the room, by reflection,
the rays from the fire which
fall on them. the next improvement
will be to reduce the throat of the
chimney, the immoderate size of
which is a most essential fault in
their construction; for, however
good the formation of a fire-place
may be in other respects, if the
opening left for the passage of the
smoke is larger than is necessary
for that purpose, nothing can prevent
the warm air of the room from
escaping through it; and whenever
this happens, there is not only an
unnecessary loss of heat, but the
warm air, which leaves the room to
go up the chimney, being replaced
by cold air from without, produces
those drafts of air so often complained
of. but though these evils
may be remedied, by reducing the
throat of the chimney to a proper
size, yet, in doing this, several considerations
will be necessary to determine
its proper situation. as the
smoke and hot vapour which rise
from a fire naturally tend upwards,
it is evident that it will be proper to
place the throat of the chimney perpendicularly
over the fire; but to
ascertain its most advantageous distance,
or how far above the burning
fuel it ought to be placed, is not so
easy, and requires several advantages
and disadvantages to be balanced.
as the smoke and vapour rise in consequence
of their being rarefied by
heat, and made lighter than the air
of the surrounding atmosphere, and
as the degree of their rarefraction is
in proportion to the intensity of their
heat, and as this heat is greater near
the fire than at a distance from it,
it is clear, that the nearer the throat
of a chimney is to the fire, the
stronger will be what is commonly
called its draught, and the less danger
there will be of its smoking, or
of dust coming into the room when
the fire is stirred. but, on the other
hand, when a very strong draught is
occasioned by the throat of the[]
chimney being very near the fire, it
may happen that the influx of air
into the fire may become so strong
as to cause the fuel to be consumed
too rapidly. this however will very
seldom be found to be the case, for
the throats of chimnies are in general
too high. in regard to the
materials which it will be most advantageous
to employ in the construction
of fire-places, little difficulty
will attend the determination
of that point. as the object in view
is to bring radiant heat into the
room, it is clear that that material
is best for the construction of a fire-place
which reflects the most, or
which absorbs the least of it, for
that heat which is absorbed cannot
be reflected. now, as bodies which
absorb radiant heat are necessarily
heated in consequence of that absorption;
to discover which of the
various materials that can be employed
for constructing fire-places
are best adapted for that purpose,
we have only to find, by an experiment
very easy to be made, what
bodies acquire least heat, when exposed
to the direct rays of a clear
fire; for those which are least heated
evidently absorb the least, and
consequently reflect the most radiant
heat. and hence it appears that
iron, and in general metals of all
kinds, which are well known to grow
very hot when exposed to the rays
projected by burning fuel, are to be
reckoned among the very worst materials
that it is possible to employ
in the construction of fire-places.
perhaps the best materials are fire-stone
and common bricks and mortar.
these substances are fortunately
very cheap, and it is not easy
to say to which of the two the preference
ought to be given. when
bricks are used, they should be covered
with a thin coating of plaster,
which, when perfectly dry, should
be white-washed. the fire-stone
should likewise be white-washed,
when that is used; and every part
of the fire-place which does not come
into actual contact with the burning
fuel should be kept as white and
clean as possible. the bringing forward
of the fire into the room, or
rather bringing it nearer to the front
of the opening of the fire-place, and
the diminishing of the throat of the
chimney, being two objects principally
had in view in the alterations
of fire-places recommended, it is
evident that both these may be attained
merely by bringing forward
the back of the chimney. it will
then remain to be determined how
far the back should be brought forward.
this point will be limited by
the necessity of leaving a proper
passage for the smoke. now, as
this passage, which in its narrowest
part is called the throat of the chimney,
ought, for reasons before stated,
to be immediately or perpendicularly
over the fire, it is evident that the
back of the chimney should be built
perfectly upright. to determine
therefore the place of the new back,
nothing more is necessary than to
ascertain how wide the throat of the
chimney ought to be left. this
width is determined by count rumford
from numerous experiments,
and comparing all circumstances, to
be four inches. therefore, supposing
the breast of the chimney, or
the wall above the mantle, to be
nine inches thick, allowing four
inches for the width of the throat,
this will give thirteen inches for the
depth of the fire-place. the next
consideration will be the width
which it will be proper to give to
the back. this, in fire-places of
the old construction, is the same
with the width of the opening in
front; but this construction is faulty,
on two accounts; first, because the
covings being parallel to each other,
are ill contrived to throw out into
the room the heat they receive from
the fire in the form of rays; and,
secondly, the large open corners
occasion eddies of wind which[]
frequently disturb the fire and embarrass
the smoke in its ascent, in
such a manner as to bring it into the
room. both these defects may be
entirely remedied, by diminishing
the width of the back of the fire-place.
the width which in most
cases it will be best to give it, is
one-third of the width of the opening
of the fire-place in front. but
it is not absolutely necessary to conform
rigorously to this decision, nor
will it always be possible. where
a chimney is designed for warming
a room of moderate size, the depth
of the fire-place being determined
by the thickness of the breast to
thirteen inches, the same dimensions
would be a good size for the
width of the back, and three times
thirteen inches, or three feet three
inches, for the width of the opening
in front, and the angles made by the
back of the fire-place, and the sides
of it, or covings, would be just 
degrees, which is the best position
they can have for throwing heat into
the room. in determining the width
of this opening in front, the chimney
is supposed to be perfectly good,
and well situated. if there is any
reason to apprehend its ever smoking,
it will be necessary to reduce
the opening in front, placing the
covings at a less angle than 
degrees, and especially to diminish
the height of the opening by lowering
the mantle. if from any consideration,
such as the wish to accommodate
the fire-place to a grate
or stove already on hand, it should
be wished to make the back wider
than the dimension recommended,
as for instance, sixteen inches; it
will be advisable not to exceed the
width of three feet three inches for
the opening in front, as in a very
wide and shallow fire-place, any
sudden motion of the air in front
would be apt to bring out puffs of
smoke into the room. the throat
of the chimney being reduced to four
inches, it will be necessary to make
a provision for the passage of a
chimney sweeper. this is to be
done in the following manner. in
building up the new back of the fire-place,
when this wall is brought up
so high that there remains no more
than about ten or eleven inches between
what is then the top of it and
the underside of the mantle, an opening
or door-way, eleven or twelve
inches wide, must be begun in the
middle of the back, and continued
quite to the top of it, which according
to the height that it will commonly
be necessary to carry up the
back, will make the opening twelve
or fourteen inches high, which will
be quite sufficient for the purpose.
when the fire-place is finished, this
door-way is to be closed by a few
bricks laid without mortar, or a tile
or piece of stone confined in its
place by means of a rebate made
for that purpose in the brick-work.
as often as the chimney is swept,
the chimney sweeper removes this
temporary wall or stone, which is
very easily done, and when he has
finished his work, he again puts it
in its place. the new back and
covings may be built either of brick-work
or of stone, and the space between
them and the old back and
covings, ought to be filled up to give
greater solidity to the structure.
this may be done with loose rubbish
or pieces of broken bricks or
stones, provided the work be strengthened
by a few layers or courses of
bricks laid in mortar; but it will be
indispensably necessary to finish
the work where these new walls end,
that is to say, at the top of the throat
of the chimney, where it ends
abruptly in the open canal or flue,
by a horizontal course of bricks
well secured with mortar. it is of
much importance that they should
terminate in this manner; for were
they to be sloped outward and raised
in such a manner as to swell out the
upper extremity of the throat of the
chimney in the form of a trumpet,[]
and increase it by degrees to the
size of the flue of the chimney, this
construction would tend to assist the
winds which may attempt to blow
down the chimney, in forcing their
way through the throat, and throwing
the smoke backward into the
room. the internal form of the
breast of the chimney is also a matter
of great importance, and which
ought to be particularly attended to.
the worst form it can have is that
of a vertical plane or upright flat,
and next to this the worst form is an
inclined plane. both these forms
cause the current of warm air from
the room which will, in spite of every
precaution, sometimes find its way
into the chimney, to cross upon the
current of smoke which rises from
the fire in a manner most likely to
embarrass it in its ascent and drive
it back. the current of air which,
passing under the mantle, gets into
the chimney, should be made gradually
to bend its course upwards,
by which means it will unite quietly
with the ascending current of smoke,
and will be less likely to check and
impede its progress. this is to be
effected by rounding off the inside
of the breast of the chimney, which
may be done by a thick coating of
plaster. when the breast or wall
of the chimney in front is very thin,
it may happen, that the depth of
the fire-place determined according
to the preceding rules may be too
small. thus supposing the breast
to be only four inches thick, which
is sometimes the case, particularly
in rooms situated near the top of a
house, taking four inches for the
width of the throat, will give only
eight inches for the depth of the fire-place.
in this case, it would be
proper to increase the depth of the
fire-place at the hearth to twelve
or thirteen inches, and to build up
the back perpendicularly to the
height of the top of the grate, and
then sloping the back by a gentle
inclination forward, bring it to
its proper place directly under the
back part of the throat of the chimney.
this slope, though it ought
not to be too abrupt, yet should be
quite finished at the height of eight
or ten inches above the fire, otherwise
it may perhaps cause the chimney
to smoke; but when it is very
near the fire, its heat will enable the
current of rising smoke to overcome
the obstacle which this slope will oppose
to its ascent, which it could not
so easily do, were the slope situated
at a greater distance from the burning
fuel. there is one important circumstance
respecting chimney fire-places
designed for burning coals
which remains to be examined, and
that is the grate. although there are
few grates that may not be used in
chimnies, altered or constructed on
the principles recommended by count
rumford, yet they are not by any
means all equally well adapted for
that purpose. those whose construction
is most simple, and which of
course are the cheapest, are beyond
comparison the best on all accounts.
nothing being wanted but merely a
grate to contain the coals, and all
additional apparatus being not only
useless but pernicious; all complicated
and expensive grates should
be laid aside, and such as are more
simple substituted in their room.
the proper width for grates in rooms
of a middling size, will be from six
to eight inches, and their length may
be diminished more or less according
to the difficulty of heating the
room, or the severity of the weather.
but where the width of a grate is
not more than five inches, it will be
very difficult to prevent the fire from
going out. it has been before observed
that the use of metals is as
much as possible to be avoided in
the construction of fire-places, it
will therefore be proper always to
line the back and sides of a grate
with fire stone, which will cause the
fire to burn better and give more
heat into the room.[]
snails. these are a species of
slugs covered with shell, and which
are very destructive to wall fruit.
to prevent their ascending the standard
trees, tie a coarse horse-hair
rope about them, two or three feet
from the ground; and to secure the
wall trees, nail a narrow slip of
horse-hair cloth against the wall,
about half an inch from the ground,
underneath the branches of the tree.
in the winter time the snails may be
found in the holes of walls, under
thorns, behind old trees or close
hedges, and might be taken and
destroyed. when they attack vegetables,
a few sliced turnips laid
on the borders will attract them in
the evening, when they may easily
be gathered up. lime and ashes
strewed on the ground, will also prevent
their depredations.
snipes. these birds will keep
several days, and should be roasted
without drawing, and then served
on toast. butter only should be
eaten with them, as gravy takes off
from the fine flavour. the thigh and
back are most esteemed.
snipes in ragout. slit
them down the backs, but do not
take out the insides; toss them up
with a little melted bacon fat, seasoned
with pepper and salt, and a
little mushroom ketchup; when they
are enough, squeeze in a little juice
of lemon, and serve them up.
snipes in surtout. half
roast your snipes, and save the trail;
then make a forcemeat with veal,
and as much beef suet chopped,
and beat in a mortar; add an equal
quantity of bread crumbs: season
it with beaten mace, pepper, salt,
parsley, and sweet herbs shred fine;
mix all together, and moisten it with
the yolks of eggs: lay a rim of this
forcemeat round the dish, then put
in your snipes. take strong gravy,
according to your dish, with morels
and truffles, a few mushrooms, a
sweetbread cut in pieces, and an
artichoke bottom cut small: let all
stew together, then beat up the
yolks of two or three eggs with a
little white wine; pour this into
your gravy, and keep it stirring till
it is of a proper thickness, then let
it stand to cool; work up the remainder
of your forcemeat, and roll
it out as you do paste; pour your
sauce over the birds, and lay on
your forcemeat; close the edges,
and wash it over with the yolks of
eggs, and strew bread crumbs over
that; send it to the oven about half
an hour, and then to table as hot as
you can.
snow balls. swell some rice
in milk, and strain it off. having
pared and cored some apples, put
the rice round them, and tie up
each in a cloth. add to each a bit
of lemon peel, a clove, or cinnamon,
and boil them well.
snow cream. put to a quart
of cream the whites of three eggs
well beaten, four spoonfuls of sweet
wine, sugar to sweeten, and a bit of
lemon peel. whip it to a froth, remove
the peel, and serve the cream
in a dish.
soldering. put into a crucible
two ounces of lead, and when
it is melted, throw in an ounce of
tin. this alloy is that generally
known by the name of solder. when
heated by a hot iron, and applied to
tinned iron, with powdered rosin, it
acts as a cement or solder. it is
also used to join leaden pipes, and
other articles.
soles. a fine thick sole is almost
as good eating as turbot, and
may be boiled in the same way.
wash the fish and clean it nicely,
put it into a fish-kettle with a handful
of salt, and as much cold water
as will cover it. set it on the side
of the fire, take off the scum as it
rises, and let it boil gently about
five minutes, or longer if it be very
large. send it up on a fish-drainer,
garnished with slices of lemon and
sprigs of curled parsley, or nicely
fried smelts, or oysters. slices of[]
lemon for garnish are universally
approved, either with fried or boiled
fish. parsley and butter, or fennel
and butter, make an excellent sauce;
chervil sauce, or anchovies, are also
approved. boiled soles are very
good warmed up like eels, or covered
with white wine sauce. when
soles are very large, the best way
is to take off the fillets, trim them
neatly, and press them dry in a soft
cloth. egg them over, strew on fine
bread crumbs, and fry them. or
skin and wash a pair of large soles
very clean, dry them in a cloth, wash
them with the yolk of an egg on both
sides, and strew over them a little
flour, and a few bread crumbs; fry
them of a fine gold colour, in florence
oil, enough to cover them;
when done, drain them, and lay
them into an earthen dish that will
hold them at length, and set them
by to cool; then make the marinate
with a pint of the best vinegar, half
a pint of sherry, some salt, pepper,
nutmeg, two cloves, and a blade of
mace; boil all together for about
ten minutes, then pour it over the
fish hot, the next day they will be
fit for use. when you dish them up,
put some of the liquor over them;
garnish the dish with fennel, sliced
lemon, barberries, and horseradish.
if you have any fried fish cold, you
may put it into this marinate.—to
fricassee soles white. clean your
soles very well, bone them nicely,
and if large, cut them in eight pieces,
if small, only in four; take off the
heads; put the heads and bones,
an anchovy, a faggot of sweet herbs,
a blade or two of mace, some whole
pepper, salt, an onion, and a crust
of bread, all into a clean saucepan,
with a pint of water, cover it close,
and let it boil till a third is wasted;
strain it through a fine sieve into a
stew-pan; put in your soles with a
gill of white wine, a little parsley
chopped fine, a few mushrooms cut
in two, a piece of butter rolled in
flour, enough to thicken your sauce;
set it over your stove, shake your
pan frequently, till they are enough,
and of a good thickness; take the
scum off very clean, dish them up,
and garnish with lemon and barberries.—another
way. strip off the
black skin of the fish, but not the
white; then take out the bones, and
cut the flesh into slices about two
inches long; dip the slices in the
yolks of eggs, and strew over them
raspings of bread; then fry them in
clarified butter, and when they are
fried enough, take them out on a
plate, and set them by the fire till
you have made the following sauce.
take the bones of the fish, boil them
up with water, and put in some anchovy
and sweet herbs, such as
thyme and parsley, and add a little
pepper, cloves and mace. when
these have boiled together some time,
take the butter in which the fish was
fried, put it into a pan over the fire,
shake flour into it, and keep it stirring
while the flour is shaking in;
then strain the liquor into it, in
which the fish bones, herbs, and spice
were boiled, and boil it together, till
it is very thick, adding lemon juice
to your taste. put your fish into a
dish, and pour the sauce over it;
serve it up, garnished with slices of
lemon and fried parsley. this dish
may take place on any part of the
table, either in the first or second
course.—another way. take a pair
of large soles, skin and clean them
well, pour a little vinegar, and strew
some salt over them; let them lay
in this till they are to be used. when
you want to boil them, take a clean
stew-pan, put in a pint of white
wine, and a little water, a faggot of
sweet herbs, an onion stuck with
three or four cloves, a blade of mace,
a little whole pepper, and a little
salt. when your soles are enough,
take them up, and lay them into a
dish, strain off the liquor, put it into
the stew-pan, with a good piece of
butter rolled in flour, and half a
pint of white shrimps clean picked;[]
toss all up together, till it is of a
proper thickness; take care to skim
it very clean, pour it over the fish.
garnish the dish with scraped horseradish,
and sliced lemon; or you
may send them to table plain, and
for sauce, chop the meat of a lobster,
bruise the body very smooth
with a spoon, mix it with your liquor,
and send it to table in a boat or
bason. this is much the best way
to dress a small turbot.
sole pie. split some soles
from the bone, and cut the fins close.
season with a mixture of salt, pepper,
a little nutmeg and pounded
mace, and put them in layers, with
oysters. a pair of middling-sized
soles will be sufficient, and half a
hundred oysters. put in the dish
the oyster liquor, two or three spoonfuls
of broth, and some butter.
when the pie comes from the oven,
pour in a cupful of thick cream, and
it will eat excellently.—another way.
clean and bone a pair of large soles;
boil about two pounds of eels tender;
take off all the meat, put the
bones into the water they were boiled
in, with the bones of the soles, a
blade of mace, whole pepper, and a
little salt; let this boil till you have
about half a pint of strong broth.
take the flesh off the eels, and chop
it very fine, with a little lemon peel,
an anchovy, parsley, and bread
crumbs: season with pepper, salt,
nutmeg, and beaten mace; melt a
quarter of a pound of butter, and
work all up to a paste. sheet the
dish with a good puff-paste; lay
the forcemeat on the paste, and then
lay in the soles; strain off the broth,
scum it clean, pour over the fish a
sufficient quantity, and lay on the
lid. when it comes from the oven,
if you have any of the broth left,
you may warm it, and pour it into
the pie.
solid syllabubs. mix a
quart of thick raw cream, one pound
of refined sugar, a pint and a half of
fine raisin wine, in a deep pan; and
add the grated peel and the juice
of three lemons. beat or whisk it
one way, half an hour; then put it
on a sieve, with a piece of thin muslin
laid smooth in the shallow end,
till the next day. put it in glasses:
it will keep good in a cool place ten
days.
put into a large china bowl a pint
of port, a pint of sherry, or other
white wine, and sugar to taste. milk
the bowl full. in twenty minutes'
time, cover it pretty high with clouted
cream. grate nutmeg over it,
add pounded cinnamon, and nonpareil
comfits.
sore breasts. sore breasts
in females, during the time of suckling,
are often occasioned by the
improper practice of drawing the
breasts, which is both painful and
dangerous. if they get too full and
hard before the infant can be applied,
it is better to let them remain
a few hours in that state, than to
use any unnatural means, or else to
present the breast to a child that is
a few months old. it is the application
of too great force in drawing
them, placing a child to suck at improper
times, the use of stimulating
liquors and heated rooms, which
frequently occasion milk fevers and
abscesses in the breast. the nipple
is sometimes so sore, that the mother
is sometimes obliged to refuse the
breast, and a stagnation takes place,
which is accompanied with ulcerations
and fever. to prevent these
dangerous affections, the young
mother should carefully protrude
the nipple between her fingers to
make it more prominent, and cover
it with a hollow nutmeg several weeks
previous to her delivery. but if the
parts be already in a diseased state,
it will be proper to bathe them with
lime water, or diluted port wine.
after this the breast should be
dressed with a little spermaceti
ointment, or a composition of white
wax and olive oil, which is mild and[]
gentle. if this do not answer the
purpose, take four ounces of diachylon,
two ounces of olive oil, and one
ounce of vinegar. boil them together
over a gentle fire, keep stirring
them till reduced to an ointment,
and apply a little of it to the nipple
on a fine linen rag. if accompanied
with fever, take the bark in electuary
three or four times a day, the
size of a nutmeg, and persevere in
it two or three weeks if necessary.
sore eyes. pound together
in a mortar, an ounce of bole-ammoniac,
and a quarter of an ounce
of white copperas. shred fine an
ounce of camphor, and mix the ingredients
well together. pour on
them a quart of boiling water,
stir the mixture till it is cold, and
apply a drop or two to the eye, to
remove humours or inflammation.
a cooling eye-water may be made
of a dram of lapis calaminaris finely
powdered, mixed with half a pint of
white wine, and the same of plantain
water.
sore throat. an easy remedy
for this disorder is to dip a
piece of broad black ribband into
hartshorn, and wear it round the
throat two or three days. if this
be not sufficient, make a gargle in
the following manner. boil a little
green sage in water, strain it, and
mix it with vinegar and honey. or
pour a pint of boiling verjuice on a
handful of rosemary tops in a basin,
put a tin funnel over it with the pipe
upwards, and let the fume go to the
throat as hot as it can be borne. a
common drink for a sore throat may
be made of two ounces of turkey
figs, the same quantity of sun raisins
cut small, and two ounces of pearl
barley, boiled in three pints of water
till reduced to a quart. boil it
gently, then strain it, and take it
warm. sometimes a handful of salt
heated in an earthen pan, then put
into a flannel bag, and applied as
hot as possible round the throat,
will answer the purpose. a fumigation
for a sore throat may be
made in the following manner. boil
together a pint of vinegar, and an
ounce of myrrh, for half an hour,
and pour the liquor into a basin.
place over it the large part of a funnel
that fits the basin, and let the
patient inhale the vapour by putting
the pipe of the funnel into his mouth.
the fumigation must be applied as
hot as possible, and renewed every
quarter of an hour, till the patient
is relieved. for an inflammation or
putrid sore throat, or a quinsey,
this will be found of singular use if
persisted in.
sorrel sauce. wash and
clean a quantity of sorrel, put it into
a stewpan that will just hold it,
with a piece of butter, and cover it
close. set it over a slow fire for a
quarter of an hour, pass the sorrel
with the back of a wooden spoon
through a hair sieve, season it with
pepper and salt, and a dust of powdered
sugar. make it hot, and serve
it up under lamb, veal, or sweetbreads.
cayenne, nutmeg, and lemon
juice, are sometimes added.
sorrel soup. make a good
gravy with part of a knuckle of veal,
and the scrag end of a neck or a
chump end of a loin of mutton. season
it with a bunch of sweet herbs,
pepper, and salt, and two or three
cloves. when the meat is quite
stewed down, strain it off, and let it
stand till cold. clear it well from
the fat, put it into a stewpan with
a young fowl nicely trussed, and set
it over a slow fire. wash three or
four large handfuls of sorrel, chop
it a little, fry it in butter, put it into
the soup, and let the whole stew till
the fowl is well done. skim it very
clean, and serve it up with the fowl
in the soup.
soups. it has generally been
considered as good economy to use
the cheapest and most inferior kind
of meat for broths and soups, and
to boil it down till it is entirely destroyed,
and hardly worth giving to[]
the pigs. but this is a false frugality;
and it is far better to buy good
pieces of meat, and only stew them
till they are tender enough to be
eaten. lean juicy beef, mutton, or
veal, form the basis of good broth;
and it is therefore advisable to procure
those pieces which afford the
richest succulence, and such as is
fresh slain. stale meat will make
the broth grouty and bad tasted,
and fat is not so well adapted to the
purpose. the following herbs,
roots, and seasonings, are proper
for making and giving a relish to
broths and soups, according as the
taste may suit. scotch barley, pearl
barley, wheat flour, oatmeal, bread,
raspings, peas, beans, rice, vermicelli,
maccaroni, isinglass, potatoe
mucilage, mushroom, or mushroom
ketchup, champignons, parsnips,
carrots, beet root, turnips, garlic,
shalots, and onions. sliced onions
fried with butter and flour till they
are browned, and then rubbed
through a sieve, are excellent to
heighten the colour and flavour of
brown soups and sauces, and form
the basis of most of the fine relishes
furnished by the cook. the older
and drier the onion, the stronger
will be its flavour, and the quantity
must be regulated accordingly.
leeks, cucumber, or burnet vinegar;
celery, or celery seed pounded. the
latter, though equally strong, does
not impart the delicate sweetness
of the fresh vegetable; and when
used as a substitute, its flavour
should be corrected by the addition
of a bit of sugar. cress seed, parsley,
common thyme, lemon thyme,
orange thyme, knotted marjoram,
sage, mint, winter savoury, and basil.
as fresh green basil is seldom
to be procured, and its fine flavour
is soon lost, the best way of preserving
the extract is by pouring
wine on the fresh leaves. bay leaves,
tomata, tarragon, chervil, burnet,
allspice, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg,
clove, mace, black pepper, white
pepper, essence of anchovy, lemon
peel, lemon juice, and seville orange
juice. the latter imparts a finer
flavour than the lemon, and the acid
is much milder. the above materials,
with wine and mushroom ketchup,
combined in various proportions,
will make an endless variety
of excellent broths and soups. the
general fault of english soups seems
to be the employment of an excess
of spice, and too small a proportion
of roots and herbs. this is especially
the case with tavern soups,
where cayenne and garlic are often
used instead of black pepper and
onion, for the purpose of obtaining
a higher relish. soups, which are
intended to constitute the principal
part of a meal, certainly ought not
to be flavoured like sauces, which
are only designed to give a relish to
some particular dish. the principal
art in composing a good rich
soup, is so to proportion the several
ingredients one to another, that no
particular taste be stronger than the
rest; but to produce such a fine
harmonious relish, that the whole
becomes delightful. in order to this,
care must be taken that the roots
and herbs be perfectly well cleaned,
and that the water be proportioned
to the quantity of meat, and other
ingredients. in general a quart of
water may be allowed to a pound
of meat for soups; and half the
quantity for gravies. if they stew
gently, little more water need be put
in at first, than is expected at the
end; for when the pot is covered
quite close, and the fire gentle, very
little is wasted. gentle stewing is
incomparably the best; the meat is
more tender, and the soup better
flavoured. the cover of a soup
kettle should fit very close, or the
most essential parts of the broth
will soon evaporate, as will also be
the case with quick boiling. it is
not merely the fibres of the meat
that afford nourishment, but chiefly
the juices they contain; and these[]
are not only extracted but exhaled,
if it be boiled fast in an open vessel.
a succulent soup can never be made
but in a well closed vessel, which
preserves the nutritive parts by preventing
their dissipation, yet the
flavour is perhaps more wholesome
by an exposure to the air. place
the soup kettle over a moderate fire,
sufficient to make the water hot,
without causing it to boil; for if
the water boils immediately, it will
not penetrate the meat, and cleanse
it from the clotted blood and other
matters, which ought to go off in
scum. the meat will be hardened all
over by violent heat, will shrink up
as if it were scorched, and afford
very little gravy. on the contrary,
by keeping the water heating about
half an hour without boiling, the
meat swells, becomes tender, and
its fibres are dilated. by this process,
it yields a quantity of scum,
which must be taken off as soon as
it appears. after the meat has had
a good infusion for half an hour, the
fire may be improved to make the
pot boil, and the vegetables be put
in with a little salt. these will cause
more scum to rise, which must be
taken off immediately. then cover
the boiler very closely, and place it
at a proper distance from the fire,
where it is to boil very gently and
equally, but not fast. soups will
generally take from three to six
hours doing. the better way is to
prepare them the evening before,
as that will give more time to attend
to the dinner the next day. when
the soup is cold, the fat may much
more easily and completely be removed;
and when it is decanted,
take care not to disturb the settlings
at the bottom of the vessel, which
are so fine that they will escape
through a sieve. a tammis is the
best strainer, the soup appears
smoother and finer, and the cloth is
easier cleaned than any sieve. if
you strain it while it is hot, let the
tammis or napkin be previously
soaked in cold water; the coldness
of the strainer will tend to coagulate
the fat, and only suffer the pure
broth to pass through. the full
flavour of the ingredients can only
be extracted by long and slow simmering,
during which the boiler
must be kept close covered, to prevent
evaporation. clear soups must
be perfectly transparent, thickened
soups about the consistence of
cream; the latter will require nearly
double the quantity of seasoning,
but too much spice makes it unwholesome.
to thicken and give
body to soups and sauces, the following
materials are used. bread
raspings, potatoe mucilage, isinglass,
flour and butter, barley, rice, or
oatmeal and water rubbed well together.
any of these are to be
mixed gradually with the soup, till
thoroughly incorporated, and it
should afterwards have at least half
an hour's gentle simmering. if it
appears lumpy, it must be passed
through a tammis or fine sieve. a
piece of boiled beef pounded to a
pulp, with a bit of butter and flour,
and rubbed through a sieve, and
gradually incorporated with the soup,
will be found an excellent addition.
if the soup is too thin or too weak,
take off the cover of the boiler, and
let it boil till some of the watery
part of it has evaporated; or add
some of the thickening materials
before mentioned. when soups and
gravies are kept from day to day, in
hot weather, they should be warmed
up every day, and put into fresh
scalded pans or tureens, and placed
in a cool cellar. in temperate weather,
every other day may be sufficient.—it
has been imagined that
soups tend to relax the stomach;
but so far from being prejudicial in
this way, the moderate use of such
kind of liquid food may rather be
considered as salutary, and affording
a good degree of nourishment.
soup of a good quality, if not eaten
too hot, or in too great a quantity,[]
is attended with great advantages,
especially to those who drink but
little. warm fluids in the form of
soup, unite with our juices much
sooner and better, than those which
are cold and raw. on this account,
what is called restorative soup is
the best food for those who are enfeebled
by disease or dissipation,
and for old people, whose teeth and
digestive organs are impaired. after
taking cold, or in nervous headachs,
cholics, indigestions, and different
kinds of cramps and spasms
in the stomach, warm broth or soup
is of excellent service. after intemperate
eating, to give the stomach a
holiday for a day or two, by a diet
on mutton broth, is the best way to
restore its tone. the stretching of
any power to its utmost extent,
weakens it; and if the stomach be
obliged every day to do as much as
it can, it will every day be able to
do less. it is therefore a point of
wisdom to be temperate in all things,
frequently to indulge in soup diet,
and occasionally in almost total abstinence,
in order to preserve the
stomach in its full tone and vigour.—cheap
soups for charitable purposes
are best made of fat meat,
well boiled with vegetables. much
unreasonable prejudice has prevailed
on this subject, as if fat was unsuitable
for such a purpose, when it is
well known that the nutritious parts
of animal and vegetable diet depend
on the oil, jelly, mucilage, and
sweetness which they contain. the
farina of grain, and the seeds of vegetables,
contain more of the nutritious
and essential parts of the
plant than any other, as is evident
from the use of celery seed, the
eighth part of an ounce of which
will give more relish to a gallon of
soup, than a large quantity of the
root or stalk. on the same principle,
the fat is the essence of meat,
nearly so as the seeds of plants are
of their respective species. to establish
this fact, a simple experiment
will be sufficient. boil from
two to four ounces of the lean part
of butcher's meat in six quarts of
water, till reduced to a gallon.
thicken it with oatmeal, and the
result of the decoction will be found
to be water gruel, or something like
it. but dissolve the same quantity
of the fat of meat in a gallon of water,
thicken it over the fire with oatmeal,
and the result will be a very
pleasant broth, possessing the identical
taste of the meat in a considerable
degree, whether of beef or
mutton. if some of the gelatinous
parts of meat be added, the broth
is then of a rich and nutritious quality,
and can be made very cheap.
for example: take from four to six
ounces of barley, oatmeal two ounces,
onions or leeks a small quantity;
beef fat, suet, or drippings, from
two to four ounces; celery seed
half a spoonful, pepper and salt to
give the soup a relish, and water
sufficient to make a gallon. boil
the barley, previously washed, in
six quarts of water, which when
boiled sufficiently soft will be reduced
to a gallon. it will be necessary
to skim it clean in the course
of the boiling, and to stir it well
from the bottom of the boiler. the
celery seed should be bruised, and
added with the leeks and onions,
towards the end of the process.
the oatmeal is to be mixed in a little
cold water, and put in about an
hour before the soup is done. in
the last place add the fat, melted
before the fire, if not in a state of
drippings, and season with pepper
and salt. a few grains of cayenne
would give the soup a higher relish.
wheat flour may be used instead of
oatmeal, but in a smaller proportion.
the addition of turnips, carrots,
and cabbages, will be a considerable
improvement. the intention
of the oatmeal or flour is, by the
mucilage they contain, assisted with
barley broth, to unite the fat with
the liquid, so as to form one uniform[]
mass. where the fat is suspended
in the soup, and not seen floating
on the top, by which it is rendered
easier of digestion, and more readily
convertible into good chyle, it is
evident that it must be more palatable,
as well as abundantly more nutritious.
some may think this kind
of soup unwholesome, from the
quantity of fat it contains; but a
little reflection will shew the contrary.
suet puddings and dumplins
are not unwholesome, neither are
mutton drippings with potatoes or
other vegetables. in short, fat is
eaten daily by all ranks of people,
in some way or other, in much larger
quantities than is prescribed for
soup. a labouring man would find
no difficulty in eating as much suet
at one meal, in a flour pudding, or
as much drippings as is necessary
for a gallon of soup, in a mass of
potatoes or cabbages; while at the
same time a quart of soup with a
slice of bread, would be a very
hearty meal. in no other way could
meat drippings be applied to so
good a purpose, as in the manufacture
of a gallon of soup, sufficient
to give a dinner to a whole family.
the quantity of fat or drippings necessary
for the soup is so small,
that it may easily be spared from a
joint of roast meat, while enough
will remain for other purposes.
when mutton dripping is made into
soup, wheat flour is better than oatmeal;
but the mucilage of potatoe
is better still, requiring only one
ounce to the gallon. when pork is
roasted, peas should be used in preference
to boiled barley, and the
soup will be very superior in flavour
to any that is made with the bones
of meat, or combined with bacon.
fat pork is eaten daily in large
quantities, in most of the counties
of england; and in some parts,
hog's lard is spread on bread instead
of butter, besides the abundance
of lard that is used by all ranks
of people, in puddings, cakes, and
pasties. fat enters so much into
the composition of our diet, that we
could scarcely subsist without it;
and the application of it to soups
is only a different mode of using it,
and certainly more frugal and economical
than any other. it may
readily be perceived how soups
made from lean meat might be improved
by the addition of a little
fat, mixed up and incorporated with
a mucilage of potatoes, of wheat
flour, oatmeal, peas, and barley.
but where a quantity of fat swims
on the surface of the broth, made
from a fat joint of meat, and it cannot
from its superabundance be
united with the liquid, by means of
any mucilage, it had better be skimmed
off, and preserved for future
use; otherwise the soup will not be
agreeable, for it is the due proportion
of animal and vegetable substance
that makes soup pleasant and
wholesome. to make good soup
of a leg of beef or an ox cheek,
which is generally called stew, a
pretty large quantity of the vegetable
class ought to be added; and none
seems better adapted than scotch
barley, by which double and treble
the quantity of soup may be made
from the same given weight of meat.
one pint of well prepared leg of
beef, or ox cheek soup, together
with the fat, will make a gallon of
good soup at the trifling expense of
four-pence. in the same way soups
may be made from the stew of beef,
mutton, veal, or pork, choosing those
parts where mucilage, jelly, and fat
abound. bacon is allowed to be a
considerable improvement to the
taste of veal, whether roasted or
boiled; and it is the same in soup.
when therefore veal broth is made
for family use, two ounces of fat
bacon should be added to every
gallon, melted before the fire or in
a fryingpan. the soup should then
be thickened with flour, potatoe
starch, and barley. the last article
should seldom be omitted in any[]
soup, it being so very cheap and
pleasant, as well as wholesome and
nutritious. soup made of tripe is
another cheap article. boil a pound
of well cleaned tripe in a gallon of
barley broth, with onions and parsley,
adding two ounces of bacon fat,
with salt and pepper. this produces
an extremely nutritious soup,
from the gelatinous principle with
which the tripe abounds. cow heels,
calves and sheep's feet, are also well
adapted to the purpose. excellent
soups may be made from fried meat,
where the fat and gravy are added
to the boiled barley; and for that
purpose, fat beef steaks, pork and
mutton chops, should be preferred,
as containing more of the nutritious
principle. towards the latter end
of frying the steaks, add a little
water to produce a gravy, which is
to be put to the barley broth. a
little flour should also be dredged
in, which will take up all the fat left
in the fryingpan. a quantity of
onions should previously be shred,
and fried with the fat, which gives
the soup a fine flavour, with the addition
of pepper, salt, and other
seasoning. there would be no end
to the variety of soups that might
be made from a number of cheap articles
differently combined; but perhaps
the distribution of soup gratis
does not answer so well as teaching
people how to make it, and to improve
their comforts at home. the
time lost in waiting for the boon,
and fetching it home, might by an
industrious occupation, however
poorly paid for labour, be turned to
a better account than the mere obtaining
of a quart of soup. but it
unfortunately happens, that the best
and cheapest method of making a
nourishing soup, is least known to
those who have most need of it.
the labouring classes seldom purchase
what are called the coarser
pieces of meat, because they do not
know how to dress them, but lay out
their money in pieces for roasting,
which are far less profitable, and
more expensive in the purchase.
to save time, trouble, and firing,
these are generally sent to the oven
to be baked, the nourishing parts
are evaporated and dried up, the
weight is diminished nearly one
third, and what is purchased with a
week's earnings is only sufficient for
a day or two's consumption. if instead
of this improvident proceeding,
a cheap and wholesome soup
were at least occasionally substituted,
it would banish the still more
pernicious custom of drinking tea
two or three times a day, for want
of something more supporting and
substantial. in addition then to the
directions already given, the following
may be considered as one of the
cheapest and easiest methods of
making a wholesome soup, suited to
a numerous family among the labouring
classes. put four ounces
of scotch barley washed clean, and
four ounces of sliced onions, into
five quarts of water. boil it gently
for one hour, and pour it into a pan.
put into a saucepan nearly two
ounces of beef or mutton drippings,
or melted suet, or two or three
ounces of minced bacon; and when
melted, stir into it four ounces of
oatmeal. rub these together into
a paste, and if properly managed,
the whole of the fat will combine
with the barley broth, and not a
particle, appear on the surface to
offend the most delicate stomach.
now add the barley broth, at first
a spoonful at a time, then the rest
by degrees, stirring it well together
till it boils. put into a teacup a
dram of finely pounded cress or celery
seed, and a quarter of a dram
of finely pounded cayenne, or a
dram and a half of ground black
pepper or allspice, and mix it up
with a little of the soup. put this
seasoning into the whole quantity,
stir up the soup thoroughly, let it
simmer gently a quarter of an hour,
and add a little salt. the flavour[]
may be varied by doubling the portion
of onions, or adding a clove of
garlic or shalot, and leaving out the
celery seed. change of food is absolutely
necessary, not only as a
matter of pleasure and comfort, but
also of health. it may likewise be
much improved, if instead of water,
it be made of the liquor that meat
has been boiled in. this soup has
the advantage of being very soon
made, with no more fuel than is necessary
to warm a room. those
who have not tasted it, cannot imagine
what a savoury and satisfying
meal is produced by the combination
of these cheap and homely ingredients.
pare and cut the cucumbers, then
stew them with some good broth,
and veal gravy to cover them. when
done enough, heat the soup with
the liquor they were stewed in, and
season it with salt. serve up the
soup garnished with the cucumbers.
these will be a proper garnish for
almost any kind of soup.
soup a l' eau. put into a
saucepan holding about three pints,
a quarter of a cabbage, four carrots,
two parsnips, six onions, and three
or four turnips. add a root of celery,
a small root of parsley, some
sorrel, a bunch of white beet leaves
and chervil, and half a pint of peas
tied in a piece of linen. add water
in proportion to the vegetables, and
stew the whole for three hours.
strain off the broth, add some salt,
heat it and serve it up, garnished
with the vegetables.
soup gravy. take some good
juicy lean beef, free from sinews or
other offal substance; or take the
lean of a neck, or loin, or the fleshy
part of a leg of mutton, or well-grown
fowl, in the proportion of a
pound of meat to a quart of water
to beef, and rather less to mutton
or fowl. cut the meat in pieces,
and let it stew very gently till the
pure gravy is fairly drawn from the
meat, without extracting the dregs.
the time required for this will vary
according to the quantity, the proper
degree of heat being of course
longer in penetrating the larger portion.
from an hour and a half to
three hours, at discretion, will allow
sufficient time for any quantity that
is likely to be wanted at once for
soup, at least in private families.
when done, strain the gravy through
a hair sieve into an earthen pot, and
let it stand till cold. take off the
fat, and pour the gravy clear from
the sediment at the bottom.
soup maigre. melt half a
pound of butter into a stewpan,
shake it round, and throw in half a
dozen sliced onions. shake the pan
well for two or three minutes, then
put in five heads of celery, two
handfuls of spinach, two cabbage
lettuces cut small, and some parsley.
shake the pan well for ten minutes,
put in two quarts of water, some
crusts of bread, a tea-spoonful of
beaten pepper, and three or four
blades of mace. a handful of white
beet leaves, cut small, may be added.
boil it gently an hour. just
before serving, beat in two yolks of
eggs, and a large spoonful of vinegar.—another.
flour and fry a
quart of green peas, four sliced
onions, the coarse stalks of celery,
a carrot, a turnip, and a parsnip.
pour on three quarts of water, let
it simmer till the whole will pulp
through a sieve, and boil in it the
best of the celery cut thin.—another
way. take a bunch of celery washed
clean and cut in pieces, a large
handful of spinage, two cabbage
lettuces, and some parsley; wash
all very clean, and shred them small;
then take a large clean stewpan, put
in about half a pound of butter, and
when it is quite hot, slice four large
onions very thin, and put into your
butter; stir them well about for
two or three minutes; then put in
the rest of your herbs; shake all
well together for near twenty minutes,[]
dust in some flour, and stir them together;
pour in two quarts of boiling
water; season with pepper, salt,
and beaten mace: chip a handful
of crust of bread, and put in; boil
it half an hour, then beat up the
yolks of three eggs in a spoonful of
vinegar; pour it in, and stir it for
two or three minutes; then send it
to table.
soup with onions. blanch
some small white onions in scalding
water, peel off the first skin, and
stew them in a little broth. when
ready, lay them in a row round the
edge of the dish intended for the
soup. to keep them in their place,
put a thin slip of bread rubbed with
white of egg round the rim of the
dish, and set the dish for a moment
over a stove to fasten the bread.
slips of bread may be used in this
manner to keep all kinds of garnishing
to soups in their proper place.
soup a la reine. blanch
and beat very fine in a marble mortar,
three quarters of a pound of
sweet almonds, with the white part
of a cold roasted fowl. slice to
these the crumb of four small rolls,
and then strain to it three quarts of
good veal gravy, boiled with a blade
of mace. simmer these all together
for a quarter of an hour, then rub
them through a tammis, season it
with salt, give it a boil, and serve it
up with a small tea-cupful of cream
stirred into it, and the slices of crust
cut off the rolls laid on the top.—another
way. have ready a strong
veal broth that is white, and clean
scummed from all fat; blanch a
pound of almonds, beat them in a
mortar, with a little water, to prevent
their oiling, and the yolks of
four poached eggs, the lean part of
the legs, and all the white part of a
roasted fowl; pound all together,
as fine as possible; then take three
quarts of the veal broth, put it into
a clean stew-pot, put your ingredients
in, and mix them well together;
chip in the crust of two french rolls
well rasped; boil all together over
a stove, or a clear fire. take a
french roll, cut a piece out of the
top, and take out all the crumb:
mince the white part of a roasted
fowl very fine, season it with pepper,
salt, nutmeg, and a little beaten
mace; put in about an ounce of
butter, and moisten it with two
spoonfuls of your soup strained to
it; set it over the stove to be thoroughly
hot: cut some french roll
in thin slices, and set them before
the fire to crisp; then strain off
your soup through a tammis or a
lawn strainer, into another clean
stew-pot; let it stew till it is as
thick as cream; then have your dish
ready; put in some of your crisp
bread; fill your roll with your mince,
and lay on the top as close as possible;
put it into the middle of your
dish, and pour a ladleful of your
soup over it; put in your bread
first, then pour in your soup, till
your dish is full. garnish with petty
patties; or make a rim for your
dish, and garnish with lemon raced.
if you please, you may send a chicken
boned in the middle, instead of
your roll; or you may send it to
table with only crisp bread.
soup a-la sap. boil half a
pound of grated potatoes, a pound
of beef sliced thin, a pint of grey
peas, an onion, and three ounces of
rice, in six pints of water till reduced
to five. strain it through a
cullender, pulp the peas into it, and
return it into the saucepan with two
heads of sliced celery. stew it tender,
add pepper and salt, and serve
it with fried bread.
sour beer. if beer be brewed
ever so well, much will depend on
the management afterwards, to prevent
its becoming sour or vapid.
different conveniences of cellarage
will materially affect beer. if the
cellar is bad, there should not be
more than six weeks between brewing
and brewing. where beer is
kept too long in a bad cellar, so as[]
to be affected by the heat of the
weather, it will putrefy, though ever
so well bunged. hops may prevent
its turning sour, but will not keep
it from becoming vapid. it should
be well understood, that there is no
certainty in keeping beer, if not
brewed at the proper season. in
winter there is a danger of wort getting
too cold, so as to prevent the
process of fermentation; and in the
summer, of its not being cool enough,
unless brewed in the dead of night.
in temperate weather, at the spring
or autumn, the spirit of the beer is
retained, and it is thereby enabled
to work the liquor clear; whereas in
hot weather, the spirit quickly evaporates,
leaving the wort vapid and
flat, unable to work itself clear, but
keeping continually on the fret, till
totally spoiled. this is the obvious
reason for the use of sugar, prepared
for colour, because sugar will bear
the heat better than malt; and when
thoroughly prepared, possesses such
a strong principle of heat in itself,
as to bid defiance to the hottest
temperature of the air, and to render
its turning sour almost impossible.
clean casks are also essential
to the preservation of good beer.
to keep the casks sweet and in order,
never allow them to remain open;
but whenever the beer is drawn off,
bung them up tight with the lees
within them. in a good cellar they
will never spoil. should the casks
get musty, the following method will
remedy the evil. soak them well
for three or four days in cold water,
then fill them full of boiling hot water;
put in a lump or two of lime,
shake it thoroughly till quite dissolved,
let the casks stand about
half an hour, then wash them out
with cold water, and they will be
clean and sweet. if still apprehensive
of the beer getting flat or sour,
put into a cask containing eighteen
gallons, a pint of ground malt suspended
in a bag, and close the bung
perfectly. this will prevent the
mischief, and the beer will improve
during the whole time of drawing it.
when beer has actually turned sour,
put in some oyster shells, calcined
to whiteness, or a little powdered
chalk. either of these will correct
the acidity, and make it brisk and
sparkling. salt of tartar, or soda
powder, put into the beer at the time
of drinking it, will also destroy the
acidity, and make it palatable.
sour krout. take some full-grown
hard cabbages of the closest
texture, and cut them into slices
about an inch thick, opening them
a little, that they may receive the
salt more effectually. rub a good
deal of salt amongst them, lay them
into a large pan, and sprinkle more
salt over them. let them remain
twenty-four hours, turning them
over four or five times, that every
part may be alike saturated. next
day put the cabbage into a tub or
large jar, pressing it down well, and
then pour over it a pickle made of
a pint of salt to a quart of water.
this pickle must be poured on boiling
hot, and the cabbage entirely
covered with it. let it stand thus
twenty-four hours longer, when it
will have shrunk nearly a third.
then take the cabbage out, and put
it into a fresh tub or jar, pressing it
down well as before, and pour over
it a pickle made as follows. to one
quart of the salt and water pickle
which had been used the day before,
put three quarts of vinegar,
four ounces of allspice, and two
ounces of carraway seeds. this
must be poured on cold, so as to
cover the cabbage completely. let
it stand one day loosely covered,
and then stop it down quite close.
sour sauce for fish. boil
two blades of mace in a wine glass
of water, and half as much sharp
vinegar, for a quarter of an hour.
then take out the mace, and put in
a quarter of a pound of butter, and
the yolk of an egg well beaten.
shake these over the fire one way[]
till the sauce is properly thickened,
without suffering it to boil.
souse for brawn. boil a
quarter of a pint of wheat bran, a
sprig of bay, and a sprig of rosemary,
in two gallons of water for
half an hour, adding four ounces of
salt. strain it, and let it cool.
this will do for pig's feet and ears,
as well as brawn.
soused sturgeons. draw
and divide the fish down the back,
and then into pieces. put the fish
into salt and water, clean it well,
bind it with tape, and boil it very
carefully in vinegar, salt, and water.
when done lay it to cool, and pack
it up close in the liquor it was boiled
in.
soused tripe. boil the tripe,
but not quite tender; then put it
into salt and water, which must be
changed every day till it is all used.
when the tripe is to be dressed, dip
it into a batter of eggs and flour,
and fry it of a good brown.
soy. to make english soy,
pound some walnuts when fit for
pickling, in a marble mortar, very
small. squeeze them through a
strainer, let the liquor stand to settle,
and then pour off the fine. to
every quart of liquor put a pound of
anchovies, and two cloves of shalot.
boil it enough to make the scum
rise, and clear it well. add two
ounces of jamaica pepper, a quarter
of an ounce of mace, and half a pint
of vinegar. boil it again, until the
anchovies are dissolved and the shalot
tender, and let it stand till the
next day. then pour off the fine,
and bottle it for use. strain the
thick through a sieve, and put it by
separately. when used for fish,
put some of the soy to the usual
anchovies and butter, or to plain
butter.
spanish cardoons. cut
them three inches long, leaving out
any that are hollow and green. boil
them in water half an hour, and then
put them into warm water to pick
them. stew them with some broth,
with a spoonful of flour mixed in it.
add salt, onions, roots, a bunch of
sweet herbs, a dash of verjuice, and
a little butter. when they are well
done take them out, and put them
into a good cullis, with a little broth.
boil them half an hour in this sauce
to give them a flavour, and then
serve them up. let the sauce be
neither too clear nor too thick, and
of a fine light colour.
spanish flummery. scald
a quart of cream, with a little cinnamon
or mace. mix this gradually
into half a pound of rice flour, and
then stir it over a gentle fire till it
acquires the thickness of jelly.
sweeten it to the taste, and pour it
into cups or shapes. turn it out
when cold, and serve it up. cream,
wine, or preserves eat well with it,
or it may be eaten alone as preferred.
oatmeal may be used instead
of rice.
spanish fritters. cut the
crumb of a french roll into square
lengths, of the thickness of one's
finger, nutmeg, sugar, pounded cinnamon,
and an egg. when well
soaked, fry the fritters of a nice
brown; and serve with butter, wine,
and sweet sauce.
spanish puffs. boil a stick
of cinnamon, a piece of lemon peel,
and a little sugar, in three quarters
of a pint of water for ten minutes.
let it cool, then add three eggs well
beaten, and shake in three large
spoonfuls of flour. beat these well
together, add three more eggs, and
simmer the whole over the fire, till
it thickens almost to a paste. drop
this with a tea-spoon into boiling
lard, and fry these little puffs of a
delicate light brown.
spanish sauce. put some
gravy into a saucepan with a glass
of white wine, and the same of good
broth. add a bunch of parsley and
chives, two cloves of garlic, half a
bay leaf, a pinch of coriander seed,
two cloves, a sliced onion, a carrot,[]
half a parsnip, and two spoonfuls of
salad oil. stew these for two hours
over a very slow fire. skim off the
fat, pass the sauce through a tammis,
season it with pepper and salt,
and use it with any thing as approved.
sparerib. baste it with a very
little butter and flour; and when
done, sprinkle it with dried sage
crumbled. serve it with potatoes
and apple sauce.
sparrow. a mischievous destructive
bird in corn-fields, and
which should mostly be destroyed.
it is observed, that were all the
farmers in a neighbourhood to agree
to their destruction, by offering rewards
for their heads, their numbers
might be lessened; and that
were the practice general, surely
the whole race might be extirpated.
it is supposed that six-pence a dozen
the first year, nine-pence the second,
and a shilling the third year, would
nearly reach their complete extirpation.
to enforce which it should
be considered how soon twelve sparrows
destroy twelve penny-worth of
wheat. in kent, they use a species
of trap, which is very effectual in
taking them. it consists of a small
wicker basket, resembling a fruit-sieve
of the london markets, with
a cover of the same material fitted
to it, and formed on the principle
of the fish-pot, and the vermin
trap, into which the entrance is easy,
but the return difficult. these traps,
which are an ordinary article of sale
in the markets of the district, are
constituted of brown unpeeled oziers.
the diameter about two feet; the
depth nine inches; the cover is
somewhat dishing, with a tunnel
or inverted cone, in the centre,
reaching to within an inch of the
bottom of the basket; the aperture
or entrance, formed by the points
of the twigs, of which the tunnel is
constructed, being about an inch
and a half in diameter. and the
usual bait is wheat scattered in the
basket. the number caught at
once, is frequently more than theory
would suggest; the contentions of
a few that have entered, seldom
failing to bring others to the combat.
these mischievous birds, however,
soon grow too cunning to be taken
in any sort of trap to any extent,
which has a chance of extirpating
and destroying the race; consequently
some more effectual and
certain plan, such as that suggested
above, or some other, which is better
and more fully adapted to the purpose,
must be had recourse to in
order to completely exterminate
them, and prevent the injury they
do annually to the farmer, in the
destruction of his wheat and other
crops. though these are only small
birds, they destroy vast quantities
of grain, much more than has indeed
been commonly supposed. it is
stated to have been calculated to
have amounted to a hundred sacks
of wheat besides the oats and barley,
in the course of only one season,
in a township of no very great extent
in the north-western part of the
kingdom. where rewards or sums
of money are paid for the taking
or destroying them, no advantages
are gained, except where there are
sufficiently ample and proper regulations
entered into and enforced,
the whole district, parish, or township,
becomes partakers in the business.
no languid or half measures
will do any thing useful, or to the
purpose, in this sort of undertaking.
it is not improbable, but that these
destructive birds might be greatly
extirpated and thinned down in their
numbers, by the use of some tasteless
infusion of a strongly poisonous
nature, either to the ears of the
grain at the time of harvest, or to
the naked grain in the winter season,
when they are extremely eager
for food, as they are constantly
found to remain hovering about
houses or other buildings, where
the effects of such trials might easily[]
be ascertained. if such a method
should succeed, the whole race might
readily, and with great facility and
certainty, be exterminated.
spasms. an involuntary and
painful contraction of the muscles
may arise from various causes, and
require different modes of treatment.
but if no medical assistance be at
hand, the application of volatile liniments
to the part affected, a clyster
with a little laudanum in it, or the
warm bath, may be tried with advantage.
this is made of a quarter of a pint
of fine salad oil, a quarter of a pound
of white wax, and half an ounce of
spermaceti, melted over a gentle
fire, and kept stirring till the ointment
is cold.
spices. as it regards health,
spices are generally improper; but
black pepper, ginger, and cayenne,
may be esteemed the best. nutmegs,
cloves, mace, cinnamon, and allspice,
are generally productive of
indigestion and headach, in persons
of a weakly habit.
spiders. these industrious insects
are generally loathed and destroyed,
though they are extremely
useful in reducing the quantity of
flies, and serve as a very accurate
barometer for the weather. when
they are totally inactive, it is a certain
sign that rain will shortly follow; but
if they continue to spin
during a shower, it indicates that
the rain will soon be over, and that
calm and fine weather will succeed.
if the weather be about to change,
and become wet or windy, the spider
will make the supporters of his web
very short; but if the threads be
extended to an unusual length, the
weather will continue serene for ten
or twelve days, or more, according
to the length of the threads which
support the web. the red spider
however is very injurious and destructive
to different sorts of plants
and fruit-trees, especially in forcing
houses. it is found particularly so
to those of the forced french bean,
melon; peach, vine, cherry, currant,
and some other kinds. the generation
and production of this insect
are greatly caused and promoted by
the dry warm heat that is constantly
kept up in the houses which contain
these sorts of plants and trees, and
there are many other circumstances
which combine in bringing it forth.
it is an insect which has no wings,
and the female is oviparous. several
different methods have been attempted
in order to the removal and destruction
of it. constant daily watering,
or washing the trees, are said
to have the power of subduing it,
but in the execution of the work,
care is always to be taken that every
part of the leaves be wetted, otherwise
the insects shelter and save
themselves in the dry parts, and are
preserved from the effects of the
water. moisture conveyed in some
way or other is certainly found to
be the most destructive, of any thing
yet discovered, of these pernicious
insects, as well as many others that
infest hot-houses. throwing weak
lime-water in a plentiful manner on
the under sides of the leaves, where
these insects are commonly found,
will, for the most part, soon destroy
them. the following directions
have been given for the destruction
of this sort of spider, when it becomes
injurious to melon plants;
and the same may probably be
found useful for those of the forced
french bean, and some other similar
kinds. in cases of dry weather,
and with a dry heat, melon plants
are very subject to be infested with
the red spider; and the appearances
of it may constantly be long
noticed before the insects can be
seen with the naked eye, by the
leaves beginning to curl and crack
in their middle parts. whenever
they are discovered to be in this
state or condition, and there is fine
warm sunny weather, the watering[]
of them all over the leaves, both on
the under and upper sides, is advised;
a watering-pot, with a rose
finely perforated with holes, or a
garden-engine, which disperses the
water in a fine dew-like manner,
being employed for the purpose.
the work should be performed about
six o'clock in the morning, and the
plants be shaded with mats about
eight, if the sun shine with much
power, shutting the frames down
closely until about eleven; and then
admitting a small quantity of fresh
air, letting the mats remain until
about three in the afternoon, when
they should be wholly taken away.
the shade which is thus afforded
by the mats prevents the leaves of
the plants from being scorched or
otherwise injured by the action of
the heat of the sun while they are
in a wet cooled down state. where
a southerly breeze prevails, watering
them again about three in the
afternoon is recommended, shutting
them up close as before, to keep the
heat in, which causes a strong exhalation
of the moisture, and is
greatly destructive of the spiders.
in all these waterings, the water is
to be thrown as much and as finely
as possible on the under sides of the
leaves, where the insects mostly
lodge; the vines or stems of the
plants being gently turned in that
intention, taking great care not to
injure them, by which means the
water is capable of being easily
thrown over the whole of the under
sides of the leaves, it being done in
a gentle manner, in the modes already
suggested, so as not to wash
up the mouldy matters unto the
plants: the lights and sides of the
frames which contain the plants,
should also, at the same time, have
water plentifully thrown on and
against them. when these waterings
are finished, the vines or
stems of the plants are to be carefully
laid down again in their former
positions. and if the day be sunny,
the mats may be let remain, as already
directed, until the leaves of
the plants become perfectly dry,
air being admitted according to the
heat that may be present at the
time. it is likewise further advised
as a precautionary measure, that,
before the frames and lights, which
are to contain plants of this sort,
are employed, they should be well
washed, both inside and out, first
with clean water, and then with a
mixture of soap-suds and urine; a
brush or woollen rag being made
use of in the operation; as by this
method the ova or eggs of the spiders
or other insects that may have
been deposited and lodged in or on
them, in the preceding season, may
be cleared away and destroyed.
the exhalations of the water which
has been thrown upon the plants,
and the frames or boxes that contain
them, may also be useful in killing
these insects, in other cases by
keeping them in a close state. these
washings should never, however, be
performed in cold frosty seasons;
and the water made use of in such
cases should always be of the rain
or soft kind.
spinach. this vegetable requires
to be carefully washed and
picked. when that is done, throw
it into a saucepan that will just hold
it, sprinkle it with a little salt, and
cover it close. set the pan on the
fire, and shake it well. when sufficiently
done, beat up the spinach
with some butter, but it must be
sent to table pretty dry. it would
look well, if pressed into a tin mould
in the form of a large leaf, which is
sold at the tin shops. a spoonful
of cream is an improvement.
spinach cream. beat the
yolks of eight eggs with a whisk or
a wooden spoon, sweeten it well,
and add a stick of cinnamon, a pint
of rich cream, and three quarters of
a pint of new milk. stir it well, and
then add a quarter of a pint of
spinach juice. set it over a gentle[]
stove, and stir it constantly one way,
till it is as thick as a hasty pudding.
put into a custard dish some naples
biscuits, or preserved orange,
in long slices, and pour the mixture
over them. it is to be eaten cold,
and is a dish either for supper, or
for a second course.
spinach and eggs. the
spinach must be well washed, then
throw a small handful of salt into a
saucepan of boiling water, before
the spinach is put in, and press it
down as it boils. when it becomes
tender, press it well in a sieve or
cullender. break the eggs into cups,
and put them into a stewpan of boiling
water. when done, take them
out with a slice, and lay them on the
spinach. send them to table with
melted butter.
spinach pudding. scald
and chop some spinach very fine,
four ounces of biscuit soaked in
cream, the yolks of eight eggs beat
up, a quarter of a pound of melted
butter, a little salt and nutmeg, and
sugar to your taste; beat up all together,
and set it over the fire till it
is stiff, but do not let it boil; cool
it, and bake it in puff-paste; or you
may butter a bason, and boil it.—another.
boil a pint of cream, with
some lemon-peel, a blade of mace,
half a nutmeg cut in pieces; strain
it off, and stir it till it is cold,
then boil a good handful of young
spinach tender; chop it very fine;
beat up eight eggs, leave out four
whites, add some fine sugar pounded,
and a glass of sack; mix all
well together, put it into the dish,
with a puff-paste at the bottom, and
lay on the top candied orange and
lemon cut in thin slices. half an
hour, or a little better, will bake it.
spinach soup. shred two
handfuls of spinach, a turnip, two
onions, a head of celery, two carrots,
and a little parsley and thyme.
put all into a stewpot, with a bit of
butter the size of a walnut, and a
pint of good broth, or the liquor
in which meat has been boiled.
stew till the vegetables are quite
tender, and work them with a spoon
through a coarse cloth or sieve. to
the vegetable pulp and liquor, add
a quart of fresh water, salt and pepper,
and boil all together. have
ready some suet dumplins the size of
a walnut, and put them into a tureen,
before the soup is poured over.
the suet must be quite fresh, and
not shred too fine.
spirits. good pure spirits
ought to be perfectly clear, pleasant,
and strong, though not of a pungent
odour, and somewhat of a
vinous taste. to try the purity of
spirits, or whether they have been
diluted with water, see whether the
liquor will burn away without leaving
any mixture behind, by dipping
in a piece of writing paper, and
lighting it at the candle. as pure
spirit is much lighter than water,
put a hollow ivory ball into it: the
deeper the ball sinks, the lighter
the liquor, and consequently the
more spirituous.
spirits of clary. distil a
peck of clary flowers in a cold still,
and then another peck of flowers,
adding to them the distilled liquor.
put to this a bottle of sack or sweet
wine, and another peck of flowers,
and put all together into a glass
still. let it distil on white sugar
candy, with the addition of a little
ambergris.
spirits of lavender. take
fourteen pounds of lavender flowers,
ten gallons and a half of rectified
spirits of wine, and one gallon of
water. draw off ten gallons by a
gentle fire, or which is much better,
by a sand-bath heat. to convert
this into the red liquid known by
the name of compound lavender
spirits, take of the above lavender
spirits two gallons, of hungary water
one gallon, cinnamon and nutmegs
three ounces each, and of red
saunders one ounce. digest the
whole for three days in a gentle heat,[]
and then filtre it for use. some add
saffron, musk, and ambergris, of
each half a scruple; but these are
now generally omitted.
spirits of saffron. pick
eight ounces of english saffron very
clean, cut it fine, and steep it twenty-four
hours in a gallon of the best
white wine. put it into an alembic
with three gallons of water, draw it
off gently so long as the saffron
tastes, and sweeten it with white
sugar candy. dissolve the candy
in some of the weaker extract, after
the stronger part is drawn off, by
setting it on the fire, and then mix
the whole together.
spits. roasting spits require
to be kept bright and clean, and
should be scoured with nothing but
sand and water. if they are wiped
clean, as soon as the meat is drawn
from them, and while they are hot,
a very little cleaning will be necessary.
a very useful kind of spit is
sold at the ironmongers, which sustains
the meat without the necessity
of passing it through, which is much
to be preferred.
spitchcock eels. take one
or two large eels, leave the skin on,
cut them into pieces of three inches
long, open them on the belly side,
and clean them nicely. wipe them
dry, smear them over with egg, and
strew on both sides chopped parsley,
pepper and salt; a very little
sage, and a bit of mace pounded fine
and mixed with the seasoning. rub
the gridiron with a bit of suet, broil
the fish of a fine colour, and serve
with anchovy and butter sauce.
splinters. to run splinters,
prickles or thorns, such as those of
roses, thistles, or chesnuts, into the
hands, feet, or legs, is a very common
accident; and provided any
such substance is immediately extracted,
it is seldom attended with
any bad consequences. but the
more certainly to prevent any ill effects,
a compress of linen dipped in
warm water, may be applied to the
part, or it may be bathed a little
while in warm water. if the thorn
or splinter cannot be extracted directly,
or if any part of it be left in,
it causes an inflammation, and nothing
but timely precaution will prevent
its coming to an abscess. a
plaster of shoemaker's wax spread
upon leather, draws these wounds
remarkably well. when it is known
that any part of it remains, an expert
surgeon would open the place
and take it out; but if it be unobserved,
as will sometimes happen,
when the thorn or splinter is very
small, till the inflammation begins,
and no advice can be at once procured,
the steam of water should be
applied to it at first, and then a
poultice of bread and milk, with a
few drops of peruvian balsam. it
is absolutely necessary that the injured
part should be kept in the
easiest posture, and as still as possible.
if this does not soon succeed,
good advice must be obtained without
delay, as an accident of this
kind neglected, or improperly treated,
may be the occasion of losing a
limb. in this and all cases of inflammation,
a forbearance from animal
food, and fermented liquors, is
always advisable.
sponge cake. weigh ten
eggs, add their weight in very fine
sugar, and of flour the weight of six
eggs. beat the yolks with the flour,
and the whites alone, to a very stiff
froth. mix by degrees the whites
and the flour with the other ingredients,
beat them well half an hour,
and bake the cake an hour in a quick
oven.—another, without butter.
dry a pound of flour, and a pound
and a quarter of sugar. grate a
lemon, add a spoonful of brandy,
and beat the whole together with
the hand for an hour. bake the
cake in a buttered pan, in a quick
oven. sweetmeats may be added
if approved.
it is something more than a human[]
axiom, that milk is for babes; and
as this forms the basis of nearly all
the food from which their nourishment
is derived, it is necessary to
observe, that the best way of using
it is without either skimming or
boiling it. the cream is the most
nutritious balsamic part of milk, and
to deprive it of this is to render it
less nourishing, and less easy of digestion,
than in its pure state. in
some particular cases skimmed milk
may be preferable, but it may be
adopted as a general rule, that new
milk is the wholesomest and the best.
if it stands any time before it is
used, instead of taking off the cream,
it should be mixed in with the milk.
boiling the milk, if it be only a little,
fixes it, and entirely alters its qualities.
as a proof of this, it will
not afterwards afford any cream, but
merely a thin skin. in this state it
is hard of digestion, and therefore
apt to occasion obstructions. it is
most proper for food in its natural
state, or when only scalded.—one
of the first and simplest preparations
for infants is bread pap, made by
pouring scalding water on thin slices
of good white bread, and letting it
stand uncovered till it cools. the
water is then drained off, the bread
bruised fine, and mixed with as much
new milk as will make it of a tolerable
consistence. it is then warm
enough for use, without setting it
upon the fire. sugar is very commonly
put into this pap, but it is
much better without it. the palate
of the child will not require sugar
in any kind of food, till habit makes
it familiar.—egg pap is another
suitable article for young children.
set a quart of spring water on a
clear brisk fire. mix two spoonfuls
of fresh fine flour with the yolks of
two or three eggs well beaten, adding
a little cold water. when the
water is ready to boil, stir in the
batter before it boils, till of a sufficient
thickness. then take it off
the fire, add a little salt, pour it into
a basin, and let it cool of itself till
it become about as warm as milk
from the cow. if eggs cannot be
procured, a small piece of butter
may be added with the salt, and
stirred in gently till well mixed, to
prevent its oiling. eggs however
are to be preferred. this food is
extremely wholesome, affords real
nourishment, opens all the passages,
breeds good blood and lively spirits,
is pleasant to the palate, and grateful
to the stomach. the frequent
use of it purifies the blood and all
the humours, prevents windy distempers
and griping pain, both of
the stomach and bowels. from all
the ingredients bearing a resemblance
to each other, no predominant
quality prevails, so that it may
justly claim the first place amongst
all spoonmeats or paps, and as food
for infants it is next to the milk of
the breast. in some cases it is much
better, on account of the various
diseases to which suckling women
are subject, and the improper food
in which they too frequently indulge.
no other ingredients should however
be added to this kind of food,
such as sugar, spices, or fruits,
which tend only to vitiate the diet,
and to render it less nutritious. this
and other sorts of spoonmeat should
be made rather thin than otherwise,
and abounding with liquid, whether
milk or water. all porridges and
spoonmeats that are made thin, and
quickly prepared, are sweeter,
brisker on the palate, and easier of
digestion, than those which are
thick, and long in preparing. food
should never be given to children
more than milk warm, and the proper
way to cool it is by letting it
stand uncovered to cool itself; for
much stirring alters the composition,
and takes off the sweetness. covering
it down too, keeps in the fumes
that ought to go off, and by excluding
the air, renders it less pure.—flour
pap. to two thirds of new
milk, after it has stood five or six[]
hours from the time of milking, add
one third of spring water, and set it
on a quick clear fire. make a batter
of milk and fine flour, and just
as the milk and water is ready to
boil, pour in the batter, and stir it
a few minutes. when it is ready to
boil again, take it off, add a little
salt, and let it stand to cool. a
good spoonful of flour is sufficient
to thicken a pint of milk, or milk
and water. this will make it about
the thickness of common milk porridge,
which is what will eat the
sweetest, and be the easiest of digestion.
this kind of food affords
substantial nourishment, it neither
binds nor loosens the body, but
keeps it in proper order, nourishes
the blood, and tends to produce a
lively disposition. pap prepared
in this way is far more friendly to
nature than in the common way of
boiling, and may be constantly eaten
with much better effect, and without
ever tiring or cloying the stomach.—oatmeal
pap. mix a pint of milk
and water, in the proportion of two
thirds milk and one third water,
with a good spoonful of oatmeal,
but it is best not to be too thick.
set it in a saucepan upon a quick
clear fire, and when it is near boiling
take it off. pour it from one
basin into another, backwards and
forwards seven or eight times, which
will bring out the fine flour of the
oatmeal, and incorporate it with
the milk. then return it into the
saucepan, set it upon the fire, and
when it is again ready to boil take
it off, and let it stand in the saucepan
a little to fine, for the husky
part of the oatmeal will sink to the
bottom. when settled, pour it off
into a basin, add a little salt, and
let it stand to cool. this is an excellent
pap, very congenial to a
weak constitution, affording good
nourishment, and easy of digestion.—water
gruel. take a spoonful
and a half of fresh ground oatmeal,
mix with it gradually a quart of
spring water, and set it on a clear
fire. when ready to boil take it off,
pour it from one basin into another,
backwards and forwards five or six
times, and set it on the fire again.
take it off again just before it boils,
and let it stand a little time in the
saucepan, that the coarse husks of
the oatmeal may sink to the bottom.
then pour it out, add a little salt,
and let it stand to cool. when water
gruel is made with grots, it must
boil gently for some time. the
longer it boils the more it will jelly;
but moderation must be observed in
this respect, for if it be very long
boiled and becomes very thick, it
will be flat and heavy. a mistaken
idea very generally prevails, that
water gruel is not nourishing; on
the contrary, it is a light, cleansing,
nourishing food, good either in sickness
or in health, both for old and
young.—milk porridge. make some
water gruel, and when it has stood
awhile to cool, add to it about one
third part of new milk without boiling.
it may be eaten with or without
salt. milk porridge is exceedingly
cleansing and easy of digestion,
and is agreeable to the weakest
stomach. there is also another way
of making it, which some prefer.
stir a pint of water gradually into
three large spoonfuls of fresh oatmeal,
let it stand till clear, and then
pour off the water. put a pint of
fresh water to the oatmeal, stir it
up well, and leave it till the next
day. strain off the liquor through
a fine sieve, and set it in a saucepan
over a clear brisk fire. add about
half the quantity of milk gradually
while it is warming, and when it is
just ready to boil take it off, pour
it into a basin, add a little salt, and
let it stand to cool. this as well as
the former porridge is very light,
and proper for weak stomachs.—indian
arrow root is another excellent
preparation for children. put
a dessert-spoonful of the powdered
root into a basin, and mix with it[]
as much cold new milk as will make
it into a paste. pour upon this half
a pint of milk scalding-hot, stirring
it briskly to keep it smooth. set it
on the fire till it is ready to boil, then
take it off, pour it into a basin, and
let it cool. this may be made with
water instead of milk, and some
cold milk mixed with it afterwards;
or if the stomach be very weak, it
will be best without any milk at all.
great care must be taken to procure
the genuine arrow root, which makes
a very strengthening and excellent
food for infants or invalids.—sago
jelly. soak a large spoonful of
sago for an hour in cold water,
then pour off the water, add a
pint of fresh water to the sago, and
stew it gently till it is reduced to
about half the quantity. when done,
pour it into a basin, and let it cool.—sago
with milk. prepare a large
spoonful of sago by soaking it for
an hour in cold water, but instead
of adding water afterwards, put in
a pint and a half of new milk. boil
it gently till reduced to about half
the quantity, then pour it into a basin,
and let it cool.—tapioca jelly.
wash two good spoonfuls of the
large sort of tapioca in cold water,
and then soak it in a pint and a half
of water for four hours. stew it
gently in the same water till it is
quite clear. let it stand to cool
after it is poured out of the saucepan,
and use it either with or without
the addition of a little new milk.—pearl
barley gruel. put two
ounces of pearl barley, after it has
been well washed, into a quart of
water. simmer it gently till reduced
to a pint, then strain it through a
sieve, and let it cool.—rice gruel.
soak two large spoonfuls of rice in
cold water for an hour. pour off
the water, and put a pint and a
quarter of new milk to the rice.
stew it gently till the rice is sufficiently
tender to pulp it through
a sieve, and then mix the pulp into
the milk that the rice was stewed
in. simmer it over the fire for ten
minutes, and if it appear too thick,
gradually add a little more milk, so
as not to damp it from simmering.
when done, pour it into a basin to
cool.—rice milk. to four large
spoonfuls of whole rice, washed very
clean in cold water, add a quart of
new milk, and stew them together
very gently for three hours. let it
stand in a basin to cool before it is
used. another way of making rice
milk is boiling the rice first in water,
then pouring off the water, and boiling
the rice with milk. a better
way perhaps is, after washing the
rice well, setting it over the fire for
half an hour with a little water to
break it. add a little at a time some
warm milk, till it is sufficiently done,
and of a proper thickness. let it
simmer slowly, and season it with
salt and sugar; but for children the
sugar had better be omitted.—ground
rice milk. mix a large
spoonful of ground rice into a batter,
with two or three spoonfuls of new
milk. set a pint of new milk on
the fire, and when it is scalding hot,
stir in the batter, and keep it on the
fire till it thickens, but it must not
boil. it should be carefully stirred
to prevent its burning, and cooled
by standing by in a basin.—millet
milk. wash three spoonfuls of
millet seed in cold water, and put
it into a quart of new milk. simmer
it gently till it becomes moderately
thick, and cool it in a basin
till wanted for use. all those preparations
which require some time
in doing, also require the precaution
of being carefully stirred, to prevent
their burning.—drinks for young
children, in addition to their diet,
are best made of milk and water,
whey, barley water, pearl barley
water, apple water, and toast and
water. for milk and water, put
one third of new milk to two thirds
of spring water. this is best drunk
cold; but if it must be warmed, it
should be by putting warm water to[]
cold milk. it ought not to be made
more than milk warm. for whey,
take a quart of new milk before it is
cold, and put in as much rennet as
will turn it to a clear whey. let it
stand till it is properly turned, and
pour it off through a cheesecloth
without pressing the curd, that the
whey may be the purer. it may be
drunk cold, or just warmed by setting
it before the fire for a little
while. if new milk cannot be had,
other milk must be warmed to the
degree of new milk.—barley water
is made of a handful of common
barley well washed, and simmered
in three pints of water, till of a proper
thickness for use; but the longer
the barley boils, the thinner the liquor
will become. pearl barley
water is made of an ounce of pearl
barley, heated in half a pint of water
over the fire in order to clean it.
the water is then poured off, and a
quart of fresh water added to the
pearl barley. simmer it half an
hour, and if it appears too thick,
add more water, but let it be kept
warm, as any quantity of cold water
would damp it too suddenly, and
thus tend to spoil it. both this and
barley water may be used cold, or
milk warm.—apple water. slice
into a jug two or three sound ripe
apples, and pour on them a quart of
scalding hot water. let it stand to
cool, and it will be fit for use. the
apples should not be pared, as it
takes off their spirit.—toast and
water is made of a slice of white
bread toasted quite dry, and of a
dark brown colour. it is then put
into a jug, and spring water poured
upon it. after an hour it is fit for
use. as all these preparations, both
of drinks and spoonmeats, become
flat and good for little by long standing,
it is better to make only such
quantities of them at a time as will
soon be used. when they are warmed
up, no more should be done at
once than is just sufficient for the
occasion, as repeated warming injures
the nutritious quality of every
thing. when it can be avoided it
is better not to set things on the
fire to warm them up, but to place
them before or on the side of the
fire. care however must be taken
not to let them dry and scorch, as
it makes them very strong and unwholesome.
some earthenware vessel
should be used for this purpose,
as less liable to produce an injurious
effect. a very good method
of warming things is by setting them
in a basin over boiling water, or by
placing them in it.
sprains. these generally proceed
from some external injury, attended
with pain, swelling, and inflammation.
a fomentation of vinegar,
or camphorated spirits of wine,
if applied immediately, will generally
be sufficient: if not, a few
drops of laudanum should be added.
the fomentation should be frequently
renewed, and the sprained
part kept in a state of rest and relaxation.
sprats. when quite good and
fresh, their gills are of a fine red,
their eyes and whole body beautifully
bright. after being scaled
and cleaned, they should be fastened
in rows by a skewer run through
the heads; then broiled, and served
up hot and hot.
salt them well, and let the salt
drain from them. in twenty-four
hours wipe them dry, but do not
wash them. mix four ounces of
common salt, an ounce of bay salt,
an ounce of saltpetre, a quarter of
an ounce of sal-prunella, and half a
tea-spoonful of cochineal, all in the
finest powder. sprinkle it amongst
three quarts of the fish, and pack
them in two stone jars. keep them
in a cool place, fastened down with
a bladder. these artificial anchovies
are pleasant on bread and butter,
but the genuine should be used
for sauce.
peel and wash four dozen sticks of
rhubarb, put them into the stewpan
with a lemon, a little cinnamon, and
sweeten the whole with moist sugar.
set it over the fire, and reduce it to
a marmalade. pass it through a
hair sieve, add the yolks of four
eggs and one white, a quarter of a
pound of fresh butter, half a nutmeg,
and the peel of a lemon grated.
beat all well together, line the inside
of a pie dish with good puff
paste, put in the pudding, and bake
it half an hour.
spring soup. put a pint of
peas into a saucepan with some
chervil, purslain, lettuce, sorrel,
parsley, three or four onions, and a
piece of butter. shake them over
the fire a few minutes, add warm
water in proportion to the vegetables,
and stew them till they are
well done. strain off the soup, and
pulp the vegetables through a tammis
or sieve. heat the pulp with
three parts of the soup, mix six
yolks of eggs with the remainder of
it, and thicken it over the fire.
when ready to serve, add this to
the soup, and season the whole
with salt.
sprouts. before the sprouts
of greens are boiled, trim and wash
them very nicely, and drain them
in a cullender. then put them into
boiling water, with some salt thrown
in, and sprinkle a little more upon
the sprouts. boil them very fast,
and clear off any scum that may
arise. when the stalks are quite
tender, drain the sprouts off directly
into a cullender, or they will
lose both their flavour and colour.
serve them up laid neatly in the
dish with a fork, as that will not
break them like a spoon. borecole
and brussel sprouts, like all the
cabbage species, should be boiled
in plenty of water, changing it when
about half done, and boiling them
well.
spruce beer. pour sixteen
gallons of warm water into a barrel,
with twelve pounds of molasses,
and half a pound of the essence of
spruce. when cool, add a pint of
yeast, stir it well for two or three
days, and put it into stone bottles.
wire down the corks, pack the bottles
in saw dust, and the liquor will
ripen in about a fortnight.
squab pie. prepare apples as
for other pies, and lay them in rows
with mutton chops. shred some
onion, and sprinkle it among them,
and also some sugar.—another.
make a good crust, and sheet your
dish all over; lay a layer of pippins,
and strew sugar over them;
cut a loin of mutton into steaks,
season them with pepper and salt;
lay a layer of steaks, then pippins;
then lay some onions sliced thin on
the apples, then the rest of your
mutton, and apples and onions over
all; pour in a pint of water, and
lid your pye; let it be well baked.
steaks. beat them a little with
a rollingpin, then flour and season,
and fry them of a fine light brown,
with sliced onions. lay the steaks
into a stewpan, and pour over them
as much boiling water as will serve
for sauce. stew them very gently
for half an hour, and add a spoonful
of ketchup or walnut liquor, before
they are served up.
put into a bowl a pint of cider, and
a glass of brandy, with sugar and
nutmeg. pour into it some warm
milk, from a large tea-pot, held up
high, and moved over it.
stains by acids. wet the
injured part, and lay on some salt
of wormwood; then rub it, without
diluting it with more water. or let
the cloth imbibe a little water without
dipping, and hold the part over
a lighted match at a due distance.
the spots will be removed by the
sulphureous gas. another way is
to tie up some pearl ash in the stained
part, then scrape some soap into
cold soft water to make a lather,[]
and boil the linen till the stain disappears.
stains in mahogany. if
any kind of furniture get stained with
ink, dilute half a tea-spoonful of oil
of vitriol with a large spoonful of
water, and touch the stained part
with a feather dipped in the liquid.
it must be watched, and not suffered
to remain too long, or it will leave
a white mark. it is better to rub
it quick, and to moisten it again, if
the stain be not entirely removed.
staining of bone. this
article must first be prepared, by
being steeped for several days in a
mixture of roche alum, vitriol, verdigris,
and copper filings, infused in
white wine vinegar. when the ingredients
are dissolved, the mixture
may be boiled with the bone in it,
and it will take a fine green colour.
by infusing brazil wood, french
berries, or indigo in the vinegar, with
a little roche alum, either red, yellow,
or blue may be produced. either
bone, ivory, or wood, may be
coloured in this manner.
paper or parchment may be stained
of a green colour, by gradually dissolving
some copper filings in aqua-fortis,
or the spirits of salt, putting
in the filings till the ebullition ceases.
a solution of verdigris in vinegar, or
the crystals of verdigris in water,
will answer the same purpose. a
fine crimson stain may be produced
by a tincture of the indian lake, made
by infusing the lake several days in
spirits of wine, and pouring off the
tincture from the dregs. a beautiful
yellow may be formed from the tincture
of turmeric, made in the same
way. if the colours be wanted of
a deeper cast, arnatto or dragon's
blood may be added to the tincture.
staining of wood. to stain
wood of a mahogany colour, put it
into a mixture of oil of turpentine
and pounded dragon's blood, and
let it stand an hour over a slow fire.
when taken off the fire, the wood
may remain in the liquor all night.
the dye may be made stronger or
weaker, by using more or less of
dragon's blood, and by a greater or
less degree of digestion and boiling.
the best wood for this purpose is
plane tree, because it may easily be
sawn and polished, and is beautifully
veined and spotted. to stain wood
a fine black, drop a little oil of vitriol
into a small quantity of water, rub
it on the wood, and hold it to the
fire. it will then become a fine black,
and receive a beautiful polish.
trim and well wash the stalks of
green and white beet leaves, and boil
them in water, moving them frequently,
to prevent the upper ones
from turning black. when done
enough, drain them in a cullender.
make a white sauce with a little
flour and water, a piece of butter,
some pepper and salt, and a taste of
vinegar. thicken this over the fire,
and put in the stalks to stew gently
for a few minutes, to give them a
flavour. if the butter oils, it is a
sign that the sauce is too thick. in
this case add another spoonful or
two of water, and shake the stewpan
till the sauce recovers it appearance.
starch is a substance which is
extracted from wheaten flour, by
washing it in water. all farinaceous
seeds, and the roots of most vegetables,
afford this substance in a greater
or less degree; but it is most easily
obtained from the flour of wheat, by
moistening any quantity thereof with
a little water, and kneading it with
the hand into a tough paste: this
being washed with water, by letting
fall upon it a very slender stream,
the water will be rendered turbid as
it runs off, in consequence of the
fecula or starch which it extracts
from the flour, and which will subside
when the water is allowed to
stand at rest. the starch so obtained,
when dried in the sun, or by
a stove, is usually concreted into
small masses of a long figure and[]
columnar shape, which have a fine
white colour, scarcely any smell, and
very little taste. if kept dry, starch
in this state continues a long time
uninjured, although exposed to the
air. it is not soluble in cold water;
but forms a thick paste with boiling-hot
water, and when this paste is
allowed to cool, it becomes semi-transparent
and gelatinous, and being
dried, becomes brittle, and somewhat
resembles gum. starch, although
found in all nutritive grains,
is only perfect when they have attained
maturity, for before this it is
in a state approaching to mucilage,
and so mixed with saccharine matter
and essential oils, that it cannot be
extracted in sufficient purity to concrete
into masses. wheat, or such
parts of it as are not used for human
food, are usually employed for manufacturing
starch, such as the refuse
wheat and bran; but when the finest
starch is required, good grain must
be used. this, being well cleaned,
and sometimes coarsely bruised, is
put into wooden vessels full of water
to ferment: to assist the fermentation,
the vessels are exposed to the
greatest heat of the sun, and the
water is changed twice a day, during
eight or twelve days, according to
the season. when the grain bursts
easily under the finger, and gives
out a milky white liquor when
squeezed, it is judged to be sufficiently
softened and fermented. in
this state, the grains are taken out
of the water by a sieve, and put into
a canvas sack, and the husks are separated
and rubbed off, by beating
and rubbing the sack upon a plank:
the sack is then put into a tub filled
with cold water, and trodden or
beaten till the water becomes milky
and turbid, from the starch which it
takes up from the grain. a scum
sometimes swims upon the surface
of the water, which must be carefully
removed; the water is then run off
through a fine sieve into a settling-vessel,
and fresh water is poured
upon the grains, two or three times,
till it will not extract any more starch,
or become coloured by the grain.
the water in the settling-vessels
being left at rest, precipitates the
starch which it held suspended; and
to get rid of the saccharine matter,
which was also dissolved by the water,
the vessels are exposed to the
sun, which soon produces the acetous
fermentation, and takes up such
matter as renders the starch more
pure and white. during this process,
the starch for sale in the shops
receives its colour, which consists
of smalt mixed with water and a
small quantity of alum, and is thoroughly
incorporated with the starch;
but this starch is unfit for medicinal
purposes. when the water becomes
completely sour, it is poured gently
off from the starch, which is washed
several times afterwards with clean
water, and at last is placed to drain
upon linen cloths supported by hurdles,
and the water drips through,
leaving the starch upon the cloths,
in which it is pressed or wrung, to
extract as much as possible of the
water; and the remainder is evaporated,
by cutting the starch into
pieces, which are laid up in airy
places, upon a floor of plaster or of
slightly burnt bricks, until it becomes
completely dried from all moisture,
partly by the access of warm air, and
partly by the floor imbibing the
moisture. in winter time, the heat
of a stove must be employed to effect
the drying. lastly, the pieces of
dried starch are scraped, to remove
the outside crust, which makes inferior
starch, and these pieces are
broken into smaller pieces for sale.
the grain which remains in the sack
after the starch is extracted, contains
the husks and the glutinous part of
the wheat, which are found very nutritious
food for cattle. the french
manufacturers, according to "les
arts et metiers," pursue a more economical
method, as they are enabled,
by employing an acid water for the[]
fermentation in the first instance, to
use the most inferior wheat, and the
bran or husks of wheat. this water
they prepare, by putting a pailful of
warm water into a tub, with about
two pounds of leaven, such as some
bakers use to make their dough rise
or ferment. the water stands two
days, and is then stirred up, and half
a pailful of warm water added to it;
then being left to settle till it is clear,
it is poured off for use. to use this
water in the fermentation of the materials,
a quantity of it is poured into
a tub, and about as much fair water
is poured upon it as will fill the tub
half full: the remainder of the tub
is then filled up with the materials,
which are one half refuse wheat,
and the other half bran. in this tub
it continues to steep and ferment
during ten days, or less, according
to the strength of the leaven-water,
and according to the disposition of
the weather for fermentation. when
the materials have been sufficiently
steeped, or fermented, an unctuous
matter, which is the oil of the grain,
will be seen swimming on the surface,
having been thrown up by the
fermentation. this must be scummed
off; and the fermented grain,
being taken out of the tub, is put
into a fine hair sieve, placed over a
settling-tub, when fair water is poured
upon it, and washed through the
sieve into the tub; by which means
the starch is carried through the
sieve with the water, of which about
six times the quantity of the grain
are used. the water stands in the
settling tub for a day, and becomes
clear at top; when it is carefully
laded out of the tub, leaving at the
bottom a white sediment, which is
the starch. the water which is
taken off is sour, and is called sure
water: this is the proper leaven for
the first steeping of the materials.
the starch now obtained must be
rendered marketable; for which purpose,
as much water is poured upon
it as will enable it to be pounded and
broken up with a shovel, and then
the tub is filled up with fair water.
two days after this, the water is
laded out from the tub, and the starch
appears in the bottom, but covered
over with a dark-coloured and inferior
kind of starch, which is taken
off, and employed for fattening hogs.
the remainder of the sediment, which
is good starch, is washed several
times, to remove all the inferior
starch; and when this is done, about
four inches of thick starch should
be found at the bottom of each tub:
but the quantity varies, according
to the goodness of the meal or bran
which has been used. it is evident
that the refuse wheat, when employed
for making starch, ought to afford
more, the whole being used, than
the bran or husks; but the starch so
extracted is always of an inferior
quality to that which is extracted
from the bran of good wheat, particularly
in the whiteness of its colour.
the starch in the different tubs is
brought together into one, and there
worked up with as much water as
will dissolve it into a thin paste,
which is put into a silk sieve, and
strained through with fresh water.
this water is settled in a tub, and
afterwards poured off, but before it
is so completely settled as to lose all
its white colour: this renders the
starch which is deposited, still finer
and whiter; and the starch which is
deposited by the water so poured
off, is of a more common quality.
the starch, thus purified, is taken
out of the bottom of the tubs, and
put into wicker-baskets, about eighteen
inches long and ten deep, rounded
at the corners, and lined with
linen cloths, which are not fastened
to the baskets. the water drips
from the starch through the cloths
for a day, and the baskets are then
carried up to apartments at the top
of the house, where the floor is made
of very clean white plaster; and the
windows are thrown open, to admit
a current of air. here the baskets[]
are turned downwards upon the plaster-floor,
and the linen cloths, not
being fastened to the baskets, follow
the starch, and when taken off, leave
loaves, or cakes of starch, which are
left to dry a little, and are then
broken into smaller pieces, and left
on the plaster-floor, till very dry.
but if the weather is at all humid,
the starch is removed from the plaster-floor
and spread out upon shelves,
in an apartment which is warmed
by a stove, and there it remains till
perfectly dry. the pieces are afterwards
scraped, to remove the outside
crust, which makes common
starch; and the scraped pieces being
again broken small, the starch
is carried to the stove, and spread
out to a depth of three inches, on
hurdles covered with cloths. the
starch must be turned over every
morning and evening, to prevent it
from turning to a greenish colour,
which it would otherwise do. those
manufacturers who are not provided
with a stove, make use of the top of
a baker's oven to spread the starch
upon; and after being thoroughly
dried here, it is ready for sale. starch
may be made from potatoes, by
soaking them about an hour in water,
and taking off their roots and
fibres, then rubbing them quite clean
by a strong brush: after this they
are reduced to a pulp, by grating
them in water. this pulp is to be
collected in a tub, and mixed up
with a large quantity of clear water:
at the same time, another clean tub
must be provided; and a hair sieve,
not too fine, must be supported over
it by two wooden rails extended
across the tub. the pulp and water
are thrown into the sieve, and the
flour of starch is carried through
with the water; fresh water must
then be poured on, till it runs through
quite clear. the refuse pulp which
remains in the sieve, being boiled in
water, makes an excellent food for
animals; and the quantity of this
pulp is near seven-eighths of all the
potatoes employed. the liquor which
has passed through the sieve is turbid,
and of a darkish colour, from
the extractive matter which is dissolved
in it. when it is suffered to
rest for five or six hours, all this
matter deposits or settles to the bottom,
and the liquor which remains
is to be poured off as useless; and
a large quantity of fresh water is
thrown upon the flour, and stirred
up: it is then settled for a day, and
the water being poured off, the flour
will be found to have again settled
in a whiter state. but to improve
it, another quantity of water is poured
on, and mixed up with it; in
which state it is passed through a
fine silk sieve, to arrest any small
quantity of the pulp which may have
escaped the first hair sieve. the
whole must afterwards be suffered
to stand quiet, till the flour is entirely
settled, and the water above
become perfectly clear; but if the
water has any sensible colour or
taste, the flour must be washed again
with fresh water, for it is absolutely
necessary that none of the extractive
matter be suffered to remain with it.
the flour, when thus obtained pure,
and drained from the water, may be
taken out of the tub with a wooden
shovel, and placed upon wicker-frames
covered with paper, to be
dried in some situation properly defended
from dust. when the manufacture
of starch from potatoes
is attempted in a large way, some
kind of mill must be used to reduce
them to a pulp, as the grating of
them by hand is too tedious an operation.
a mill invented by m. baumé
is very complete for this purpose.
in its general structure it resembles
a large coffee-mill: the grater consists
of a cone of iron plate, about
seven inches in diameter, and eight
inches in height, the exterior surface
of which is made toothed, like
a rasp, by piercing holes through
the plate from the inside. this cone
is fixed upon a verticle axle, with a[]
handle at the top to turn it by; and
is mounted on the pivots of the axle,
within a hollow cylinder of plate-iron,
toothed withinside like the outside
of the cone; the smallest end
of the interior cone being uppermost,
and the lower or larger end being
as large as the interior diameter of
the hollow cylinder. a conical hopper
is fixed to the hollow cylinder,
round the top of it, into which the
potatoes are thrown; and falling
down into the space between the outside
of the cone and the inside of
the hollow cylinder, they are ground,
and reduced to a pulp, when the interior
cone is turned round by its
handle; and as the lower part of
the cone is fitted close to the interior
diameter of the cylinder, the potatoes
must be ground to a fine pulp
before they can pass through between
the two. the machine, when
at work, is placed in a tub filled with
water; and as fast as the grinding
proceeds, the pulp mixes regularly
with the water, ready for the process
before described. poland starch is
reckoned the best: its quality may
be judged of by the fineness of the
grain, its being very brittle, and of
a good colour. the price of starch
depends upon that of flour; and
when bread is cheap, starch may be
bought to advantage. if it be of
good quality it will keep for some
years, covered close, and laid up in
a dry warm room. in the year ,
lord william murray obtained a patent
for manufacturing starch from
horse-chesnuts. the method was
to take the horse-chesnuts out of the
outward green prickly husk, and
either by hand, with a knife or tool,
or else with a mill adapted for the
purpose, the brown rind was carefully
removed, leaving the chesnuts
perfectly white, and without the
smallest speck. in this state the
nuts were rasped or ground to a pulp
with water, and the pulp washed
with water through a coarse horse-hair
sieve, and twice afterwards
through finer sieves, with a constant
addition of clear cold water, till all
the starch was washed clean from
the pulp which remained in the sieve;
and the water being settled, deposited
the starch, which was afterwards
repeatedly washed, purified, and
dried, in the same manner as the
potatoe-starch before described. we
are not informed if this manufacture
has been carried into effect. the
sour, nauseous, milky liquor obtained
in the process of starch-making,
appears, upon analysis, to contain
acetous acid, ammonia, alcohol,
gluten, and phosphate of lime. the
office of the acid is to dissolve the
gluten and phosphate of lime, and
thus to separate them from the starch.
starch is used along with smalt, or
stone-blue, to stiffen and clear linen.
the powder of it is also used to
whiten and powder the hair. it is
also used by the dyers, to dispose
their stuffs to take colours the better.
starch is sometimes used instead of
sugar-candy for mixing with the colours
that are used in strong gum-water,
to make them work more
freely, and to prevent their cracking.
it is also used medicinally for the
same intentions with the viscous substance
which the flour of wheat forms
with milk, in fluxes and catarrhs,
under various forms of powders,
mixtures, &c. a drachm of starch,
with three ounces of any agreeable
simple water, and a little sugar, compose
an elegant jelly, of which a
spoonful may be taken every hour
or two. these gelatinous mixtures
are likewise an useful injection in
some diarrhœas, particularly where
the lower intestines have their natural
mucus rubbed off by the flux, or
are constantly irritated by the acrimony
of the matter.
steaks fried. moisten the
pan with butter, put in some beef
steaks, and when done, lay them on
a dish. put to the gravy that comes
out of them, a glass of port wine,
half an anchovy, a sliced shalot with[]
nutmeg, pepper, and salt. give it a
boil in the pan, pour it over the
steaks, and send them hot to table.
in a plainer way, put a little flour and
water into the pan with the gravy
when the steaks are taken out, adding
a spoonful of ketchup, an onion
or shalot. the wine and anchovy
may be omitted. garnish with scraped
horse-radish round the dish.
steak pie. raise a crust pretty
deep and thick. divide a breast or
neck of mutton into steaks, beat and
season them with nutmeg, pepper,
and salt. add some sweet herbs cut
very fine, two onions sliced, the yolks
of three or four hard eggs minced,
and two spoonfuls of capers. scatter
these among the steaks as they are
laid into the pie. put on the top
crust, and let the pie soak in a moderately
hot oven for two hours or longer,
according to its size. have some
gravy ready to put into it through a
funnel, when it is to be served up.
steak pudding. make a
paste of suet or dripping and flour,
roll it out, and line a basin with it.
season the meat, and put it in. cover
it with the paste, pinch it close
round the edge, tie it up in a cloth,
and boil it two hours, but be careful
not to break it.—another way. make
a good paste, with suet shred very
fine, and flour; mix it up with cold
water, and a little salt, and make
your crust pretty stiff; about two
pounds of suet to a quarter of a peck
of flour. let the steaks be either beef
or mutton, well seasoned with pepper
and salt; make it up like an
apple-pudding, tie it in a cloth tight,
and put it into the water boiling. if
it be a large pudding, it will take
four or five hours; if a middling one,
three hours.
steaks rolled. after beating
them to make them tender, spread
them over with any quantity of high
seasoned forcemeat. then roll them
up, and skewer them tight. fry the
steaks in nice dripping, till they become
of a delicate brown. then take
them out of the fat in which they
were fried, and put them into a stewpan
with some good gravy, a spoonful
of port wine, and some ketchup.
when sufficiently stewed, serve them
up with the gravy, and a few pickled
mushrooms.
steam. steam is employed to
great advantage for culinary purposes.
it is made to communicate
with vessels in the form of boilers,
as a substitute for having fires under
them, which is a great advantage,
both in the economy of fuel,
and in avoiding at the same time the
nuisance of ashes and smoke. the
most convenient application of steam
for culinary purposes is, when it
directly acts upon the substance to
be heated. this has been generally
effected by placing the substance,
whether meat or vegetables, in a
vessel without water, and allowing
the steam to enter and condense
upon it. the most convenient apparatus
of this kind we have yet
heard of, consists of a cast-iron
plate about thirty inches or three
feet square, standing horizontally in
a recess in the wall, like a table.
round the edge of this plate is a
groove, about half an inch wide and
two inches deep. into this groove
fits an inverted tin vessel, like a dish-cover.
this is capable of being elevated
and depressed by a pulley and
chain, having a counterpoise, in order
to expose the table at any time.
the steam comes under the table
and enters in the centre. the dishes
to receive the heat are placed on
any part within the groove, the steam
being common to all. the water
resulting from the condensation runs
into the groove, and at a point short
of the top runs off. the water which
remains forms a complete water-lute,
to prevent the escape of steam. the
table being placed in a recess, like a
common stone hearth, a small flue is
placed over it to take away any
steam that may escape when the
cover is lifted up. the great quantity[]
of hot water required in a scullery
should be perpetually kept up
by a supply of steam. for this purpose
a large cylindrical vessel of
cast-iron should be elevated in a
corner of the scullery, in order that
water may be drawn from it by a
cock. this vessel should be connected
from the bottom with a cold-water
cistern, the bottom of which
is level with the top of the cylinder,
by which the latter is kept constantly
full. the hot-water cylinder is
closed firmly at the top, and therefore,
when the air is allowed to escape,
the water rises to the top. if
now a pipe be connected with the
top, coming down to where it is to
be drawn off, if any portion is drawn
out here, as much will come in at
the bottom of the cylinder from the
reservoir above. so far we have
described this cylinder without its
steam-vessel. within this cylinder,
and about the middle, is a distinct
vessel, nearly of the width of the cylinder;
but having a free space round
the inner vessel about an inch wide.
the depth of the inner vessel must
be about one-sixth that of the outer
one. this inner vessel must have
no connection with the outer one,
and must be so water-tight, that although
it is surrounded with the
water of the outer one, none should
get in. the inner vessel is on one
side connected by a pipe with a
steam-boiler, having another pipe
to allow the condensed water to run
off, which may be preserved as distilled
water, and is valuable for many
purposes. the heat arising from
the condensation is communicated
to the water in the outer vessel, the
hottest being at the top, where the
mouth of the exit-pipe is placed.
when, therefore, a portion of hot
water is drawn from the cock, the
pipe of which comes from the top of
the vessel immediately under the
cover, an equal quantity comes in at
the bottom from the reservoir. this
useful apparatus is the invention of
an ingenious economist of derby,
and is at present in use in his kitchen.
the art of boiling vegetables
of all kinds in steam instead of water,
might probably be managed to
advantage, as a greater degree of
heat might be thus given them, by
contriving to increase the heat of
the steam after it has left the water;
and thus the vegetable mucilage in
roots and seeds, as in potatoes and
flour puddings, as well as in their
leaves, stems, and flower-cups, might
be rendered probably more nutritive,
and perhaps more palatable;
but that many of the leaves of vegetables,
as the summits of cabbage-sprouts,
lose their green colour by
being boiled in steam, and look like
blanched vegetables. steam has
likewise lately been applied in gardening
to the purpose of forcing
plants of different kinds in the winter
season, in order to have their
produce at an early period, as to
the cucumber, and some other vegetables
of a somewhat similar nature;
but the exact manner of its
application in this intention, so far
as we know, has not yet been communicated
to the public; it is, however,
by some mode of flues, pipes,
and other contrivances for conveying
and containing it, so as that its heat
may be uninterruptedly, equally,
and regularly afforded to the roots
of the plants which it is designed to
push forward into the fruiting state.
it is said to have been used in some
instances in different parts of lancashire
with great success. but how
far the expense and advantage of
such a method may admit of and
encourage its being introduced into
general practice, have not, probably,
yet been well or fully ascertained.
if it should be found capable of perfectly
succeeding in this use, on
more full and correct experience, it
will, however, constitute not only a
neat and clean, but an elegant mode
of forcing plants into fruit at early
seasons.[]
steamed potatoes. the
potatoes must be well washed, but
not pared, and put into the steamer
when the water boils. moderate sized
potatoes will require three quarters
of an hour to do them properly.
they should be taken up as soon as
they are done enough, or they will
become watery.
steel. to transform iron into
steel, put four ounces of cast iron
into a crucible, with a considerable
degree of heat. while in a state of
fusion, immerse in it a polished iron
wire of some thickness, and keep it
there for some time, but not so long
as to fuse it. when cold, the wire
will be so hard as to resist the action
of a common file, being converted
into steel.
steel rust. the prevention of
rust, on such articles of furniture as
are made of polished steel, is an object
of great importance in domestic
economy. the cutlers in sheffield,
when they have given a knife or razor
blade the requisite degree of
polish, rub them with powdered
quick-lime, in order to prevent them
from tarnishing; and it seems that
articles made of polished steel are
dipped in lime water, before they
are sent into the retail market. but
when steel has contracted rust, the
method of cleaning and polishing it
is to oil the rusty parts, and let it
remain in that state two or three
days. then wipe it dry with clean
rags, and polish with emery or pumice
stone, or hard wood. after the
oil is cleared off, a little fresh lime
finely powdered will often be found
sufficient; but where a higher polish
is required, it will be necessary to
use a paste composed of finely levigated
bloodstone and spirits of wine.
steel stoves. to preserve
them effectually from rust, beat into
three pounds of unsalted lard, two
drams of camphor sliced thin, till the
whole is absorbed. then take as
much black lead as will make it of
the colour of broken steel; dip a rag
into it, rub it thick on the stove, and
the steel will never rust, even if wetted.
when the stove is to be used,
the grease must be washed off with
hot water, and the steel be dried
before polishing.
stewed artichokes. wash
and pare some jerusalem artichokes,
and part them in two. boil them in
a small quantity of gravy till almost
done, and the liquor nearly consumed.
then add some cream, a piece
of butter rolled in flour and a little
salt, all in proportion to the number
of artichokes. stew them gently for
ten minutes, and serve them up with
sippets of white bread fried.
boil some artichokes till
about half done, and then take off
the leaves and the choke. trim the
bottoms nicely, and stew them gently
in some gravy, with a little lemon-juice
or vinegar, and some salt, till
they are quite tender. before serving
them up, wipe them dry, then lay
them in a dish with sippets of toasted
or fried bread laid round it, and
pour some strong clear gravy over
them. dried artichoke bottoms may
also be used for stewing, but should
first be soaked a little while in warm
water.
take a nice breast of veal, cut off
the thin end, and boil it down for
your sauce, with a faggot of sweet
herbs, an onion stuck with three
cloves, two blades of mace, some
whole pepper and salt; put to it a
quart of water, and let it stew gently
till half is wasted, then raise the
skin off your breast of veal, and
make a forcemeat of the sweetbread
first parboiled, a few crumbs
of bread, a little beef suet, and some
parsley shred very fine; season it
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg;
moisten it with a spoonful of cream,
and an egg; mix all well together,
and force your veal; skewer it down
close, dredge it over with flour, tie
it up in a clean cloth, and let it boil[]
an hour and a half. if your gravy is
done, strain it off, and take off the fat
very clean; blanch and beard half a
pint of oysters, a gill of pickled mushrooms,
a little lemon-peel shred very
fine: put this to your gravy, and
thicken it with a piece of butter rolled
in flour; fry six or eight large oysters,
dipped in batter for garnish.
when your veal is enough, dish it up,
and pour your sauce over. garnish
your dish with lemon, oysters, and
barberries.
stew nine pounds of brisket of beef,
in two gallons of water, for two or
three hours over night. when made
sufficiently tender, take out the
bones, and carefully skim off the fat.
boil in some of the liquor a few carrots,
turnips, onions, celery, and
white cabbage, till they become quite
tender. add some salt, and the remainder
of the broth to the beef, and
stew all together till sufficiently done.
larded. take a calf's liver, and
lard it, and put it into a stewpan,
with some water, a bundle of sweet
herbs, an onion, a blade of mace,
some whole pepper, and a little salt;
cover it close, and let it stew till it
is enough; then take up your liver,
and put it into the dish you intend;
cover it over, and take out your
herbs and spice; skim off all the
fat very clean; put in a piece of
butter rolled in flour; boil it till it
is of a proper thickness; pour it
over your liver, and send it to table
garnished with lemon.
stewed cardoons. cut
them into pieces, not more than five
or six inches long. take off the
outward skin, and wash and scald
them. put them into a stewpan,
with gravy enough to cover them,
and let them stew gently till almost
done, and the liquor nearly exhausted.
add a small quantity of fresh
gravy, and continue stewing them
gently till quite tender. serve them
up with sippets of toasted bread
round the edge of the dish. if the
gravy is not sufficiently seasoned,
add a little salt and cayenne.
stewed carp. scale and clean
the fish, and preserve the roe. lay
the carp in a stewpan, with a rich
beef-gravy, an onion, eight cloves,
a dessert-spoonful of jamaica pepper,
the same of black pepper, and
a glass of port or cider. simmer it
closely covered; when nearly done,
add two anchovies chopped fine, a
dessert-spoonful of made mustard,
a little fine walnut ketchup, and a
bit of butter rolled in flour. shake
it, and let the gravy boil a few minutes.
serve with sippets of fried
bread, the roe fried, and a good deal
of horseradish and lemon.—another
way. scale your carp, then gut and
wash them very clean, and dry them
in a cloth; put a piece of butter into
a stewpan, when it is hot, fry
them as quick as you can, till they
are of a fine brown; boil the roes,
then fry them of a fine gold colour;
take them up, and keep them hot before
the fire: then put to your carp
half port wine and half water, as much
as will cover them a little more than
half way; put in some thyme, parsley,
a piece of lemon-peel, whole pepper,
a few cloves, a blade or two of
mace, an onion, some horse-radish
sliced, and two spoonfuls of ketchup;
put on your cover, and let it
stew very gently, till your fish is
enough; do not turn them in the pan,
but with a ladle take some of the liquor,
and pour over your fish every
now and then, while they are stewing,
then cover them close again:
when they are done enough, take
them out of the pan with a slice, and
take care not to break them; put
them into the dish you intend to
send them to table in, then strain
the liquor, and thicken it up with a
piece of butter rolled in flour; let it
boil till it is pretty thick, pour the
sauce over the fish, and garnish your[]
dish with the roes, lemon, and horseradish,
and send it to table. you
may squeeze a little lemon into the
sauce, if you like it, and add oysters
fried in butter; or you may stew them
in cider, instead of wine, and it is
very little inferior. tench may be
done the same way.—to stew carp
white. scale and gut your fish very
clean, save the roes and melts, then
stove them in some good white broth;
season them with mace, salt, whole
pepper, an onion stuck with cloves,
a faggot of sweet herbs, and about
half a pint of white wine; cover them
close, and let them stew gently over
a charcoal fire. dip the roes and
melts in the yolk of an egg; flour
them, and fry them of a fine brown,
and have fried parsley and sippets
ready. when the fish is near done,
take out the onion and faggot, beat
up the yolks of four or five eggs,
take up the fish carefully, and put
it into the dish you serve it in; pour
off the sauce, then strain it into a
stewpan, and put in your eggs; keep
it stirring till it is as fine as cream,
then pour it over the dish. garnish
with the roes, fried parsley, sippets,
horseradish scraped, and lemon:
send it as hot as possible to table.—a
plain way to stew carp. clean
your carp very well, cut them in two,
put them into a stewpan, with a little
onion shred fine, pepper, salt, a little
beaten mace, a few capers chopped
small, and some crusts of bread chipped
in. then pour in a gill of
white, and a gill of red wine, and as
much water as will just cover them;
cover the pan close, and let them
stew till they are enough, and the
sauce grown thick. serve it up with
lemon and horseradish for garnish.
stewed carrots. half boil,
scrape them nicely, and slice them
into a stewpan. add half a tea-cupful
of weak broth, the same quantity
of cream, with pepper and salt. simmer
till the carrots are quite tender,
but not broken. before serving,
warm them up with a bit of butter
rubbed in flour. chopped parsley
may be added, if approved, ten minutes
before serving.
stewed celery. wash six
heads, and strip off the outer leaves.
either divide or leave them whole,
according to their size, and cut them
into lengths of four inches. put them
into a stewpan with a cup of broth,
or weak gravy, and stew them tender.
add two spoonfuls of cream,
and a little flour and butter seasoned
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, and
simmer them all together.
stewed chickens. cut two
chickens into quarters; wash them
clean, and put them into a stewpan,
with half a pint of red wine, and a
gill of water, an onion, a faggot of
sweet herbs, seasoned with mace,
pepper, and salt; cover them close,
and let them stew half an hour, then
take the quantity of an egg of butter
rolled in flour; take out the onion
and sweet herbs; shake it round till
it is of a good thickness, and take off
all the scum very clean: dish it up
garnished with lemon.—to stew
chickens for a tender stomach. take
two nice chickens, and half boil
them; then take them up into a
small soup-dish; separate all the
joints, and add three or four spoonfuls
of the liquor they are boiled in,
with a little beaten mace, and salt;
then cover them close with another
dish, and keep in all the steam; set
it over a clear stove, and let it stew
till the chickens are enough, and send
them hot to table in the same dish
they were stewed in.
stewed cod. cut a cod in
slices, as you would for crimping,
lay it in a clean stewpan; season it
with nutmeg, a little mace finely
beaten, pepper, and salt, and a bundle
of sweet herbs; then pour in
white wine and water an equal quantity,
just to cover it: put on the
cover, and let it simmer for six or
eight minutes; skim it very clean,[]
put in half a pint of shrimps clean
picked, a good piece of butter rolled
in flour, and the juice of a lemon;
cover it, and shake your pan round
gently: as soon as it begins to boil,
take off all the scum as it rises: if
your sauce is of a proper thickness,
your fish will be enough; wipe the
rim of the pan very clean, and slide
the fish into your dish, taking care
not to break it. garnish with lemon
and scraped horse-radish.—another
way. lay the slices into a large
stewpan, so that they need not be
laid one upon another. season with
nutmeg, pepper, and salt, a bundle
of sweet herbs, and an onion. add
half a pint of white wine, and a quarter
of a pint of water. simmer it
gently a few minutes, squeeze in a
lemon, add a few oysters, the liquor
strained, a piece of butter rolled in
flour, and a little mace. cover it
close, and let it stew gently, shaking
the pan often. when done take out
the herbs and onions, and serve it
up with the sauce poured over it.
stewed cucumbers. slice
them thick, or halve and divide them
into two lengths. strew over them
some salt and pepper, and sliced
onions: add a little broth, or a bit
of butter. simmer very slowly, and
put in a little flour and butter before
serving.—another way. slice the
onions, and cut the cucumbers large.
flour and fry them in butter, then
stew them in good broth or gravy,
and skim off the fat.
stewed duck. half roast a
duck, put it into a stewpan with a
pint of beef gravy, a few leaves of
sage and mint cut small, pepper and
salt, and a small bit of onion shred
as fine as possible. simmer them a
quarter of an hour, skim it clean,
and add nearly a quart of green
peas. cover the stewpan close, and
simmer near half an hour longer.
put in a piece of butter and a little
flour, give it one boil, and serve all
together in a dish.
stewed eels. melt an ounce
of butter in a stewpan, add a handful
of sorrel cut in large pieces, a
dozen sage leaves finely minced,
five pounds of eels cut in pieces,
and seasoned with pepper and salt.
then put in two anchovies boned
and minced, half a nutmeg, and half
a pint of water. stew them gently
together for half an hour, take out
the onion, squeeze in a lemon, and
lay toasted bread round the dish.
half this quantity will be sufficient
for a small dish.—another way.
take what quantity of eels you please;
after they are cleaned, fry them in
butter, then pour the butter clear
off; put into your pan a bundle of
sweet herbs, an onion stuck with
two or three cloves, a blade of mace,
some whole pepper, and a little salt;
then add a pint of red wine and water,
and let them stew till they are
tender: put the eels into a dish,
strain off the sauce, and thicken it
up with a piece of butter rolled in
flour, or a piece of thickened burnt
butter. garnish your dish with
horse-radish and lemon.—another
way. having cleaned your eels very
well, cut them in pieces, put them
into a stewpan, with a bundle of
sweet herbs, an onion stuck with
cloves, mace, whole pepper, and a
little salt; put to them a gill of white
wine, half a pint of red, and a gill
of water; cover them close, and let
them stew till tender; strain off the
gravy, thicken it up, and send it to
table.—to stew an eel whole. take
a fine large eel, clean it well, force
the inside with crumbs of bread, an
anchovy cut fine, salt, pepper, a little
nutmeg, and two or three oysters
bruised, with some parsley shred
fine; fill the inside as full as you
can, sew it up with fine thread, turn
it round, and run a small skewer
through it, to keep it in its folds;
put it into a small stewpan, with an
onion stuck with cloves, and a faggot
of herbs; put over it red wine;
cover the pan down very close, and
let it stew gently till tender; take[]
out the onion, &c. put the eel into
a dish, and a plate over it; thicken
the sauce with butter rolled in flour,
and squeeze a little lemon into the
plate. if you have any forcemeat
left, make them into small balls, and
fry them; put them into the sauce,
give them a toss, and pour it over
the eel. garnish the dish with fried
oysters, horseradish, and lemon.
stewed endive. trim off all
the green parts of the endive, wash
and cut into pieces, and scald it till
about half done. drain it well,
chop it a little, put it into a stewpan
with a little strong gravy, and
stew it gently till quite tender. season
it with some pepper and salt,
and serve it up as a sauce to any
kind of roast meat; or it eats well
with potatoes.
take a fowl or turkey trussed
short as for boiling, press down the
breast-bone, put it into a clean stewpan,
with good veal broth, as much
as will cover it; season it with beaten
mace, pepper and salt, a faggot
of sweet herbs, and an onion; cover
it close, and let it boil; in the mean
time, take a large bunch of celery,
cut all the white part small, and
wash it very clean; if your turkey
or fowl boils, take out the onion and
herbs; scum it very clean, and put
in your celery; cover it down close,
and let it stew till your celery is very
tender, and your fowl likewise; take
a clean stewpan, and set it over your
stove; take up your fowl or turkey,
and keep it hot; pour your celery
and sauce into your stewpan; beat
up the yolks of two or three eggs in
half a pint of cream, and a large
spoonful of white wine; stir it till it
is of a good thickness, and just at
boiling squeeze in a little juice of lemon,
or a little mushroom pickle;
shake it round, and pour it over your
fowl. garnish your dish with lemon.
prepare some young beans as for
boiling, and boil them in plenty of
water, with salt in it, till they are rather
more than half done. drain
them in a cullender, beat up the
yolks of three eggs with a quarter of
a pint of cream, put them into a
stewpan with two ounces of fresh
butter, and set it over a slow fire.
when hot, put in the beans, with a
spoonful of vinegar, and simmer them
quite tender, stirring the mixture to
keep it from curdling or burning. to
stew french beans with gravy, pursue
the same method, only instead
of the eggs and cream, put half a
pint of gravy. use only half the
quantity of butter, and add that rolled
in flour, to thicken up the whole
after the beans are put in. the vinegar
should be omitted, and cayenne
and salt added if required.
stewed giblets. after very
nicely cleaning goose or duck giblets,
and removing the thick membrane
from the gizzards, stew them,
in a little water. season them with
salt and pepper, and a very small
piece of mace. before serving, give
them one boil with a cup of cream,
and a piece of butter rubbed in a tea-spoonful
of flour.
stewed green peas. to
a quart of peas add a quart of gravy,
two or three lumps of sugar,
with pepper and salt. stew them
gently till the peas are quite tender,
and if the gravy is not sufficiently
thick, add a piece of butter rolled
in flour. if the peas are old, half
boil them first in hard water, before
they are stewed. whether for young
or old peas, the gravy must be strong.
to stew them in a mild way, put a
pint of young peas into a stewpan,
with very little water, and two young
lettuces cut small. stew them gently
till the peas are tender, then add
four spoonfuls of cream, a lump of
sugar, and the yolks of two eggs.
stir the whole together over the fire
for a short time, but do not allow it
to boil. a little salt should be added
before serving up the stew. another
way is to take a quart of young[]
peas, a small onion sliced, two lettuces
cut small, and a sprig or two
of mint. put them into a stewpan,
adding some salt, a little pepper and
mace, and half a pint of hard water.
stew these gently for twenty minutes,
then put in a quarter of a pound of
butter rolled in flour, and a spoonful
of mushroom ketchup. keep the
stewpan over the fire till the peas
are quite tender, shaking it frequently,
and never suffering them to
boil. receipts for stewing peas might
be multiplied to almost any extent,
for there is no one preparation in
cookery perhaps more varied than
this, though without any very material
difference.
stewed hare. take off the
legs and shoulders, cut out the backbone,
cut into pieces the meat which
comes off the sides, and put all into
a stewpan. add three quarters of
a pint of small beer, the same of water,
a large onion stuck with cloves,
some whole pepper, a slice of lemon,
and a little salt. stew it gently for
an hour, close covered, and put to it
a quart of gravy. stew it gradually
two hours longer, or till it is quite
tender. take out the hare, rub
smooth half a spoonful of flour in a
little gravy, add it to the sauce, and
boil it up. then add a little salt and
cayenne, and put in the hare again.
when heated through, serve it up in
a tureen or deep dish, adding port
wine if approved.
take a knuckle of veal of about five
pounds; wash it clean, and put it
into a clean stewpan, with two quarts
of water, a faggot of sweet herbs,
two blades of mace, an onion stuck
with three or four cloves, some whole
pepper, and a little salt; put in a
crust of the upper part of a loaf, cover
it down close, and make it boil,
then scum it very clean, and let it
just simmer for full two hours. when
you take it up, put your veal into
the dish first, and strain your broth
through a fine sieve over it, then take
off all the fat very clean, and put
some thin slices of french roll in
your dish, and toasted bread cut in
dice, in a plate. serve it up hot.
you may boil a quarter of a pound
of rice in fair water, till it is very
tender; then strain it off; and when
you send your veal to table, lay your
rice all over it.—rice is better boiled
by itself, for when you boil it with
the meat, the scum is apt to discolour
it, and make it eat greasy.
stewed lobster. pick the
meat out of the shell, put it into a
dish that has a lamp, and rub it
down with a bit of butter. add two
spoonfuls of any sort of gravy, one
of soy or walnut ketchup, a little salt
and cayenne, and a spoonful of port.
a lobster thus stewed will have a
very fine relish.
stewed muscles. wash
your muscles very clean, then put
them into a large stewpan over a
good fire; put over them a coarse
wet cloth doubled: when they begin
to boil, take up the cloth; if the
shells are open, take them off the
fire, and pick out the fish, beard
them, and cut off the tongue: when
you have picked about a quart,
strain half a pint of the liquor to
them, roll two ounces of butter in
flour, add a glass of white wine, a
little beaten mace, and squeeze in a
little lemon juice; let them stew till
of a proper thickness, put toasted
sippets in the dish, pour in the muscles,
and send them to table. cockles
may be done the same way.
stewed mushrooms. the
large buttons are best, and the small
flaps while the fur is still red. rub
the large buttons with salt and a
piece of flannel, cut out the fur, and
take off the skin from the others.
sprinkle them with salt, put them
into a stewpan, and add some peppercorns.
let it simmer slowly till
it is done, then put in a small bit of
butter and flour, and two spoonfuls
of cream. give it one boil, and serve
up the dish with sippets of bread.[]
take some chops of the best end of a
loin of mutton, or some slices out of
the middle part of a leg. season them
with pepper and salt, lay them into
a stewpan with some sliced onion,
and cover them with water and a
little gravy. when done on one
side, turn the steaks on the other,
and thicken the gravy at the same
time with some butter and flour. a
little shalot or ketchup, or both,
may be added at pleasure. twenty
or twenty-five minutes will stew
them, but long stewing will make
them hard.
stewed onions. peel six
large onions, fry them gently of a
fine brown, but do not blacken them.
then put them into a small stewpan,
with a little weak gravy, pepper
and salt. cover and stew them
gently two hours, and let them be
lightly floured at first.
stewed ox cheek. soak
and cleanse a fine cheek the day
before it is to be eaten. put it into
a stewpan that will cover close, with
three quarts of water; simmer it
after it has first boiled up, and been
well skimmed. in two hours put in
plenty of carrots, leeks, two or three
turnips, a bunch of sweet herbs,
some whole pepper, and four ounces
of allspice. skim it often, and when
the meat is tender, take it out. let
the soup get cold, take off the cake
of fat, and serve the soup separately,
or with the meat. it should be of
a fine brown, which may be done
by adding a little burnt sugar, or by
frying some onions quite brown with
flour, and simmering them with it.
this last method improves the flavour
of all soups and gravies of the
brown sort. if vegetables are not
approved, they may be taken out of
the soup, and a small roll be toasted,
or bread fried and added. celery
is a great addition, and should
always be served. when out of
season, the seed of it gives quite as
good a flavour, boiled in, and strained
off.—another way. soak an ox
cheek three hours, and clean it with
plenty of water. take the meat off
the bones, and put it into a stewpan
with a large onion, a bunch of sweet
herbs, some bruised allspice, pepper
and salt. lay the bones on the
top, pour on two or three quarts of
water, and cover the pan close with
stout paper, or a dish that will fit
close. let it stand eight or ten
hours in a slow oven, or simmer it
by the side of the fire, or on a hot
hearth. when done tender, put the
meat into a clean pan, and let it get
cold. take off the cake of fat, and
warm the head in pieces in the soup.
serve with any sort of vegetables.
stewed oysters. open the
shells, separate the liquor from the
oysters, and wash them from the
grit. strain the liquor, add to the
oysters a bit of mace, lemon peel,
and a few white peppers. simmer
them very gently, put in some cream,
a little flour and butter, and serve
them up with sippets. boiled oysters
should be served in the shell,
and eaten with cold butter.
stewed parsnips. boil the
parsnips in milk and water, or milk
alone, till fully half done. slice and
divide them into two, down the
middle and across. stew them gently
with some good gravy, seasoned
with pepper and salt; and five minutes
before they are taken up, add
a piece of butter rolled in flour. if
parsnips are to be stewed white, put
in broth and cream in equal quantities,
instead of gravy.
stewed pears. pare and
quarter some large pears; throw
them into water as soon as pared,
and before they are divided, to prevent
their turning black. pack them
round a block-tin stewpan, and
sprinkle as much sugar over as will
make them pretty sweet. add lemon
peel, a clove or two, and some
bruised allspice; just cover them
with water, and add a little red
liquor. cover them close, and stew[]
three or four hours: when tender,
take them out, and pour the liquor
upon them.
stewed peas. steep some
old peas in water all night, if not
fine boilers; otherwise only half an
hour. put them into a stewpan of
water, just enough to cover them,
with a good bit of butter, or a piece
of beef or pork. stew them very
gently till the peas are soft, and
the meat is tender. if it be not
salt meat, add salt and a little pepper,
and serve the peas round the
meat.
stewed pheasants. stew
your pheasants in a strong veal gravy.
while they are simmering,
prepare artichoke bottoms cut in
dice, and some chesnuts roasted,
blanched, and cut in four: let your
pheasants stew till your gravy is
half wasted, then scum it very clean,
and put in your chesnuts and artichoke
bottoms; season with a little
beaten mace, pepper, and salt, a
small glass of white wine, and a little
juice of lemon. if your sauce is
not thick enough, roll a piece of
butter in flour, and let it boil up:
in case any scum arises, take it clean
off; dish your pheasants, and pour
the sauce over them; garnish with
lemon.
stewed pigeons. see that
they are quite fresh, carefully cropped,
drawn, and washed; then soak
them half an hour. in the mean
time cut a hard white cabbage in
slices, as if for pickling, and put it
in water. then drain and boil it in
milk and water; drain it again, and
lay some of it at the bottom of a
stewpan. put the pigeons upon it,
but first season them well with salt
and pepper, and cover them with
the remainder of the cabbage. add
a little broth, and stew gently till
the pigeons are tender; then put
among them two or three spoonfuls
of cream, and a piece of butter and
flour for thickening. after a boil
or two, serve up the birds in the
middle of the dish, with the cabbage
placed round them.—another way
is to stew the birds in a good brown
gravy, either stuffed or not; and
seasoned high with spice and fresh
mushrooms, or a little ketchup.—another
way. take your pigeons
trussed as for baking; bruise the
livers, and mix them up with a few
bread crumbs, parsley, and a little
lemon peel chopped small; season
it with mace, nutmeg, pepper, and
salt; work all up with a piece of
butter, and stuff the bellies of your
pigeons; tie up the necks and vents;
then stew them with some butter,
till they are brown all over; put
them into another pan that will just
hold them, with as much strong
gravy as will cover them; let them
stew till they are tender, then bruise
an anchovy, a shalot shred fine, a
piece of butter rolled in flour, and
a spoonful of white wine; let all
boil together to a proper thickness;
scum very clean; dish up, and garnish
with crisp bacon and lemon.
stewed pippins. scoop out
the core of some golden pippins, pare
them very thin, and throw them into
water. for every pound of fruit, make
half a pound of refined sugar into a
syrup, with a pint of water. when
skimmed, put in the pippins, and stew
them quite clear. grate some lemon
over, be careful not to break them,
and serve them up in the syrup. they
make an elegant corner dish, or a
dessert.—another way. pare your
pippins nicely, cut them in halves, and
take out the cores; to a quart of spring
water, put a pound of double refined
sugar, and a piece of lemon-peel;
boil it almost to a syrup; take out
the peel, and put in the pippins; boil
them till they are pretty tender, then
draw them to one side of the fire, and
let them stew till clear; take them
out carefully one at a time, and lay
them in a china or earthen dish for
use. if golden pippins are done this
way, they are very little inferior to
apricots.[]
stewed pork steaks. cut
some steaks from the best end of a
loin or neck of pork. take off the
skin, and nearly all the fat, and fry
them of a nice brown. put the steaks
into a stewpan, with good gravy
enough to make a proper sauce to
them, adding pepper and salt. ten
minutes before they are done, thicken
the gravy with a piece of butter rolled
in flour. a little shalot, or ketchup,
or both may be added.
stewed potatoes. half boil
some potatoes, drain and peel them
nicely, and cut them into neat pieces.
put them into a stewpan with some
cream, fresh butter, and salt, each
proportioned to the quantity of potatoes;
or stew them in good gravy,
with pepper and salt. simmer them
gently till they are well done and be
careful not to let them break.
stewed prunes. stew some
prunes gently in a little water, till the
stones will slip out easily, but they
must not be boiled too much. these
are useful in fevers, or in any complaint
where fruit is proper; and
when fruit more acid would not agree.
stewed rabbit. divide them
into quarters, flour and fry them in
butter; then put them into a stewpan,
with some good gravy, and a
glass of white wine. season with
salt, pepper, and a sprig of sweet
herbs. cover them close, and let
them stew till they become tender.
strain off the sauce, thicken it with
flour and butter, and pour it over
them.
slice a small red cabbage, or half a
large one, and wash it clean. put
it into a saucepan with pepper, salt,
and butter, but no water except what
hangs about the cabbage. stew it
tender, and when ready to serve, add
two or three spoonfuls of vinegar,
and give it one boil over the fire. it
may be eaten with cold meat, or with
sausages laid upon it.—another
way. shred the cabbage, and wash
it. put it into a saucepan with
pepper, salt, some slices of onion;
and a little plain gravy. when it is
boiled quite tender, add a bit of butter
rubbed with flour, a few minutes
before serving, with two or three
spoonfuls of vinegar, and boil it up.—another.
cut the cabbage very
thin, put it into a stewpan with a
small slice of ham, and half an ounce
of butter at the bottom. put in half
a pint of broth, and a gill of vinegar,
and let it stew three hours covered
down. when it is very tender,
add a little more broth, salt,
pepper, and a table-spoonful of
pounded sugar. mix these well,
and boil it till the liquor is wasted.
then put it into the dish, and lay
fried sausages upon it.
wash it well, and season it high with
pepper, cayenne, salt, allspice,
three cloves, and a blade of mace,
all in fine powder. bind it up tight,
and lay it into a pot that will just
hold it. fry three large onions
sliced, and put them to it, with three
carrots, two turnips, one shalot,
four cloves, a blade of mace, and
some celery. cover the meat with
good beef broth, or weak gravy.
simmer it as gently as possible for
several hours, till quite tender.
clear off the fat, and add to the
gravy half a pint of port wine, a
glass of vinegar, and a large spoonful
of ketchup; half a pint of beer
may be added. simmer for half
an hour, and serve in a deep dish.
the herbs to be used should be
burnet, tarragon, parsley, thyme,
basil, savoury, marjoram, pennyroyal,
knotted marjoram, and some
chives; a good handful all together.
but observe to proportion the quantities
to the pungency of the several
sorts. garnish with carrots, turnips,
or truffles and morels, or pickles
of different colours, cut small, and
laid in little heaps separate. chopped
parsley, chives, and beet root
may be added. if there is too much
gravy for the dish, take only a part[]
to season for serving, the less the
better; and to increase the richness,
add a few beef bones and shanks of
mutton in stewing. a spoonful or two
of made mustard is a great improvement
to the gravy.—another way.
half roast the rump, then put it into
a large pot with three pints of water,
one of small beer, one of port
vine, some salt, three or four spoonfuls
of vinegar, and two of ketchup.
add a bunch of sweet herbs, consisting
of burnet, tarragon, parsley,
thyme, basil, savoury, pennyroyal,
marjoram, knotted marjoram, and a
leaf or two of sage; also some onions,
cloves, and cayenne. cover it
close, and simmer it for two or three
hours, till quite tender. when done
lay it into a deep dish, set it over
some hot water, and cover it close.
skim the gravy, put in a few pickled
mushrooms, truffles, morels, and
oysters if agreeable, but it is very
good without. thicken the gravy
with flour and butter, heat it with
the above, and pour it over the beef.
forcemeat balls of veal, anchovies,
bacon, suet, herbs, spice, bread, and
eggs to bind, are a great improvement.
a rump of beef is excellent
roasted; but in the country it is generally
sold whole with the edge-bone,
or cut across instead of lengthways
as in london, where one piece
is for boiling, and the rump for stewing
or roasting. this must be attended
to, the whole being too large
to dress together.—another way.
raise the lean next the chump-end;
cut that bone off, but leave the
chine-bone, then with two skewers
fasten the meat as if the bone was
not taken away: put it into a pot
with a little more water than will
cover it: add parsley, thyme, two
or three large onions, a handful of
salt, whole pepper half an ounce,
half a quarter of an ounce of cloves,
the same quantity of mace; cover it
close down, and stew it over a slow
fire for three hours, till your beef is
very tender. to make your sauce,
take two pounds of gravy beef, cut
it in pretty thick slices, and flour
them well; put a piece of butter
into your stewpan, over a stove, or a
quick fire. when that is brown, put
in the slices of beef, and fry them
brown, as quick as you can; then
add water as much as you think will
be sufficient to make a very strong
gravy; cut an onion cross with parsley,
thyme, pepper, and salt, two or
three cloves, and a blade of mace;
let this stew till your gravy is very
rich, then strain it off, and thicken
it up with a piece of butter rolled in
flour.
stewed savoys. these may
be done in the same manner as red
cabbage; but the better way is to
boil the savoy in water till about half
done, and then stew it. this takes
off the strong flavour, and makes it
much more agreeable.
stewed scallops. boil
them very well in salt and water;
take out the fish, stew them in some
of their liquor, with a little white
wine, two or three blades of mace,
a little nutmeg, and a good piece of
butter rolled in flour; let them be
thoroughly stewed, then pour in a
little cream, shake your pan round,
and squeeze in the juice of a seville
orange. send them to table garnished
with baked sippets and orange.
stewed soles. half fry them
in butter, take out the fish, and put
a quart of water or gravy into the
pan, two anchovies, and a sliced
onion. when they have boiled
slowly for a quarter of an hour, put
the fish in again, and stew them
gently about twenty minutes. take
them out, thicken the liquor with
butter and flour, boil it gently, strain
it over the fish, and serve it with
oyster, cockle, or shrimp sauce.
stewed sorrel. wash it
clean, and put it into a silver vessel,
or stone jar, with no more water
than hangs to the leaves. simmer
it as slowly as possible; and when
done enough, beat it up with a piece[]
of butter. this is very fine with a
fricandeau, with roast meat, mackarel,
or any thing usually eaten with
an acid sauce. the same thickening
may be added, as for spinach
and sorrel. it is as well prepared
in a stone jar set before the fire, only
it requires a longer time.
cream. boil the spinach till nearly
done enough, then squeeze all the
water from it, and put it into a stewpan,
with a piece of butter and some
salt. stir it over the fire till the butter
is well mixed in with it, and add
as much cream as will make it of a
moderate thickness. shake it for a
minute or two over the fire, and serve
it up with sippets of bread, either
fried or toasted.
gravy. pick the spinach nicely,
then wash it well, and put it into a
stewpan, with a few spoonfuls of
water, and a little salt. stew this
till quite tender, shaking the pan
very often to prevent its burning.
when done enough, put it into a
sieve to drain, and give it a slight
squeeze. beat the spinach well,
then return it to the stewpan with
some gravy, pepper, salt, and a piece
of butter. let it stew about a quarter
of an hour, stirring it frequently.
serve it up either in a dish by itself,
or with poached eggs upon it, according
to the occasion for which it
is wanted.
sorrel. take spinach and sorrel,
in the proportion of three fourths of
spinach to one of sorrel. pick and
wash these very nicely; cut them a
little, and put them into a stewpan,
with two or three spoonfuls of water.
keep them stirring over the fire, till
they begin to soften and to liquify.
then leave it to stew at a distance
over the fire for an hour or more,
stirring it every now and then.
thicken it with a little flour, and
when quite done, add some pepper
and salt, and serve it up. this will
form an excellent sauce to all kinds
of meat, or to eat with potatoes.
almost any kind of cold vegetables
may be added to this stew. they
should be put in just long enough to
heat, and mixed in properly with the
spinach before it is served up.
stewed tongue. prepare
a tongue with saltpetre and common
salt for a week, and turn it every day.
boil it tender enough to peel, and
afterwards stew it in a moderately
strong gravy. season it with soy,
mushroom ketchup, cayenne, pounded
cloves, and salt if necessary.
serve with truffles, morels, and mushrooms.
the roots of the tongue
must be removed before it is salted,
but some fat should be left.
stewed turkey. have a
nice hen turkey trussed close, and
the breast-bone broken; put it into
a stewpan with a good piece of butter;
let the breast and pinions be
glazed of a fine brown; then put it
into a stewpan that is very clean;
and a faggot of sweet herbs, an onion
stuck with three cloves, two blades
of mace, some whole pepper, and a
little salt; then put in as much
strong broth or gravy as will just
cover it; cover it very close, and let
it stew over a moderate fire, till you
think it is tender; in the mean time
make some forcemeat balls of veal, &c.
and let them be fried of a fine brown,
in readiness. when your turkey
is done, take it up, put it into your
dish, and keep it hot; strain off your
liquor into a clean stewpan, and
scum it very clean: if it is not thick
enough, roll apiece of butter in flour;
put in half a glass of white wine, and
your forcemeat balls; toss up all
together, till your sauce is of a good
thickness; squeeze in a little lemon;
pour your sauce over the turkey, and
garnish your dish with lemon. in
the same manner you may do a large
fowl; and you may add morels,
truffles, artichoke bottoms, &c.—another.
put turkey or fowl into a
stewpan, with a sufficient quantity[]
of gravy or good broth, a head of
celery cut small, whole pepper, and
a sprig of thyme tied up in a muslin
bag. when these are stewed enough,
take them up, thicken the liquor with
flour and butter, lay the meat in a
dish, and pour the sauce over it.
stewed veal. cut off the
neck end of a breast of veal, and
stew it for gravy. make a forcemeat
of the sweetbread boiled, a few
crumbs of bread, a little beef suet,
an egg, pepper and salt, a spoonful
or two of cream, and a little grated
nutmeg. mix them all together,
raise the thin part of the breast,
and put in the stuffing. skewer the
skin close down, dredge it over with
flour, tie it up in a cloth, and stew
it in milk and water rather more than
an hour: if a large one, an hour
and a half. the proper sauce for
this dish is made of a little gravy, a
few oysters, a few mushrooms chopped
fine, and a little lemon juice,
thickened with flour and butter. if
preferred, the veal may be stewed in
broth, or weak gravy. then thicken
the gravy it was stewed in, pour it
over the veal, and garnish with forcemeat
balls.
stewed venison. let the
meat hang as long as it will keep
sweet. take out the bone, beat
the meat with a rolling-pin, lay on
some slices of mutton fat, sprinkle
over it a little pepper and salt, roll
it up light and tie it. stew it in
mutton or beef gravy, with a quarter
of a pint of port wine, some pepper
and allspice. cover it close, and
simmer it as slowly as possible for
three or four hours. when quite
tender take off the tape, lay the
meat on a dish, strain the gravy
over it, and serve it up with currant
jelly.
pick and wash a quantity of water
cresses, and boil them for a few minutes.
drain and press them dry,
chop them slightly, and put them into
a stewpan, either with good gravy or
cream, and a seasoning of salt and
pepper. add a thickening of butter
rolled in flour, if necessary. stew
them gently for ten minutes, or a
quarter of an hour, and serve them
up with a garnish of sippets, of fried
or toasted bread.
sticking plaster. melt
three ounces of diachylon with half
an ounce of rosin, and when cooled
to about the thickness of treacle,
spread it upon a piece of smooth soft
linen.
stilton cheese. this rich
and relishing article is made in the
following manner. the night's cream
is put into the morning's milk, with
the rennet. when the curd is come,
it is not broken, as is usually done
with other cheese, but taken out
whole, and put into a sieve to drain.
here it is pressed till it becomes
firm and dry, when it is placed in a
wooden hoop made to fit it, in order
to prevent its breaking. after being
taken out of the hoop, the cheese is
bound with cloths, which are changed
every day, till it is sufficiently firm
to support itself. the cloths are
then removed, and the cheese is rubbed
with a brush and turned every
day. the rennet bag should be
kept perfectly sweet and fresh: if it
be in the least degree tainted, the
cheese will never have a good flavour.
stings. the stings of bees are
often more virulent than those of
wasps, and attended with more painful
effects. the sting being barbed,
it is always left in the wound. when
therefore a person is stung by a bee,
the sting should be instantly extracted,
or it will communicate more of
its poison, according to the time it
is permitted to remain. it should
be carefully pulled out with a steady
hand, for if any of it break in, remedies
will in a great measure be ineffectual.
when the sting is completely
extracted, the wounded part
should be sucked, and very little inflammation
will ensue. if a few drops[]
of the spirits of hartshorn be immediately
rubbed on the part affected,
the cure will be more speedily accomplished.
another simple remedy
is, a solution of indigo in water,
or of potash, a little oil of tartar, or
common sweet oil, rubbed upon the
part. honey and olive oil, or some
bruised mallows, may occasionally
be substituted with advantage; but
their application should be repeated
till the pain ceases. rubbing on a
little common salt, after it has been
moistened, is also said to be an effectual
cure. if a wasp or bee has
been incautiously swallowed in a
glass of liquor, take a spoonful of
common salt, or repeated doses of
salt and water. this will immediately
kill the insect, and prevent the
injurious effects of the sting. to
remove the disagreeable itching
which arises from the sting of gnats,
wash the part directly with cold
water; or at night, rub on fuller's
earth mixed with water.
stock. to make a clear brown
stock, for gravy or gravy soup, put
into a stewpan with two quarts of
water, a pound of lean beef, a pound
of the lean of a gammon of bacon,
all sliced. add two or three scraped
carrots, two onions, two turnips, and
two heads of sliced celery. stew the
meat quite tender, but do not let it
brown. when thus prepared, it will
serve either for soup, or brown or
white gravy. if for brown, put in
some soup colouring, and boil it a
few minutes.
stock-fish. put it into water,
and let it remain there two days,
shifting the water often; then take
it out, and clean the skin and inner
part with a hard brush, and hang it
up for one night in the air. in the
morning put it again into water, and
let it remain till the next morning,
shifting the water often; take it out,
and hang it up for another day, when
it will be fit for dressing. roll up
the fish round, and tie it close with
a tape; put it into a fish-kettle, the
water of which simmers when you
put it on: let it remain simmering
for three quarters of an hour, then
let it boil for five minutes, and the
fish is enough.
stomachic tincture. in
low nervous affections arising from
a languid circulation, and when the
stomach is in a state of debility, the
following tincture will be found to
be strengthening and beneficial. an
ounce and a half of peruvian bark
bruised, and an ounce of orange peel,
steeped in a pint of the best brandy,
for ten days. shake the bottle every
day, then let it settle for two days,
and decant off the clear liquor.
take a tea-spoonful of the tincture
in a wine glass of water, twice a day,
when the stomach feels empty and
uneasy, an hour before dinner, and
also in the evening. this agreeable
aromatic tonic will procure an appetite,
and aid digestion. tea made
with dried seville orange peel, in
the same way as common tea, and
drunk with milk and sugar, has been
taken by nervous persons with great
benefit. sucking a bit of dried
orange peel about an hour before
dinner, when the stomach is empty,
is very grateful and strengthening.
in order to clean these properly,
boil a pound of pipe-maker's clay
with a quart of water, a quart of
small beer, and a bit of stone blue.
wash the stairs or the floor with this
mixture, and when dry, rub it with
flannel and a brush.
stopples. when a glass stopple
is set fast, in a bottle or decanter,
rub a drop or two of olive oil round
it, close to the mouth of the decanter,
and place it near the fire.
the oil will soon insinuate itself
downwards, and the stopple may
then be loosened by the hand, or by
striking it lightly with a piece of
soft wood. sometimes the rubbing
of the neck of the bottle with a small
key, and striking the head of the[]
stopper, will be sufficient to loosen
it, without the application of any
oil.
storing. the storing of fruits,
vegetables, and roots, has been performed
in various ways, which are
well known already; but lately some
better modes have been suggested
for this purpose. for apples and
pears, after they have been carefully
gathered from the trees, and laid in
heaps covered with clean cloths or
mats for sweating, which is effected
in three or four days, they remaining
for that length of time afterwards,
they are to be wiped separately with
clean cloths; when some glazed
earthen jars are to be provided with
tops and covers, and likewise a quantity
of pure pit-sand, which is quite
free from any mixture. this is to
be thoroughly dried upon a flue.
then put a layer of this sand an
inch thick on the bottoms of the jars;
above this layer of fruit, a quarter
of an inch free of each other; covering
the whole with sand to the depth
of an inch; then a second course of
fruit is to be laid in, and again covered
with an inch of the sand, proceeding
in the same way until the
whole be finished and completed.
an inch and a half in depth of sand
may be laid over the last or uppermost
layer of fruit; when the jars
are to be closed and placed in some
dry situation, as cool as possible,
but entirely out of the way of frost.
the usual time at which each kind
of such fruits should be ready for the
table being known, the jars containing
such fruit may, it is said, be examined,
by turning out the sand and
fruit together cautiously into a sieve.
the ripe fruit may then be laid upon
the shelves of the fruit-room for use,
and the unripe be carefully replaced
in the jars as before, but with fresh
dry sand. some kinds of apples
managed in this way, will, it is said,
keep a great while, as till july; and
pears until april, and in some sorts
till june. it is not improbable but
that many other sorts of fruit might
be stored and preserved in somewhat
the same way. vegetables of the
cauliflower kind have been stored and
kept well through a great part of the
winter, by putting them, when in full
head, on a dry day, into pits about
eighteen inches in depth, and much
the same breadth, in a perfectly dry
soil, with the stalks and leaves to
them, the latter being carefully
doubled over and lapped round the
heads, instead of hanging them up
in sheds or other places, as is the
usual practice in preserving them.
in performing the work, it is begun
at one end of the pits, laying the
heads in with the root-stalks uppermost,
so as that the former may incline
downwards, the roots of the
one layer covering the tops or heads
of the other, until the whole is completed.
the pits are then to be
closely covered up with the earth into
a sort of ridge, and beaten quite
smooth with the back of the spade,
in order that the rain-water may be
fully thrown off. fine cauliflowers
have been thus stored and kept for
the occasional supply of the table
until the middle of the following january.
for storing and preserving
different kinds of roots for common
summer use, until the coming in or
return of the natural crops, the following
method has likewise been
proposed. as the ice in ice-houses
has commonly subsided some feet, as
four, five, or more, by the beginning
of the spring, it is proposed to deposit
in the rooms or vacancies so
left empty, the roots that are to be
preserved. as soon as any openings
in the places have been well stuffed
with straw, and the surfaces of the
ice covered with the sort of material,
case-boxes, dry ware, casks, baskets,
or any other such vessels, are to be
placed upon it, which are then to be
filled with the roots, such as turnips,
carrots, beets, celery, potatoes in
particular, and some others. in
cases where there are not ice-houses,[]
vegetation may be greatly retarded,
and the roots preserved by storing
them in deep vaulted cellars, caves,
coal-pits, mines, or in any place
seated deep in the earth. potatoes
have also been well stored and preserved,
it is said, by earthing them
in small parcels, as about two bolls
each, heaped up, and covered in the
usual way with straw and earth;
which are turned over into other pits
in the early spring, first rubbing off
all the sprouts or shoots, and having
the roots well watered in small quantities
as they are put into the other
pits, the whole earthy covering being
also well watered and beaten together
at the time with the back part
of the spade. this covering is to
be made to the thickness of about
two feet. the same practice or process
is to be repeated every time the
potatoes are turned over, which
should be about once in three weeks,
as the state of the weather may be.
and where the pits or heaps are not
in the shade, it is sometimes proper,
when the season is very hot, to cover
them with mats supported on sticks,
so as to permit a free current of air
between the mats and the heaps.
in this way it is stated that these
roots have been preserved quite
plump and entire in the taste until
the end of september, or till the succeeding
crop becomes perfectly ripe,
so as to be used without loss, as
that must always be the case where
the roots are largely employed before
they are in a state of mature
growth. it is asserted, too, that in
this manner potatoes are even capable
of recovering in plumpness and
taste, where they have been suffered,
by improper exposure to air or heat,
to become deficient in these qualities.
stove blacking, for backs
of grates, hearths, and the fronts of
stoves, is made in the following manner.
boil a quarter of a pound of
the best black lead, with a pint of
small beer, and a bit of soap the size
of a walnut. when that is melted,
dip in a painter's brush, and wet the
grate, having first cleared off all the
soot and dust. then take a hard
brush, and rub it till it is quite
bright. a mixture of black lead
and whites of eggs well beaten together,
will answer the same purpose.
stramonium. this celebrated
plant, commonly called the thorn
apple, often grows on dunghills,
and flowers in the month of july.
having lately been discovered as
possessing very powerful medical
properties, and as affording the most
effectual remedy for the asthma, it
is now frequently transplanted into
gardens, though its odour is extremely
offensive. a kind of herb
tobacco is made of the dried leaves,
mixed with a little rosemary to prevent
nausea, and a pipeful is smoked
in the evening before going to bed.
the practice should be continued for
some time, or as often as asthma
returns, and it will afford very sensible
relief. the plant may easily
be raised from seed; but an elegant
preparation of the stramonium, or
the asthmatic tobacco, may be had
of several medicine vendors in the
kingdom.
strawberries. sir joseph
banks, from a variety of experiments,
and the experience of many years,
recommends a general revival of the
now almost obsolete practice of laying
straw under strawberry plants,
when the fruit begins to swell; by
which means the roots are shaded
from the sun, the waste of moisture
by evaporation prevented, the leaning
fruit kept from damage, by resting
on the ground, particularly in
wet weather, and much labour in watering
saved. twenty trusses of long
straw are sufficient for  feet of
plants. on the management of
strawberries in june and july, the
future prosperity of them greatly
depends; and if each plant has not
been kept separate, by cutting off
the runners, they will be in a state of[]
confusion, and you will find three
different sorts of plants. . old
plants, whose roots are turned black,
hard, and woody. . young plants,
not strong enough to flower. .
flowering plants, which ought only
to be there, and perhaps not many
of them. before the time of flowering
is quite over, examine them, and
pull up every old plant which has
not flowered; for, if once they have
omitted to flower you may depend
upon it they will never produce any
after, being too old, and past bearing;
but to be fully convinced, leave
two or three, set a stick to them, and
observe them next year. if the
young plants, runners of last year,
be too thick, take some of them
away, and do not leave them nearer
than a foot of the scarlet, alpines,
and wood, and fifteen or sixteen
inches of all the larger sorts; and in
the first rainy weather in july or august,
take them all up, and make a
fresh plantation with them, and they
will be very strong plants for flowering
next year. old beds, even if the
plants be kept single at their proper
distance, examine, and pull all the
old plants which have not flowered.
when the fruit is nearly all gathered
examine them again, and cut off the
runners; but if you want to make a
fresh plantation, leave some of the
two first, and cut off all the rest.
then stir up the ground with a trowel,
or three-pronged fork, and in august
they will be fit to transplant. if
you have omitted in july do not fail
in august, that the runners may make
good roots to be transplanted in
september, for, if later, the worms
will draw them out of the ground,
and the frost afterwards will prevent
them from striking root; the consequence
of which is, their not flowering
the next spring; and you will
lose a year.
fool. bruise a pint of
scarlet strawberries, and a pint of
raspberries, pass them through a
sieve, and sweeten them with half a
pound of fine sugar pounded, add a
spoonful of orange-flower water,
then boil it over the fire, for two or
three minutes; take it off, and set
on a pint and a half of cream, boil
it and stir it till it is cold; when
the pulp is cold, put them together,
and stir them till they are well mixed;
put the fool into glasses, or basins,
as you think proper.
strawberry jam. dissolve
four pounds of lump sugar in a quart
of currant juice, then boil and scum
it quite clean. mash four quarts of
raspberries, and mix with it. let it
boil quick, over a clear fire, for
nearly an hour, or till the sugar and
raspberries are quite mixed. this
may be known by putting a little on
a plate; if the juice drains from the
fruit, it must be boiled longer. when
done enough, put it into pots, and
the next day put brandy papers
over them. tie them down with
another paper, and set the jars in a
dry place.
to keep whole strawberries, take
equal weights of the fruit and double
refined sugar. lay the strawberries
in a large dish, and sprinkle over
them half the sugar in fine powder.
shake the dish gently, that the sugar
may touch the under side of the
fruit. next day make a thin syrup
with the remainder of the sugar,
and instead of water, allow to every
pound of strawberries a pint of red
currant juice. simmer the fruit in
this, until sufficiently jellied. choose
the largest scarlet strawberries, before
they are dead ripe. they will
eat well in thin cream, served up in
glasses.
put a quantity of the finest strawberries
into a gooseberry bottle, and
strew in three spoonfuls of fine sugar.
fill up the bottle with madeira, or
fine sherry.
for weakly persons, any of the following[]
preparations will be highly
beneficial. put two calves' feet in
two pints of water, and the same
quantity of new milk; bake them in
a jar closely covered, three hours
and a half. when cold remove the
fat, and take a large teacupful of the
mucilage, morning and evening. it
may be flavoured by baking in it
lemon peel, cinnamon, or mace: sugar
is to be added afterwards.—or
simmer six sheeps' trotters, with two
blades of mace, a bit of cinnamon,
lemon peel, a few hartshorn shavings,
and a little isinglass, in two quarts
of water till reduced to one. when
cold, remove the fat, and take nearly
half a pint twice a day, warming it
with a little new milk.—another
way. boil an ounce of isinglass
shavings, forty peppercorns, and a
bit of brown crust of bread, in a
quart of water, till reduced to a pint,
and strain it. this makes a pleasant
jelly to keep in case of sickness, and
a large spoonful may be taken in
wine and water, in milk, tea, soup,
or any other way.—or boil a quarter
of an ounce of isinglass shavings
with a pint of new milk, till reduced
one half. add a little sugar, and
for a change a bitter almond. take
this at bed-time, but not too warm.
dutch flummery, jellies, or blamange,
if not too rich, are also very strengthening.
put an ounce of isinglass shavings,
with a few jamaica peppercorns,
and a toast of bread. boil it to a
pint, and strain it off. a large spoonful
of the jelly may be taken in wine
and water, milk, tea, or any other
agreeable liquor. or boil a quarter
of an ounce of isinglass shavings in
a pint of new milk, till it is reduced
to half a pint, adding a bitter almond,
or a little sugar, by way of
change.
strong gravy. take a
stewpan that will hold four quarts,
lay at the bottom of it a slice or two
of undressed ham or bacon, about a
quarter of an inch thick, and two
pounds of beef or veal. add a carrot,
a large onion with four cloves
stuck in it, one head of celery, a
bundle of parsley, lemon thyme, and
savoury; a few leaves of sweet basil,
a bay leaf, a shalot, a piece of lemon
peel, and a dozen corns of allspice.
pour on half a pint of water, cover it
close, and let it simmer gently on a
slow fire for half an hour, in which
time it will be almost dry. watch
it very carefully, and let it take a
nice brown colour. turn the meat
and herbs, to brown on all sides;
then put in a pint of water to a
pound of meat, and let it boil for
two hours. it will now be formed
into a rich strong gravy, easily converted
into cullis, or thickened gravy.
stucco. a stucco for walls, &c.
may be formed of the grout or putty,
made of good stone-lime, or
the lime of cockle-shells, which is
better, properly tempered and sufficiently
beat, mixed with sharp grit-sand,
in a proportion which depends
on the strength of the lime: drift-sand
is best for this purpose, and it
will derive advantage from being
dried on an iron plate or kiln, so as
not to burn; for thus the mortar
would be discoloured. when this
is properly compounded, it should
be put up in small parcels against
walls, or otherwise, to mellow, as
the workmen term it; reduced again
to a soft putty, or paste, and spread
thin on the walls without any undercoat,
and well trowelled. a succeeding
coat should be laid on, before the
first is quite dry, which will prevent
joints of brick-work appearing
through it. much depends upon
the workmen giving it sufficient labour,
and trowelling it down. if
this stucco, when dry, is laid over
with boiling linseed oil, it will last
a long time, and not be liable, when
once hardened, to the accidents to
which common stucco is liable.
liardet's, or, as it is commonly called,
adams oil-cement, or stucco, is[]
prepared in the following manner:
for the first coat, take twenty-one
pounds of fine whiting, or oyster-shells,
or any other sea-shells calcined,
or plaster of paris, or any
calcareous material calcined and
pounded, or any absorbent material
whatever, proper for the purpose;
add white or red lead at pleasure,
deducting from the other absorbent
materials in proportion to the white
or red lead added; to which put
four quarts, beer measure, of oil;
and mix them together with a grinding-mill,
or any levigating machine:
and afterwards mix and beat up the
same well with twenty-eight quarts,
beer measure, of any sand or gravel,
or of both, mixed and sifted, or of
marble or stone pounded, or of
brick-dust, or of any kind of metallic
or mineral powders, or of any solid
material whatever, fit for the purpose.
for the second coat, take
sixteen pounds and a half of super-fine
whiting, or oyster-shells, or any
sea-shells calcined, &c. as for the
first coat; add sixteen pounds and
a half of white or red lead, to which
put six quarts and a half of oil,
wine measure, and mix them together
as before: afterwards mix and
beat up the same well with thirty
quarts, wine measure, of fine sand
or gravel sifted, or stone or marble
pounded, or pyrites, or any kind of
metallic or mineral powder, &c.
this composition requires a greater
proportion of sand, gravel, or other
solids, according to the nature of the
work, or the uses to which it is to
be applied. if it be required to have
the composition coloured, add to
the above ingredients such a proportion
of painter's colours, as will be
necessary to give the tint or colour
required. in making the composition,
the best linseed or hempseed,
or other oils proper for the purpose,
are to be used, boiled or raw, with
drying ingredients, as the nature of
the work, the season, or the climate
requires; and in some cases, bees'
wax may be substituted in place of
oil: all the absorbent and solid materials
must be kiln-dried. if the
composition is to be of any other
colour than white, the lead may be
omitted, by taking the full proportion
of the other absorbents; and
also white or red lead may be substituted
alone, instead of any other
absorbent material. the first coat
of this composition is to be laid on
with a trowel, and floated to an
even surface with a rule or darby,
(i. e. a handle-float.) the second
coat, after it is laid on with a trowel,
when the other is nearly dry, should
be worked down and smoothed with
floats edged with horn, or any hard
smooth substance that does not stain.
it may be proper, previously to laying
on the composition, to moisten
the surface on which it is to be laid
by a brush with the same sort of
oil and ingredients which pass
through the levigating machine,
reduced to a more liquid state, in
order to make the composition adhere
the better. this composition
admits of being modelled or cast in
moulds, in the same manner as plasterers
or statuaries model or cast
their stucco work. it also admits
of being painted upon, and adorned
with landscape, or ornamental, or
figure-painting, as well as plain
painting.—to make an excellent
stucco, which will adhere to wood
work, take a bushel of the best stone
lime, a pound of yellow ochre, and
a quarter of a pound of brown umber,
all in fine powder. mix them
to a proper thickness, with a sufficient
quantity of hot water, but
not boiling, and lay it on with a new
white-washer's brush. if the wall
be quite smooth, one or two coats
will do; but each must be dry before
the next is put on. the month
of march is the best season for doing
this.
stucco washes. the most
beautiful white-wash is made of clean
good lime mixed with skim milk[]
instead of water. for blue wash,
put four pounds of blue vitriol into
an iron or brass pot, with a pound
of the best whiting, and a gallon of
water. let it boil an hour, stirring
it all the time. then pour it into
an earthen pan, and set it by for a
day or two till the colour is settled.
pour off the water, and mix the colour
with the white-washer's size.
wash the walls over three or four
times, according as it may be necessary.
to make yellow wash, dissolve
in soft water over the fire equal
quantities of umber, bright ochre,
and blue black. add as much white-wash
as is necessary for the work,
and stir it all together. if either
cast predominates, put in more of
the others, till the proper tint is obtained.
stuffings. forcemeat or stuffing
is generally considered as a necessary
accompaniment to most of
the made dishes, and when composed
with good taste, it gives to
them additional spirit and relish.
it is often employed in making of
patties, for stuffing of veal, game,
and poultry. the ingredients should
be so proportioned, that no one flavour
predominates; and instead of
using the same stuffing for veal, hare,
and other things, it is easy to make
a suitable variety. the poignancy
of forcemeat should be regulated by
the savouriness of the viands, to
which it is intended to give an additional
zest. some dishes require
a very delicately flavoured stuffing,
while for others it should be full
and high seasoned. the consistence
of forcemeats is attended with some
difficulty; they are almost always
either too heavy or too light. they
should be mixed perfectly smooth,
and the ingredients thoroughly incorporated.
forcemeat balls must
not be larger than a small nutmeg.
if for brown sauce, flour and fry
them: if for white sauce, put them
into boiling water, and boil them
for three minutes: the latter are by
far the most delicate. parboiled
sweetbreads and tongues are the
principal ingredients for stuffing or
forcemeat. besides these, yolks of
hard eggs, flour, bread crumbs, boiled
onion, mashed potatoe, mutton,
beef, veal suet, marrow, calf's udder
or brains, veal minced and
pounded, and potted meats. also
of garden herbs and roots, parsley,
thyme, spinach, marjoram, savoury,
tarragon, sage, chervil, basil, burnet,
bay leaf, truffles, morels, mushrooms,
leeks, shalot, onions, and
garlic. of fish, shrimps, prawns,
crabs, oysters, lobsters, and anchovies.
of spices, pepper, mace,
allspice, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg,
cayenne, and cloves. these, with
bacon and ham, form the principal
ingredients for various kinds of stuffing.
the liquids in general consist
of meat gravy, lemon juice, syrup
of lemons, essence of anchovy,
mushroom ketchup, vegetable essences,
and the essence of spices.
stuffing for goose. chop
very fine one or two onions, and a
little green sage. add a large teacupful
of bread crumbs, a very little
pepper and salt, half the liver
parboiled, and the yolks of two
eggs. incorporate the whole well
together, put it into the goose, but
leave a little room for the stuffing to
swell.
stuffing for hare. two
ounces of beef suet chopped fine,
three ounces of fine bread crumbs,
a little parsley, marjoram, lemon
thyme, or winter savory; a dram of
grated lemon peel, half a dram of
nutmeg, of shalot, and the same of
pepper and salt. mix these with
an egg, so as to make them cohesive;
but if the stuffing be not of a
sufficient consistence, it will be good
for nothing. if the liver be quite
sound, it may be parboiled, minced
very fine, and added to the above.
put the stuffing into the hare, and
sow it up.
stuffing for pig. rub[]
some of the crumb of a stale loaf
through a cullender, mince fine a
handful of sage, and a large onion.
mix these together with an egg,
some pepper and salt, and a piece
of butter. fill the belly of the pig
with the stuffing, and sow it up.
lay the pig to the fire, and baste it
with salad oil, without leaving it for
a moment.
stuffing for pike. take
equal parts of fat bacon, beef suet,
and fresh butter; some parsley,
thyme, and savoury; a small onion,
and a few leaves of scented marjoram
shred fine; an anchovy or
two, a little salt and nutmeg, and
some pepper. oysters will be an
improvement, with or without anchovies;
add some crumbs, and an
egg to bind.
mince a quarter of a pound of beef
suet, (marrow is better,) the same
weight of bread crumbs, two drams
of parsley leaves, nearly as much of
sweet marjoram or lemon thyme,
and the same of grated lemon peel.
add an onion or shalot, chopped as
fine as possible, a little grated nutmeg,
pepper and salt. pound all
together thoroughly, with the yolk
and white of two eggs. this is about
the quantity for a turkey poult; a
very large turkey will take nearly
twice as much. to the above may
be added an ounce of dressed ham.
stuffing for veal. take
an equal quantity of grated bread
and beef suet, shred very fine. add
parsley and sweet herbs chopped
small, a minced anchovy, some nutmeg,
pepper, and salt, and a little
grated lemon peel. mix these well
together with raw egg or milk.
this stuffing will do for roast turkey
or hare.
sturgeon. fresh sturgeon
should be cut in slices, rubbed over
with egg, and sprinkled with grated
bread, parsley, salt and pepper.
then fold the slices in white paper,
and broil them gently. for sauce,
send up butter, anchovy, and soy.—another
way. clean the sturgeon,
and prepare as much liquor as
will cover it, thus: take a pint of
vinegar, about two quarts of water,
a stick of horseradish cut in slips,
some lemon peel, two or three bay
leaves, and a small handful of salt,
boil it in this pickle, till you think
it is enough, and serve it with the
following sauce: melt a pound of
butter, with an anchovy bruised,
a blade or two of mace, the body of
a crab, or lobster bruised, a little
ketchup, a small glass of white wine,
half a pint of white shrimps, boil all
together, till it is of a proper thickness,
squeeze in some lemon, and
scraped horseradish; pour a little
sauce over your fish, the rest send
in boats.
sturtiums. gather them
young and dry, and put them into a
jar of old vinegar, which has been
taken from green pickles and onions.
the vinegar must be boiled afresh,
or boil some fresh vinegar with salt
and spice, and when cold, put in
the sturtiums.
as milk or cream is difficult to procure
in some situations, particularly
during a long voyage, a very good
substitute may be found in beating
up a fresh egg, and gradually pouring
on boiling water to prevent its
curdling. the taste of this composition
in tea will scarcely be distinguished
from the richest cream, and
eggs may easily be preserved for a
considerable length of time.
mix a gill of water, a gill of table
beer, a spoonful of ketchup, an onion
sliced thin, a clove or two, three or
four peppercorns, and a little salt,
all together. melt a piece of butter,
the size of an egg in a small saucepan,
and when hot dredge in some
flour, stirring it till the froth subsides,
by which time it will be browned.
add to it the mixture already
prepared, give it a boil, and flavour[]
it with a very small quantity of the
essence of anchovy.
succory. wild white succory
is only good to eat in salads. the
green is used to put into cooling
broths, and to make decoctions in
medicine. common white succory
is eaten in salads, and used for ragouts.
first pick and wash it, then
scald it half an hour in water, put it
afterwards into fresh water, in order
to press it well with the hands. stew
it with some broth, a little butter,
and some cullis, if any at hand. if
not, brown a little flour to thicken
the sauce. when done enough,
take off the fat, season it nicely, and
add a little shalot. serve it under
a shoulder, a leg, or neck of mutton,
roasted.
suckers. the season for taking
up or transplanting suckers of
trees and shrubs, is almost any time,
in open weather, from october till
march, being careful to dig them up
from the mother-plant with as much
and many root-fibres as possible,
and trimming them ready for planting,
by shortening the long straggling
fibres, and cutting off any
thick-nobbed part of the old root
that may adhere to the bottom,
leaving only the fibres arising from
the young wood; though it is probable
some will appear with hardly
any fibres; but as the bottom part,
having been under ground, and contiguous
to the root of the main plant,
is naturally disposed to send forth
fibres for rooting; preparatory to
planting them out, the stems of the
shrub and tree-suckers should likewise
be trimmed occasionally, by cutting
off all lower laterals; and any
having long, slender, and weak tops,
or such as are intended to assume a
more dwarfish or bushy growth, may
be shortened at top in proportion,
to form about half a foot to one or
two feet in length, according to their
nature or strength; and others that
are more strong, or that are designed
to run up with taller stems, may
have their tops left entire, or shortened
but little: when thus taken up
and trimmed, they should be planted
out in rows in the nursery; the weak
suckers separately in close rows;
and also the shortened and stronger
plants, each separately in wider
rows; so that the rows may be from
one to two feet asunder, in proportion
to the size and strength of the
suckers: and after being thus planted
out, they should have the common
nursery-culture of cleaning from
weeds in summer, and digging the
ground between the rows in winter,
&c. and in from one to two or three
years they will be of a proper size
for planting out where they are to
remain: and some kinds of trees,
large shrubs, &c. produce suckers
strong enough in one season to be
fit for planting where they are to
remain; as well as some sorts of
roses, and numerous other flowering
shrubs; also some plants of the
strong shooting gooseberries, currants,
raspberries, and others of
similar kinds. it may generally be
observed of such trees and shrubs
as are naturally disposed to send up
many suckers, that by whatsoever
method they are propagated, whether
by seeds, suckers, layers, cuttings,
&c. they commonly still continue their
natural tendency in this respect.
when it is, therefore, required to
have any sorts to produce as few
suckers as possible, not to over-run
the ground, or disfigure the plants,
it is proper, both at the time of separating
the suckers, or planting
them off from the main plants, and
at the time of their final removal
from the nursery, to observe if at
the bottom part they shew any tendency
to emit suckers, by the appearance
of prominent buds, which,
if the case, should all be rubbed off
as close as possible: as, however,
many sorts of trees and shrubs are
liable to throw out considerably
more than may be wanted, they
should always be cleared away annually[]
at least, and in such as are
not wanted for increase, it is proper
to eradicate them constantly, as
they are produced in the spring and
summer seasons. also numerous
herbaceous and succulent plants are
productive of bottom offset suckers
from the roots, by which they may
be increased. in slipping and planting
these sorts of offset suckers, the
smaller ones should be planted in
nursery beds, pots, &c. according
to the nature of growth and temperature
of the different sorts, to have
the advantage of one summer's advanced
growth; and the larger ones
be set at once, where they are to
remain, in beds, borders, pots, &c.
according to the different sorts or
descriptions of them. the suckers
of many of the finer kinds of flower-plants,
as in the auricula and others,
may be separated or taken off from
the parent plants any time between
the month of february and that of
august, as they may become of a
proper size, or be wanted for increase;
but if they be not wanted
for this use, they should never be
suffered to remain. they can often
be slipped off by the fingers, or a
sharp piece of wood, without removing
much earth, or the plants
from the pots; but when they are
large, and cannot be thus separated
with a sufficient number of fibres to
their bottom parts, they may be
taken out of the pots, and be removed
by the knife without danger,
which is perhaps the best way, as
affording most fibres. the suckers
of such old flower-plants, when they
are wanted to blow strong, should
always be taken off without disturbing
the plants in the pots, especially
when they are few. the suckers, in
all cases of this sort, should constantly
be planted as soon as possible
after they are slipped, in proper
small upright pots, giving a
slight watering at the time, with suitable
temporary shade. they should
be placed in proper situations out
of the droppings of trees. they
thus soon become rooted. the
suckers of such flower-plants must,
however, never be removed after the
latter of the above periods, as they
have then done shooting, and are
become inactive, and as the winter
immediately succeeds, seldom do
well, especially without great care
and trouble.
sucking pig. when the pig
has been killed and well cleaned,
cut off the feet at the first joint, and
put them with the heart, liver, and
lights, to boil for gravy. before the
pig is spitted, chop a little sage very
fine, mix it with a handful of bread
crumb, a little pepper and salt, and
sow it up in the belly. lay it down
to a brisk fire, rub it with butter
tied up in a piece of thin rag, during
the whole time of roasting. take
off the head while at the fire, take
out the brains and chop them, mix
them with the gravy that comes
from the pig, and add a little melted
butter. before the spit is drawn,
cut the pig down the back and belly,
and lay it in the dish. put a
little of the sauce over it, take the
bottom jaws and ears to garnish
with, and send brown gravy sauce
to table, mixed with the bread and
sage that comes out of the pig. currant
sauce is frequently eaten with
it. a moderate sized pig will require
about an hour and a half roasting.
suet. the proper way of treating
suet, is to choose the firmest
part as soon as it comes in, and
pick it free from skin and veins.
set it in a nice saucepan at some distance
from the fire, that it may melt
without frying, or it will taste. when
melted, pour it into a pan of cold
water. when it comes to a hard
cake, wipe it very dry, fold it in fine
paper, and then in a linen bag. keep
it in a dry cool place. suet prepared
in this way, will keep a twelvemonth.[]
when used, scrape it fine, and it
will make a good crust, either with
or without butter.
suet dumplins. take a
pound of suet, or the outward fat of
loins or necks of mutton, and shred
it very fine. mix it well with a pound
and a quarter of flour, two eggs, a
sufficient quantity of milk to make
it, and a little salt. drop the batter
into boiling water, or boil the dumplins
in a cloth.
take a pint of milk, four
eggs, a pound of suet shred fine, and
a pound of currants well cleaned,
two tea-spoonfuls of salt, and three
of beaten ginger; first take half the
milk and mix it like a thick batter,
then put in the eggs, the salt, and
ginger, then the rest of the milk by
degrees, with the suet and currants,
and flour enough to make it like a
light paste. make them up about
the bigness of a large turkey's egg,
flat them a little, and put them into
boiling water; move them softly that
they do not stick together, keep the
water boiling, and a little more than
half an hour will do them.
mix up a pint of milk, two eggs,
three quarters of a pound of beef
suet chopped fine, a tea-spoonful of
grated ginger, and flour enough to
make it into a moderately stiff paste.
make the paste into dumplins, roll
them in a little flour, and put them
into boiling water. move them gently
for a little while to prevent their
sticking together. if the dumplins
are small, three quarters of an hour
will boil them; if large, the time
must be proportioned to their size.
they will boil equally well in cloths,
which is often preferred for keeping
the outside drier.
suet pudding. shred a
pound of suet; mix with it a pound
and a quarter of flour, two eggs
beaten separately, some salt, and as
little milk as will make it. boil the
pudding four hours. it eats well
the next day, cut in slices and broiled.
the outward fat of a loin or
neck of mutton finely shred, makes
a more delicate pudding than suet.
to a pound of beef suet chopped
very fine, add six large spoonfuls of
flour, a tea-spoonful of grated ginger,
and a tea-spoonful of salt. gradually
mix with these ingredients a
quart of milk, and four eggs well
beaten. boil it three hours in a
buttered basin, or two hours and a
half in a cloth well floured.
suffocation. immediately
on discovering a person in this unfortunate
situation, whatever be the
cause, the windows and doors ought
to be opened; the body undressed,
covered with blankets, removed to
the open air, and supported in a leaning
posture on a chair. the patient's
face should be sprinkled with vinegar,
the pit of the stomach with water,
and the legs plunged into a cold
bath; at the same time rubbing the
skin with flannel, or a soft brush.
clysters of vinegar and water will
also be useful, and an attempt should
be made to promote sickness, by
tickling the throat with a feather
dipped in oil. when the patient is
able to swallow, the most proper
drink is vinegar and water, or infusions
of mint and balm.
suffolk cheese. the curd
is broken up in the whey, which is
poured off as soon as the former has
subsided. the remainder, with the
curd, is put into a coarse strainer,
left to cool, and is then pressed as
tightly as possible. after this it is
put into the vat, and set in a press
to discharge the remaining whey.
the curd is then taken out, broken
again as finely as possible, salted,
and returned to the press.
suffolk dumplins. make
a very light dough with yeast, as for
bread; add a little salt, and use
milk instead of water. let it rise[]
an hour before the fire. round the
dough into balls, the size of a middling
apple; throw them into boiling
water, and let them boil twenty
minutes. to ascertain when they
are done enough, stick a clean fork
into one; and if it come out clear,
they are ready to take up. do not
cut, but tear them apart on the top
with two forks, for they become heavy
by their own steam. they should
be eaten immediately, with gravy or
cold butter, or with meat.
sugars. these being an article
of considerable expense in all families,
the purchase demands particular
attention. the cheapest does
not go so far as the more refined,
and there is a difference even
in the degree of sweetness. of
white sugar that should be preferred
which is close, heavy, and shining.
the best sort of brown sugar
has a bright gravelly appearance,
and it is often to be bought pure as
imported. east india sugars are
finer for the price, but not so strong,
consequently unfit for wines and
sweetmeats, but do well for common
purposes, if good of their kind. to
prepare white sugar pounded, rolling
it with a bottle and sifting it,
wastes less than pounding it in a
mortar.
sugar cakes. make into a
paste a pound of flour, twelve ounces
of fine sugar sifted, the yolks of two
eggs, a little nutmeg, and orange-flower
water. roll it out thin, cut
out the cakes with a tin or glass,
sift sugar over them, and bake them
in a quick oven.
sugar paste. to a pound
of flour put two ounces of loaf sugar
rolled and sifted, and rub in half
a pound of butter. mix it up with
one egg well beaten, and cold water
sufficient to make it into a paste.
mould it with the hand till it is
quite smooth, and roll it out for
use.
sugar vinegar. to every
gallon of water, add two pounds of
the coarsest sugar; then boil and
skim it thoroughly, and add one
quart of cold water for every gallon
of hot. when cool, put in a toast
spread with yeast. stir it nine days,
then barrel it off, and set it in the
sun, with a piece of slate on the
bung hole. make the vinegar in
march, and it will be ready in six
months. when sufficiently sour it
may be bottled, or may be used
from the cask with a wooden spigot
and faucet.
sun flower. the valuable
properties of the sun flower are too
much neglected, and might be rendered
of general advantage. the
leaves furnish abundance of agreeable
fodder for cattle, the flower is
enriched with honey for the bees,
the dry stalks burn well, affording a
considerable quantity of alkali from
the ashes, and the seed is highly valuable
in feeding pigs and poultry.
the cultivation of this plant cannot
be too much recommended, and requires
but little management.
supper dish. to make a
pretty supper dish, wash a tea-cupful
of rice in milk, and boil it
tender. strain off the milk, lay
the rice in small heaps on a dish,
strew over them some finely-powdered
sugar and cinnamon, and put
warm wine and a little butter into
the dish.
suppers. hot suppers are not
much in use where people dine late,
nor indeed in ordinary cases. when
required, the top and bottom of the
table may be furnished with game,
fowls, rabbit; boiled fish, such as
soles, mackarel, oysters, stewed or
scalloped; french beans, cauliflower,
or jerusalem artichokes, in
white sauce; brocoli with eggs,
stewed spinach with eggs, sweetbreads,
small birds, mushrooms,
scalloped potatoes; cutlets, roast
onions, salmagundi, buttered eggs
on toast, cold neat's tongue, ham,
collared things, sliced hunter's beef,
buttered rusks with anchovies,[]
grated hung beef with butter, with
or without rusks; grated cheese
round, and butter dressed in the
middle of a plate; radishes the
same, custards in glasses with sippets,
oysters cold or pickled; potted
meats, fish, birds, cheese; good
plain cake sliced, pies of birds or
fruit; lobsters, prawns, cray fish,
any sweet things, and fruits. a
sandwich set with any of the above
articles, placed on the table at a
little distance from each other, will
look well. the lighter the things,
the better they appear, and glass
intermixed has the best effect. jellies,
different coloured things, and
flowers, add to the beauty of the
table. an elegant supper may be
served at a small expense, by those
who know how to make trifles that
are in the house form the greatest
part of the entertainment.
susan pudding. boil some
windsor beans, just as they begin
to be black-eyed, till they are quite
tender. then peel them, and beat
up half a pound of them very smooth
in a marble mortar. add four spoonfuls
of thick cream, sugar to taste,
half a pound of clarified butter, and
eight eggs, leaving out half the
whites. beat up the eggs well with
a little salt, and white wine sufficient
to give it an agreeable flavour. line
a dish with puff paste, add a pretty
good layer of candied citron cut in
long pieces, pour in the other ingredients,
and bake it in a moderate
oven three quarters of an hour.
the common practice of employing
poor children to sweep narrow chimnies,
is most inhuman and unwise:
many lives are lost by this means,
and much injury is done to the building.
the children being obliged to
work themselves up by pressing
with their feet and knees on one
side, and their back on the other,
often force out the bricks which divide
the chimnies, and thereby encrease
the danger, in case a foul
chimney should take fire, as the
flames frequently communicate by
those apertures to other apartments,
which were not suspected to be in
any danger. to avoid these consequences,
a rope twice the length
of the chimney should be provided,
to the middle of which a bunch of
furze or broom is to be tied, sufficient
to fill the cavity of the chimney.
put one end of the rope down
the chimney, with a stone fastened
to it, and draw the brush after it,
which will clear the sides of the
chimney, and bring down the soot.
if necessary, a person at top may
draw the brush up again to the top
of the chimney, keeping hold of the
rope, and thus clean the chimney
thoroughly without difficulty or danger.
sweet herbs. it is of some
importance to know when the various
seasons commence for procuring
sweet and savoury herbs, fit
for culinary purposes. all vegetables
are in the highest state of perfection,
and fullest of juice and flavour,
just before they begin to
flower. the first and last crop have
neither the fine flavour nor the perfume
of those which are gathered in
the height of the season; that is,
when the greater part of the crop
of each species is ripe. let them
be gathered on a dry day, and they
will have a better colour after being
preserved. cleanse them well from
dust and dirt, cut off the roots, separate
the bunches into smaller ones,
and dry them by the heat of a stove,
or in a dutch oven before the fire.
take them in small quantities, that
the process may be speedily finished,
and thus their flavour will be
preserved. drying them in the sun
exhausts some of their best qualities.
in the application of artificial heat,
the only caution requisite is to avoid
burning; and of this, a sufficient
test is afforded by the preservation
of the colour. the common custom
is, when they are perfectly dried,[]
to put them in bags, and lay them in
a dry place. but the best way to
preserve the flavour of aromatic
plants, is to pick off the leaves as
soon as they are dried; then to
pound and pass them through a
hair sieve, and keep them in well-stopped
bottles.—basil is in the
best state for drying, from the middle
of august, and three weeks
afterwards. knotted marjoram,
from the beginning of july to
the end of the month. winter savoury,
the latter end of july, and
throughout august. thyme, lemon
thyme, and orange thyme, during
june and july. mint, the latter end
of june, and throughout july. sage,
august and september. tarragon,
june, july, and august. chervil,
may, june, and july. burnet, june,
july, and august. parsley, may,
june, and july. fennel, the same.
elder flowers, and orange flowers,
may, june, and july. herbs carefully
dried, are a very agreeable substitute;
but when fresh ones can be
had, their flavour and fragrance are
much finer, and therefore to be preferred.
sweet lamb pie. make a
good puff paste; then cut a loin of
lamb into chops, and season with
salt and nutmeg; lay a paste over
the bottom of your dish; put in your
chops, with a handful of currants
washed and picked very clean; lay
on your lid, and bake it. when it
comes from the oven, take off the lid
nicely, and pour over a caudle made
of white wine, the yolks of eggs, a
little nutmeg, and sugar pounded:
lay the lid on again, and send it to
table as hot as you can.
sweet macaroni. to make
a very nice dish of macaroni, boil
two ounces of it in a pint of milk,
with a bit of cinnamon and lemon
peel, till the pipes are swelled to
their utmost size without breaking.
lay them on a custard dish, pour a
custard over them, and serve them
up cold.
sweet patties. chop the
meat of a boiled calf's foot, the liquor
of which is intended for jelly; two
apples, one ounce of orange and lemon
peel candied, and some fresh
peel and juice. mix with them half
a nutmeg grated, the yolk of an egg,
a spoonful of brandy, and four ounces
of currants washed and dried. fill
some small pattipans lined with paste,
and bake them.—to make patties
resembling mince pies, chop the kidney
and fat of cold veal, apple,
orange and lemon peel candied; adding
some fresh currants, a little wine,
two or three cloves, a little brandy
and sugar.
sweet pot. take three handfuls
of orange flowers, three of clove
gilliflowers, three of damask roses,
one of knotted marjoram, one of lemon
thyme, six bay leaves, a handful
of rosemary, one of myrtle, one
of lavender, half one of mint, the
rind of a lemon, and a quarter of an
ounce of cloves. chop all together,
and put them in layers, with pounded
bay-salt between, up to the top of
the jar. if all the ingredients cannot
be got at once, put them in when
obtained, always throwing in salt
with every fresh article. this will
be found a quick and easy way of
making a sweet-scented pot.
sweet sauce. put some currant
jelly into a stewpan, and when
melted, pour it into a sauce boat.
this is a more salubrious relish for
venison or hare, than either spice or
salt, and is an agreeable accompaniment
to roast or hashed meats.
cut the sweetbreads in pretty thick
slices, boil them till about half done,
with a little more water than just to
cover them. add a little salt, white
pepper, and mace. then some butter,
the yolks of four eggs beaten
with a little white wine, and some
verjuice. keep this over the fire,
shaking it well, till the sauce is properly
thickened. serve it up with
the juice of a seville orange squeezed[]
over it. if it is to be a brown fricassee,
fry the sweetbreads first in
butter till the outside is browned.
then pour away the butter, put water
to the sweetbreads, and boil and
finish them as before. an onion or
a clove of garlic may be added to
the water; or if broth be used instead
of water, it will make the fricassee
more savoury.
sweetbreads fried. cut
them into long slices, rub them over
with egg, season with pepper, salt,
and grated bread, and fry them in
butter. serve them up with melted
butter and ketchup, garnished with
crisped parsley, and thin slices of
toasted bacon.
sweetbreads ragout. cut
them about the size of a walnut,
wash and dry them, then fry them of
a fine brown. pour on them a good
gravy, seasoned with salt, pepper,
allspice, and either mushrooms or
mushroom ketchup, adding truffles
and morels, if approved. strain, and
thicken with butter and a little flour.
parboil two large ones; when cold,
lard them with bacon, and roast
them in a dutch oven. for sauce,
plain butter and mushroom ketchup.
sweetmeats. preserves or
sweetmeats should be carefully kept
from the air, and set in a very dry
place. if they have only a small
proportion of sugar, a warm situation
would not injure them; but if
they have not been sufficiently boiled,
the heat will make them ferment,
and the damp will cause them to
grow mouldy. they should be inspected
two or three times in the first
two months that they may be gently
boiled again, if not likely to keep.
it is necessary to observe, that the
boiling of sugar more or less, constitutes
the chief art of the confectioner;
and those who are not practically
acquainted with the subject,
and only preserve fruit in a plain
way for family use, are not aware
that in two or three minutes, a syrup
over the fire will pass from one gradation
to another, called by the confectioners,
degrees of boiling, of
which there are six, and those sub-divided.
without entering, however,
into the minutiæ of the business, it
is only necessary to make the observation
in order to guard against under
boiling, which prevents sweetmeats
from keeping; and quick and
long boiling, which reduces them to
candy. attention, without much
practice, will enable a person to do
any of the following sorts of sweetmeats
and preserves, which are quite
sufficient for a private family. the
higher articles of preserved fruits
may be bought at less expense than
made. jellies of fruit are made with
an equal quantity of sugar, that is,
a pound to a pint, and require no
very long boiling. a pan should be
kept for the purpose of preserving,
of double block tin, with a bow
handle for safety, opposite the straight
one: and if when done with, it be
carefully cleaned and set by in a dry
place, it will last for several years.
pans of copper or brass are extremely
improper, as the tinning wears out
by the scraping of the ladle. sieves
and spoons should likewise be kept
on purpose for sweetmeats. sweetmeats
keep best in drawers that are
not connected with a wall. if there
be the least damp, cover them only
with paper dipped in brandy, and
laid on quite close; and to prevent
the mouldiness occasioned by insects,
cover them with fresh paper
in the spring. when any sweetmeats
are to be dried in the sun, or in a
stove, it will be best in private families,
where there is not a regular
stove for the purpose, to place them
in the sun on flag stones, which reflect
the heat, and to cover them
with a garden glass to keep off the
insects. if put into an oven, take
care that it be not too warm, and
watch to see them done properly
and slowly. when green fruits are[]
to be preserved, take pippins, apricots,
pears, plums, or peaches, and
put them into a block tin preserving
pan, with vine leaves under and over
them, and cover them with spring
water. put on the tin cover to exclude
the air, and set the pan on the
side of the fire. when the fruit
begins to simmer, remove the pan
from the fire, pour off the water,
and if not green, put fresh leaves
when cold, and repeat the same.
take them out carefully with a slice,
peel and do them as directed for the
different kinds of preserves. when
fruit is plentiful, and sweetmeats are
wanted for tarts, divide two pounds
of apricots just ripe, and take out
and break the stones. put the kernels
without their skins to the fruit;
add three pounds of greengages,
and two pounds and a half of lump
sugar. the sugar should be broken
in large pieces, and just dipped in
water, and added to the fruit over
a slow fire. simmer it till reduced
to a clear jam, but observe that it
does not boil, and skim it well. if
the sugar be clarified, it will make
the jam the better. put it into small
pots, which art the best for preserving
sweetmeats.
sweetmeat pies. sweetmeats
made with syrups are made
into pies the same as raw fruit, and
the same crusts may be used for
them. tarts made of any kind of
jam are commonly made with a crust
round the bottom of the dish, the
sweetmeat then put in, and only little
ornaments of crust cut with a
jagging iron, and laid over the top.
sugar paste may be used if preferred.
little tartlets are made in the
same way, only baked in tins and
turned out.
swoons. in a swooning fit,
the patient should immediately be
exposed to the open air, and the
face and neck sprinkled with cold
water. pungent odours, or volatile
spirits, should be held to the nostrils,
and the feet rubbed with hot
flannels, or put into warm water.
syllabub. put a pint of cider
and a bottle of strong beer into a
large punch bowl, grate in a nutmeg,
and sweeten it. put in as much new
milk from the cow as will make a
strong froth, and let it stand an
hour. clean and wash some currants,
and make them plump before
the fire: then strew them over the
syllabub, and it will be fit for use.
a good imitation of this may be
made by those who do not keep
cows, by pouring new milk out of a
tea-pot into the cider and beer, or
wine.—a fine syllabub from the
cow. make your syllabub either of
wine or cyder, (if cyder, put a spoonful
of brandy in) sweeten it, and
grate in some nutmeg; then milk
into the liquor till you have a fine
light curd; pour over it half a pint,
or a pint of good cream, according
to the quantity of syllabub you
make: you may send it in the basin
it was made in, or put it into custard-cups,
and tea-spoons with it on
a salver.—to make very fine syllabubs.
take a quart and half a pint
of cream, a pint of rhenish, and
half a pint of sack; grate the rind
of three lemons into the cream;
with near a pound of double-refined
sugar; squeeze the juice of three
lemons into the wine, and put it to
the cream; then beat all together
with a whisk half an hour, take it
up together with a spoon, and fill
the glasses. it is best at three or
four days old, and will keep good
nine or ten days. these are called
the everlasting syllabubs.
sympathetic ink. write on
paper with a solution of nitrate of
bismuth, and smear the writing over
with a feather, moistened with an
infusion of galls. the letters which
were before invisible, will now appear
of a brown colour. or write
with a solution of muriate of antimony,[]
and smear the writing over
with a feather dipped in a solution
of galls. the writing before invisible,
will now turn yellow. or write
with a transparent infusion of gall
nuts, and smear it over with a solution
of metallic salt; and on a slight
exposure to the air, the writing will
turn quite black. if written with a
solution of sulphate of iron, and
rubbed over with a solution of prussiate
of potass, it will appear of a
beautiful blue colour.
syrup of cream. scald a
pint of perfectly fresh cream, add to
it a pound and a quarter of powdered
lump sugar. keep it in a cool place
for two or three hours, then put it
into small phials, holding one or
two ounces each, and cork it close.
it will keep good thus for several
weeks, and will be found very useful
in voyages.
syrup of diacodium. steep
two pounds and a quarter of poppy
heads in a gallon of water, and let
it infuse twenty-four hours. boil
the infusion till reduced to three
pints, and add to it a pound and a
half of sugar.
syrup of mulberries. put
the mulberries into a jar, and the
jar into a kettle of water over the
fire, till the juice runs from them.
then squeeze the fruit, and add to
the juice twice its weight in sugar.
set it over a slow fire, skim it clean,
and keep it simmering till the sugar
is all dissolved.
table beer. if the quantity
to be brewed is taken as a barrel,
or six and thirty gallons, two bushels
and a half of malt will be sufficient.
the dimensions of the vessels may
be supposed to correspond with
those used in a moderate family, and
the copper holding about thirty gallons.
a quantity of boiling water
being poured into the mash tub, is
suffered to remain there till the steam
is nearly all evaporated. the malt
previously ground, is then thrown
into the water, and thoroughly stirred
and mixed with it. this agitation
of the malt and water, commonly
called mashing, is kept up
for a quarter of an hour, by which
the malt is more effectually brought
into contact with the water, and a
greater proportion of its soluble
matter extracted. after this the
mash tub is covered over in order to
retain as much heat as possible,
and the whole is suffered to remain
undisturbed for an hour and a half
or two hours. at the end of that
time, the water thus impregnated
with the malt, in which state it is
commonly called sweet wort, is
slowly drawn off into another vessel.
the quantity of water used in the
first mashing is about twenty-five
gallons; of which, not above fifteen
are afterwards obtained, the rest
being absorbed by the malt, with
the exception of a small quantity
carried off by evaporation. this
first wort being drawn off from the
malt, a fresh portion of hot water is
thrown into the mash tub, and the
process of mashing is repeated for
ten minutes. the tub being again
covered, the whole is suffered to remain
for about an hour, when a second
wort is drawn off. the quantity
of water used in this second
mashing is about fifteen gallons;
and the malt having already retained
as much water as is sufficient[]
to saturate it, the whole amount
of the fifteen gallons is afterwards
recovered from the mash tub. about
twelve gallons of hot water is now
added to the malt, and the mixture
being mashed for a few minutes,
is suffered to remain another hour,
in order to form a third wort. in
the meantime a part of the two first
worts is poured into the copper, with
a pound and a half or two pounds of
hops, and boiled for an hour, or an
hour and a half; after which it is
strained through a sieve into another
vessel. the third wort is now drawn
off from the mash tub, and being
mixed with the remaining part of
the first and second wort, it is boiled
for an hour or more, with the hops
used in the former instance. the
three worts are then distributed into
shallow vessels or coolers, and suffered
to remain there till the liquor
is reduced to a lukewarm state. it
is then collected into the tun tub,
and fermented with about a quart of
yeast, which converts it into beer.
but as table beer is sometimes brewed
in considerable quantities for the
use of large families, and in a still
more economical manner, an estimate
will be given, in order to show
the saving that is made in private
brewing. the following is a preparation
for ten barrels.
£s.d.
malt, one quarter
hops, eight pounds
colouring, ditto
spanish liquorice, oz.
treacle, ten pounds
ten barrels bought at the brewery at s.
ten barrels brewed at home
clear gain
liquorice root and other flavouring
substances may be added: what
are here inserted are only the general
requisites.—another way of making
a cheap and wholesome table beer,
is to dissolve four pounds of coarse
sugar in ten gallons of water. then
put in three ounces of hops, boil the
whole for three quarters of an hour,
and let it work as usual. it should be
kept a week or ten days before it is
tapped, and it will improve daily afterwards,
if not kept too long. or for
a still smaller quantity, put a pound of
treacle to eight quarts of boiling water:
add two bay leaves, and a quarter
of an ounce of powdered ginger.
boil the whole for fifteen minutes,
then let it cool, and work it with
yeast.
tainted meat. when the
weather is so hot that meat will
scarcely keep from day to day, wrapping
it in a thin cloth dipped in vinegar,
and not wrung very dry, will
help to keep it from being tainted.
or rubbing the meat with black pepper
will preserve it, and let it be
hung up as usual. it is much better
however, that meat should not be
kept so long as to risk its being
tainted.
tan gloves. to dye gloves
to look like york tan or limerick,
put some saffron into a pint of water
boiling hot, and let it infuse all night.
next morning wet the leather over
with a brush, but take care that the
tops of the gloves be sewn close, to
prevent the colour from getting
in.
tansey. to make a tansey,
beat up seven eggs, yolks and whites
separately. add a pint of cream,
nearly the same of spinach juice,
and a little tansey juice, gained by
pounding it in a stone mortar; a
quarter of a pound of naples biscuit,
a glass of white wine, and a
little sugar and nutmeg. set all in
a saucepan, just to thicken, over the
fire; then put it into a dish, lined
with paste to turn out, and bake it.—another.[]
beat ten eggs very well
with a little salt, half a pound of
loaf sugar pounded, half a pint of
spinach juice, and a spoonful of the
juice of tansey; mix them well together,
and strain it to a quart of
cream; grate in half a pound of
naples biscuits, and a nutmeg; add
a quarter of a pound of jordan almonds
blanched and beat fine, with
a little rose water, and mix all well
together; put it into a stewpan,
with a piece of butter the bigness of
a golden pippin. set it over a slow
charcoal fire; keep it stirring till it
is hardened; then butter a dish very
well, that will just hold it: put in
the tansey, bake it in a moderate
oven, taking care that it is not
scorched. when it comes home,
turn it upon a pie plate, cut seville
oranges in small quarters, and lay
round it, and on the tansey, citron,
and orange peel cut thin, with double
refined sugar laid in little heaps
between. if you have not naples
biscuits, grate seven ounces of the
finest stale bread you have.—a boiled
tansey. cut the crumb of a stale
penny loaf thin, pour over as much
hot cream as will wet it, and cover
it over till cold; then beat and strain
six eggs to it, a little lemon peel
shred fine, a little grated nutmeg,
and salt; green it as you did the
baked tansey, and sweeten it to your
taste; stir all very well together,
butter a bason, that will hold it, butter
also a cloth to lay over the top,
tie it tight, and boil it an hour and
quarter; turn it into a dish, and
garnish with seville orange; stick
candied orange cut thin on the top.
tansey pudding. grate
four ounces of bread, blanch two
ounces of sweet almonds, and beat
them fine in a marble mortar, with
orange-flower water. mix these,
and four ounces of fine powdered
sugar with the bread. add five eggs,
a little salt, a pint of cream, a grated
nutmeg, half a pint of spinach juice
expressed from the leaves, beaten in
a marble mortar, and strained through
a cloth, and two or three spoonfuls
of tansey juice beaten out and strained
in the same manner. stir the
whole together, and put it into a
saucepan with a small piece of butter.
set it over the fire till it thickens,
stirring it all the time, but do not let
it boil. when done, cool it in a
basin, then pour it into a dish well
buttered, and bake it half an hour.
turn it out of the dish before it is
sent to table, sift some fine sugar
over it, and lay a seville orange round
it cut in pieces, and squeeze the juice
upon it.
tapioca jelly. choose the
largest sort, pour on cold water to
wash in two or three times, and then
soak it in fresh water five or six
times. simmer it in the same until
it become quite clear, with a bit of
lemon peel. then add lemon juice,
wine, and sugar.
tapioca pudding. wash
six spoonfuls of the large kind of
tapioca, and stew it gently in a quart
of milk till it is pretty thick. let
it stand uncovered to cool. add two
eggs well beaten with some salt,
and sugar to the taste. bake it with
a crust round the edge of a dish, in
a moderate oven, for an hour.
tar water. pour a gallon
of cold water on a quart of tar, and
stir and mix them thoroughly with
a ladle or flat stick, for the space of
three or four minutes; after which
the vessel must stand forty-eight
hours, that the tar may have time to
subside; when the clear water is to
be poured off, and kept for use, no
more being made from the same tar,
which may still serve for common
purposes. the general rule for
taking it is, about half a pint night
and morning, on an empty stomach,
which quantity may be varied according
to the case and age of the
patient; provided it be always taken
on an empty stomach, and about two
hours before or after a meal. tar
water cures indigestion, and gives[]
a good appetite. it is an excellent
medicine in an asthma; it imparts a
kindly warmth, and quick circulation
to the juices, without heating,
and is therefore useful, not only as
a pectoral and balsamic, but also
as a powerful and a safe deobstruent
in cachectic and hysteric cases. as
it is both healing and diuretic, it is
very good for the gravel. it is
believed to be of great use in a
dropsy, having been known to cure
a very bad anasarca in a person
whose thirst, though very extraordinary,
was in a short time removed
by the drinking of tar water. it is
also believed to be the best and
safest medicine, either for preventing
the gout, or for so strengthening
nature against the fit, as to drive it
from the vitals. it may likewise be
safely used in inflammatory cases;
and, in fact, hath been found an
admirable febrifuge, at once the
safest cooler and cordial. the salts
and more active spirits of tar are got
by infusion in cold water; but the
resinous part is not to be dissolved
thereby. hence the prejudice which
some, perhaps, may entertain against
tar water, the use of which might
inflame the blood by its sulphur and
resin, as a medicine, appears not to
be well grounded. it is observed by
chemists, that all sorts of balsamic
wood afford an acid spirit, which is
the volatile oily salt of the vegetable.
herein is chiefly contained their medicinal
virtues; and it appears that
the acid spirit in tar water possesses
the virtues, in an eminent degree, of
that of guaiacum, and other medicinal
woods. it is certain tar water warms,
and therefore some may perhaps
still think it cannot cool. the more
effectually to remove this prejudice,
let it be farther considered, that, as
on one hand, opposite causes do
sometimes produce the same effect;
for instance, heat by rarefaction,
and cold by condensation, do both
increase the air's elasticity; so, on
the other hand, the same cause shall
sometimes produce opposite effects.
heat, for instance, in one degree
thins, in another coagulates, the
blood. it is not therefore strange,
that tar water should warm one habit
and cool another; have one good
effect on a cold constitution, and
another good effect on an inflamed
one; nor, if this be so, that it
should cure opposite disorders. a
medicine of so great virtue in so
many different disorders, and especially
in that grand enemy the fever,
must needs be a benefit to mankind
in general. there are nevertheless
three sorts of people to whom it may
be peculiarly recommended; seafaring
persons, ladies, and men of
studious and sedentary lives. if it
be asked, what precise quantity, or
degree of strength is required in
tar water? it is answered, that the
palate, the stomach, the particular
case and constitution of the patient,
the very season of the year, will dispose
and require him to drink more
or less in quantity, stronger or weaker
in degree. precisely to measure
its strength by a scrupulous exactness,
is by no means necessary. it
is to be observed, that tar water
should not be made in unglazed
earthen vessels, these being apt to
communicate a nauseous sweetness
to the water. tar water is also recommended
in the plague, and for
the distemper among horned cattle;
with what success must be left to
experience.
tarragon vinegar. fill a
wide-mouthed bottle with tarragon
leaves, gathered on a dry day, just
before the plant begins to flower. dry
the leaves a little before the fire,
steep them a fortnight in the best vinegar,
and strain it fine through a
flannel jelly bag. pour it into half-pint
bottles, cork them up carefully,
and keep them in a dry place. this
forms an agreeable addition to soups
and salad sauce, and to mix with
mustard.
tartar wine. add to a quantity[]
of mare's milk a sixth part of
water, and pour the mixture into a
wooden vessel. use as a ferment an
eighth part of sour cow's milk; but
at any future preparation, a small
portion of old koumiss will answer
better. cover the vessel with a thick
cloth, and set it in a place of moderate
warmth, leaving it at rest for
twenty four hours. at the end of
this time the milk will become sour,
and a thick substance will be gathered
on its surface. now with a
churn-staff, beat it till the thick substance
just mentioned, be intimately
blended with the subjacent fluid.
in this situation leave it at rest for
twenty four hours more. afterwards
pour it into a higher and narrower
vessel, resembling a churn, where
the agitation must be repeated as before,
till the liquor appear to be perfectly
combined. in this state it is
called koumiss, the taste of which
ought to be a pleasant mixture of
sweet and sour. agitation must be
employed every time before it is
used. this wine, prepared by the
tartars, is cooling and antiseptic.
sometimes aromatic herbs, as angelica,
are infused in the liquor during
fermentation.
tarts. sweetmeats made with
syrups are formed into pies and tarts
the same as raw fruits, and the same
crusts may be used for them. tarts
made of any kind of jam are usually
formed with a crust round the bottom
of the dish, the sweetmeat is
then put in, and little ornaments of
crust placed over the top, made with
a jagging iron. sugar paste is suitable
for these. little tartlets are
made in the same way, only baked in
tins and turned out.——take apples,
or pears, cut them in small quarters,
and set them over the fire, with a
piece of lemon peel, and some cinnamon;
let them simmer in as much
water as will cover them, till tender;
and if you bake them in tin pattipans,
butter them first, and lay over
a thin paste; lay in some sugar,
then the fruit, with three or four
tea-spoonfuls of the liquor they were
simmered in; put in a little more
sugar, and lid them over. if your
tarts are made of apricots, green
almonds, nectarines, or green plums,
they must be scalded before you use
them, and observe to put nothing
to them but sugar, and as little water
as possible; make use of the
syrup they were scalded in, as you
did for your apples, &c. cherries,
currants, raspberries, and all ripe
fruits need not be scalded; and if
you make your tarts in china, or
glass patties, lay the sugar at bottom,
then the fruit, with a little more
sugar on the top; put no paste at
the bottom, only lid them over, and
bake them in a slack oven. you
have receipts how to make crust for
tarts; mince pies must be baked in
tin patties, that you may slip them
out into a dish, and a puff paste is
the best for them. when you make
sweetmeat tarts, or a crocant tart,
lay in the sweetmeats, or preserved
fruit either in glass or china patties
that are small, for that purpose;
lay a very thin crust on the top, and
let them be baked no more than till
your crust is nicely coloured, and
that in a slow oven. if you would
have a crocant tart for the middle
of the table, or a side-dish, have a
glass, or china dish, of what size
you please, and lay in the preserved
fruit of different sorts, (you must
have a round cover just the size of
the inside of your dish) roll out a
sugar crust, the thickness of an half
crown, and lay over the cover; mark
it with marking irons made on purpose
for that use, of what shapes
you please; then put the crust, with
the cover, into a very slack oven,
not to discolour it, only to have it
crisp. when you take it out of the
oven, loosen it from the cover very
gently, and when quite cold, take it
carefully off, and lay over your
sweetmeats, and it being hollow,
you will see the fruit through it.[]
if the tart is not eaten, only take off
the lid, and your sweetmeats may be
put into the pots again.
tea. the habit of drinking tea
frequently, and in large quantities,
cannot fail to be injurious, as it greatly
weakens and relaxes the tone of
the stomach. this produces indigestion,
nervous trembling and weakness,
attended with a pale, wan complexion.
when tea is taken only at
intervals, and after solid food, it is
salutary and refreshing; but when
used as a substitute for plain nourishing
diet, as is too commonly the
case amongst the lower classes, it is
highly pernicious, especially as large
quantities of a spurious description
are too frequently imposed upon the
public. the policy which compels
a very numerous class to purchase
this foreign article, for procuring
which immense sums are sent out of
the country, while the produce of our
own soil is comparatively withheld by
an exorbitant system of taxation,
cannot be too severely condemned, as
alike injurious to health, to the interests
of agriculture, and to the comfort
and industry of the people. the
duty on foreign tea has indeed been
greatly encreased, but at the same
time, so has the duty on malt and
beer; no encouragement therefore is
given to the home consumption, but
the money which ought to be paid for
the production of barley and malt is
given to the foreigner, while by the
enormous price of the article, a powerful
stimulus is furnished for attempting
an illicit importation, and
for the pernicious adulteration of
what is now esteemed almost a common
necessary of life. it is desirable to
lessen the injurious effects of tea as
much as possible by mixing it with
milk, which will render it softer and
more nutritious. with the addition of
sugar it may be made to form a
wholesome breakfast for those who
are strong and live freely, operating
as a diluent for cleansing the bladder
and kidnies, and the alimentary passages.
persons of weak nerves ought
however to abstain from tea, as they
would from drains and cordials, as it
causes the same kind of irritation on
the delicate fibres of the stomach,
which ends in lowness, trembling, and
vapours. tea should never be drunk
hot at any time, as it tends still more
to produce that relaxation which
ought to be carefully avoided. green
tea is less wholesome than black or
bohea.
tea cakes. rub four ounces
of butter into eight ounces of flour,
mix with it eight ounces of currants,
and six of fine lisbon sugar. add
two yolks and one white of eggs, and
a spoonful of brandy. roll the paste
about the thickness of a biscuit, and
cut it out with a wine glass into little
cakes. the white of the other egg
beaten up, may be washed over them,
and then they may be dusted with
fine sugar.
tea-kettles. hard water
used for tea is apt to form an offensive
crust inside the tea-kettle, which
may be prevented by frequent cleaning,
or putting a flat oyster shell at
the bottom. this will attract the
stony particles that are in the water,
and the concretion will be formed
upon it.
tea-pots. an infusion of tea is
always more perfect in a metal tea-pot,
than in one of stone or earthenware.
if boiling water be poured into two
tea-pots, one of bright silver or polished
tin, and the other of black
stoneware, and they be left in a room
of moderate temperature, it will be
found that the former will retain its
heat nearly twice as long as the other.
tea-pots of polished metal are therefore
to be preferred.
teats. sore teats, in neat cattle,
is an affection in those of the cow
kind, to which some are much more
subject than others; especially such
as have newly or lately calved.
when the teats of these animals are
affected during the summer months,
they often become ulcerated, and by[]
the teazing of the flies, the cattle are
rendered difficult to be milked; they
also become a very great nuisance
at the periods of milking, as the discharges
from them are apt, without
much attention, to pass between the
fingers of the operator into the milk-pail,
and spoil the milk. the affection
is caused by inflammation, irritation,
and too much distention of
the parts by the milk. in order to
the removal of it, the milk should be
first frequently drawn, and the parts
well washed with soft soap and
warm water; after which, a substance
composed of elder ointment
and wax melted together, to which
is then added a little alum and sugar
of lead, in fine powder, may be used
to the parts after milking at night
and in the morning; or a weak solution
of white vitriol and a little sugar
of lead, in soft water may be
made use of in the same way, in some
cases, with more advantage. the
addition of a little assafœtida, and
such like substances, in powder, is,
it is said, beneficial in the summer
season in driving away the flies.
great care is to be taken to keep the
teats as clean as possible during the
time of cure.
teeth and gums. in order
to preserve the teeth and gums, they
require to be cleaned very carefully;
for if the enamel of the teeth be
worn off by an improper mode of
cleaning, they will suffer more injury
than by a total neglect. a common
skewer of soft wood, bruised and
bitten at the end, will make the best
brush for this purpose. once a
week dip the skewer brush into a
few grains of gunpowder, after they
have been bruised, and it will remove
every spot and blemish till the teeth
appear beautifully white. the mouth
should be well washed after the
operation, to prevent any ill effects
of the gunpowder. teeth, if not
regularly cleaned, are apt to contract
a false kind of enamel which is injurious
to the gums, leaving the
fangs of the teeth bare, so that they
are soon destroyed, by being exposed
to the air, and for want of
being protected by the gums. this
tartarous enamel must therefore be
scaled off, that the gums may grow
up to their proper place. raspberries
or strawberries eaten plentifully
have been found to dissolve
these concretions, and contribute
to the preservation of the teeth and
gums. tooth powders and tinctures
also have their use. a very convenient
powder may be made of charcoal
pounded in a mortar, and sifted
fine. apply a little of it to the
teeth twice a week, and it will not
only render them beautifully white,
but also make the breath sweet, and
the gums firm and comfortable. the
charcoal may be ground in water,
and so preserved for use. a tincture
for the gums may be made of three
ounces of the tincture of bark, and
half an ounce of sal ammoniac,
mixed together. dip the finger into
a tea-spoonful of the tincture, and
rub the gums and teeth with it,
which are afterwards to be washed
with warm water. this tincture not
only cures the toothache, but preserves
the teeth and gums, and
causes them to adhere to each other.
when a lease is expired, and the
tenant keeps possession without any
new contract, he is deemed a tenant
at sufferance. but on the landlord's
acceptance of any rent after the expiration
of the lease, the tenant may
hold the premises from year to
year, till half a year's notice is
given.
tenant at will. a tenant
at will is one who holds an estate
or tenement at the will of the landlord,
and may at any time be ejected.
meanwhile he is at liberty to
leave when he chooses, on giving
proper notice, and cannot be compelled
to occupy.
tench. these are a fine flavoured
fresh-water fish, and should[]
be killed and dressed as soon as
caught. they abound very much
in the dykes of lincolnshire. when
they are to be bought, examine whether
the gills are red and hard to
open, the eyes bright, and the body
stiff. the tench has a slimy matter
about it, the clearness and brightness
of which indicate freshness.
the season for this delicate fish is
july, august, and september. when
to be dressed, put them into cold
water, boil them carefully, and serve
with melted butter and soy. they
are also very fine stewed, or fricasseed,
as follows. to fricassee tench
white. having cleaned your tench
very well, cut off their heads, slit
them in two, and if large, cut each
half in three pieces, if small, in two:
melt some butter in a stewpan, and
put in your tench; dust in some
flour, and pour in some boiling water,
and a few mushrooms, and season
it with salt, pepper, a bundle of
sweet herbs, and an onion stuck with
cloves: when this boils, pour in a
pint of white wine boiling hot; let
it stew till sufficiently wasted; take
out the fish, and strain the liquor,
saving the mushrooms; bind your
fricassee with the yolk of three or
four eggs beaten up with a little
verjuice, some parsley chopped fine,
and a little nutmeg grated; stir it
all the time it boils, scum it very
clean, pour your sauce over the fish,
and send it to table.—to fricassee
tench brown. prepare your tench
as in the other receipt; put some
butter and flour into a stewpan,
and brown it; then put in the tench
with the same seasoning you did
your white fricassee; when you have
tossed them up, moisten them with
a little fish broth; boil a pint of
white wine, and put to your fricassee,
stew it till enough, and properly
wasted; then take the fish up, and
strain the liquor, bind it with a
brown cullis, and serve it up. if
asparagus or artichokes are in season,
you may boil these, and add
them to your fricassee.
tench broth. clean the fish,
and set them on the fire with three
pints of water; add some parsley, a
slice of onion, and a few peppercorns.
simmer till the fish is broken,
the broth become good, and reduced
one half. add some salt, and strain
it off. tench broth is very nutricious,
and light of digestion.
thick milk. beat up an egg,
and add to it a tea spoonful of flour.
mix it smooth with a tea-spoonful
of cold milk, and put to it a pint of
boiling milk. stir it over a slow fire
till it boils, then pour it out, and
add a little sugar and nutmeg. the
saucepan should have a little cold
water put into it first, to prevent
the milk from burning at the bottom,
or marbles boiled in it will answer
the same purpose.
thickened gravy. to a
quart of gravy allow a table-spoonful
of thickening, or from one to two
table-spoonfuls of flour, according
to the thickness required. put a
ladleful of the gravy into a basin
with the thickening, stir it up quick,
add the rest by degrees, till it is all
well mixed. then pour it back into
a stewpan, and leave it by the side
of the fire to simmer for half an
hour longer, that the thickening may
be thoroughly incorporated with the
gravy. let it neither be too pale
nor too dark a colour. if not thick
enough, let it stew longer, or add to
it a little glaze or portable soup. if
too thick, it may be diluted with a
spoonful or too of warm broth or
water.
thickened soup. put into
a small stewpan three table-spoonfuls
of the fat taken off the soup,
and mix it with four table-spoonfuls
of flour. pour in a ladleful of the
soup, mix it with the rest by degrees,
and boil it up till it is smooth.
this may be rendered more savoury
by adding a little ketchup. the[]
soup should be strained through a
tammis.
thickening. clarified butter
is best for this purpose, or put some
fresh butter into a stewpan over a
slow clear fire. when it is melted,
add fine flour sufficient to make it
the thickness of paste. stir it well
together with a wooden spoon for
fifteen or twenty minutes, till it is
quite smooth, and the colour of a
guinea. this must be done very
gradually and patiently, or it will be
spoiled. pour it into an earthen
pan, and it will keep good a fortnight
in summer, and longer in winter.
particular attention must be
paid in making it; if it gets any
burnt smell or taste, it will spoil
every thing it is put into. when
cold, it should be thick enough to
cut out with a knife, like a solid
paste. this is a very essential article
in the kitchen, and the basis of
consistency in most made dishes,
soups, sauces, and ragouts. in making
this thickening, the less butter
and the more flour is used the better.
they must be thoroughly worked
together, and the broth or soup added
by degrees. unless well incorporated,
the sauce will taste floury,
and have a greasy disagreeable appearance.
to prevent this, it must
be finished and cleansed, after it is
thickened, by adding a little broth
or warm water, and setting it by
the side of the fire to raise any fat
that is not thoroughly incorporated
with the gravy, that it may be carefully
removed as it comes to the top.
some cooks merely thicken their
soups and sauces with flour, or the
farina of potatoe; and others use
the fat skimmings off the top of
broth, as a substitute for butter.
to run prickles or thorns, such as
those of roses, thistles, and chesnuts,
or little splinters of wood or
bone, into the hands, feet, or legs,
is a very common accident, and provided
any such substance be immediately
extracted, it is seldom attended
with any bad consequences.
but the more certain prevention is
a compress of linen dipped in warm
water, and applied to the part, or
to bathe it a little while in warm
water. if the thorn or splinter cannot
be extracted directly, or if any
part of it be left in, it causes an
inflammation, and nothing but timely
precaution will prevent its coming
to an abscess. a plaster of shoemaker's
wax spread upon leather,
draws these wounds remarkably well.
when it is known that any part of
the splinter remains, an expert surgeon
would open the place and take
it out; but if it be unobserved, as
will sometimes happen when the
substance is very small, till the inflammation
begins, and no advice
can at once be procured, the steam
of water should be applied to it first,
and then a poultice of bread crumb
and milk, with a few drops of peruvian
balsam. it is quite necessary
that the injured part should be kept
in the easiest posture, and as still as
possible. if this does not soon succeed,
good advice must be procured
without delay, as an accident of this
kind neglected, or improperly treated,
may be the occasion of losing
a limb. in this and all other cases
of inflammation, a forbearance from
animal food and fermented liquors,
is always advisable.
thrush. this disorder in children
affects the mouth and throat,
and sometimes the stomach. in the
former case it will be sufficient to
cleanse the mouth with a little sage
tea, sweetened with the honey of
roses, and mixed with a dram of
borax. in the latter, great benefit
may be derived from a decoction of
carrots in water, or an ounce of
linseed boiled in a pint of water till
reduced to a consistence, and sweetened
with two ounces of honey, a
table-spoonful of which may be[]
given occasionally. this complaint
may generally be prevented by a
due attention to cleanliness, daily
washing and bathing the child in
lukewarm water, washing its mouth
after it has been applied to the
breast, giving it pure air, and removing
any obstruction in the bowels
by the use of manna or tamarinds.
thyme. these plants may be
easily raised from seed, by slipping
the roots and branches, and by cuttings;
but the seed method is seldom
practised, except with the second
sort, or garden thyme. the seed
should be sown in the early spring on
light, rich, dry ground, which should
be properly dug over, and the surface
be made moderately smooth with the
spade. as the seed is small, it should
not be sown too thick, or be covered
too deep: the seed is best sown while
the ground is fresh stirred, either
broad-cast on the surface, raking it
in lightly, or in flat shallow drills,
earthed over thinly: the plants appear
in two or three weeks. it is necessary
to be careful to keep them
well weeded, giving occasional light
waterings in dry weather; and by
june they will require thinning, especially
if the plants are to grow
stocky, and with bushy full heads;
in which case they should be set out
to six or eight inches distance; when
those thinned out may be planted in
another place, in rows six or eight
inches asunder, giving water till fresh
rooted, keeping the whole clean from
weeds by occasional hoeing between
them in dry days, which will also stir
the surface of the earth, and much
improve the growth of the plants:
they will be in perfection for use in
summer, or early in autumn. some
think the common thyme best cultivated
for kitchen use in beds or borders,
in rows at least half a foot
apart, employing for the purpose either
the young seedling plants, which
are fit to set out, or the root slips of
old plants, each of which soon increase
into plants of bushy growths
proper for being cropped for the
above use. it may also often be well
cultivated as an edging to herbary
and other compartments; in both of
which methods the plants multiply
exceedingly fast by offsets, and are
abiding, furnishing the means of great
future increase. some should, however,
always be annually raised from
seed in the above manner, as such
plants possess a stronger aromatic
quality than those from old ones.
when it is intended to increase any
particular varieties, and continue
them the same with certainty, it can
only be effected by slips and cuttings.
in respect to the offsets and slips, all
the sorts multiply by offsets of the
root and slips of the branches: the
rooted slips are the most expeditious
method, as the old plants increase
into many offset stems rising from the
root, each furnished with fibres; and
by taking up the old plants in the
spring, &c. and slipping or dividing
them into separate parts, not too
small, with roots to each, and planting
them in beds of good earth, in
rows half a foot asunder, giving water
directly, and repeating it occasionally
in dry weather till they have
taken root, and begin to shoot at
top; they soon grow freely, and form
good bushy plants in two or three
months. the strong slips of the
branches without roots, succeed when
planted any time in the early spring
season in a shady border, in rows
four or five inches distant, giving due
waterings; and become good plants
by autumn, when they may be planted
out where they are to remain.
the cuttings of the young branches
grow readily, the same as the slips,
when planted at the same season in
a shady place, and well watered.
the common thyme is in universal
use as a pot-herb for various culinary
purposes; it may also be employed
in assemblage with other small
plants, to embellish the fronts of
flower-borders, shrubbery clumps,[]
small and sloping banks, &c. placing
the plants detached or singly, to form
little bushy tufts, and in which the
variegated sorts, and the silver thyme
and lemon thyme particularly, form
a very agreeable variety. the lemon
thyme is also in much estimation
for its peculiar odoriferous smell.
some of each of these sorts may
also be potted, in order to be moved
occasionally to any particular places
as may be required, and under occasional
shelter in severe winters,
to preserve the plants more effectually
in a lively state; likewise some
of the mastick thyme. spanish and
portugal thymes are also sometimes
potted for the same purpose, and to
place under the protection of a garden
frame or greenhouse in winter,
to continue them in a more fresh
and lively growth; and sometimes
some of the smaller thymes are sown
or planted for edgings to particular
beds or borders for variety, such as
the lemon thyme, silver-leaved and
variegated sorts; also occasionally
the common thyme; and all kept
low, close and regular, by clipping
them at the sides and tops annually
in the summer season. all
the several sorts and varieties possess
an aromatic quality, which
principally resides in the leaves,
whence it is imparted and affords
a line agreeable fragrance. but the
first three kinds are much the most
noted and valued in kitchen gardens,
and more especially the common
thyme, which is so very useful as a
culinary herb.
tin covers. properly to clean
tin covers and pewter pots, get the
finest whiting, which is only sold in
large cakes, the small being mixed
with sand. powder and mix a little
of it with a drop of sweet oil, rub
the pots and covers well with it,
and wipe them clean. then dust
over some dry whiting in a muslin
bag, and rub the articles bright with
dry leather. the last is to prevent
rust, which must be carefully guarded
against by wiping thoroughly
dry, and setting them by the fire
when they come from table. if
covers are once hung up without
wiping, the steam will be sure to
rust the inside.
bruise three ounces of allspice, and
steep it in a quart of brandy. shake
it up occasionally and after a fortnight
pour off the clear liquor. it
makes a most grateful addition in
all cases where allspice is used, in
gravies, or to flavour and preserve
potted meats.
tincture of bark. to
make the compound tincture, take
two ounces of peruvian bark powdered,
half an ounce of seville
orange peel, and half an ounce of
bruised cinnamon. infuse the whole
in a pint and a half of brandy, let it
stand five or six days in a close vessel,
and then strain off the tincture.
take one or two tea-spoonfuls twice
a day in any suitable liquor, sharpened
with a few drops of the spirits
of vitriol. this tincture is highly
beneficial in intermitting fevers, and
in slow, nervous, or putrid fevers,
especially towards their decline.
this exhilirating cordial is made by
pouring a bottle of the best brandy
on three ounces of bruised cinnamon.
a tea-spoonful of it, and a
lump of sugar, in a glass of good
sherry or madeira, with the yolk of
an egg beaten up in it, was formerly
considered as the balsam of life.
two tea-spoonfuls of it in a wine
glass of water, are at present a very
pleasant remedy in nervous languors,
and in relaxations of the bowels. in
the latter case, five drops of laudanum
may be added to each dose.
tincture of cloves. bruise
three ounces of cloves, steep them
for ten days in a quart of brandy,
and strain off the tincture through
a flannel sieve. it imparts an excellent
flavour to mulled wine. in
all cases tinctures are to be preferred[]
to essences, as affording a much finer
flavour.
a very easy and economical way of
obtaining and preserving the flavour
of lemon peel, is to fill a wide-mouthed
pint bottle half full of brandy
or rum; and when a lemon is
used, pare off the rind very thin,
and put it into the spirits. in the
course of a fortnight the liquor will
be strongly flavoured with the lemon.
steep three ounces of nutmeg in a
quart of brandy, and let it stand a
fortnight. shake it up occasionally,
and then pour off the clear liquor.
take two ounces and a half of rhubarb,
and half an ounce of lesser
cardamon seeds; steep them for a
week in a quart of brandy, and
strain off the tincture. to make
the bitter tincture of rhubarb, add
an ounce of gentian root, and a
dram of snake root. the tincture
is of great use in case of indigestion,
pain or weakness of the stomach;
and from one to three or four spoonfuls
may be taken every day.
tingeing of glass. the art
of tingeing glass of various colours
is by mixing with it, while in a state
of fusion, some of the metallic oxides;
and on this process, well conducted,
depends the formation of
pastes. blue glass is formed by
means of oxide of cobalt; green,
by the oxide of iron or copper;
violet, by oxide of manganese; red,
by a mixture of the oxides of copper
and iron; purple, by the purple
oxide of gold; white, by the oxides
of arsenic and of zinc; yellow,
by the oxide of silver, and by combustible
bodies.
toast and water. take a
slice of fine and stale loaf-bread,
cut very thin, (as thin as toast is
ever cut) and let it be carefully
toasted on both sides, until it be
completely browned all over, but no
wise blackened or burned in any
way. put this into a common deep
stone or china jug, and pour over it,
from the tea kettle, as much clean
boiling water as you wish to make
into drink. much depends on the
water being actually in a boiling
state. cover the jug with a saucer
or plate, and let the drink stand until
it be quite cold; it is then fit to be
used; the fresher it is made the
better, and of course the more agreeable.
the above will be found a
pleasant, light, and highly diuretic
drink. it is peculiarly grateful to
the stomach, and excellent for carrying
off the effects of any excess in
drinking. it is also a most excellent
drink at meals, and may be used
in the summer time, if more agreeable
to the drinker.
toasted cheese. mix some
fine butter, made mustard, and salt,
into a mass. spread it on fresh
made thin toasts, and grate some
gloucester cheese upon them.
tomatoes. these are chiefly
used in soups and sauces, and serve
as little dishes at table at any part
of a dinner. when they are to be
baked, cut the tomatoes lengthways
in the middle, with the part where
there is a rind downwards. strew
upon each a seasoning of pepper,
salt, and sweet herbs chopped small.
set them in the oven till they are
soft, and serve them up, without
any other sauce. the fruit of the
purple egg plant is eaten, prepared
in the same manner.
tomata sauce. for hot or
cold meats put tomatas, when perfectly
ripe, into an earthen jar.
set it in an oven when the bread is
drawn, till they are quite soft; then
separate the skins from the pulp,
and mix this with capsicum vinegar,
and a few cloves of pounded garlic,
which must both be proportioned to
the quantity of fruit. add powdered
ginger and salt to taste. some
white wine vinegar and cayenne may
be used instead of capsicum vinegar.
keep the mixture in small wide-mouthed[]
bottles, well corked, and
in a cool dry place.
tongues. when a tongue is
intended to be eaten cold, season it
with common salt and saltpetre,
brown sugar, a little bay salt, pepper,
cloves, mace, and allspice, in
fine powder, and let it lie a fortnight.
then take away the pickle,
put the tongue into a small pan, and
lay some butter on it. cover it with
brown crust, and bake it slowly till
it becomes so tender that a straw
would go through it. the thin part
of tongues, when hung up to dry,
grates like hung beef, and also makes
a fine addition to the flavour of
omlets.—to boil a tongue. if it is
a dried tongue, soak it over night;
the next day put it into cold water,
and let it have a good deal of room;
it will take at least four hours. if
it is a green tongue out of the pickle,
you need not soak it, but it will require
near the same time. about
an hour before you send it to table,
take it out and blanch it, then put
it into the pot again till you want it,
by this means it will eat the tenderer.
tongue and udder. clean
the tongue nicely, rub it with salt, a
very little saltpetre, and a little
coarse sugar, and let it lie for two
or three days. when to be dressed,
have a fresh tender udder with some
fat to it, and boil that and the tongue
gently till half done. take them
very clean out of the water, then tie
the thick end of the one to the thin
end of the other, and roast them
with a few cloves stuck into the udder.
serve them up with gravy in
the dish, and currant jelly in a tureen.
a dried tongue to be boiled,
requires to be previously soaked for
ten or twelve hours. a tongue out
of pickle is only to be washed, and
boiled in the same way. it will
take four hours to do it well, and
for the first two hours it should only
simmer. about an hour before it is
done it should be taken up and
peeled, and then put into the boiler
again to finish it. serve it up with
turnips nicely mashed, and laid
round it.
tooth ach. the best possible
preventive of this disorder is
to keep the teeth clean, as directed
for the teeth and gums. if the
gums be inflamed, recourse should
be had to bleeding by leeches, and
blisters behind the ears. a few
drops of laudanum in cotton, laid
on the tooth, will sometimes afford
relief. in some cases, vitriolic æther
dropped on the cheek, and the hand
held to the part till the liquid is evaporated,
is found to answer the purpose.
but it is much easier to prescribe
the means of preventing the
disorder, than to point out a specific
remedy; and the nostrums generally
given on this subject are either ineffectual
or injurious.
tourte crust. to make a
crust for french pies called tourtes,
take a pound and a half of fine flour,
a pound of butter, and three quarters
of an ounce of salt. put the
flour upon a clean pie board, make
a hole in the middle, and put in the
salt, with the butter cut into small
pieces. pour in the water carefully,
as it is of great importance that the
crust be rather stiff; and for this
purpose there should only be just
water enough to make it hold together
so as to roll it out smooth.
work up the butter and water well
together with the hand, and mix it
in the flour by degrees. when the
flour is all mixed in, mould the paste
till it is quite smooth and free from
lumps, and let it lie two hours before
it be used. this is a very nice
crust for putting round the dish for
baked puddings.
tourtes of fish. prepare
the crust and put it into the dish,
as for meat tourtes. then take almost
any kind of fish, cut them from
the backbone, and lay them in slices
upon the crust, with a little bunch of
sweet herbs in the middle, some salt[]
and pounded spice, according to the
taste. lay butter all over the top
crust, and bake it an hour and a
half. cut the crust round after it
is baked, take out the herbs, skim
off the remainder of the fat, pour on
a sauce of fish gravy, and serve it
up. mushrooms are very nice in
the sauce, and so are capers, but
the flavour of the sauce must be regulated
by the taste. truffles and
morels may also be put in, as in the
meat tourtes. eels, pike, salmon,
tench, whiting, are proper for the
purpose. nothing makes a nicer
tourte in this way than large soles,
taking off the flesh from the backbone,
without the side fins. lobsters
also make an excellent tourte,
and oysters are very nice mixed with
other fish.
tourtes of meat. prepare
a crust of paste, roll it out, and line
a dish with it not deeper than a
common plate. veal, chicken, pigeons,
sweetbread, or game of any
kind, may be prepared as follows.
cut in pieces whichever is preferred,
just heat it in water, drain it, season
it with pepper and salt, lay it upon
the crust without piling it up high,
and leave a border round the rim of
the dish. place some pieces of butter
upon the meat to keep it moist,
and add truffles, mushrooms, morels,
artichoke bottoms, or forcemeat
balls, at pleasure. cover the whole
with slices of fat bacon, and then
lay a crust over it exactly corresponding
with that underneath. glaze
over the upper crust with yolk of
egg, and set the tourte into an oven.
when it has been in a quarter of an
hour, draw it to the mouth of the
oven, and make a hole in the centre
of the crust to let out the fumes.
let it stand nearly three hours longer
in the oven, then take it out, cut the
crust round with the rim, take it off,
take out the bacon, and clear off
any fat that may remain on the top.
have ready a rich ragout sauce to
pour over it, then replace the crust,
and serve it up. this dish is according
to the french fashion.
cut the palest seville oranges in
quarters, take out the pulp, and put
it in a bason, picking out the seeds
and skins. let the outsides soak in
water with a little salt all night,
then boil them in a good quantity
of spring water till tender; drain,
and cut them in very thin slices, and
put them to the pulp. to every
pound, add a pound and a half of
double-refined sugar beaten fine;
boil them together twenty minutes,
but be careful not to break the slices.
it must be stirred all the time very
gently, and put into glasses when
cold.
the paper must be fixed in a
straining frame, in order to place it
between the eye and the light, when
required. after tracing the design,
the colours must be laid on, in the
usual method of stained drawings.
when the tints are got in, place the
picture against the window, on a
pane of glass framed for the purpose,
and begin to strengthen the
shadows with indian ink, or with
colours, according as the effect requires;
laying the colours sometimes
on both sides of the paper, to
give greater force and depth of colour.
the last touches for giving
final strength to shadows and forms,
are to be done with ivory black or
lamp black, prepared with gum water;
as there is no pigment so opaque,
and capable of giving strength and
decision. when the drawing is
finished, and every part has got its
depth of colour and brilliancy, being
perfectly dry, touch very carefully
with spirits of turpentine, on
both sides, those parts which are to
be the brightest, such as the moon
and fire; and those parts requiring
less brightness, only on one side.
then lay on immediately with a
pencil, a varnish made by dissolving
one ounce of canada balsam in an[]
equal quantity of spirit of turpentine.
be cautious with the varnish, as it is
apt to spread. when the varnish is
dry, tinge the flame with red lead
and gamboge, slightly touching the
smoke next the flame. the moon
must not be tinted with colour. much
depends on the choice of the subject,
and none is so admirably adapted to
this species of effect, as the gloomy
gothic ruin, whose antique towers and
pointed turrets finely contrast their
dark battlements with the pale yet brilliant
moon. the effect of rays passing
through the ruined windows, half
choked with ivy; or of a fire among
the clustering pillars and broken
monuments of the choir, round
which are figures of banditti, or
others, whose haggard faces catch
the reflecting light; afford a peculiarity
of effect not to be equaled
in any other species of painting.
internal views of cathedrals also,
where windows of stained glass are
introduced, have a beautiful effect.
the great point to be attained is,
a happy coincidence between the
subject and the effect produced. the
fine light should not be too near the
moon, as its glare would tend to injure
her pale silver light. those
parts which are not interesting,
should be kept in an undistinguishing
gloom; and where the principal
light is, they should be marked with
precision. groups of figures should
be well contrasted; those in shadow
crossing those that are in light, by
which means the opposition of light
against shade is effected.
beat up eight eggs, put them into a
stewpan, with half a pound of sugar
finely pounded, the same quantity of
butter, and some grated nutmeg. set
it on the fire, and keep it stirring till
it thickens. then set it into a basin
to cool, put a rich puff paste round
the dish, pour in the pudding, and
bake it in a moderate oven. it will
cut light and clear. candied orange
and citron may be added if approved.
annuals and perennials, sown
in march or april, may be transplanted
about the end of may. a showery
season is preferable, or they must
frequently be watered till they have
taken root. in the summer time the
evening is the proper season, and
care should be taken not to break
the fibres in digging up the root.
chinasters, columbines, marigolds,
pinks, stocks, hollyhocks, mallows,
sweetwilliams, wallflowers, and various
others, may be sown and transplanted
in this manner.
traps. garden traps, such as
are contrived for the purpose of destroying
mice and other vermin;
which are often conveyed into such
places with the straw, litter, and other
matters that are made use of in them;
and which are extremely hurtful and
troublesome in the spring season, in
destroying peas and beans, as well
as lettuces, melons, and cucumbers
in frames. traps for this purpose
are contrived in a great many ways;
but as field vermin are very shy, and
will rarely enter traps which are
close, the following simple cheap
form has been advised, though it has
nothing of novelty in it. these traps
may be made by stringing garden
beans on a piece of fine pack-thread,
in the manner of beads, and then
driving two small stake-like pieces
of wood into the ground at the breadth
of a brick from each other, and setting
up a brick, flat stone, or board
with a weight on it, inclining to an
angle of about forty-five degrees;
tying the string, with the beans on
it, round the brick or other substances
and stakes, to support them in their
inclining position, being careful to
place all the beans on the under
sides of the bricks or other matters.
the mice in eating the beans, in such
cases, will also destroy the pack-thread,
and by such means disengage
the brick or other weighty body,
which by falling on them readily
destroys them. mice are always[]
best got rid of by some sort of simple
open traps of this nature.
treacle beer. pour two
quarts of boiling water on a pound
of treacle, and stir them together.
add six quarts of cold water,
and a tea-cupful of yeast. tun
it into a cask, cover it close down,
and it will be fit to drink in two or
three days. if made in large quantities,
or intended to keep, put in a
handful of malt and hops, and when
the fermentation is over, stop it up
close.
treacle posset. add two
table-spoonfuls of treacle to a pint
of milk, and when ready to boil, stir
it briskly over the fire till it curdles.
strain it off after standing covered
a few minutes. this whey promotes
perspiration, is suitable for a cold,
and children will take it very
freely.
it ought to be an invariable rule with
all who have the care of children,
to give them food only when it is
needful. instead of observing this
simple and obvious rule, it is too
common, throughout every period of
childhood, to pervert the use of food
by giving it when it is not wanted,
and consequently when it does mischief,
not only in a physical but in
a moral point of view. to give food
as an indulgence, or in a way of reward,
or to withhold it as a matter
of punishment, are alike injurious.
a proper quantity of food is necessary
in all cases, to sustain their
health and growth; and their faults
ought to be corrected by more rational
means. the idea of making
them suffer in their health and
growth on account of their behaviour,
is sufficient to fill every considerate
mind with horror. it is the project
only of extreme weakness, to attempt
to correct the disposition by creating
bodily sufferings, which are so
prone to hurt the temper, even at
an age when reason has gained a
more powerful ascendancy. eatables
usually given to children by
well-meaning but injudicious persons,
in order to pacify or conciliate,
are still worse than the privations
inflicted by way of punishment. sugar
plums, sugar candy, barley
sugar, sweetmeats, and most kinds
of cakes, are unwholesome, and
cloying to the appetite. till children
begin to run about, the uniformity
of their lives makes it probable
that the quantity of food they
require in the day is nearly the
same, and that it may be given to
them statedly at the same time. by
establishing a judicious regularity
with regard to both, much benefit
will accrue to their health and comfort.
the same rule should be applied
to infants at the breast, as
well as after they are weaned. by
allowing proper intervals between
the times of giving children suck,
the breast of the mother becomes
duly replenished with milk, and the
stomach of the infant properly emptied
to receive a fresh supply. the
supposition that an infant wants
food every time it cries, is highly
fanciful; and it is perfectly ridiculous
to see the poor squalling thing
thrown on its back, and nearly suffocated
with food to prevent its crying,
when it is more likely that the
previous uneasiness arises from an
overloaded stomach. even the mother's
milk, the lightest of all food,
will disagree with the child, if the
administration of it is improperly
repeated. a very injurious practice
is sometimes adopted, in suckling a
child beyond the proper period,
which ought by all means to be discountenanced,
as evidently unnatural,
and tending to produce weakness
both in body and mind. suckling
should not be continued after
the cutting of the first teeth, when
the clearest indication is given, that
the food which was adapted to the
earliest stage of infancy ceases to
be proper. attention should also
be paid to the quantity as well as to[]
quality of the food given, for though
a child will sleep with an overloaded
stomach, it will not be the refreshing
sleep of health. when the
stomach is filled beyond the proper
medium, it induces a similar kind
of heaviness to that arising from
opiates and intoxicating liquors;
and instead of awakening refreshed
and lively, the child will be heavy
and fretful. by the time that children
begin to run about, the increase
of their exercise will require an increase
of nourishment: but those
who overload them with food at any
time, in hopes of strengthening
them, are very much deceived. no
prejudice is equally fatal to such
numbers of children. whatever unnecessary
food a child receives,
weakens instead of strengthening it:
for when the stomach is overfilled,
its power of digestion is impaired,
and food undigested is so far from
yielding nourishment, that it only
serves to debilitate the whole system,
and to occasion a variety of
diseases. amongst these are obstructions,
distention of the body,
rickets, scrophula, slow fevers, consumptions,
and convulsion fits.
another pernicious custom prevails
with regard to the diet of children,
when they begin to take other nourishment
besides their mother's milk,
and that is by giving them such as
their stomachs are unable to digest,
and indulging them also in a mixture
of such things at their meals as are
hurtful to every body, and more especially
to children, considering the
feeble and delicate state of their
organs. this injudicious indulgence
is sometimes defended on the plea
of its being necessary to accustom
them to all kinds of food; but this
idea is highly erroneous. their
stomachs must have time to acquire
strength sufficient to enable them to
digest varieties of food; and the filling
them with indigestible things is
not the way to give them strength.
children can only acquire strength
gradually with their proper growth,
which will always be impeded if the
stomach is disordered. food for
infants should be very simple, and
easy of digestion. when they require
something more solid than
spoonmeats alone, they should have
bread with them. plain puddings,
mild vegetables, and wholesome ripe
fruits, eaten with bread, are also
good for them. animal food is better
deferred till their increased capacity
for exercise will permit it
with greater safety, and then care
must be taken that the exercise be
proportioned to this kind of food.
the first use of it should be gradual,
not exceeding two or three times in
a week. an exception should be
made to these rules in the instances
of scrophulous and rickety children,
as much bread is always hurtful in
these cases, and fruits are particularly
pernicious. plain animal food
is found to be the most suitable to
their state. the utmost care should
be taken under all circumstances to
procure genuine unadulterated bread
for children, as the great support of
life. if the perverted habits of the
present generation give them an indifference
as to what bread they eat,
or a vitiated taste for adulterated
bread, they still owe it to their children
as a sacred duty, not to undermine
their constitution by this injurious
composition. the poor, and
many also of the middling ranks of
society are unhappily compelled to
this species of infanticide, as it may
almost be called, by being driven
into large towns to gain a subsistence,
and thus, from the difficulty
of doing otherwise, being obliged to
take their bread of bakers, instead
of making wholesome bread at home,
as in former times, in more favourable
situations. while these are to
be pitied, what shall be said of those
whose fortunes place them above
this painful necessity. let them at
at least rear their children on wholesome
food, and with unsophisticated[]
habits, as the most unequivocal testimony
of parental affection performing
its duty towards its offspring.
it is proper also to observe, that
children ought not to be hurried in
their eating, as it is of great importance
that they should acquire a habit
of chewing their food well. they
will derive from it the various advantages
of being less likely to eat
their food hot, of thus preparing
what they eat properly for the stomach,
instead of imposing upon it
what is the real office of the teeth;
and also that of checking them from
eating too much. when food is not
properly masticated, the stomach
is longer before it feels satisfied;
which is perhaps the most frequent,
and certainly the most excusable
cause of eating more than is fairly
sufficient. thoughtless people will
often, for their own amusement, give
children morsels of high dishes, and
sips of spirituous or fermented liquors,
to see whether they will relish
them, or make faces at them. but
trifling as this may seem, it would
be better that it were never practised,
for the sake of preserving the
natural purity of their tastes as long
as possible.
though an unskilful dabbling in
cases of illness, which require the
attention of the most medical practitioners,
is both dangerous and
presumptuous; yet it is quite necessary
that those who have the
care of a family should be able to
afford some relief in case of need,
as well as those whose duty it is
more immediately to attend upon
the sick. uneasy symptoms are
experienced at times by all persons,
not amounting to a decided state of
disease, which if neglected may nevertheless
issue in some serious disorder
that might have been prevented,
not only without risk, but
even with greater advantage to the
individual than by an application to
a positive course of medicine. attention
to the state of the bowels,
and the relief that may frequently
be afforded by a change of diet,
come therefore very properly within
the sphere of domestic management,
in connection with a few simple medicines
in common use. the sensations
of lassitude or weariness,
stiffness or numbness, less activity
than usual, less appetite, a load or
heaviness at the stomach, some uneasiness
in the head, a more profound
degree of sleep, yet less composed
and refreshing than usual;
less gaiety and liveliness, a slight
oppression of the breast, a less regular
pulse, a propensity to be cold,
or to perspire, or sometimes a suppression
of a former disposition to
perspire, are any of them symptomatic
of a diseased state, though
not to any very serious or alarming
degree. yet under such circumstances
persons are generally restless,
and scarcely know what to do
with themselves; and often for the
sake of change, or on the supposition
that their sensations proceed from
lowness, they unhappily adopt the
certain means of making them terminate
in dangerous if not fatal diseases.
they increase their usual
quantity of animal food, leave off
vegetables and fruit, drink freely of
wine or other strong liquors, under
an idea of strengthening the stomach,
and expelling wind; all of
which strengthen nothing but the
disposition to disease, and expel
only the degree of health yet remaining.
the consequence of this mistaken
management is, that all the
evacuations are restrained, the humours
causing and nourishing the
disease are not at all attempered
and diluted, nor rendered proper
for evacuation. on the contrary they
become sharper, and more difficult
to be discharged. by judicious management
it is practicable, if not
entirely to prevent a variety of disorders,
yet at least to abate their
severity, and so to avert the ultimate[]
danger. as soon as any of the symptoms
begin to appear, the proper
way is to avoid all violent or laborious
exercise, and to indulge in
such only as is gentle and easy. to
take very little or no solid food, and
particularly to abstain from meat,
or flesh broth, eggs, and wine, or
other strong liquors. to drink
plentifully of weak diluting liquor,
by small glasses at a time, at intervals
of about half an hour. if these
diluents are not found to answer the
purpose of keeping the bowels open,
stronger cathartics must be taken,
or injections for the bowels, called
lavements. by pursuing these precautions,
the early symptoms of disease
will often be removed, without
coming to any serious issue: and
even where this is not the case, the
disorder will be so lessened as to
obviate any kind of danger from it.
when confirmed diseases occur, the
only safe course is to resort to the
most skilful medical assistance that
can be obtained. good advice and
few medicines will much sooner effect
a cure, than all the drugs of the
apothecary's shop unskilfully administered.
but the success of the
best advice may be defeated, if the
patient and his attendants will not
concur to render it effectual. if the
patient is to indulge longings for
improper diet, and his friends are
to gratify them, the advantage of the
best advice may be defeated by one
such imprudent measure. patients
labouring under accidents which
require surgical assistance, must be
required strictly to attend to the
same directions. general regulations
are all that a physician or surgeon
can make respecting diet, many
other circumstances will therefore
require the consideration of
those who attend upon the sick, and
it is of consequence that they be
well prepared to undertake their
charge, for many fatal mistakes have
arisen from ignorance and prejudice
in these cases. a few rules
that may be referred to in the absence
of a medical adviser, are all
that are necessary in the present instance,
more especially when the
patient is so far recovered as to be
released from medicines, and put
under a proper regimen, with the
use of a gentle exercise, and such
other regulations as a convalescent
state requires.—when for example,
persons are labouring under acute
disorders, or accidents, they are
frequently known to suffer from the
injudiciousness of those about them,
in covering them up in bed with a
load of clothes that heat and debilitate
them exceedingly, or in keeping
them in bed when the occasion does
not require it, without even suffering
them to get up and have it new
made, and by never allowing a breath
of fresh air to be admitted into the
room. the keeping patients quiet
is undoubtedly of essential importance; they
should not be talked to,
nor should more persons be admitted
into the room than are absolutely
necessary. every thing that
might prove offensive should immediately
be removed. sprinkling the
room sometimes with vinegar, will
contribute to keep it in a better state.
the windows should be opened occasionally
for a longer or shorter
time, according to the weather and
season of the year, without suffering
the air to come immediately upon
the patient. waving the chamber
door backward and forward for
a few minutes, two or three times in
a day, ventilates the room, without
exposing the sick person to chilness.
occasionally burning pastils in the
room, or a roll of paper, is also useful.
the bed linen, and that of the
patient, should be changed every
day, or in two or three days, as circumstances
may require. a strict
forbearance from giving sick persons
any nourishment beyond what is
prescribed by their medical attendant,
should invariably be observed.
some persons think they do well in[]
this respect to cheat the doctor,
while in fact they cheat the patient
out of the benefit of his advice, and
endanger his life under a pretence of
facilitating his recovery. in all cases
it is important to wait with patience
the slow progress of recovery, rather
than by injudicious means to attempt
to hasten it; otherwise the desired
event will only be retarded. what
has long been undermining the stamina
of health, which is commonly
the case with diseases, or what has
violently shocked it by accident, can
only be removed by slow degrees.
medicines will not operate like a
charm; and even when they are most
efficacious, time is required to recover
from the languid state to which
persons are always reduced, both
by accident and by disease. when
the period is arrived at which sick
persons may be said to be out of
danger, a great deal of patience and
care will still be necessary to prevent
a relapse. much of this will
depend on the convalescent party
being content for some time with
only a moderate portion of food, for
we are not nourished in proportion
to what we swallow, but to what we
are well able to digest. persons on
their recovery, who eat moderately,
digest their food, and grow strong
from it. those in a weak state,
who eat much, do not digest it; instead
therefore of being nourished
and strengthened by it, they insensibly
wither away. the principal
rules to be observed in this case are,
that persons in sickness, or those who
are slowly recovering, should take
very little nourishment at a time,
and take it often. let them have
only one sort of food at each meal,
and not change their food too often;
