to make; and all these employments call for no ordinary degree of care,
taste, and attention.
 the still-room was formerly much more in vogue than at present;
 for in days of "auld lang syne," the still was in constant
 requisition for the supply of sweet-flavoured waters for the
 purposes of cookery, scents and aromatic substances used in the
 preparation of the toilet, and cordials in cases of accidents
 and illness. there are some establishments, however, in which
 distillation is still carried on, and in these, the still-room
 maid has her old duties to perform. in a general way, however,
 this domestic is immediately concerned with the housekeeper. for
 the latter she lights the fire, dusts her room, prepares the
 breakfast-table, and waits at the different meals taken in the
 housekeeper's room (see ). a still-room maid may learn a
 very great deal of useful knowledge from her intimate connection
 with the housekeeper, and if she be active and intelligent, may
 soon fit herself for a better position in the household.
. in the evening, the housekeeper will often busy herself with the
necessary preparations for the next day's duties. numberless small, but
still important arrangements, will have to be made, so that everything
may move smoothly. at times, perhaps, attention will have to be paid to
the breaking of lump-sugar, the stoning of raisins, the washing,
cleansing, and drying of currants, &c. the evening, too, is the best
time for setting right her account of the expenditure, and duly writing
a statement of moneys received and paid, and also for making memoranda
of any articles she may require for her storeroom or other departments.
 periodically, at some convenient time,—for instance, quarterly
 or half-yearly, it is a good plan for the housekeeper to make an
 inventory of everything she has under her care, and compare this
 with the lists of a former period; she will then be able to
 furnish a statement, if necessary, of the articles which, on
 account of time, breakage, loss, or other causes, it has been
 necessary to replace or replenish.
. in concluding these remarks on the duties of the housekeeper, we
will briefly refer to the very great responsibility which attaches to
her position. like "caesar's wife," she should be "above suspicion," and
her honesty and sobriety unquestionable; for there are many temptations
to which she is exposed. in a physical point of view, a housekeeper
should be healthy and strong, and be particularly clean in her person,
and her hands, although they may show a degree of roughness, from the
nature of some of her employments, yet should have a nice inviting
appearance. in her dealings with the various tradesmen, and in her
behaviour to the domestics under her, the demeanour and conduct of the
housekeeper should be such as, in neither case, to diminish, by an undue
familiarity, her authority or influence.
note.—it will be useful for the mistress and housekeeper to know the
best seasons for various occupations connected with household
management; and we, accordingly, subjoin a few hints which we think will
prove valuable.
as, in the winter months, servants have much more to do, in consequence
of the necessity there is to attend to the number of fires throughout
the household, not much more than the ordinary every-day work can be
attempted.
in the summer, and when the absence of fires gives the domestics more
leisure, then any extra work that is required, can be more easily
performed.
the spring is the usual period set apart for house-cleaning, and
removing all the dust and dirt, which will necessarily, with the best of
housewives, accumulate during the winter months, from the smoke of the
coal, oil, gas, &c. this season is also well adapted for washing and
bleaching linen, &c., as, the weather, not being then too hot for the
exertions necessary in washing counterpanes, blankets, and heavy things
in general, the work is better and more easily done than in the intense
heats of july, which month some recommend for these purposes. winter
curtains should be taken down, and replaced by the summer white ones;
and furs and woollen cloths also carefully laid by. the former should be
well shaken and brushed, and then pinned upon paper or linen, with
camphor to preserve them from the moths. furs, &c., will be preserved in
the same way. included, under the general description of house-cleaning,
must be understood, turning out all the nooks and corners of drawers,
cupboards, lumber-rooms, lofts, &c., with a view of getting rid of all
unnecessary articles, which only create dirt and attract vermin;
sweeping of chimneys, taking up carpets, painting and whitewashing the
kitchen and offices, papering rooms, when needed, and, generally
speaking, the house putting on, with the approaching summer, a bright
appearance, and a new face, in unison with nature. oranges now should be
preserved, and orange wine made.
the summer will be found, as we have mentioned above, in consequence of
the diminution of labour for the domestics, the best period for
examining and repairing household linen, and for "putting to rights" all
those articles which have received a large share of wear and tear during
the dark winter days. in direct reference to this matter, we may here
remark, that sheets should be turned "sides to middle" before they are
allowed to get very thin. otherwise, patching, which is uneconomical
from the time it consumes, and is unsightly in point of appearance, will
have to be resorted to. in june and july, gooseberries, currants,
raspberries, strawberries, and other summer fruits, should be preserved,
and jams and jellies made. in july, too, the making of walnut ketchup
should be attended to, as the green walnuts will be approaching
perfection for this purpose. mixed pickles may also be now made, and it
will be found a good plan to have ready a jar of pickle-juice (for the
making of which all information will be given in future pages), into
which to put occasionally some young french beans, cauliflowers, &c.
in the early autumn, plums of various kinds are to be bottled and
preserved, and jams and jellies made. a little later, tomato sauce, a
most useful article to have by you, may be prepared; a supply of apples
laid in, if you have a place to keep them, as also a few keeping pears
and filberts. endeavour to keep also a large vegetable marrow,—it will
be found delicious in the winter.
in october and november, it will be necessary to prepare for the cold
weather, and get ready the winter clothing for the various members of
the family. the white summer curtains will now be carefully put away,
the fireplaces, grates, and chimneys looked to, and the house put in a
thorough state of repair, so that no "loose tile" may, at a future day,
interfere with your comfort, and extract something considerable from
your pocket.
in december, the principal household duty lies in preparing for the
creature comforts of those near and dear to us, so as to meet old
christmas with a happy face, a contented mind, and a full larder; and in
stoning the plums, washing the currants, cutting the citron, beating the
eggs, and mixing the pudding, a housewife is not unworthily greeting the
genial season of all good things.
[illustration]
. "the distribution of a kitchen," says count rumford, the celebrated
philosopher and physician, who wrote so learnedly on all subjects
connected with domestic economy and architecture, "must always depend so
much on local circumstances, that general rules can hardly be given
respecting it; the principles, however, on which this distribution
ought, in all cases, to be made, are simple and easy to be understood,"
and, in his estimation, these resolve themselves into symmetry of
proportion in the building and convenience to the cook. the requisites
of a good kitchen, however, demand something more special than is here
pointed out. it must be remembered that it is the great laboratory of
every household, and that much of the "weal or woe," as far as regards
bodily health, depends upon the nature of the preparations concocted
within its walls. a good kitchen, therefore, should be erected with a
view to the following particulars. . convenience of distribution in its
parts, with largeness of dimension. . excellence of light, height of
ceiling, and good ventilation. . easiness of access, without passing
through the house. . sufficiently remote from the principal apartments
of the house, that the members, visitors, or guests of the family, may
not perceive the odour incident to cooking, or hear the noise of
culinary operations. . plenty of fuel and water, which, with the
scullery, pantry, and storeroom, should be so near it, as to offer the
smallest possible trouble in reaching them.
[illustration: fig. .]
 the kitchens of the middle ages, in england, are said to have
 been constructed after the fashion of those of the romans. they
 were generally octagonal, with several fireplaces, but no
 chimneys; neither was there any wood admitted into the building.
 the accompanying cut, fig. , represents the turret which was
 erected on the top of the conical roof of the kitchen at
 glastonbury abbey, and which was perforated with holes to allow
 the smoke of the fire, as well as the steam from cooking, to
 escape. some kitchens had funnels or vents below the eaves to
 let out the steam, which was sometimes considerable, as the
 anglo-saxons used their meat chiefly in a boiled state. from
 this circumstance, some of their large kitchens had four ranges,
 comprising a boiling-place for small boiled meats, and a
 boiling-house for the great boiler. in private houses the
 culinary arrangements were no doubt different; for du cange
 mentions a little kitchen with a chamber, even in a solarium, or
 upper floor.
. the simplicity of the primitive ages has frequently been an object
of poetical admiration, and it delights the imagination to picture men
living upon such fruits as spring spontaneously from the earth, and
desiring no other beverages to slake their thirst, but such as fountains
and rivers supply. thus we are told, that the ancient inhabitants of
argos lived principally on pears; that the arcadians revelled in acorns,
and the athenians in figs. this, of course, was in the golden age,
before ploughing began, and when mankind enjoyed all kinds of plenty
without having to earn their bread "by the sweat of their brow." this
delightful period, however, could not last for ever, and the earth
became barren, and continued unfruitful till ceres came and taught the
art of sowing, with several other useful inventions. the first whom she
taught to till the ground was triptolemus, who communicated his
instructions to his countrymen the athenians. thence the art was carried
into achaia, and thence into arcadia. barley was the first grain that
was used, and the invention of bread-making is ascribed to pan.
 the use of fire, as an instrument of cookery, must have been
 coeval with this invention of bread, which, being the most
 necessary of all kinds of food, was frequently used in a sense
 so comprehensive as to include both meat and drink. it was, by
 the greeks, baked under the ashes.
. in the primary ages it was deemed unlawful to eat flesh, and when
mankind began to depart from their primitive habits, the flesh of swine
was the first that was eaten. for several ages, it was pronounced
unlawful to slaughter oxen, from an estimate of their great value in
assisting men to cultivate the ground; nor was it usual to kill young
animals, from a sentiment which considered it cruel to take away the
life of those that had scarcely tasted the joys of existence.
 at this period no cooks were kept, and we know from homer that
 his ancient heroes prepared and dressed their victuals with
 their own hands. ulysses, for example, we are told, like a
 modern charwoman, excelled at lighting a fire, whilst achilles
 was an adept at turning a spit. subsequently, heralds, employed
 in civil and military affairs, filled the office of cooks, and
 managed marriage feasts; but this, no doubt, was after mankind
 had advanced in the art of living, a step further than
 roasting, which, in all places, was the ancient manner of
 dressing meat.
. the age of roasting we may consider as that in which the use of the
metals would be introduced as adjuncts to the culinary art; and amongst
these, iron, the most useful of them all, would necessarily take a
prominent place. this metal is easily oxidized, but to bring it to a
state of fusibility, it requires a most intense heat. of all the metals,
it is the widest diffused and most abundant; and few stones or mineral
bodies are without an admixture of it. it possesses the valuable
property of being welded by hammering; and hence its adaptation to the
numerous purposes of civilized life.
 metallic grains of iron have been found in strawberries, and a
 twelfth of the weight of the wood of dried oak is said to
 consist of this metal. blood owes its colour of redness to the
 quantity of iron it contains, and rain and snow are seldom
 perfectly free from it. in the arts it is employed in three
 states,—as cast iron, wrought iron, and steel. in each of
 these it largely enters into the domestic economy, and stoves,
 grates, and the general implements of cookery, are usually
 composed of it. in antiquity, its employment was, comparatively
 speaking, equally universal. the excavations made at pompeii
 have proved this. the accompanying cuts present us with
 specimens of stoves, both ancient and modern. fig.  is the
 remains of a kitchen stove found in the house of pansa, at
 pompeii, and would seem, in its perfect state, not to have been
 materially different from such as are in use at the present day.
 fig.  is a self-acting, simple open range in modern use, and
 may be had of two qualities, ranging, according to their
 dimensions, from ł. s. and ł. s. respectively, up to ł.
 s. and ł. s. they are completely fitted up with oven,
 boiler, sliding cheek, wrought-iron bars, revolving shelves, and
 brass tap. fig. , is called the improved leamington kitchener,
 and is said to surpass any other range in use, for easy cooking
 by one fire. it has a hot plate, which is well calculated for an
 ironing-stove, and on which as many vessels as will stand upon
 it, may be kept boiling, without being either soiled or injured.
 besides, it has a perfectly ventilated and spacious wrought-iron
 roaster, with movable shelves, draw-out stand, double
 dripping-pan, and meat-stand. the roaster can be converted into
 an oven by closing the valves, when bread and pastry can be
 baked in it in a superior manner. it also has a large iron
 boiler with brass tap and steam-pipe, round and square gridirons
 for chops and steaks, ash-pan, open fire for roasting, and a set
 of ornamental covings with plate-warmer attached. it took a
 first-class prize and medal in the great exhibition of , and
 was also exhibited, with all the recent improvements, at the
 dublin exhibition in . fig.  is another kitchener, adapted
 for large families. it has on the one side, a large ventilated
 oven; and on the other, the fire and roaster. the hot plate is
 over all, and there is a back boiler, made of wrought iron, with
 brass tap and steam-pipe. in other respects it resembles fig. ,
 with which it possesses similar advantages of construction.
 either maybe had at varying prices, according to size, from ł.
 s. up to ł. s. they are supplied by messrs. richard & john
 slack , strand, london.
[illustration: fig. .]
[illustration: fig. .]
[illustration: fig. .]
[illustration: fig. .]
. from kitchen ranges to the implements used in cookery is but a step.
with these, every kitchen should be well supplied, otherwise the cook
must not be expected to "perform her office" in a satisfactory manner.
of the culinary utensils of the ancients, our knowledge is very limited;
but as the art of living, in every civilized country, is pretty much the
same, the instruments for cooking must, in a great degree, bear a
striking resemblance to each other. on referring to classical
antiquities, we find mentioned, among household utensils, leather bags,
baskets constructed of twigs, reeds, and rushes; boxes, basins, and
bellows; bread-moulds, brooms, and brushes; caldrons, colanders,
cisterns, and chafing-dishes; cheese-rasps, knives, and ovens of the
dutch kind; funnels and frying-pans; handmills, soup-ladles, milk-pails,
and oil-jars; presses, scales, and sieves; spits of different sizes, but
some of them large enough to roast an ox; spoons, fire-tongs, trays,
trenchers, and drinking-vessels; with others for carrying food,
preserving milk, and holding cheese. this enumeration, if it does
nothing else, will, to some extent, indicate the state of the simpler
kinds of mechanical arts among the ancients.
[illustration: fig. .]
[illustration: fig. .]
[illustration: fig. .]
 in so far as regards the shape and construction of many of the
 kitchen utensils enumerated above, they bore a great resemblance
 to our own. this will be seen by the accompanying cuts. fig. 
 is an ancient stock-pot in bronze, which seems to have been made
 to hang over the fire, and was found in the buried city of
 pompeii. fig.  is one of modern make, and may be obtained
 either of copper or wrought iron, tinned inside. fig.  is
 another of antiquity, with a large ladle and colander, with
 holes attached. it is taken from the column of trajan. the
 modern ones can be obtained at all prices, according to size,
 from s. d. up to ł. s.
. in the manufacture of these utensils, bronze metal seems to have
been much in favour with the ancients. it was chosen not only for their
domestic vessels, but it was also much used for their public sculptures
and medals. it is a compound, composed of from six to twelve parts of
tin to one hundred of copper. it gives its name to figures and all
pieces of sculpture made of it. brass was another favourite metal, which
is composed of copper and zinc. it is more fusible than copper, and not
so apt to tarnish. in a pure state it is not malleable, unless when hot,
and after it has been melted twice it will not bear the hammer. to
render it capable of being wrought, it requires  lb. of lead to be put
to  cwt. of its own material.
 the corinthian brass of antiquity was a mixture of silver, gold,
 and copper. a fine kind of brass, supposed to be made by the
 cementation of copper plates with calamine, is, in germany,
 hammered out into leaves, and is called dutch metal in this
 country. it is employed in the same way as gold leaf. brass is
 much used for watchworks, as well as for wire.
. the braziers, ladles, stewpans, saucepans, gridirons, and colanders
of antiquity might generally pass for those of the english manufacture
of the present day, in so far as shape is concerned. in proof of this we
have placed together the following similar articles of ancient and
modern pattern, in order that the reader may, at a single view, see
wherein any difference that is between them, consists.
[illustration: fig. . modern.]
[illustration: fig. . ancient.]
[illustration: fig. . modern.]
[illustration: fig. . ancient.]
[illustration: fig. . modern.]
[illustration: fig. . ancient.]
[illustration: fig. . modern.]
[illustration: fig. . modern.]
[illustration: fig. . ancient.]
[illustration: fig. . ancient.]
 figs.  and  are flat sauce or sauté pans, the ancient one
 being fluted in the handle, and having at the end a ram's head.
 figs.  and  are colanders, the handle of the ancient one
 being adorned, in the original, with carved representations of a
 cornucopia, a satyr, a goat, pigs, and other animals. any
 display of taste in the adornment of such utensils, might seem
 to be useless; but when we remember how much more natural it is
 for us all to be careful of the beautiful and costly, than of
 the plain and cheap, it may even become a question in the
 economy of a kitchen, whether it would not, in the long run, be
 cheaper to have articles which displayed some tasteful ingenuity
 in their manufacture, than such as are so perfectly plain as to
 have no attractions whatever beyond their mere suitableness to
 the purposes for which they are made. figs.  and  are
 saucepans, the ancient one being of bronze, originally copied
 from the cabinet of m. l'abbé charlet, and engraved in the
 antiquities of montfaucon. figs.  and  are gridirons, and 
 and  dripping-pans. in all these utensils the resemblance
 between such as were in use , years ago, and those in use at
 the present day, is strikingly manifest.
. some of the ancient utensils represented in the above cuts, are
copied from those found amid the ruins of herculaneum and pompeii. these
roman cities were, in the first century, buried beneath the lava of an
eruption of vesuvius, and continued to be lost to the world till the
beginning of the last century, when a peasant, in digging for a well,
gradually discovered a small temple with some statues. little notice,
however, was taken of this circumstance till , when the king of
naples, desiring to erect a palace at portici, caused extensive
excavations to be made, when the city of herculaneum was slowly unfolded
to view. pompeii was discovered about , and being easier cleared
from the lava in which it had so long been entombed, disclosed itself as
it existed immediately before the catastrophe which overwhelmed it,
nearly two thousand years ago. it presented, to the modern world, the
perfect picture of the form and structure of an ancient roman city. the
interior of its habitations, shops, baths, theatres, and temples, were
all disclosed, with many of the implements used by the workmen in their
various trades, and the materials on which they were employed, when the
doomed city was covered with the lavian stream.
. amongst the most essential requirements of the kitchen are scales or
weighing-machines for family use. these are found to have existed among
the ancients, and must, at a very early age, have been both publicly and
privately employed for the regulation of quantities. the modern english
weights were adjusted by the th chapter of magna charta, or the great
charter forced, by the barons, from king john at runnymede, in surrey.
therein it is declared that the weights, all over england, shall be the
same, although for different commodities there were two different kinds,
troy and avoirdupois. the origin of both is taken from a grain of wheat
gathered in the middle of an ear. the standard of measures was
originally kept at winchester, and by a law of king edgar was ordained
to be observed throughout the kingdom.
[illustration: fig. .]
[illustration: fig. .]
 fig.  is an ancient pair of common scales, with two basins and
 a movable weight, which is made in the form of a head, covered
 with the pileus, because mercury had the weights and measures
 under his superintendence. it is engraved on a stone in the
 gallery of florence. fig.  represents a modern
 weighing-machine, of great convenience, and generally in use in
 those establishments where a great deal of cooking is carried
 on.
. accompanying the scales, or weighing-machines, there should be
spice-boxes, and sugar and biscuit-canisters of either white or japanned
tin. the covers of these should fit tightly, in order to exclude the
air, and if necessary, be lettered in front, to distinguish them. the
white metal of which they are usually composed, loses its colour when
exposed to the air, but undergoes no further change. it enters largely
into the composition of culinary utensils, many of them being entirely
composed of tinned sheet-iron; the inside of copper and iron vessels
also, being usually what is called tinned. this art consists of
covering any metal with a thin coating of tin; and it requires the metal
to be covered, to be perfectly clean and free from rust, and also that
the tin, itself, be purely metallic, and entirely cleared from all ashes
or refuse. copper boilers, saucepans, and other kitchen utensils, are
tinned after they are manufactured, by being first made hot and the tin
rubbed on with resin. in this process, nothing ought to be used but pure
grain-tin. lead, however, is sometimes mixed with that metal, not only
to make it lie more easily, but to adulterate it—a pernicious practice,
which in every article connected with the cooking and preparation of
food, cannot be too severely reprobated.—the following list, supplied
by messrs. richard & john slack, , strand, will show the articles
required for the kitchen of a family in the middle class of life,
although it does not contain all the things that may be deemed necessary
for some families, and may contain more than are required for others. as
messrs. slack themselves, however, publish a useful illustrated
catalogue, which may be had at their establishment gratis, and which
it will be found advantageous to consult by those about to furnish, it
supersedes the necessity of our enlarging that which we give:—
 s. d.
  tea-kettle  
  toasting-fork  
  bread-grater  
  pair of brass candlesticks  
  teapot and tray  
  bottle-jack  
  spoons  
  candlesticks  
  candle-box  
  knives and forks  
  sets of skewers  
  meat-chopper  
  cinder-sifter  
  coffee-pot  
  colander  
  block-tin saucepans  
  iron saucepans  
  ditto and steamer  
  large boiling-pot  
  iron stewpans  
  dripping-pan and stand  
  dustpan  
  fish and egg-slice  
  fish-kettles  
  flour-box  
  flat-irons  
  frying-pans  
  gridiron  
  mustard-pot  
  salt-cellar  
  pepper-box  
  pair of bellows  
  jelly-moulds  
  plate-basket  
  cheese-toaster  
  coal-shovel  
  wood meat-screen  
 the set ł  
. as not only health but life may be said to depend on the cleanliness
of culinary utensils, great attention must be paid to their condition
generally, but more especially to that of the saucepans, stewpans, and
boilers. inside they should be kept perfectly clean, and where an open
fire is used, the outside as clean as possible. with a leamington range,
saucepans, stewpans, &c., can be kept entirely free from smoke and soot
on the outside, which is an immense saving of labour to the cook or
scullery-maid. care should be taken that the lids fit tight and close,
so that soups or gravies may not be suffered to waste by evaporation.
they should be made to keep the steam in and the smoke out, and should
always be bright on the upper rim, where they do not immediately come in
contact with the fire. soup-pots and kettles should be washed
immediately after being used, and dried before the fire, and they should
be kept in a dry place, in order that they may escape the deteriorating
influence of rust, and, thereby, be destroyed. copper utensils should
never be used in the kitchen unless tinned, and the utmost care should
be taken, not to let the tin be rubbed off. if by chance this should
occur, have it replaced before the vessel is again brought into use.
neither soup nor gravy should, at any time, be suffered to remain in
them longer than is absolutely necessary, as any fat or acid that is in
them, may affect the metal, so as to impregnate with poison what is
intended to be eaten. stone and earthenware vessels should be provided
for soups and gravies not intended for immediate use, and, also, plenty
of common dishes for the larder, that the table-set may not be used for
such purposes. it is the nature of vegetables soon to turn sour, when
they are apt to corrode glazed red-ware, and even metals, and
frequently, thereby, to become impregnated with poisonous particles. the
vinegar also in pickles, by its acidity, does the same. consideration,
therefore, should be given to these facts, and great care also taken
that all sieves, jelly-bags, and tapes for collared articles, be well
scalded and kept dry, or they will impart an unpleasant flavour when
next used. to all these directions the cook should pay great attention,
nor should they, by any means, be neglected by the mistress of the
household, who ought to remember that cleanliness in the kitchen gives
health and happiness to home, whilst economy will immeasurably assist in
preserving them.
. without fuel, a kitchen might be pronounced to be of little use;
therefore, to discover and invent materials for supplying us with the
means of domestic heat and comfort, has exercised the ingenuity of man.
those now known have been divided into five classes; the first
comprehending the fluid inflammable bodies; the second, peat or turf;
the third, charcoal of wood; the fourth, pit-coal charred; and the
fifth, wood or pit-coal in a crude state, with the capacity of yielding
a copious and bright flame. the first may be said seldom to be employed
for the purposes of cookery; but peat, especially amongst rural
populations, has, in all ages, been regarded as an excellent fuel. it is
one of the most important productions of an alluvial soil, and belongs
to the vegetable rather than the mineral kingdom. it may be described as
composed of wet, spongy black earth, held together by decayed
vegetables. formerly it covered extensive tracts in england, but has
greatly disappeared before the genius of agricultural improvement.
charcoal is a kind of artificial coal, used principally where a strong
and clear fire is desired. it is a black, brittle, insoluble, inodorous,
tasteless substance, and, when newly-made, possesses the remarkable
property of absorbing certain quantities of the different gases. its
dust, when used as a polishing powder, gives great brilliancy to metals.
it consists of wood half-burned, and is manufactured by cutting pieces
of timber into nearly the same size, then disposing them in heaps, and
covering them with earth, so as to prevent communication with the air,
except when necessary to make them burn. when they have been
sufficiently charred, the fire is extinguished by stopping the vents
through which the air is admitted. of coal there are various species;
as, pit, culm, slate, cannel, kilkenny, sulphurous, bovey, jet, &c.
these have all their specific differences, and are employed for various
purposes; but are all, more or less, used as fuel.
 the use of coal for burning purposes was not known to the
 romans. in britain it was discovered about fifty years before
 the birth of christ, in lancashire, not tar from where
 manchester now stands; but for ages after its discovery, so long
 as forests abounded, wood continued to be the fuel used for
 firing. the first public notice of coal is in the reign of henry
 iii., who, in , granted a charter to the town of newcastle,
 permitting the inhabitants to dig for coal. it took some
 centuries more, however, to bring it into common use, as this
 did not take place till about the first quarter of the
 seventeenth century, in the time of charles i. a few years after
 the restoration, we find that about , chaldrons were
 consumed in london. although several countries possess mines of
 coal, the quality of their mineral is, in general, greatly
 inferior to that of great britain, where it is found mostly in
 undulating districts abounding with valleys, and interspersed
 with plains of considerable extent. it lies usually between the
 strata of other substances, and rarely in an horizontal
 position, but with a dip or inclination to one side. our cut,
 fig. , represents a section of coal as it is found in the
 stratum.
[illustration: fig. .]
. to be acquainted with the periods when things are in season, is one
of the most essential pieces of knowledge which enter into the "art of
cookery." we have, therefore, compiled the following list, which will
serve to show for every month in the year the
fish.—barbel, brill, carp, cod, crabs, crayfish, dace, eels, flounders,
haddocks, herrings, lampreys, lobsters, mussels, oysters, perch, pike,
plaice, prawns, shrimps, skate, smelts, soles, sprats, sturgeon, tench,
thornback, turbot, whitings.
meat.—beef, house lamb, mutton, pork, veal, venison.
poultry.—capons, fowls, tame pigeons, pullets, rabbits, turkeys.
game.—grouse, hares, partridges, pheasants, snipe, wild-fowl, woodcock.
vegetables.—beetroot, broccoli, cabbages, carrots, celery, chervil,
cresses, cucumbers (forced), endive, lettuces, parsnips, potatoes,
savoys, spinach, turnips,—various herbs.
fruit.—apples, grapes, medlars, nuts, oranges, pears, walnuts,
crystallized preserves (foreign), dried fruits, such as almonds and
raisins; french and spanish plums; prunes, figs, dates.
fish.—barbel, brill, carp, cod may be bought, but is not so good as in
january, crabs, crayfish, dace, eels, flounders, haddocks, herrings,
lampreys, lobsters, mussels, oysters, perch, pike, plaice, prawns,
shrimps, skate, smelts, soles, sprats, sturgeon, tench, thornback,
turbot, whiting.
meat.—beef, house lamb, mutton, pork, veal.
poultry.—capons, chickens, ducklings, tame and wild pigeons, pullets
with eggs, turkeys, wild-fowl, though now not in full season.
game.—grouse, hares, partridges, pheasants, snipes, woodcock.
vegetables.—beetroot, broccoli (purple and white), brussels sprouts,
cabbages, carrots, celery, chervil, cresses, cucumbers (forced), endive,
kidney-beans, lettuces, parsnips, potatoes, savoys, spinach,
turnips,—various herbs.
fruit.—apples (golden and dutch pippins), grapes, medlars, nuts,
oranges, pears (bon chrétien), walnuts, dried fruits (foreign), such as
almonds and raisins; french and spanish plums; prunes, figs, dates,
crystallized preserves.
fish.—barbel, brill, carp, crabs, crayfish, dace, eels, flounders,
haddocks, herrings, lampreys, lobsters, mussels, oysters, perch, pike,
plaice, prawns, shrimps, skate, smelts, soles, sprats, sturgeon, tench,
thornback, turbot, whiting.
meat.—beef, house lamb, mutton, pork, veal.
poultry.—capons, chickens, ducklings, tame and wild pigeons, pullets
with eggs, turkeys, wild-fowl, though now not in full season.
game.—grouse, hares, partridges, pheasants, snipes, woodcock.
vegetables.—beetroot, broccoli (purple and white), brussels sprouts,
cabbages, carrots, celery, chervil, cresses, cucumbers (forced), endive,
kidney-beans, lettuces, parsnips, potatoes, savoys, sea-kale, spinach,
turnips,—various herbs.
fruit.—apples (golden and dutch pippins), grapes, medlars, nuts,
oranges, pears (bon chrétien), walnuts, dried fruits (foreign), such as
almonds and raisins; french and spanish plums; prunes, figs, dates,
crystallized preserves.
fish.—brill, carp, cockles, crabs, dory, flounders, ling, lobsters, red
and gray mullet, mussels, oysters, perch, prawns, salmon (but rather
scarce and expensive), shad, shrimps, skate, smelts, soles, tench,
turbot, whitings.
meat.—beef, lamb, mutton, veal.
poultry.—chickens, ducklings, fowls, leverets, pigeons, pullets,
rabbits.
game.—hares.
vegetables.—broccoli, celery, lettuces, young onions, parsnips,
radishes, small salad, sea-kale, spinach, sprouts,—various herbs.
fruit.—apples, nuts, pears, forced cherries, &e. for tarts, rhubarb,
dried fruits, crystallized preserves.
fish.—carp, chub, crabs, crayfish, dory, herrings, lobsters, mackerel,
red and gray mullet, prawns, salmon, shad, smelts, soles, trout, turbot.
meat.—beef, lamb, mutton, veal.
poultry.—chickens, ducklings, fowls, green geese, leverets, pullets,
rabbits.
vegetables.—asparagus, beans, early cabbages, carrots, cauliflowers,
creases, cucumbers, lettuces, pease, early potatoes, salads,
sea-kale,—various herbs.
fruit.—apples, green apricots, cherries, currants for tarts,
gooseberries, melons, pears, rhubarb, strawberries.
fish.—carp, crayfish, herrings, lobsters, mackerel, mullet, pike,
prawns, salmon, soles, tench, trout, turbot.
meat.—beef, lamb, mutton, veal, buck venison.
poultry.—chickens, ducklings, fowls, green geese, leverets, plovers,
pullets, rabbits, turkey poults, wheatears.
vegetables.—artichokes, asparagus, beans, cabbages, carrots, cucumbers,
lettuces, onions, parsnips, pease, potatoes, radishes, small salads,
sea-kale, spinach,—various herbs.
fruit.—apricots, cherries, currants, gooseberries, melons, nectarines,
peaches, pears, pineapples, raspberries, rhubarb, strawberries.
fish.—carp, crayfish, dory, flounders, haddocks, herrings, lobsters,
mackerel, mullet, pike, plaice, prawns, salmon, shrimps, soles,
sturgeon, tench, thornback.
meat.—beef, lamb, mutton, veal, buck venison.
poultry.—chickens, ducklings, fowls, green geese, leverets, plovers,
pullets, rabbits, turkey poults, wheatears, wild ducks (called
flappers).
vegetables.—artichokes, asparagus, beans, cabbages, carrots,
cauliflowers, celery, cresses, endive, lettuces, mushrooms, onions,
pease, radishes, small salading, sea-kale, sprouts, turnips, vegetable
marrow,—various herbs.
fruit.—apricots, cherries, currants, figs, gooseberries, melons,
nectarines, pears, pineapples, plums, raspberries, strawberries, walnuts
in high season, and pickled.
fish.—brill, carp, chub, crayfish, crabs, dory, eels, flounders, grigs,
herrings, lobsters, mullet, pike, prawns, salmon, shrimps, skate, soles,
sturgeon, thornback, trout, turbot.
meat.—beef, lamb, mutton, veal, buck venison.
poultry.—chickens, ducklings, fowls, green geese, pigeons, plovers,
pullets, rabbits, turkey poults, wheatears, wild ducks.
game.—leverets, grouse, blackcock.
vegetables.—artichokes, asparagus, beans, carrots, cabbages,
cauliflowers, celery, cresses, endive, lettuces, mushrooms, onions,
pease, potatoes, radishes, sea-bale, small salading, sprouts, turnips,
various kitchen herbs, vegetable marrows.
fruit.—currants, figs, filberts, gooseberries, grapes, melons,
mulberries, nectarines, peaches, pears, pineapples, plums, raspberries,
walnuts.
fish.—brill, carp, cod, eels, flounders, lobsters, mullet, oysters,
plaice, prawns, skate, soles, turbot, whiting, whitebait.
meat.—beef, lamb, mutton, pork, veal.
poultry.—chickens, ducks, fowls, geese, larks, pigeons, pullets,
rabbits, teal, turkeys.
game.—blackcock, buck venison, grouse, hares, partridges, pheasants.
vegetables.—artichokes, asparagus, beans, cabbage sprouts, carrots,
celery, lettuces, mushrooms, onions, pease, potatoes, salading,
sea-kale, sprouts, tomatoes, turnips, vegetable marrows,—various herbs.
fruit.—bullaces, damsons, figs, filberts, grapes, melons,
morella-cherries, mulberries, nectarines, peaches, pears, plums,
quinces, walnuts.
fish.—barbel, brill, cod, crabs, eels, flounders, gudgeons, haddocks,
lobsters, mullet, oysters, plaice, prawns, skate, soles, tench, turbot,
whiting.
meat.—beef, mutton, pork, veal, venison.
poultry.—chickens, fowls, geese, larks, pigeons, pullets, rabbits,
teal, turkeys, widgeons, wild ducks.
game.—blackcock, grouse, hares, partridges, pheasants, snipes,
woodcocks, doe venison.
vegetables.—artichokes, beets, cabbages, cauliflowers, carrots, celery,
lettuces, mushrooms, onions, potatoes, sprouts, tomatoes, turnips,
vegetable marrows,—various herbs.
fruit.—apples, black and white bullaces, damsons, figs, filberts,
grapes, pears, quinces, walnuts.
fish.—brill, carp, cod, crabs, eels, gudgeons, haddocks, oysters, pike,
soles, tench, turbot, whiting.
meat.—beef, mutton, veal, doe venison.
poultry.—chickens, fowls, geese, larks, pigeons, pullets, rabbits,
teal, turkeys, widgeons, wild duck.
game.—hares, partridges, pheasants, snipes, woodcocks.
vegetables.—beetroot, cabbages, carrots, celery, lettuces, late
cucumbers, onions, potatoes, salading, spinach, sprouts,—various herbs.
fruit.—apples, bullaces, chestnuts, filberts, grapes, pears, walnuts.
fish.—barbel, brill, carp, cod, crabs, eels, dace, gudgeons, haddocks,
herrings, lobsters, oysters, porch, pike, shrimps, skate, sprats, soles,
tench, thornback, turbot, whiting.
meat.—beef, house lamb, mutton, pork, venison.
poultry.—capons, chickens, fowls, geese, pigeons, pullets, rabbits,
teal, turkeys, widgeons, wild ducks.
game.—hares, partridges, pheasants, snipes, woodcocks.
vegetables.—broccoli, cabbages, carrots, celery, leeks, onions,
potatoes, parsnips, scotch kale, turnips, winter spinach.
fruit.—apples, chestnuts, filberts, grapes, medlars, oranges, pears,
walnuts, dried fruits, such as almonds and raisins, figs, dates,
&c.,—crystallized preserves.
. when fuel and food are procured, the next consideration is, how the
latter may be best preserved, with a view to its being suitably dressed.
more waste is often occasioned by the want of judgment, or of necessary
care in this particular, than by any other cause. in the absence of
proper places for keeping provisions, a hanging safe, suspended in an
airy situation, is the best substitute. a well-ventilated larder, dry
and shady, is better for meat and poultry, which require to be kept for
some time; and the utmost skill in the culinary art will not compensate
for the want of proper attention to this particular. though it is
advisable that annual food should be hung up in the open air till its
fibres have lost some degree of their toughness, yet, if it is kept till
it loses its natural sweetness, its flavour has become deteriorated,
and, as a wholesome comestible, it has lost many of its qualities
conducive to health. as soon, therefore, as the slightest trace of
putrescence is detected, it has reached its highest degree of
tenderness, and should be dressed immediately. during the sultry summer
months, it is difficult to procure meat that is not either tough or
tainted. it should, therefore, be well examined when it comes in, and if
flies have touched it, the part must be cut off, and the remainder well
washed. in very cold weather, meat and vegetables touched by the frost,
should be brought into the kitchen early in the morning, and soaked in
cold water. in loins of meat, the long pipe that runs by the bone should
be taken out, as it is apt to taint; as also the kernels of beef. rumps
and edgebones of beef, when bruised, should not be purchased. all these
things ought to enter into the consideration of every household manager,
and great care should be taken that nothing is thrown away, or suffered
to be wasted in the kitchen, which might, by proper management, be
turned to a good account. the shank-bones of mutton, so little esteemed
in general, give richness to soups or gravies, if well soaked and
brushed before they are added to the boiling. they are also particularly
nourishing for sick persons. roast-beef bones, or shank-bones of ham,
make excellent stock for pea-soup.—when the whites of eggs are used for
jelly, confectionary, or other purposes, a pudding or a custard should
be made, that the yolks may be used. all things likely to be wanted
should be in readiness: sugars of different sorts; currants washed,
picked, and perfectly dry; spices pounded, and kept in very small
bottles closely corked, or in canisters, as we have already directed
(). not more of these should be purchased at a time than are likely to
be used in the course of a month. much waste is always prevented by
keeping every article in the place best suited to it. vegetables keep
best on a stone floor, if the air be excluded; meat, in a cold dry
place; as also salt, sugar, sweet-meats, candles, dried meats, and hams.
rice, and all sorts of seed for puddings, should be closely covered to
preserve them from insects; but even this will not prevent them from
being affected by these destroyers, if they are long and carelessly
kept.
[illustration]
. as in the fine arts, the progress of mankind from barbarism to
civilization is marked by a gradual succession of triumphs over the rude
materialities of nature, so in the art of cookery is the progress
gradual from the earliest and simplest modes, to those of the most
complicated and refined. plain or rudely-carved stones, tumuli, or
mounds of earth, are the monuments by which barbarous tribes denote the
events of their history, to be succeeded, only in the long course of a
series of ages, by beautifully-proportioned columns, gracefully-sculptured
statues, triumphal arches, coins, medals, and the higher efforts of the
pencil and the pen, as man advances by culture and observation to the
perfection of his facilities. so is it with the art of cookery. man,
in his primitive state, lives upon roots and the fruits of the earth,
until, by degrees, he is driven to seek for new means, by which his
wants may be supplied and enlarged. he then becomes a hunter and a
fisher. as his species increases, greater necessities come upon him,
when he gradually abandons the roving life of the savage for the more
stationary pursuits of the herdsman. these beget still more settled
habits, when he begins the practice of agriculture, forms ideas of the
rights of property, and has his own, both defined and secured. the
forest, the stream, and the sea are now no longer his only resources for
food. he sows and he reaps, pastures and breeds cattle, lives on the
cultivated produce of his fields, and revels in the luxuries of the
dairy; raises flocks for clothing, and assumes, to all intents and
purposes, the habits of permanent life and the comfortable condition of
a farmer. this is the fourth stage of social progress, up to which the
useful or mechanical arts have been incidentally developing themselves,
when trade and commerce begin. through these various phases, only to
live has been the great object of mankind; but, by-and-by, comforts are
multiplied, and accumulating riches create new wants. the object, then,
is not only to live, but to live economically, agreeably, tastefully,
and well. accordingly, the art of cookery commences; and although the
fruits of the earth, the fowls of the air, the beasts of the field, and
the fish of the sea, are still the only food of mankind, yet these are
so prepared, improved, and dressed by skill and ingenuity, that they are
the means of immeasurably extending the boundaries of human enjoyments.
everything that is edible, and passes under the hands of the cook, is
more or less changed, and assumes new forms. hence the influence of that
functionary is immense upon the happiness of a household.
. in order that the duties of the cook may be properly performed, and
that he may be able to reproduce esteemed dishes with certainty, all
terms of indecision should be banished from his art. accordingly, what
is known only to him, will, in these pages, be made known to others. in
them all those indecisive terms expressed by a bit of this, some of
that, a small piece of that, and a handful of the other, shall never be
made use of, but all quantities be precisely and explicitly stated. with
a desire, also, that all ignorance on this most essential part of the
culinary art should disappear, and that a uniform system of weights and
measures should be adopted, we give an account of the weights which
answer to certain measures.
a table-spoonful is frequently mentioned in a recipe, in the
prescriptions of medical men, and also in medical, chemical, and
gastronomical works. by it is generally meant and understood a measure
or bulk equal to that which would be produced by half an ounce of
water.
a dessert-spoonful is the half of a table-spoonful; that is to say, by
it is meant a measure or bulk equal to a quarter of an ounce of water.
a tea-spoonful is equal in quantity to a drachm of water.
a drop.—this is the name of a vague kind of measure, and is so called
on account of the liquid being dropped from the mouth of a bottle. its
quantity, however, will vary, either from the consistency of the liquid
or the size and shape of the mouth of the bottle. the college of
physicians determined the quantity of a drop to be one grain,  drops
making one fluid drachm. their drop, or sixtieth part of a fluid drachm,
is called a minim.
[illustration: fig. .]
 graduated class measures can be obtained at any chemist's, and
 they save much trouble. one of these, containing a wine pint, is
 divided into  oz., and the oz, into  drachms of water; by
 which, any certain weight mentioned in a recipe can be
 accurately measured out. home-made measures of this kind can
 readily be formed by weighing the water contained in any given
 measure, and marking on any tall glass the space it occupies.
 this mark can easily be made with a file. it will be interesting
 to many readers to know the basis on which the french found
 their system of weights and measures, for it certainly possesses
 the grandeur of simplicity. the metre, which is the basis of the
 whole system of french weights and measures, is the exact
 measurement of one forty-millionth part of a meridian of the
 earth.
. excellence in the art of cookery, as in all other things, is only
attainable by practice and experience. in proportion, therefore, to the
opportunities which a cook has had of these, so will be his excellence
in the art. it is in the large establishments of princes, noblemen, and
very affluent families alone, that the man cook is found in this
country. he, also, superintends the kitchens of large hotels, clubs, and
public institutions, where he, usually, makes out the bills of fare,
which are generally submitted to the principal for approval. to be able
to do this, therefore, it is absolutely necessary that he should be a
judge of the season of every dish, as well as know perfectly the state
of every article he undertakes to prepare. he must also be a judge of
every article he buys; for no skill, however great it may be, will
enable him to, make that good which is really bad. on him rests the
responsibility of the cooking generally, whilst a speciality of his
department, is to prepare the rich soups, stews, ragouts, and such
dishes as enter into the more refined and complicated portions of his
art, and such as are not usually understood by ordinary professors. he,
therefore, holds a high position in a household, being inferior in rank,
as already shown (), only to the house steward, the valet, and the
butler.
 in the luxurious ages of grecian antiquity, sicilian cooks were
 the most esteemed, and received high rewards for their services.
 among them, one called trimalcio was such an adept in his art,
 that he could impart to common fish both the form and flavour of
 the most esteemed of the piscatory tribes. a chief cook in the
 palmy days of roman voluptuousness had about ł a year, and
 antony rewarded the one that cooked the supper which pleased
 cleopatra, with the present of a city. with the fall of the
 empire, the culinary art sank into less consideration. in the
 middle ages, cooks laboured to acquire a reputation for their
 sauces, which they composed of strange combinations, for the
 sake of novelty, as well as singularity.
. the duties of the cook, the kitchen and the scullery maids, are so
intimately associated, that they can hardly be treated of separately.
the cook, however, is at the head of the kitchen; and in proportion to
her possession of the qualities of cleanliness, neatness, order,
regularity, and celerity of action, so will her influence appear in the
conduct of those who are under her; as it is upon her that the whole
responsibility of the business of the kitchen rests, whilst the others
must lend her, both a ready and a willing assistance, and be especially
tidy in their appearance, and active, in their movements.
 in the larger establishments of the middle ages, cooks, with the
 authority of feudal chiefs, gave their orders from a high chair
 in which they ensconced themselves, and commanded a view of all
 that was going on throughout their several domains. each held a
 long wooden spoon, with which he tasted, without leaving his
 seat, the various comestibles that were cooking on the stoves,
 and which he frequently used as a rod of punishment on the backs
 of those whose idleness and gluttony too largely predominated
 over their diligence and temperance.
. if, as we have said (), the quality of early rising be of the first
importance to the mistress, what must it be to the servant! let it,
therefore, be taken as a long-proved truism, that without it, in every
domestic, the effect of all things else, so far as work is concerned,
may, in a great measure, be neutralized. in a cook, this quality is most
essential; for an hour lost in the morning, will keep her toiling,
absolutely toiling, all day, to overtake that which might otherwise have
been achieved with ease. in large establishments, six is a good hour to
rise in the summer, and seven in the winter.
. her first duty, in large establishments and where it is requisite,
should be to set her dough for the breakfast rolls, provided this has
not been done on the previous night, and then to engage herself with
those numerous little preliminary occupations which may not
inappropriately be termed laying out her duties for the day. this will
bring in the breakfast hour of eight, after which, directions must be
given, and preparations made, for the different dinners of the household
and family.
. in those numerous households where a cook and housemaid are only
kept, the general custom is, that the cook should have the charge of the
dining-room. the hall, the lamps and the doorstep are also committed to
her care, and any other work there may be on the outside of the house.
in establishments of this kind, the cook will, after having lighted her
kitchen fire, carefully brushed the range, and cleaned the hearth,
proceed to prepare for breakfast. she will thoroughly rinse the kettle,
and, filling it with fresh water, will put it on the fire to boil. she
will then go to the breakfast-room, or parlour, and there make all
things ready for the breakfast of the family. her attention will next be
directed to the hall, which she will sweep and wipe; the kitchen stairs,
if there be any, will now be swept; and the hall mats, which have been
removed and shaken, will be again put in their places.
 the cleaning of the kitchen, pantry, passages, and kitchen
 stairs must always be over before breakfast, so that it may not
 interfere with the other business of the day. everything should
 be ready, and the whole house should wear a comfortable aspect
 when the heads of the house and members of the family make their
 appearance. nothing, it may be depended on, will so please the
 mistress of an establishment, as to notice that, although she
 has not been present to see that the work was done, attention to
 smaller matters has been carefully paid, with a view to giving
 her satisfaction and increasing her comfort.
. by the time that the cook has performed the duties mentioned above,
and well swept, brushed, and dusted her kitchen, the breakfast-bell will
most likely summon her to the parlour, to "bring in" the breakfast. it
is the cook's department, generally, in the smaller establishments, to
wait at breakfast, as the housemaid, by this time, has gone up-stairs
into the bedrooms, and has there applied herself to her various duties.
the cook usually answers the bells and single knocks at the door in the
early part of the morning, as the tradesmen, with whom it is her more
special business to speak, call at these hours.
. it is in her preparation of the dinner that the cook begins to feel
the weight and responsibility of her situation, as she must take upon
herself all the dressing and the serving of the principal dishes, which
her skill and ingenuity have mostly prepared. whilst these, however, are
cooking, she must be busy with her pastry, soups, gravies, ragouts, &c.
stock, or what the french call consommé, being the basis of most made
dishes, must be always at hand, in conjunction with her sweet herbs and
spices for seasoning. "a place for everything, and everything in its
place," must be her rule, in order that time may not be wasted in
looking for things when they are wanted, and in order that the whole
apparatus of cooking may move with the regularity and precision of a
well-adjusted machine;—all must go on simultaneously. the vegetables
and sauces must be ready with the dishes they are to accompany, and in
order that they may be suitable, the smallest oversight must not be made
in their preparation. when the dinner-hour has arrived, it is the duty
of the cook to dish-up such dishes as may, without injury, stand, for
some time, covered on the hot plate or in the hot closet; but such as
are of a more important or recherché kind, must be delayed until the
order "to serve" is given from the drawing-room. then comes haste; but
there must be no hurry,—all must work with order. the cook takes charge
of the fish, soups, and poultry; and the kitchen-maid of the vegetables,
sauces, and gravies. these she puts into their appropriate dishes,
whilst the scullery-maid waits on and assists the cook. everything must
be timed so as to prevent its getting cold, whilst great care should be
taken, that, between the first and second courses, no more time is
allowed to elapse than is necessary, for fear that the company in the
dining-room lose all relish for what has yet to come of the dinner. when
the dinner has been served, the most important feature in the daily life
of the cook is at an end. she must, however, now begin to look to the
contents of her larder, taking care to keep everything sweet and clean,
so that no disagreeable smells may arise from the gravies, milk, or meat
that may be there. these are the principal duties of a cook in a
first-rate establishment.
in smaller establishments, the housekeeper often conducts the higher
department of cooking (see , , ), and the cook, with the
assistance of a scullery-maid, performs some of the subordinate duties
of the kitchen-maid.
when circumstances render it necessary, the cook engages to perform the
whole of the work of the kitchen, and, in some places, a portion of the
house-work also.
. whilst the cook is engaged with her morning duties, the kitchen-maid
is also occupied with hers. her first duty, after the fire is lighted,
is to sweep and clean the kitchen, and the various offices belonging to
it. this she does every morning, besides cleaning the stone steps at the
entrance of the house, the halls, the passages, and the stairs which
lead to the kitchen. her general duties, besides these, are to wash and
scour all these places twice a week, with the tables, shelves, and
cupboards. she has also to dress the nursery and servants'-hall dinners,
to prepare all fish, poultry, and vegetables, trim meat joints and
cutlets, and do all such duties as may be considered to enter into the
cook's department in a subordinate degree.
. the duties of the scullery-maid are to assist the cook; to keep the
scullery clean, and all the metallic as well as earthenware kitchen
utensils.
 the position of scullery-maid is not, of course, one of high
 rank, nor is the payment for her services large. but if she be
 fortunate enough to have over her a good kitchen-maid and clever
 cook, she may very soon learn to perform various little duties
 connected with cooking operations, which may be of considerable
 service in fitting her for a more responsible place. now, it
 will be doubtless thought by the majority of our readers, that
 the fascinations connected with the position of the
 scullery-maid, are not so great as to induce many people to
 leave a comfortable home in order to work in a scullery. but we
 are acquainted with one instance in which the desire, on the
 part of a young girl, was so strong to become connected with the
 kitchen and cookery, that she absolutely left her parents, and
 engaged herself as a scullery-maid in a gentleman's house. here
 she showed herself so active and intelligent, that she very
 quickly rose to the rank of kitchen-maid; and from this, so
 great was her gastronomical genius, she became, in a short space
 of time, one of the best women-cooks in england. after this, we
 think, it must be allowed, that a cook, like a poet, nascitur,
 non fit.
. modern cookery stands so greatly indebted to the gastronomic
propensities of our french neighbours, that many of their terms are
adopted and applied by english artists to the same as well as similar
preparations of their own. a vocabulary of these is, therefore,
indispensable in a work of this kind. accordingly, the following will be
found sufficiently complete for all ordinary purposes:—
aspic.—a savoury jelly, used as an exterior moulding for cold game,
poultry, fish, &c. this, being of a transparent nature, allows the bird
which it covers to be seen through it. this may also be used for
decorating or garnishing.
assiette (plate).—assiettes are the small entrées and
hors-d'oeuvres, the quantity of which does not exceed what a plate
will hold. at dessert, fruits, cheese, chestnuts, biscuits, &c., if
served upon a plate, are termed assiettes.—assiette volante is a
dish which a servant hands round to the guests, but is not placed upon
the table. small cheese soufflés and different dishes, which ought to be
served very hot, are frequently made assielles volantes.
au-bleu.—fish dressed in such a manner as to have a bluish
appearance.
bain-marie.—an open saucepan or kettle of nearly boiling water, in
which a smaller vessel can be set for cooking and warming. this is very
useful for keeping articles hot, without altering their quantity or
quality. if you keep sauce, broth, or soup by the fireside, the soup
reduces and becomes too strong, and the sauce thickens as well as
reduces; but this is prevented by using the bain-marie, in which the
water should be very hot, but not boiling.
béchamel.—french white sauce, now frequently used in english cookery.
blanch.—to whiten poultry, vegetables, fruit, &c., by plunging them
into boiling water for a short time, and afterwards plunging them into
cold water, there to remain until they are cold.
blanquette.—a sort of fricassee.
bouilli.—beef or other meat boiled; but, generally speaking, boiled
beef is understood by the term.
bouillie.—a french dish resembling hasty-pudding.
bouillon.—a thin broth or soup.
braise.—to stew meat with fat bacon until it is tender, it having
previously been blanched.
braisičre.—a saucepan having a lid with ledges, to put fire on the top.
brider.—to pass a packthread through poultry, game, &c., to keep
together their members.
caramel (burnt sugar).—this is made with a piece of sugar, of the size
of a nut, browned in the bottom of a saucepan; upon which a cupful of
stock is gradually poured, stirring all the time a glass of broth,
little by little. it may be used with the feather of a quill, to colour
meats, such as the upper part of fricandeaux; and to impart colour to
sauces. caramel made with water instead of stock may be used to colour
compôtes and other entremets.
casserole.—a crust of rice, which, after having been moulded into the
form of a pie, is baked, and then filled with a fricassee of white meat
or a purée of game.
compote.—a stew, as of fruit or pigeons.
consommé.—rich stock, or gravy.
croquette.—ball of fried rice or potatoes.
croutons.—sippets of bread.
daubičre.—an oval stewpan, in which daubes are cooked; daubes being
meat or fowl stewed in sauce.
désosser.—to bone, or take out the bones from poultry, game, or fish.
this is an operation requiring considerable experience.
entrées.—small side or corner dishes, served with the first course.
entremets.—small side or corner dishes, served with the second course.
escalopes.—collops; small, round, thin pieces of tender meat, or of
fish, beaten with the handle of a strong knife to make them tender.
feuilletage.—puff-paste.
flamber.—to singe fowl or game, after they have been picked.
foncer.—to put in the bottom of a saucepan slices of ham, veal, or thin
broad slices of bacon.
galette.—a broad thin cake.
gâteau.—a cake, correctly speaking; but used sometimes to denote a
pudding and a kind of tart.
glacer.—to glaze, or spread upon hot meats, or larded fowl, a thick and
rich sauce or gravy, called glaze. this is laid on with a feather or
brush, and in confectionary the term means to ice fruits and pastry with
sugar, which glistens on hardening.
hors-d'oeuvres.—small dishes, or assiettes volantes of sardines,
anchovies, and other relishes of this kind, served to the guests during
the first course. (see assiettes volantes.)
lit.—a bed or layer; articles in thin slices are placed in layers,
other articles, or seasoning, being laid between them.
maigre.—broth, soup, or gravy, made without meat.
matelote.—a rich fish-stew, which is generally composed of carp, eels,
trout, or barbel. it is made with wine.
mayonnaise.—cold sauce, or salad dressing.
menu.—the bill of fare.
meringue.—a kind of icing, made of whites of eggs and sugar, well
beaten.
miroton.—larger slices of meat than collops; such as slices of beef for
a vinaigrette, or ragout or stew of onions.
mouiller.—to add water, broth, or other liquid, during the cooking.
paner.—to cover over with very fine crumbs of bread, meats, or any
other articles to be cooked on the gridiron, in the oven, or frying-pan.
piquer.—to lard with strips of fat bacon, poultry, game, meat, &c. this
should always be done according to the vein of the meat, so that in
carving you slice the bacon across as well as the meat.
poęlée.—stock used instead of water for boiling turkeys, sweetbreads,
fowls, and vegetables, to render them less insipid. this is rather an
expensive preparation.
purée.—vegetables, or meat reduced to a very smooth pulp, which is
afterwards mixed with enough liquid to make it of the consistency of
very thick soup.
ragout.—stew or hash.
remoulade.—salad dressing.
rissoles.—pastry, made of light puff-paste, and cut into various forms,
and fried. they may be filled with fish, meat, or sweets.
roux.—brown and white; french thickening.
salmi.—ragout of game previously roasted.
sauce piquante.—a sharp sauce, in which somewhat of a vinegar flavour
predominates.
sauter.—to dress with sauce in a saucepan, repeatedly moving it about.
tamis.—tammy, a sort of open cloth or sieve through which to strain
broth and sauces, so as to rid them of small bones, froth, &c.
tourte.—tart. fruit pie.
trousser.—to truss a bird; to put together the body and tie the wings
and thighs, in order to round it for roasting or boiling, each being
tied then with packthread, to keep it in the required form.
vol-au-vent.—a rich crust of very fine puff-paste, which may be filled
with various delicate ragouts or fricassees, of fish, flesh, or fowl.
fruit may also be inclosed in a vol-au-vent.
[illustration]
. lean, juicy beef, mutton, and veal, form the basis of all good
soups; therefore it is advisable to procure those pieces which afford
the richest succulence, and such as are fresh-killed. stale meat renders
them bad, and fat is not so well adapted for making them. the principal
art in composing good rich soup, is so to proportion the several
ingredients that the flavour of one shall not predominate over another,
and that all the articles of which it is composed, shall form an
agreeable whole. to accomplish this, care must be taken that the roots
and herbs are perfectly well cleaned, and that the water is proportioned
to the quantity of meat and other ingredients. generally a quart of
water may be allowed to a pound of meat for soups, and half the quantity
for gravies. in making soups or gravies, gentle stewing or simmering is
incomparably the best. it may be remarked, however, that a really good
soup can never be made but in a well-closed vessel, although, perhaps,
greater wholesomeness is obtained by an occasional exposure to the air.
soups will, in general, take from three to six hours doing, and are much
better prepared the day before they are wanted. when the soup is cold,
the fat may be much more easily and completely removed; and when it is
poured off, care must be taken not to disturb the settlings at the
bottom of the vessel, which are so fine that they will escape through a
sieve. a tamis is the best strainer, and if the soup is strained while
it is hot, let the tamis or cloth be previously soaked in cold water.
clear soups must be perfectly transparent, and thickened soups about the
consistence of cream. to thicken and give body to soups and gravies,
potato-mucilage, arrow-root, bread-raspings, isinglass, flour and
butter, barley, rice, or oatmeal, in a little water rubbed well
together, are used. a piece of boiled beef pounded to a pulp, with a bit
of butter and flour, and rubbed through a sieve, and gradually
incorporated with the soup, will be found an excellent addition. when
the soup appears to be too thin or too weak, the cover of the boiler
should be taken off, and the contents allowed to boil till some of the
watery parts have evaporated; or some of the thickening materials, above
mentioned, should be added. when soups and gravies are kept from day to
day in hot weather, they should be warmed up every day, and put into
fresh scalded pans or tureens, and placed in a cool cellar. in temperate
weather, every other day may be sufficient.
. various herbs and vegetables are required for the purpose of making
soups and gravies. of these the principal are,—scotch barley, pearl
barley, wheat flour, oatmeal, bread-raspings, pease, beans, rice,
vermicelli, macaroni, isinglass, potato-mucilage, mushroom or mushroom
ketchup, champignons, parsnips, carrots, beetroot, turnips, garlic,
shalots, and onions. sliced onions, fried with butter and flour till
they are browned, and then rubbed through a sieve, are excellent to
heighten the colour and flavour of brown soups and sauces, and form the
basis of many of the fine relishes furnished by the cook. the older and
drier the onion, the stronger will be its flavour. leeks, cucumber, or
burnet vinegar; celery or celery-seed pounded. the latter, though
equally strong, does not impart the delicate sweetness of the fresh
vegetable; and when used as a substitute, its flavour should be
corrected by the addition of a bit of sugar. cress-seed, parsley, common
thyme, lemon thyme, orange thyme, knotted marjoram, sage, mint, winter
savoury, and basil. as fresh green basil is seldom to be procured, and
its fine flavour is soon lost, the best way of preserving the extract is
by pouring wine on the fresh leaves.
. for the seasoning of soups, bay-leaves, tomato, tarragon, chervil,
burnet, allspice, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, clove, mace, black and white
pepper, essence of anchovy, lemon-peel, and juice, and seville
orange-juice, are all taken. the latter imparts a finer flavour than the
lemon, and the acid is much milder. these materials, with wine, mushroom
ketchup, harvey's sauce, tomato sauce, combined in various proportions,
are, with other ingredients, manipulated into an almost endless variety
of excellent soups and gravies. soups, which are intended to constitute
the principal part of a meal, certainly ought not to be flavoured like
sauces, which are only designed to give a relish to some particular
dish.
. it has been asserted, that english cookery is, nationally speaking,
far from being the best in the world. more than this, we have been
frequently told by brilliant foreign writers, half philosophers, half
chefs, that we are the worst cooks on the face of the earth, and
that the proverb which alludes to the divine origin of food, and the
precisely opposite origin of its preparers, is peculiarly applicable to
us islanders. not, however, to the inhabitants of the whole island; for,
it is stated in a work which treats of culinary operations, north of the
tweed, that the "broth" of scotland claims, for excellence and
wholesomeness, a very close second place to the bouillon, or common
soup of france. "three hot meals of broth and meat, for about the
price of one roasting joint," our scottish brothers and sisters get,
they say; and we hasten to assent to what we think is now a very
well-ascertained fact. we are glad to note, however, that soups of
vegetables, fish, meat, and game, are now very frequently found in the
homes of the english middle classes, as well as in the mansions of the
wealthier and more aristocratic; and we take this to be one evidence,
that we are on the right road to an improvement in our system of
cookery. one great cause of many of the spoilt dishes and badly-cooked
meats which are brought to our tables, arises, we think, and most will
agree with us, from a non-acquaintance with "common, every-day things."
entertaining this view, we intend to preface the chapters of this work
with a simple scientific résumé of all those causes and circumstances
which relate to the food we have to prepare, and the theory and
chemistry of the various culinary operations. accordingly, this is the
proper place to treat of the quality of the flesh of animals, and
describe some of the circumstances which influence it for good or bad.
we will, therefore, commence with the circumstance of age, and examine
how far this affects the quality of meat.
. during the period between the birth and maturity of animals, their
flesh undergoes very considerable changes. for instance, when the animal
is young, the fluids which the tissues of the muscles contain, possess a
large proportion of what is called albumen. this albumen, which is
also the chief component of the white of eggs, possesses the peculiarity
of coagulating or hardening at a certain temperature, like the white of
a boiled egg, into a soft, white fluid, no longer soluble, or capable of
being dissolved in water. as animals grow older, this peculiar animal
matter gradually decreases, in proportion to the other constituents of
the juice of the flesh. thus, the reason why veal, lamb, and young pork
are white, and without gravy when cooked, is, that the large quantity
of albumen they contain hardens, or becomes coagulated. on the other
hand, the reason why beef and mutton are brown, and have gravy, is,
that the proportion of albumen they contain, is small, in comparison
with their greater quantity of fluid which is soluble, and not
coagulable.
. the quality of the flesh of an animal is considerably influenced by
the nature of the food on which it has been fed; for the food supplies
the material which produces the flesh. if the food be not suitable and
good, the meat cannot be good either; just as the paper on which these
words are printed, could not be good, if the rags from which it is made,
were not of a fine quality. to the experienced in this matter, it is
well known that the flesh of animals fed on farinaceous produce, such as
corn, pulse, &c., is firm, well-flavoured, and also economical in the
cooking; that the flesh of those fed on succulent and pulpy substances,
such as roots, possesses these qualities in a somewhat less degree;
whilst the flesh of those whose food contains fixed oil, as linseed, is
greasy, high coloured, and gross in the fat, and if the food has been
used in large quantities, possessed of a rank flavour.
. it is indispensable to the good quality of meat, that the animal
should be perfectly healthy at the time of its slaughter. however
slight the disease in an animal may be, inferiority in the quality of
its flesh, as food, is certain to be produced. in most cases, indeed, as
the flesh of diseased animals has a tendency to very rapid putrefaction,
it becomes not only unwholesome, but absolutely poisonous, on account of
the absorption of the virus of the unsound meat into the systems of
those who partake of it. the external indications of good and bad meat
will be described under its own particular head, but we may here premise
that the layer of all wholesome meat, when freshly killed, adheres
firmly to the bone.
. another circumstance greatly affecting the quality of meat, is the
animal's treatment before it is slaughtered. this influences its value
and wholesomeness in no inconsiderable degree. it will be easy to
understand this, when we reflect on those leading principles by which
the life of an animal is supported and maintained. these are, the
digestion of its food, and the assimilation of that food into its
substance. nature, in effecting this process, first reduces the food in
the stomach to a state of pulp, under the name of chyme, which passes
into the intestines, and is there divided into two principles, each
distinct from the other. one, a milk-white fluid,—the nutritive
portion,—is absorbed by innumerable vessels which open upon the mucous
membrane, or inner coat of the intestines. these vessels, or absorbents,
discharge the fluid into a common duct, or road, along which it is
conveyed to the large veins in the neighbourhood of the heart. here it
is mixed with the venous blood (which is black and impure) returning
from every part of the body, and then it supplies the waste which is
occasioned in the circulating stream by the arterial (or pure) blood
having furnished matter for the substance of the animal. the blood of
the animal having completed its course through all parts, and having had
its waste recruited by the digested food, is now received into the
heart, and by the action of that organ it is urged through the lungs,
there to receive its purification from the air which the animal inhales.
again returning to the heart, it is forced through the arteries, and
thence distributed, by innumerable ramifications, called capillaries,
bestowing to every part of the animal, life and nutriment. the other
principle—the innutritive portion—passes from the intestines, and is
thus got rid of. it will now be readily understood how flesh is affected
for bad, if an animal is slaughtered when the circulation of its blood
has been increased by over-driving, ill-usage, or other causes of
excitement, to such a degree of rapidity as to be too great for the
capillaries to perform their functions, and causing the blood to be
congealed in its minuter vessels. where this has been the case, the meat
will be dark-coloured, and become rapidly putrid; so that self-interest
and humanity alike dictate kind and gentle treatment of all animals
destined to serve as food for man.
. stock being the basis of all meat soups, and, also, of all the
principal sauces, it is essential to the success of these culinary
operations, to know the most complete and economical method of
extracting, from a certain quantity of meat, the best possible stock or
broth. the theory and philosophy of this process we will, therefore,
explain, and then proceed to show the practical course to be adopted.
. as all meat is principally composed of fibres, fat, gelatine,
osmazome, and albumen, it is requisite to know that the fibres are
inseparable, constituting almost all that remains of the meat after it
has undergone a long boiling.
. fat is dissolved by boiling; but as it is contained in cells covered
by a very fine membrane, which never dissolves, a portion of it always
adheres to the fibres. the other portion rises to the surface of the
stock, and is that which has escaped from the cells which were not
whole, or which have burst by boiling.
. gelatine is soluble: it is the basis and the nutritious portion of
the stock. when there is an abundance of it, it causes the stock, when
cold, to become a jelly.
. osmazome is soluble even when cold, and is that part of the meat
which gives flavour and perfume to the stock. the flesh of old animals
contains more osmazome than that of young ones. brown meats contain
more than white, and the former make the stock more fragrant. by
roasting meat, the osmazome appears to acquire higher properties; so, by
putting the remains of roast meats into your stock-pot, you obtain a
better flavour.
. albumen is of the nature of the white of eggs; it can be dissolved
in cold or tepid water, but coagulates when it is put into water not
quite at the boiling-point. from this property in albumen, it is evident
that if the meat is put into the stock-pot when the water boils, or
after this is made to boil up quickly, the albumen, in both cases,
hardens. in the first it rises to the surface, in the second it remains
in the meat, but in both it prevents the gelatine and osmazome from
dissolving; and hence a thin and tasteless stock will be obtained. it
ought to be known, too, that the coagulation of the albumen in the meat,
always takes place, more or less, according to the size of the piece, as
the parts farthest from the surface always acquire that degree of heat
which congeals it before entirely dissolving it.
. bones ought always to form a component part of the stock-pot. they
are composed of an earthy substance,—to which they owe their
solidity,—of gelatine, and a fatty fluid, something like marrow. two
ounces of them contain as much gelatine as one pound of meat; but in
them, this is so incased in the earthy substance, that boiling water can
dissolve only the surface of whole bones. by breaking them, however, you
can dissolve more, because you multiply their surfaces; and by reducing
them to powder or paste, you can dissolve them entirely; but you must
not grind them dry. we have said () that gelatine forms the basis of
stock; but this, though very nourishing, is entirely without taste; and
to make the stock savoury, it must contain osmazome. of this, bones do
not contain a particle; and that is the reason why stock made entirely
of them, is not liked; but when you add meat to the broken or pulverized
bones, the osmazome contained in it makes the stock sufficiently
savoury.
. in concluding this part of our subject, the following condensed
hints and directions should be attended to in the economy of
soup-making:—
i. beef makes the best stock; veal stock has less colour and taste;
whilst mutton sometimes gives it a tallowy smell, far from agreeable,
unless the meat has been previously roasted or broiled. fowls add very
little to the flavour of stock, unless they be old and fat. pigeons,
when they are old, add the most flavour to it; and a rabbit or partridge
is also a great improvement. from the freshest meat the best stock is
obtained.
ii. if the meat be boiled solely to make stock, it must be cut up into
the smallest possible pieces; but, generally speaking, if it is desired
to have good stock and a piece of savoury meat as well, it is necessary
to put a rather large piece into the stock-pot, say sufficient for two
or three days, during which time the stock will keep well in all
weathers. choose the freshest meat, and have it cut as thick as
possible; for if it is a thin, flat piece, it will not look well, and
will be very soon spoiled by the boiling.
iii. never wash meat, as it deprives its surface of all its juices;
separate it from the bones, and tie it round with tape, so that its
shape may be preserved, then put it into the stock-pot, and for each
pound of meat, let there be one pint of water; press it down with the
hand, to allow the air, which it contains, to escape, and which often
raises it to the top of the water.
iv. put the stock-pot on a gentle fire, so that it may heat gradually.
the albumen will first dissolve, afterwards coagulate; and as it is in
this state lighter than the liquid, it will rise to the surface;
bringing with it all its impurities. it is this which makes the scum.
the rising of the hardened albumen has the same effect in clarifying
stock as the white of eggs; and, as a rule, it may be said that the more
scum there is, the clearer will be the stock. always take care that the
fire is very regular.
v. remove the scum when it rises thickly, and do not let the stock boil,
because then one portion of the scum will be dissolved, and the other go
to the bottom of the pot; thus rendering it very difficult to obtain a
clear broth. if the fire is regular, it will not be necessary to add
cold water in order to make the scum rise; but if the fire is too large
at first, it will then be necessary to do so.
vi. when the stock is well skimmed, and begins to boil, put in salt and
vegetables, which may be two or three carrots, two turnips, one parsnip,
a bunch of leeks and celery tied together. you can add, according to
taste, a piece of cabbage, two or three cloves stuck in an onion, and a
tomato. the latter gives a very agreeable flavour to the stock. if fried
onion be added, it ought, according to the advice of a famous french
chef, to be tied in a little bag: without this precaution, the colour
of the stock is liable to be clouded.
vii. by this time we will now suppose that you have chopped the bones
which were separated from the meat, and those which were left from the
roast meat of the day before. remember, as was before pointed out, that
the more these are broken, the more gelatine you will have. the best way
to break them up is to pound them roughly in an iron mortar, adding,
from time to time, a little water, to prevent them getting heated. it is
a great saving thus to make use of the bones of meat, which, in too many
english families, we fear, are entirely wasted; for it is certain, as
previously stated (no. ), that two ounces of bone contain as much
gelatine (which is the nutritive portion of stock) as one pound of meat.
in their broken state tie them up in a bag, and put them in the
stock-pot; adding the gristly parts of cold meat, and trimmings, which
can be used for no other purpose. if, to make up the weight, you have
received from the butcher a piece of mutton or veal, broil it slightly
over a clear fire before putting it in the stock-pot, and be very
careful that it does not contract the least taste of being smoked or
burnt.
viii. add now the vegetables, which, to a certain extent, will stop the
boiling of the stock. wait, therefore, till it simmers well up again,
then draw it to the side of the fire, and keep it gently simmering till
it is served, preserving, as before said, your fire always the same.
cover the stock-pot well, to prevent evaporation; do not fill it up,
even if you take out a little stock, unless the meat is exposed; in
which case a little boiling water may be added, but only enough to cover
it. after six hours' slow and gentle simmering, the stock is done; and
it should not be continued on the fire, longer than is necessary, or it
will tend to insipidity.
note.—it is on a good stock, or first good broth and sauce, that
excellence in cookery depends. if the preparation of this basis of the
culinary art is intrusted to negligent or ignorant persons, and the
stock is not well skimmed, but indifferent results will be obtained. the
stock will never be clear; and when it is obliged to be clarified, it is
deteriorated both in quality and flavour. in the proper management of
the stock-pot an immense deal of trouble is saved, inasmuch as one
stock, in a small dinner, serves for all purposes. above all things, the
greatest economy, consistent with excellence, should be practised, and
the price of everything which enters the kitchen correctly ascertained.
the theory of this part of household management may appear trifling;
but its practice is extensive, and therefore it requires the best
attention.
[illustration]
[it will be seen, by reference to the following recipes, that an
entirely original and most intelligible system has been pursued in
explaining the preparation of each dish. we would recommend the young
housekeeper, cook, or whoever may be engaged in the important task of
"getting ready" the dinner, or other meal, to follow precisely the order
in which the recipes are given. thus, let them first place on their
table all the ingredients necessary; then the modus operandi, or mode of
preparation, will be easily managed. by a careful reading, too, of the
recipes, there will not be the slightest difficulty in arranging a
repast for any number of persons, and an accurate notion will be gained
of the time the cooling of each dish will occupy, of the periods at
which it is seasonable, as also of its average cost.
the addition of the natural history, and the description of the various
properties of the edible articles in common use in every family, will be
serviceable both in a practical and an educational point of view.
speaking specially of the recipes for soups, it may be added, that by
the employment of the best, medium, or common stock, the quality of
the soups and their cost may be proportionately increased or lessened.]
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef,  lbs. of knuckle of veal,
/ lb. of good lean ham; any poultry trimmings;  small onions,  small
carrots,  turnips (the latter should be omitted in summer, lest they
ferment),  head of celery, a few chopped mushrooms, when obtainable; 
tomato, a bunch of savoury herbs, not forgetting parsley; -/ oz. of
salt,  white peppercorns,  cloves,  small blades of mace,  quarts
of water.
mode.—line a delicately clean stewpan with the ham cut in thin broad
slices, carefully trimming off all its rusty fat; cut up the beef and
veal in pieces about  inches square, and lay them on the ham; set it on
the stove, and draw it down, and stir frequently. when the meat is
equally browned, put in the beef and veal bones, the poultry trimmings,
and pour in the cold water. skim well, and occasionally add a little
cold water, to stop its boiling, until it becomes quite clear; then put
in all the other ingredients, and simmer very slowly for  hours. do not
let it come to a brisk boil, that the stock be not wasted, and that its
colour may be preserved. strain through a very fine hair sieve, or
tammy, and it will be fit for use.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d. per quart.
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef, or  lbs. of knuckle of veal,
or  lbs. of each; any bones, trimmings of poultry, or fresh meat, / a
lb. of lean bacon or ham,  oz. of butter,  large onions, each stuck
with  cloves;  turnip,  carrots, / a leek,  head of celery,  oz.
of salt, / a teaspoonful of whole pepper,  large blade of mace, 
small bunch of savoury herbs,  quarts and / pint of cold water.
mode.—cut up the meat and bacon or ham into pieces about  inches
square; rub the butter on the bottom of the stewpan; put in / a pint
of water, the meat, and all the other ingredients. cover the stewpan,
and place it on a sharp fire, occasionally stirring its contents. when
the bottom of the pan becomes covered with a pale, jelly-like substance,
add  quarts of cold water, and simmer very gently for  hours. as we
have said before, do not let it boil quickly. skim off every particle of
grease whilst it is doing, and strain it through a fine hair sieve.
this is the basis of many of the soups afterwards mentioned, and will be
found quite strong enough for ordinary purposes.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d. per quart.
. ingredients.—the liquor in which a joint of meat has been boiled,
say  quarts; trimmings of fresh meat or poultry, shank-bones, &c.,
roast-beef bones, any pieces the larder may furnish; vegetables, spices,
and the same seasoning as in the foregoing recipe.
mode.—let all the ingredients simmer gently for  hours, taking care
to skim carefully at first. strain it off, and put by for use.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
(to be used in the preparation of white soups.)
. ingredients.— lbs. of knuckle of veal, any poultry trimmings, 
slices of lean ham,  carrot,  onions,  head of celery,  white
peppercorns,  oz. of salt,  blade of mace,  oz. butter,  quarts of
water.
mode.—cut up the veal, and put it with the bones and trimmings of
poultry, and the ham, into the stewpan, which has been rubbed with the
butter. moisten with / a pint of water, and simmer till the gravy
begins to flow. then add the  quarts of water and the remainder of the
ingredients; simmer for  hours. after skimming and straining it
carefully through a very fine hair sieve, it will be ready for use.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d. per quart.
note.—when stronger stock is desired, double the quantity of veal, or
put in an old fowl. the liquor in which a young turkey has been boiled,
is an excellent addition to all white stock or soups.
. ingredients.— oz. of powdered sugar, and / a pint of water.
mode.—place the sugar in a stewpan over a slow fire until it begins
to melt, keeping it stirred with a wooden spoon until it becomes black,
then add the water, and let it dissolve. cork closely, and use a few
drops when required.
note.—in france, burnt onions are made use of for the purpose of
browning. as a general rule, the process of browning is to be
discouraged, as apt to impart a slightly unpleasant flavour to the
stock, and, consequently, all soups made from it.
. ingredients.—the whites of  eggs, / pint of water,  quarts of
stock.
mode.—supposing that by some accident the soup is not quite clear,
and that its quantity is  quarts, take the whites of  eggs, carefully
separated from their yolks, whisk them well together with the water, and
add gradually the  quarts of boiling stock, still whisking. place the
soup on the fire, and when boiling and well skimmed, whisk the eggs with
it till nearly boiling again; then draw it from the fire, and let it
settle, until the whites of the eggs become separated. pass through a
fine cloth, and the soup should be clear.
note.—the rule is, that all clear soups should be of a light straw
colour, and should not savour too strongly of the meat; and that all
white or brown thick soups should have no more consistency than will
enable them to adhere slightly to the spoon when hot. all purées
should be somewhat thicker.
. ingredients.— lbs. of lean beef or veal, / a scrag of mutton, 
oz. of vermicelli,  blades of mace,  cloves, / lb. of sweet almonds,
the yolks of  eggs,  gill of thick cream, rather more than  quarts of
water.
mode.—boil the beef, or veal, and the mutton, gently in water that
will cover them, till the gravy is very strong, and the meat very
tender; then strain off the gravy, and set it on the fire with the
specified quantities of vermicelli, mace, and cloves, to  quarts. let
it boil till it has the flavour of the spices. have ready the almonds,
blanched and pounded very fine; the yolks of the eggs boiled hard;
mixing the almonds, whilst pounding, with a little of the soup, lest the
latter should grow oily. pound them till they are a mere pulp, and keep
adding to them, by degrees, a little soup until they are thoroughly
mixed together. let the soup be cool when mixing, and do it perfectly
smooth. strain it through a sieve, set it on the fire, stir frequently,
and serve hot. just before taking it up, add the cream.
time.— hours. average cost per quart, s. d.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: almond & blossom.]
 the almond-tree.—this tree is indigenous to the northern parts
 of asia and africa, but it is now cultivated in europe,
 especially in the south of france, italy, and spain. it flowers
 in spring, and produces its fruit in august. although there are
 two kinds of almonds, the sweet and the bitter, they are
 considered as only varieties of the same species. the best sweet
 almonds brought to england, are called the syrian or jordan, and
 come from malaga; the inferior qualities are brought from
 valentia and italy. bitter almonds come principally from
 magadore. anciently, the almond was much esteemed by the nations
 of the east. jacob included it among the presents which he
 designed for joseph. the greeks called it the greek or thasian
 nut, and the romans believed that by eating half a dozen of
 them, they were secured against drunkenness, however deeply they
 might imbibe. almonds, however, are considered as very
 indigestible. the bitter contain, too, principles which
 produce two violent poisons,—prussic acid and a kind of
 volatile oil. it is consequently dangerous to eat them in large
 quantities. almonds pounded together with a little sugar and
 water, however, produce a milk similar to that which is yielded
 by animals. their oil is used for making fine soap, and their
 cake as a cosmetic.
. ingredients.— lbs. of good boiling apples, / teaspoonful of
white pepper,  cloves, cayenne or ginger to taste,  quarts of medium
stock.
mode.—peel and quarter the apples, taking out their cores; put them
into the stock, stew them gently till tender. rub the whole through a
strainer, add the seasoning, give it one boil up, and serve.
time.— hour. average cost per quart, s.
seasonable from september to december.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: apple and blossom.]
 the apple.—this useful fruit is mentioned in holy writ; and
 homer describes it as valuable in his time. it was brought from
 the east by the romans, who held it in the highest estimation.
 indeed, some of the citizens of the "eternal city" distinguished
 certain favourite apples by their names. thus the manlians were
 called after manlius, the claudians after claudius, and the
 appians after appius. others were designated after the country
 whence they were brought; as the sidonians, the epirotes, and
 the greeks. the best varieties are natives of asia, and have, by
 grafting them upon others, been introduced into europe. the
 crab, found in our hedges, is the only variety indigenous to
 britain; therefore, for the introduction of other kinds we are,
 no doubt, indebted to the romans. in the time of the saxon
 heptarchy, both devon and somerset were distinguished as the
 apple country; and there are still existing in herefordshire
 some trees said to have been planted in the time of william the
 conqueror. from that time to this, the varieties of this
 precious fruit have gone on increasing, and are now said to
 number upwards of ,. it is peculiar to the temperate zone,
 being found neither in lapland, nor within the tropics. the best
 baking apples for early use are the colvilles; the best for
 autumn are the rennets and pearmains; and the best for winter
 and spring are russets. the best table, or eating apples, are
 the margarets for early use; the kentish codlin and summer
 pearmain for summer; and for autumn, winter, or spring, the
 dowton, golden and other pippins, as the ribstone, with small
 russets. as a food, the apple cannot be considered to rank high,
 as more than the half of it consists of water, and the rest of
 its properties are not the most nourishing. it is, however, a
 useful adjunct to other kinds of food, and, when cooked, is
 esteemed as slightly laxative.
(a white soup.)
. ingredients.— slices of lean bacon or ham, / a head of celery,
 turnip,  onion,  oz. of butter,  lbs. of artichokes,  pint of
boiling milk, or / pint of boiling cream, salt and cayenne to taste, 
lumps of sugar, -/ quarts of white stock.
mode.—put the bacon and vegetables, which should be cut into thin
slices, into the stewpan with the butter. braise these for / of an
hour, keeping them well stirred. wash and pare the artichokes, and after
cutting them into thin slices, add them, with a pint of stock, to the
other ingredients. when these have gently stewed down to a smooth pulp,
put in the remainder of the stock. stir it well, adding the seasoning,
and when it has simmered for five minutes, pass it through a strainer.
now pour it back into the stewpan, let it again simmer five minutes,
taking care to skim it well, and stir it to the boiling milk or cream.
serve with small sippets of bread fried in butter.
time.— hour. average cost per quart, s. d.
seasonable from june to october.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— lbs. of lean beef,  slices of bacon, / pint of
pale ale, a few leaves of white beet, spinach,  cabbage lettuce, a
little mint, sorrel, and marjoram, a pint of asparagus-tops cut small,
the crust of  french roll, seasoning to taste,  quarts of water.
mode.—put the beef, cut in pieces and rolled in flour, into a
stewpan, with the bacon at the bottom; cover it close, and set it on a
slow fire, stirring it now and then till the gravy is drawn. put in the
water and ale, and season to taste with pepper and salt, and let it stew
gently for  hours; then strain the liquor, and take off the fat, and
add the white beet, spinach, cabbage lettuce, and mint, sorrel, and
sweet marjoram, pounded. let these boil up in the liquor, then put in
the asparagus-tops cut small, and allow them to boil till all is tender.
serve hot, with the french roll in the dish.
time.—altogether  hours. average cost per quart, s. d.
seasonable from may to august.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of split peas, a teacupful of gravy, 
young onions,  lettuce cut small, / a head of celery, / a pint of
asparagus cut small, / a pint of cream,  quarts of water: colour the
soup with spinach juice.
mode.—boil the peas, and rub them through a sieve; add the gravy, and
then stew by themselves the celery, onions, lettuce, and asparagus, with
the water. after this, stew altogether, and add the colouring and cream,
and serve.
time.—peas -/ hours, vegetables  hour; altogether  hours.
average cost per quart, s.
[illustration: asparagus.]
 asparagus.—the ancients called all the sprouts of young
 vegetables asparagus, whence the name, which is now limited to a
 particular species, embracing artichoke, alisander, asparagus,
 cardoon, rampion, and sea-kale. they are originally mostly wild
 seacoast plants; and, in this state, asparagus may still be
 found on the northern as well as southern shores of britain. it
 is often vulgarly called, in london, sparrowgrass; and, in
 it's cultivated form, hardly bears any resemblance to the
 original plant. immense quantities of it are raised for the
 london market, at mortlake and deptford; but it belongs rather
 to the classes of luxurious than necessary food. it is light and
 easily digested, but is not very nutritious.
. ingredients.— lb. of any kind of meat, any trimmings or odd
pieces;  onions,  carrots,  oz. of rice,  pint of split peas, pepper
and salt to taste,  quarts of water.
mode.—cut the meat and vegetables in slices, add to them the rice and
peas, season with pepper and salt. put the whole in a jar, fill up with
the water, cover very closely, and bake for  hours.
time.— hours. average cost, -/d. per quart.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  or  persons.
note.—this will be found a very cheap and wholesome soup, and will be
convenient in those cases where baking is more easily performed than
boiling.
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef, / lb. of pearl barley, a
large bunch of parsley,  onions,  potatoes, salt and pepper,  quarts
of water.
mode.—put in all the ingredients, and simmer gently for  hours.
time.— hours. average cost, -/d. per quart.
seasonable all the year, but more suitable for winter.
[illustration: barley.]
 barley.—this, in the order of cereal grasses, is, in britain,
 the next plant to wheat in point of value, and exhibits several
 species and varieties. from what country it comes originally, is
 not known, but it was cultivated in the earliest ages of
 antiquity, as the egyptians were afflicted with the loss of it
 in the ear, in the time of moses. it was a favourite grain with
 the athenians, but it was esteemed as an ignominious food by the
 romans. notwithstanding this, however, it was much used by them,
 as it was in former times by the english, and still is, in the
 border counties, in cornwall, and also in wales. in other parts
 of england, it is used mostly for malting purposes. it is less
 nutritive than wheat; and in  parts, has of starch , gluten
 , saccharine matter , husk . it is, however, a lighter and
 less stimulating food than wheat, which renders a decoction of
 it well adapted for invalids whose digestion is weak.
(economical.)
. ingredients.— lb. of bread crusts,  oz. butter,  quart of
common stock.
mode.—boil the bread crusts in the stock with the butter; beat the
whole with a spoon, and keep it boiling till the bread and stock are
well mixed. season with a little salt.
time.—half an hour. average cost per quart, d.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this is a cheap recipe, and will be found useful where extreme
economy is an object.
[illustration: quern, or grinding-mill.]
 bread.—the origin of bread is involved in the obscurity of
 distant ages. the greeks attributed its invention to pan; but
 before they, themselves, had an existence, it was, no doubt, in
 use among the primitive nations of mankind. the chaldeans and
 the egyptians were acquainted with it, and sarah, the companion
 of abraham, mixed flour and water together, kneaded it, and
 covered it with ashes on the hearth. the scriptures inform us
 that leavened bread was known to the israelites, but it is not
 known when the art of fermenting it was discovered. it is said
 that the romans learnt it during their wars with perseus, king
 of macedon, and that it was introduced to the "imperial city"
 about  years before the birth of christ. with them it no
 doubt found its way into britain; but after their departure from
 the island, it probably ceased to be used. we know that king
 alfred allowed the unfermented cakes to burn in the neatherd's
 cottage; and that, even in the sixteenth century, unfermented
 cakes, kneaded by the women, were the only kind of bread known
 to the inhabitants of norway and sweden. the italians of this
 day consume the greater portion of their flour in the form of
 polenta, or soft pudding, vermicelli, and macaroni; and, in
 the remoter districts of scotland, much unfermented bread is
 still used. we give a cut of the quern grinding-mill, which,
 towards the end of the last century, was in use in that country,
 and which is thus described by dr. johnson in his "journey to
 the hebrides:"—"it consists of two stones about a foot and half
 in diameter; the lower is a little convex, to which the
 concavity of the upper must be fitted. in the middle of the
 upper stone is a round hole, and on one side is a long handle.
 the grinder sheds the corn gradually into the hole with one
 hand, and works the handle round with the other. the corn slides
 down the convexity of the lower stone, and by the motion of the
 upper, is ground in its passage." such a primitive piece of
 machinery, it may safely be said, has entirely disappeared from
 this country.—in other parts of this work, we shall have
 opportunities of speaking of bread and bread-making, which, from
 its great and general use in the nourishment of mankind, has
 emphatically been called the "staff of life." the necessity,
 therefore, of having it both pure and good is of the first
 importance.
. ingredients.— large cabbage,  carrots,  onions,  or  slices
of lean bacon, salt and pepper to taste,  quarts of medium stock no.
mode.—scald the cabbage, exit it up and drain it. line the stewpan
with the bacon, put in the cabbage, carrots, and onions; moisten with
skimmings from the stock, and simmer very gently, till the cabbage is
tender; add the stock, stew softly for half an hour, and carefully skim
off every particle of fat. season and serve.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: cabbage seeding.]
 the cabbage.—it is remarkable, that although there is no
 country in the world now more plentifully supplied with fruits
 and vegetables than great britain, yet the greater number of
 these had no existence in it before the time of henry viii.
 anderson, writing under the date of , says, "the english
 cultivated scarcely any vegetables before the last two
 centuries. at the commencement of the reign, of henry viii.
 neither salad, nor carrots, nor cabbages, nor radishes, nor any
 other comestibles of a like nature, were grown in any part of
 the kingdom; they came from holland and flanders." the original
 of all the cabbage tribe is the wild plant sea-colewort, which
 is to be found wasting whatever sweetness it may have on the
 desert air, on many of the cliffs of the south coast of england.
 in this state, it scarcely weighs more than half an ounce, yet,
 in a cultivated state, to what dimensions can it be made to
 grow! however greatly the whole of the tribe is esteemed among
 the moderns, by the ancients they were held in yet higher
 estimation. the egyptians adored and raised altars to them, and
 the greeks and romans ascribed many of the most exalted virtues
 to them. cato affirmed, that the cabbage cured all diseases, and
 declared, that it was to its use that the romans were enabled to
 live in health and without the assistance of physicians for 
 years. it was introduced by that people into germany, gaul, and,
 no doubt, britain; although, in this last, it may have been
 suffered to pass into desuetude for some centuries. the whole
 tribe is in general wholesome and nutritive, and forms a
 valuable adjunct to animal food.
(an excellent soup, very beneficial for the voice.)
. ingredients.— oz. of sago, / pint of cream, the yolks of 
eggs,  lump of sugar, and seasoning to taste,  bay-leaf (if liked), 
quarts of medium stock no. .
mode.—having washed the sago in boiling water, let it be gradually
added to the nearly boiling stock. simmer for / an hour, when it
should be well dissolved. beat up the yolks of the eggs, add to them the
boiling cream; stir these quickly in the soup, and serve immediately. do
not let the soup boil, or the eggs will curdle.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this is a soup, the principal ingredients of which, sago and
eggs, have always been deemed very beneficial to the chest and throat.
in various quantities, and in different preparations, these have been
partaken of by the principal singers of the day, including the
celebrated swedish nightingale, jenny lind, and, as they have always
avowed, with considerable advantage to the voice, in singing.
. ingredients.— quarts of liquor in which a leg of mutton or beef
has been boiled, a few beef-bones,  large carrots,  large onions, 
turnip; seasoning of salt and pepper to taste; cayenne.
mode.—put the liquor, bones, onions, turnip, pepper, and salt, into a
stewpan, and simmer for  hours. scrape and cut the carrots thin, strain
the soup on them, and stew them till soft enough to pulp through a hair
sieve or coarse cloth; then boil the pulp with the soup, which should be
of the consistency of pea-soup. add cayenne. pulp only the red part of
the carrot, and make this soup the day before it is wanted.
time.—-/ hours. average cost per quart, -/d.
seasonable from october to march.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— lbs. of carrots,  oz. of butter, seasoning to
taste of salt and cayenne,  quarts of stock or gravy soup.
mode.—scrape and cut out all specks from the carrots, wash, and wipe
them dry, and then reduce them into quarter-inch slices. put the butter
into a large stewpan, and when it is melted, add  lbs. of the sliced
carrots, and let them stew gently for an hour without browning. add to
them the soup, and allow them to simmer till tender,—say for nearly an
hour. press them through a strainer with the soup, and add salt and
cayenne if required. boil the whole gently for  minutes, skim well, and
serve as hot as possible.
time.—-/ hour. average cost per quart, s. d.
[illustration: tazza and carrot leaves.]
 the carrot.—there is a wild carrot which grows in england; but
 it is white and small, and not much esteemed. the garden carrot
 in general use, was introduced in the reign of queen elizabeth,
 and was, at first, so highly esteemed, that the ladies wore
 leaves of it in their head-dresses. it is of great value in the
 culinary art, especially for soups and stews. it can be used
 also for beer instead of malt, and, in distillation, it yields a
 large quantity of spirit. the carrot is proportionably valuable
 as it has more of the red than the yellow part. there is a large
 red variety much used by the farmers for colouring butter. as a
 garden vegetable, it is what is called the orange-carrot that is
 usually cultivated. as a fattening food for cattle, it is
 excellent; but for man it is indigestible, on account of its
 fibrous matter. of , parts,  consist of sugar, and  of
 starch.—the accompanying cut represents a pretty winter
 ornament, obtained by placing a cut from the top of the
 carrot-root in a shallow vessel of water, when the young leaves
 spring forth with a charming freshness and fullness.
. ingredients.— heads of celery,  teaspoonful of salt, nutmeg to
taste,  lump of sugar, / pint of strong stock, a pint of cream, and 
quarts of boiling water.
mode.—cut the celery into small pieces; throw it into the water,
seasoned with the nutmeg, salt, and sugar. boil it till sufficiently
tender; pass it through a sieve, add the stock, and simmer it for half
an hour. now put in the cream, bring it to the boiling point, and serve
immediately.
time.— hour. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable from september to march.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this soup can be made brown, instead of white, by omitting the
cream, and colouring it a little. when celery cannot be procured, half a
drachm of the seed, finely pounded, will give a flavour to the soup, if
put in a quarter of an hour before it is done. a little of the essence
of celery will answer the same purpose.
 celery.—this plant is indigenous to britain, and, in its wild
 state, grows by the side of ditches and along some parts of the
 seacoast. in this state it is called smallaqe, and, to some
 extent, is a dangerous narcotic. by cultivation, however, it has
 been brought to the fine flavour which the garden plant
 possesses. in the vicinity of manchester it is raised to an
 enormous size. when our natural observation is assisted by the
 accurate results ascertained by the light of science, how
 infinitely does it enhance our delight in contemplating the
 products of nature! to know, for example, that the endless
 variety of colour which we see in plants is developed only by
 the rays of the sun, is to know a truism sublime by its very
 comprehensiveness. the cause of the whiteness of celery is
 nothing more than the want of light in its vegetation, and in
 order that this effect may be produced, the plant is almost
 wholly covered with earth; the tops of the leaves alone being
 suffered to appear above the ground.
. ingredients.— quart of young green peas, a small bunch of
parsley,  young onions,  quarts of medium stock no. .
mode.—boil the peas till quite tender, with the parsley and onions;
then rub them through a sieve, and pour the stock to them. do not let it
boil after the peas are added, or you will spoil the colour. serve very
hot.
time.—half an hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable from june to the end of august.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—cold peas pounded in a mortar, with a little stock added to
them, make a very good soup in haste.
 parsley.—among the greeks, in the classic ages, a crown of
 parsley was awarded, both in the nemaean and isthmian games, and
 the voluptuous anacreon pronounces this beautiful herb the
 emblem of joy and festivity. it has an elegant leaf, and is
 extensively used in the culinary art. when it was introduced to
 britain is not known. there are several varieties,—the
 plain-leaved and the curled-leaved, celery-parsley,
 hamburg parsley, and purslane. the curled is the best, and,
 from the form of its leaf, has a beautiful appearance on a dish
 as a garnish. its flavour is, to many, very agreeable in soups;
 and although to rabbits, hares, and sheep it is a luxury, to
 parrots it is a poison. the celery-parsley is used as a celery,
 and the hamburg is cultivated only for its roots, which are used
 as parsnips or carrots, to eat with meat. the purslane is a
 native of south america, and is not now much in use.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of spanish chestnuts, / pint of cream;
seasoning to taste of salt, cayenne, and mace;  quart of stock no. .
mode.—take the outer rind from the chestnuts, and put them into a
large pan of warm water. as soon as this becomes too hot for the fingers
to remain in it, take out the chestnuts, peel them quickly, and immerse
them in cold water, and wipe and weigh them. now cover them with good
stock, and stew them gently for rather more than / of an hour, or
until they break when touched with a fork; then drain, pound, and rub
them through a fine sieve reversed; add sufficient stock, mace, cayenne,
and salt, and stir it often until it boils, and put in the cream. the
stock in which the chestnuts are boiled can be used for the soup, when
its sweetness is not objected to, or it may, in part, be added to it;
and the rule is, that / lb. of chestnuts should be given to each quart
of soup.
time.—rather more than  hour. average cost per quart, s. d.
seasonable from october to february.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: chestnut.]
 the chestnut.—this fruit is said, by some, to have originally
 come from sardis, in lydia; and by others, from castanea, a city
 of thessaly, from which it takes its name. by the ancients it
 was much used as a food, and is still common in france and
 italy, to which countries it is, by some, considered indigenous.
 in the southern part of the european continent, it is eaten both
 raw and roasted. the tree was introduced into britain by the
 romans; but it only flourishes in the warmer parts of the
 island, the fruit rarely arriving at maturity in scotland. it
 attains a great age, as well as an immense size. as a food, it
 is the least oily and most farinaceous of all the nuts, and,
 therefore, the easiest of digestion. the tree called the horse
 chestnut is very different, although its fruit very much
 resembles that of the other. its "nuts," though eaten by horses
 and some other animals, are unsuitable for human food.
. ingredients.— oz. of grated cocoa-nut,  oz. of rice flour, / a
teaspoonful of mace; seasoning to taste of cayenne and salt; / of a
pint of boiling cream,  quarts of medium stock no. .
mode.—take the dark rind from the cocoa-nut, and grate it down small
on a clean grater; weigh it, and allow, for each quart of stock,  oz.
of the cocoa-nut. simmer it gently for  hour in the stock, which should
then be strained closely from it, and thickened for table.
time.—-/ hours. average cost per quart, s. d.
seasonable in autumn.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: cocoa-nut palm.]
[illustration: nut & blossom.]
 the cocoa-nut.—this is the fruit of one of the palms, than
 which it is questionable if there is any other species of tree
 marking, in itself, so abundantly the goodness of providence, in
 making provision for the wants of man. it grows wild in the
 indian seas, and in the eastern parts of asia; and thence it has
 been introduced into every part of the tropical regions. to the
 natives of those climates, its bark supplies the material for
 creating their dwellings; its leaves, the means of roofing them;
 and the leaf-stalks, a kind of gauze for covering their windows,
 or protecting the baby in the cradle. it is also made into
 lanterns, masks to screen the face from the heat of the sun,
 baskets, wicker-work, and even a kind of paper for writing on.
 combs, brooms, torches, ropes, matting, and sailcloth are made
 of its fibers. with these, too, beds are made and cushions
 stuffed. oars are supplied by the leaves; drinking-cups, spoons,
 and other domestic utensils by the shells of the nuts; milk by
 its juice, of which, also, a kind of honey and sugar are
 prepared. when fermented, it furnishes the means of
 intoxication; and when the fibres are burned, their ashes supply
 an alkali for making soap. the buds of the tree bear a striking
 resemblance to cabbage when boiled; but when they are cropped,
 the tree dies. in a fresh state, the kernel is eaten raw, and
 its juice is a most agreeable and refreshing beverage. when the
 nut is imported to this country, its fruit is, in general,
 comparatively dry, and is considered indigestible. the tree is
 one of the least productive of the palm tribe.
. ingredients.— carrots,  sliced onions,  cut lettuce, and
chervil;  oz. butter,  pint of lentils, the crumbs of  french rolls,
half a teacupful of rice,  quarts of medium stock no. .
mode.—put the vegetables with the butter in the stewpan, and let them
simmer  minutes; then add the lentils and  pint of the stock, and stew
gently for half an hour. now fill it up with the remainder of the stock,
let it boil another hour, and put in the crumb of the rolls. when well
soaked, rub all through a tammy. have ready the rice boiled; pour the
soup over this, and serve.
time.—-/ hour. average cost,s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: the lentil.]
 the lentil.—this belongs to the legumious or pulse kind of
 vegetables, which rank next to the corn plants in their
 nutritive properties. the lentil is a variety of the bean tribe,
 but in england is not used as human food, although considered
 the best of all kinds for pigeons. on the continent it is
 cultivated for soups, as well as for other preparations for the
 table; and among the presents which david received from shobi,
 as recounted in the scriptures, were beans, lentils, and parched
 pulse. among the egyptians it was extensively used, and among
 the greeks, the stoics had a maxim, which declared, that "a wise
 man acts always with reason, and prepares his own lentils."
 among the romans it was not much esteemed, and from them the
 english may have inherited a prejudice against it, on account,
 it is said, of its rendering men indolent. it takes its name
 from lentus 'slow,' and, according to pliny, produces mildness
 and moderation of temper.
cucumber soup (french recipe).
. ingredients.— large cucumber, a piece of butter the size of a
walnut, a little chervil and sorrel cut in large pieces, salt and pepper
to taste, the yolks of  eggs,  gill of cream,  quart of medium stock
no. .
mode.—pare the cucumber, quarter it, and take out the seeds; cut it
in thin slices, put these on a plate with a little salt, to draw the
water from them; drain, and put them in your stewpan, with the butter.
when they are warmed through, without being browned, pour the stock on
them. add the sorrel, chervil, and seasoning, and boil for  minutes.
mix the well-beaten yolks of the eggs with the cream, which add at the
moment of serving.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable from june to september.
sufficient for  persons.
 the cucumber.—the antiquity of this fruit is very great. in the
 sacred writings we find that the people of israel regretted it,
 whilst sojourning in the desert; and at the present time, the
 cucumber, and other fruits of its class, form a large portion of
 the food of the egyptian people. by the eastern nations
 generally, as well as by the greeks and romans, it was greatly
 esteemed. like the melon, it was originally brought from asia by
 the romans, and in the th century it was common in england,
 although, in the time of the wars of "the roses," it seems no
 longer to have been cultivated. it is a cold food, and of
 difficult digestion when eaten raw. as a preserved sweetmeat,
 however, it is esteemed one of the most agreeable.
. ingredients.—a tablespoonful of flour,  eggs,  small blades of
finely-pounded mace,  quarts of stock no. .
mode.—beat up the flour smoothly in a teaspoonful of cold stock, and
put in the eggs; throw them into boiling stock, stirring all the time.
simmer for / of an hour. season and serve with a french roll in the
tureen, or fried sippets of bread.
time. / an hour. average cost,d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
soup a la flamande (flemish).
. ingredients.— turnip,  small carrot, / head of celery,  green
onions shred very fine,  lettuce cut small, chervil, / pint of
asparagus cut small, / pint of peas,  oz. butter, the yolks of 
eggs, / pint of cream, salt to taste,  lump of sugar,  quarts of
stock no. .
mode.—put the vegetables in the butter to stew gently for an hour
with a teacupful of stock; then add the remainder of the stock, and
simmer for another hour. now beat the yolks of the eggs well, mix with
the cream (previously boiled), and strain through a hair sieve. take the
soup off the fire, put the eggs, &c. to it, and keep stirring it well.
bring it to a boil, but do not leave off stirring, or the eggs will
curdle. season with salt, and add the sugar.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable from may to august.
sufficient for  persons.
 chervil.—although the roots of this plant are poisonous, its
 leaves are tender, and are used in salads. in antiquity it made
 a relishing dish, when prepared with oil, wine, and gravy. it is
 a native of various parts of europe; and the species cultivated
 in the gardens of paris, has beautifully frizzled leaves.
. ingredients.— onions,  heads of celery,  moderate-sized
potatoes,  oz. butter, / pint of water, / pint of cream,  quarts
of stock no. .
mode.—slice the onions, celery, and potatoes, and put them with the
butter and water into a stewpan, and simmer for an hour. then fill up
the stewpan with stock, and boil gently till the potatoes are done,
which will be in about an hour. rub all through a tammy, and add the
cream (previously boiled). do not let it boil after the cream is put in.
time.—-/ hours. __average cost_,s. d. per quart.
seasonable from september to may.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this soup can be made with water instead of stock.
[illustration: strips of vegetable.]
. ingredients.—/ pint of carrots, / pint of turnips, / pint of
onions,  or  leeks, / head of celery,  lettuce, a little sorrel and
chervil, if liked,  oz. of butter,  quarts of stock no. .
mode.—cut the vegetables into strips of about -/ inch long, and be
particular they are all the same size, or some will be hard whilst the
others will be done to a pulp. cut the lettuce, sorrel, and chervil into
larger pieces; fry the carrots in the butter, and pour the stock boiling
to them. when this is done, add all the other vegetables, and herbs, and
stew gently for at least an hour. skim off all the fat, pour the soup
over thin slices of bread, cut round about the size of a shilling, and
serve.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—in summer, green peas, asparagus-tops, french beans, &c. can be
added. when the vegetables are very strong, instead of frying them in
butter at first, they should be blanched, and afterwards simmered in the
stock.
 sorrel.—this is one of the spinaceous plants, which take
 their name from spinach, which is the chief among them. it is
 little used in english cookery, but a great deal in french, in
 which it is employed for soups, sauces, and salads. in english
 meadows it is usually left to grow wild; but in france, where it
 is cultivated, its flavour is greatly improved.
kale brose (a scotch recipe).
. ingredients.—half an ox-head or cow-heel, a teacupful of toasted
oatmeal, salt to taste,  handfuls of greens,  quarts of water.
mode.—make a broth of the ox-head or cow-heel, and boil it till oil
floats on the top of the liquor, then boil the greens, shred, in it. put
the oatmeal, with a little salt, into a basin, and mix with it quickly a
teacupful of the fat broth: it should not run into one doughy mass, but
form knots. stir it into the whole, give one boil, and serve very hot.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable all the year, but more suitable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.—a sheep's head,  quarts of water,  leeks cut
small, pepper and salt to taste, oatmeal to thicken.
mode.—prepare the head, either by skinning or cleaning the skin very
nicely; split it in two; take out the brains, and put it into boiling
water; add the leeks and seasoning, and simmer very gently for  hours.
mix smoothly, with cold water, as much oatmeal as will make the soup
tolerably thick; pour it into the soup; continue stirring till the whole
is blended and well done, and serve.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.—a capon or large fowl (sometimes an old cock, from
which the recipe takes its name, is used), which should be trussed as
for boiling;  or  bunches of fine leeks,  quarts of stock no. ,
pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—well wash the leeks (and, if old, scald them in boiling water
for a few minutes), taking off the roots and part of the heads, and cut
them into lengths of about an inch. put the fowl into the stock, with,
at first, one half of the leeks, and allow it to simmer gently. in half
an hour add the remaining leeks, and then it may simmer for  or  hours
longer. it should be carefully skimmed, and can be seasoned to taste. in
serving, take out the fowl, and carve it neatly, placing the pieces in a
tureen, and pouring over them the soup, which should be very thick of
leeks (a purée of leeks the french would call it).
time.— hours. average cost, s. d. per quart; or, with stock no.
, s.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—without the fowl, the above, which would then be merely called
leek soup, is very good, and also economical. cock-a-leekie was largely
consumed at the burns centenary festival at the crystal palace,
sydenham, in .
[illustration: leeks.]
 the leek.—as in the case of the cucumber, this vegetable was
 bewailed by the israelites in their journey through the desert.
 it is one of the alliaceous tribe, which consists of the onion,
 garlic, chive, shallot, and leek. these, as articles of food,
 are perhaps more widely diffused over the face of the earth than
 any other genus of edible plants. it is the national badge of
 the welsh, and tradition ascribes to st. david its introduction
 to that part of britain. the origin of the wearing of the leek
 on st. david's day, among that people, is thus given in
 "beeton's dictionary of universal information:"—"it probably
 originated from the custom of cymhortha, or the friendly aid,
 practised among farmers. in some districts of south wales, all
 the neighbours of a small farmer were wont to appoint a day when
 they attended to plough his land, and the like; and, at such
 time, it was the custom for each to bring his portion of leeks
 with him for making the broth or soup." (see st. david.)
 others derive the origin of the custom from the battle of
 cressy. the plant, when grown in wales and scotland, is sharper
 than it is in england, and its flavour is preferred by many to
 that of the onion in broth. it is very wholesome, and, to
 prevent its tainting the breath, should be well boiled.
. ingredients.— oz. of macaroni, a piece of butter the size of a
walnut, salt to taste,  quarts of clear stock no. .
mode.—throw the macaroni and butter into boiling water, with a pinch
of salt, and simmer for / an hour. when it is tender, drain and cut it
into thin rings or lengths, and drop it into the boiling stock. stew
gently for  minutes, and serve grated parmesan cheese with it.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: macaroni.]
 macaroni.—this is the favourite food of italy, where,
 especially among the neapolitans, it may be regarded as the
 staff of life. "the crowd of london," says mr. forsyth, "is a
 double line in quick motion; it is the crowd of business. the
 crowd of naples consists in a general tide rolling up and down,
 and in the middle of this tide, a hundred eddies of men. you are
 stopped by a carpenter's bench, you are lost among shoemakers'
 stalls, and you dash among the pots of a macaroni stall." this
 article of food is nothing more than a thick paste, made of the
 best wheaten flour, with a small quantity of water. when it has
 been well worked, it is put into a hollow cylindrical vessel,
 pierced with holes of the size of tobacco-pipes at the bottom.
 through these holes the mass is forced by a powerful screw
 bearing on a piece of wood made exactly to fit the inside of the
 cylinder. whilst issuing from the holes, it is partially baked
 by a fire placed below the cylinder, and is, at the same time,
 drawn away and hung over rods placed about the room, in order to
 dry. in a few days it is fit for use. as it is both wholesome
 and nutritious, it ought to be much more used by all classes in
 england than it is. it generally accompanies parmesan cheese to
 the tables of the rich, but is also used for thickening soups
 and making puddings.
soup maigre (i.e. without meat).
. ingredients.— oz. butter,  onions sliced,  heads of celery, 
lettuces, a small bunch of parsley,  handfuls of spinach,  pieces of
bread-crust,  blades of mace, salt and pepper to taste, the yolks of 
eggs,  teaspoonfuls of vinegar,  quarts of water.
mode.—melt the butter in a stewpan, and put in the onions to stew
gently for  or  minutes; then add the celery, spinach, lettuces, and
parsley, cut small. stir the ingredients well for  minutes. now put in
the water, bread, seasoning, and mace. boil gently for -/ hour, and,
at the moment of serving, beat in the yolks of the eggs and the vinegar,
but do not let it boil, or the eggs will curdle.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: lettuce.]
 the lettuce.—this is one of the acetarious vegetables, which
 comprise a large class, chiefly used as pickles, salads, and
 other condiments. the lettuce has in all antiquity been
 distinguished as a kitchen-garden plant. it was, without
 preparation, eaten by the hebrews with the paschal lamb; the
 greeks delighted in it, and the romans, in the time of domitian,
 had it prepared with eggs, and served in the first course at
 their tables, merely to excite their appetites. its botanical
 name is lactuca, so called from the milky juice it exudes when
 its stalks are cut. it possesses a narcotic virtue, noticed by
 ancient physicians; and even in our day a lettuce supper is
 deemed conducive to repose. its proper character, however, is
 that of a cooling summer vegetable, not very nutritive, but
 serving as a corrective, or diluent of animal food.
milk soup (a nice dish for children).
. ingredients.— quarts of milk,  saltspoonful of salt, 
teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon,  teaspoonfuls of pounded sugar, or
more if liked,  thin slices of bread, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—boil the milk with the salt, cinnamon, and sugar; lay the bread
in a deep dish, pour over it a little of the milk, and keep it hot over
a stove, without burning. beat up the yolks of the eggs, add them to the
milk, and stir it over the fire till it thickens. do not let it curdle.
pour it upon the bread, and serve.
time.—/ of an hour. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  children.
. ingredients.— large onions,  oz. of butter, salt and pepper to
taste, / pint of cream,  quart of stock no. .
mode.—chop the onions, put them in the butter, stir them
occasionally, but do not let them brown. when tender, put the stock to
them, and season; strain the soup, and add the boiling cream.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— middling-sized onions,  oz. of butter, a
tablespoonful of rice-flour, salt and pepper to taste,  teaspoonful of
powdered sugar, thickening of butter and flour,  quarts of water.
mode.—cut the onions small, put them in the stewpan with the butter,
and fry them well; mix the rice-flour smoothly with the water, add the
onions, seasoning, and sugar, and simmer till tender. thicken with
butter and flour, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost,d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: onion.]
 the onion.—like the cabbage, this plant was erected into an
 object of worship by the idolatrous egyptians , years before
 the christian era, and it still forms a favourite food in the
 country of these people, as well as in other parts of africa.
 when it was first introduced to england, has not been
 ascertained; but it has long been in use, and esteemed as a
 favourite seasoning plant to various dishes. in warmer climates
 it is much milder in its flavour; and such as are grown in spain
 and portugal, are, comparatively speaking, very large, and are
 often eaten both in a boiled and roasted state. the strasburg is
 the most esteemed; and, although all the species have highly
 nutritive properties, they impart such a disagreeable odour to
 the breath, that they are often rejected even where they are
 liked. chewing a little raw parsley is said to remove this
 odour.
. ingredients.— lbs. of cabbage, or savoy greens; / lb. of butter
or dripping, salt and pepper to taste, oatmeal for thickening,  quarts
of water.
mode.—chop the cabbage very fine, thicken the water with oatmeal, put
in the cabbage and butter, or dripping; season and simmer for -/
hour. it can be made sooner by blanching and mashing the greens, adding
any good liquor that a joint has been boiled in, and then further
thicken with bread or pounded biscuit.
time—-/ hour. average cost, -/d. per quart.
seasonable all the year, but more suitable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
 the savoy.—this is a close-hearted wrinkle-leaved cabbage,
 sweet and tender, especially the middle leaves, and in season
 from november to spring. the yellow species bears hard weather
 without injury, whilst the dwarf kind are improved and
 rendered more tender by frost.
. ingredients.— lb. of sliced parsnips,  oz. of butter, salt and
cayenne to taste,  quart of stock no. .
mode.—put the parsnips into the stewpan with the butter, which has
been previously melted, and simmer them till quite tender. then add
nearly a pint of stock, and boil together for half an hour. pass all
through a fine strainer, and put to it the remainder of the stock.
season, boil, and serve immediately.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable from october to april.
sufficient for  persons.
 the parsnip.—this is a biennial plant, with a root like a
 carrot, which, in nutritive and saccharine matter, it nearly
 equals. it is a native of britain, and, in its wild state, may
 be found, in many parts, growing by the road-sides. it is also
 to be found, generally distributed over europe; and, in catholic
 countries, is mostly used with salt fish, in lent. in scotland
 it forms an excellent dish, when beat up with butter and
 potatoes; it is, also, excellent when fried. in ireland it is
 found to yield, in conjunction with the hop, a pleasant
 beverage; and it contains as much spirit as the carrot, and
 makes an excellent wine. its proportion of nutritive matter is
  parts in ,;  being mucilage and  sugar.
. ingredients.— pints of green peas, / lb. of butter,  or three
thin slices of ham,  onions sliced,  shredded lettuces, the crumb of 
french rolls,  handfuls of spinach,  lump of sugar,  quarts of common
stock.
mode.—put the butter, ham,  quart of the peas, onions, and lettuces,
to a pint of stock, and simmer for an hour; then add the remainder of
the stock, with the crumb of the french rolls, and boil for another
hour. now boil the spinach, and squeeze it very dry. rub the soup
through a sieve, and the spinach with it, to colour it. have ready a
pint of young peas boiled; add them to the soup, put in the sugar,
give one boil, and serve. if necessary, add salt.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable from june to the end of august.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—it will be well to add, if the peas are not quite young, a
little sugar. where economy is essential, water may be used instead of
stock for this soup, boiling in it likewise the pea-shells; but use a
double quantity of vegetables.
. ingredients.— quart of split peas,  lbs. of shin of beef,
trimmings of meat or poultry, a slice of bacon,  large carrots, 
turnips,  large onions,  head of celery, seasoning to taste,  quarts
of soft water, any bones left from roast meat,  quarts of common stock,
or liquor in which a joint of meat has been boiled.
mode.—put the peas to soak over-night in soft water, and float off
such as rise to the top. boil them in the water till tender enough to
pulp; then add the ingredients mentioned above, and simmer for  hours,
stirring it occasionally. pass the whole through a sieve, skim well,
season, and serve with toasted bread cut in dice.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart. seasonable all the
year round, but more suitable for cold weather. sufficient for 
persons.
[illustration: pea.]
 the pea.—it is supposed that the common gray pea, found wild in
 greece, and other parts of the levant, is the original of the
 common garden pea, and of all the domestic varieties belonging
 to it. the gray, or field pea, called bisallie by the french,
 is less subject to run into varieties than the garden kinds, and
 is considered by some, perhaps on that account, to be the wild
 plant, retaining still a large proportion of its original habit.
 from the tendency of all other varieties "to run away" and
 become different to what they originally were, it is very
 difficult to determine the races to which they belong. the pea
 was well known to the romans, and, probably, was introduced to
 britain at an early period; for we find peas mentioned by
 lydgate, a poet of the th century, as being hawked in london.
 they seem, however, for a considerable time, to have fallen out
 of use; for, in the reign of queen elizabeth, fuller tells us
 they were brought from holland, and were accounted "fit dainties
 for ladies, they came so far and cost so dear." there are some
 varieties of peas which have no lining in their pods, which are
 eaten cooked in the same way as kidney-beans. they are called
 sugar peas, and the best variety is the large crooked sugar,
 which is also very good, used in the common way, as a culinary
 vegetable. there is also a white sort, which readily splits when
 subjected to the action of millstones set wide apart, so as not
 to grind them. these are used largely for soups, and especially
 for sea-stores. from the quantity of farinaceous and saccharine
 matter contained in the pea, it is highly nutritious as an
 article of food.
pea soup (inexpensive).
. ingredients.—/ lb. of onions, / lb. of carrots,  oz. of
celery, / lb. of split peas, a little mint, shred fine; 
tablespoonful of coarse brown sugar, salt and pepper to taste,  quarts
of water, or liquor in which a joint of meat has been boiled.
mode.—fry the vegetables for  minutes in a little butter or
dripping, previously cutting them up in small pieces; pour the water on
them, and when boiling add the peas. let them simmer for nearly  hours,
or until the peas are thoroughly done. add the sugar, seasoning, and
mint; boil for / of an hour, and serve.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, -/d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— lbs. of mealy potatoes, boiled or steamed very dry,
pepper and salt to taste,  quarts of stock no. .
mode.—when the potatoes are boiled, mash them smoothly, that no lumps
remain, and gradually put them to the boiling stock; pass it through a
sieve, season, and simmer for  minutes. skim well, and serve with fried
bread.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable from september to march.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— lb. of shin of beef,  lb. of potatoes,  onion,
/ a pint of peas,  oz. of rice,  heads of celery, pepper and salt to
taste,  quarts of water.
mode.—cut the beef into thin slices, chop the potatoes and onion, and
put them in a stewpan with the water, peas, and rice. stew gently till
the gravy is drawn from the meat; strain it off, take out the beef, and
pulp the other ingredients through a coarse sieve. put the pulp back in
the soup, cut up the celery in it, and simmer till this is tender.
season, and serve with fried bread cut into it.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable from september to march.
sufficient for  persons.
(very economical.)
. ingredients.— middle-sized potatoes well pared, a thick slice of
bread,  leeks peeled and cut into thin slices as far as the white
extends upwards from the roots, a teacupful of rice, a teaspoonful of
salt, and half that of pepper, and  quarts of water.
mode.—the water must be completely boiling before anything is put
into it; then add the whole of the ingredients at once, with the
exception of the rice, the salt, and the pepper. cover, and let these
come to a brisk boil; put in the others, and let the whole boil slowly
for an hour, or till all the ingredients are thoroughly done, and their
several juices extracted and mixed.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d. per quart.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable in winter.
[illustration: potatoes.]
 the potato.—humboldt doubted whether this root was a native of
 south america; but it has been found growing wild both in chili
 and buenos ayres. it was first brought to spain from the
 neighbourhood of quito, in the early part of the sixteenth
 century, first to england from virginia, in , and first
 planted by sir walter raleigh, on his estate of youghal, near
 cork, in ireland. thence it was brought and planted in
 lancashire, in england, and was, at first, recommended to be
 eaten as a delicate dish, and not as common food. this was in
 . nutritious properties.—of a thousand parts of the
 potato, sir h. davy found about a fourth nutritive; say, 
 mucilage or starch,  sugar, and  gluten.
. ingredients.— turnips,  lump of sugar,  spoonfuls of strong
veal stock, salt and white pepper to taste,  quarts of very bright
stock, no. .
mode.—peel the turnips, and with a cutter cut them in balls as round
as possible, but very small. put them in the stock, which must be very
bright, and simmer till tender. add the veal stock and seasoning. have
little pieces of bread cut round, about the size of a shilling; moisten
them with stock; put them into a tureen and pour the soup over without
shaking, for fear of crumbling the bread, which would spoil the
appearance of the soup, and make it look thick.
time.— hours.
seasonable in the winter.
sufficient for  persons.
 the prince of wales.—this soup was invented by a philanthropic
 friend of the editress, to be distributed among the poor of a
 considerable village, when the prince of wales attained his
 majority, on the th november, . accompanying this fact, the
 following notice, which appears in "beeton's dictionary of
 universal information" may appropriately be introduced,
 premising that british princes attain their majority in their
 th year, whilst mortals of ordinary rank do not arrive at that
 period till their st.—"albert edward, prince of wales, and
 heir to the british throne, merits a place in this work on
 account of the high responsibilities which he is, in all
 probability, destined to fulfil as sovereign of the british
 empire. on the th of november, , he was gazetted as having
 been invested with the rank of a colonel in the army. speaking
 of this circumstance, the times said,—'the significance of
 this event is, that it marks the period when the heir to the
 british throne is about to take rank among men, and to enter
 formally upon a career, which every loyal subject of the queen
 will pray may be a long and a happy one, for his own sake and
 for the sake of the vast empire which, in the course of nature,
 he will one day be called to govern. the best wish that we can
 offer for the young prince is, that in his own path he may ever
 keep before him the bright example of his royal mother, and show
 himself worthy of her name.' there are few in these realms who
 will not give a fervent response to these sentiments. b.
 november th, ."
. ingredients.—/ a pint of green peas, if in season, a little
chervil,  shredded lettuces,  onions, a very small bunch of parsley, 
oz. of butter, the yolks of  eggs,  pint of water, seasoning to taste,
 quarts of stock no. .
mode.—put in a very clean stewpan the chervil, lettuces, onions,
parsley, and butter, to  pint of water, and let them simmer till
tender. season with salt and pepper; when done, strain off the
vegetables, and put two-thirds of the liquor they were boiled in to the
stock. beat up the yolks of the eggs with the other third, give it a
toss over the fire, and at the moment of serving, add this, with the
vegetables which you strained off, to the soup.
time.—/ of an hour. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable from may to october.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— oz. of patna rice, salt, cayenne, and mace, 
quarts of white stock.
mode.—throw the rice into boiling water, and let it remain  minutes;
then pour it into a sieve, and allow it to drain well. now add it to the
stock boiling, and allow it to stew till it is quite tender; season to
taste. serve quickly.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: ears of rice.]
 rice.—this is a plant of indian origin, and has formed the
 principal food of the indian and chinese people from the most
 remote antiquity. both pliny and dioscorides class it with the
 cereals, though galen places it among the vegetables. be this as
 it may, however, it was imported to greece, from india, about
  years before christ, and by the ancients it was esteemed
 both nutritious and fattening. there are three kinds of
 rice,—the hill rice, the patna, and the carolina, of the united
 states. of these, only the two latter are imported to this
 country, and the carolina is considered the best, as it is the
 dearest. the nourishing properties of rice are greatly inferior
 to those of wheat; but it is both a light and a wholesome food.
 in combination with other foods, its nutritive qualities are
 greatly increased; but from its having little stimulating power,
 it is apt, when taken in large quantities alone, to lie long on
 the stomach.
. ingredients.— oz. of rice, the yolks of  eggs, / a pint of
cream, rather more than  quarts of stock no. .
mode.—boil the rice in the stock, and rub half of it through a tammy;
put the stock in the stewpan, add all the rice, and simmer gently for 
minutes. beat the yolks of the eggs, mix them with the cream (previously
boiled), and strain through a hair sieve; take the soup off the fire,
add the eggs and cream, stirring frequently. heat it gradually, stirring
all the time; but do not let it boil, or the eggs will curdle.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— oz. of sago,  quarts of stock no. .
mode.—wash the sago in boiling water, and add it, by degrees, to the
boiling stock, and simmer till the sago is entirely dissolved, and forms
a sort of jelly.
time.—nearly an hour. average cost, d. per quart.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year.
note.—the yolks of  eggs, beaten up with a little cream, previously
boiled, and added at the moment of serving, much improves this soup.
[illustration: sago palm.]
 sago.—the farinaceous food of this name constitutes the pith of
 the sago tree (the sagus farinifera of linnaeus), which grows
 spontaneously in the east indies and in the archipelago of the
 indian ocean. there it forms the principal farinaceous diet of
 the inhabitants. in order to procure it, the tree is felled and
 sawn in pieces. the pith is then taken out, and put in
 receptacles of cold water, where it is stirred until the flour
 separates from the filaments, and sinks to the bottom, where it
 is suffered to remain until the water is poured off, when it is
 taken out and spread on wicker frames to dry. to give it the
 round granular form in which we find it come to this country, it
 is passed through a colander, then rubbed into little balls, and
 dried. the tree is not fit for felling until it has attained a
 growth of seven years, when a single trunk will yield  lbs.
 weight; and, as an acre of ground will grow  of these trees,
 a large return of flour is the result. the best quality has a
 slightly reddish hue, and easily dissolves to a jelly, in hot
 water. as a restorative diet, it is much used.
. ingredients.— oz. of semolina,  quarts of boiling stock, no.
, or .
mode.—drop the semolina into the boiling stock, and keep stirring, to
prevent its burning. simmer gently for half an hour, and serve.
time.—/ an hour. average cost, d. per quart, or d.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
 semolina.—this is the heart of the grano duro wheat of italy,
 which is imported for the purpose of making the best vermicelli.
 it has a coarse appearance, and may be purchased at the italian
 warehouses. it is also called soojee; and semoletta is
 another name for a finer sort.
soup a la solferino (sardinian recipe).
. ingredients.— eggs, / pint of cream,  oz. of fresh butter,
salt and pepper to taste, a little flour to thicken,  quarts of
bouillon, no. .
mode.—beat the eggs, put them into a stewpan, and add the cream,
butter, and seasoning; stir in as much flour as will bring it to the
consistency of dough; make it into balls, either round or egg-shaped,
and fry them in butter; put them in the tureen, and pour the boiling
bouillon over them.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this recipe was communicated to the editress by an english
gentleman, who was present at the battle of solferino, on june , ,
and who was requested by some of victor emmanuel's troops, on the day
before the battle, to partake of a portion of their potage. he
willingly enough consented, and found that these clever campaigners had
made a most palatable dish from very easily-procured materials. in
sending the recipe for insertion in this work, he has, however,
anglicised, and somewhat, he thinks, improved it.
spinach soup (french recipe).
. ingredients.—as much spinach as, when boiled, will half fill a
vegetable-dish,  quarts of very clear medium stock, no. .
mode.—make the cooked spinach into balls the size of an egg, and slip
them into the soup-tureen. this is a very elegant soup, the green of the
spinach forming a pretty contrast to the brown gravy.
time.— hour. average cost,s. per quart.
seasonable from october to june.
[illustration: spinach.]
 spinach.—this plant was unknown by the ancients, although it
 was cultivated in the monastic gardens of the continent in the
 middle of the th century. some say, that it was originally
 brought from spain; but there is a wild species growing in
 england, and cultivated in lincolnshire, in preference to the
 other. there are three varieties in use; the round-leaved, the
 triangular-leaved, and flanders spinach, known by its large
 leaves. they all form a useful ingredient in soup; but the
 leaves are sometimes boiled alone, mashed, and eaten as greens.
. ingredients.— oz. of tapioca,  quarts of stock no.  or .
mode.—put the tapioca into cold stock, and bring it gradually to a
boil. simmer gently till tender, and serve.
time.—rather more than  hour. average cost. s. or d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
 tapioca.—this excellent farinaceous food is the produce of the
 pith of the cassava-tree, and is made in the east indies, and
 also in brazil. it is, by washing, procured as a starch from the
 tree, then dried, either in the sun or on plates of hot iron,
 and afterwards broken into grains, in which form it is imported
 into this country. its nutritive properties are large, and as a
 food for persons of delicate digestion, or for children, it is
 in great estimation. "no amylaceous substance," says dr.
 christison, "is so much relished by infants about the time of
 weaning; and in them it is less apt to become sour during
 digestion than any other farinaceous food, even arrowroot not
 excepted."
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  good-sized turnips,  onions, 
quarts of stock no. , seasoning to taste.
mode.—melt the butter in the stewpan, but do not let it boil; wash,
drain, and slice the turnips and onions very thin; put them in the
butter, with a teacupful of stock, and stew very gently for an hour.
then add the remainder of the stock, and simmer another hour. rub it
through a tammy, put it back into the stewpan, but do not let it boil.
serve very hot.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable from october to march.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—by adding a little cream, this soup will be much improved.
[illustration: turnip.]
 the turnip.—although turnips grow wild in england, they are not
 the original of the cultivated vegetable made use of in this
 country. in ancient times they were grown for cattle by the
 romans, and in germany and the low countries they have from time
 immemorial been raised for the same purpose. in their cultivated
 state, they are generally supposed to have been introduced to
 england from hanover, in the time of george i.; but this has
 been doubted, as george ii. caused a description of the norfolk
 system to be sent to his hanoverian subjects, for their
 enlightenment in the art of turnip culture. as a culinary
 vegetable, it is excellent, whether eaten alone, mashed, or
 mixed with soups und stews. its nutritious matter, however, is
 small, being only  parts in ,.
. ingredients.— young vegetable marrows, or more, if very small,
/ pint of cream, salt and white pepper to taste,  quarts of white
stock, no. .
mode.—pare and slice the marrows, and put them in the stock boiling.
when done almost to a mash, press them through a sieve, and at the
moment of serving, add the boiling cream and seasoning.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable in summer.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: vegetable marrow.]
 the vegetable marrow.—this is a variety of the gourd family,
 brought from persia by an east-india ship, and only recently
 introduced to britain. it is already cultivated to a
 considerable extent, and, by many, is highly esteemed when fried
 with butter. it is, however, dressed in different ways, either
 by stewing or boiling, and, besides, made into pies.
. ingredients.— oz. of carrot,  oz. of parsnip,  oz. of potato,
cut into thin slices; -/ oz. of butter,  teaspoonfuls of flour, a
teaspoonful of made mustard, salt and pepper to taste, the yolks of 
eggs, rather more than  quarts of water.
mode.—boil the vegetables in the water -/ hours; stir them often,
and if the water boils away too quickly, add more, as there should be 
quarts of soup when done. mix up in a basin the butter and flour,
mustard, salt, and pepper, with a teacupful of cold water; stir in the
soup, and boil  minutes. have ready the yolks of the eggs in the
tureen; pour on, stir well, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.—equal quantities of onions, carrots, turnips; / lb.
of butter, a crust of toasted bread,  head of celery, a faggot of
herbs, salt and pepper to taste,  teaspoonful of powdered sugar, 
quarts of common stock or boiling water. allow / lb. of vegetables to
 quarts of stock, no. .
mode.—cut up the onions, carrots, and turnips; wash and drain them
well, and put them in the stewpan with the butter and powdered sugar.
toss the whole over a sharp fire for  minutes, but do not let them
brown, or you will spoil the flavour of the soup. when done, pour the
stock or boiling water on them; add the bread, celery, herbs, and
seasoning; stew for  hours; skim well and strain it off. when ready to
serve, add a little sliced carrot, celery, and turnip, and flavour with
a spoonful of harvey's sauce, or a little ketchup.
time.—-/ hours. average cost,d. per quart.
seasonable all the year. sufficient for  persons.
(good and cheap, made without meat.)
. ingredients.— potatoes,  turnips, or  if very large;  carrots,
 onions; if obtainable,  mushrooms;  head of celery,  large slice of
bread,  small saltspoonful of salt, / saltspoonful of ground black
pepper,  teaspoonfuls of harvey's sauce,  quarts of water.
mode.—peel the vegetables, and cut them up into small pieces; toast
the bread rather brown, and put all into a stewpan with the water and
seasoning. simmer gently for  hours, or until all is reduced to a pulp,
and pass it through a sieve in the same way as pea-soup, which it should
resemble in consistence; but it should be a dark brown colour. warm it
up again when required; put in the harvey's sauce, and, if necessary,
add to the flavouring.
time.— hours, or rather more. average cost,d. per quart.
seasonable at any time. sufficient for  persons.
note.—this recipe was forwarded to the editress by a lady in the
county of durham, by whom it was strongly recommended.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of bacon, stuck with cloves; / oz. of
butter, worked up in flour;  small fowl, trussed for boiling;  oz. of
vermicelli,  quarts of white stock, no. .
mode.—put the stock, bacon, butter, and fowl into the stewpan, and
stew for / of an hour. take the vermicelli, add it to a little of the
stock, and set it on the fire, till it is quite tender. when the soup is
ready, take out the fowl and bacon, and put the bacon on a dish. skim
the soup as clean as possible; pour it, with the vermicelli, over the
fowl. cut some bread thin, put in the soup, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, exclusive of the fowl and bacon, d.
per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: vermicelli.]
 vermicelli.—this is a preparation of italian origin, and is
 made in the same way as macaroni, only the yolks of eggs, sugar,
 saffron, and cheese, are added to the paste.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of vermicelli,  quarts of clear gravy stock,
no. .
mode.—put the vermicelli in the soup, boiling; simmer very gently for
/ an hour, and stir frequently.
time—/ an hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sweet almonds, / lb. of cold veal or
poultry, a thick slice of stale bread, a piece of fresh lemon-peel, 
blade of mace, pounded, / pint of cream, the yolks of  hard-boiled
eggs,  quarts of white stock, no. .
mode.—reduce the almonds in a mortar to a paste, with a spoonful of
water, and add to them the meat, which should be previously pounded with
the bread. beat all together, and add the lemon-peel, very finely
chopped, and the mace. pour the boiling stock on the whole, and simmer
for an hour. rub the eggs in the cream, put in the soup, bring it to a
boil, and serve immediately.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—a more economical white soup may be made by using common veal
stock, and thickening with rice, flour, and milk. vermicelli should be
served with it.
average cost, d. per quart.
. ingredients.—an ox-cheek, any pieces of trimmings of beef, which
may be bought very cheaply (say  lbs.), a few bones, any pot-liquor the
larder may furnish, / peck of onions,  leeks, a large bunch of herbs,
/ lb. of celery (the outside pieces, or green tops, do very well); /
lb. of carrots, / lb. of turnips, / lb. of coarse brown sugar, / a
pint of beer,  lbs. of common rice, or pearl barley; / lb. of salt, 
oz. of black pepper, a few raspings,  gallons of water.
mode.—cut up the meat in small pieces, break the bones, put them in a
copper, with the  gallons of water, and stew for / an hour. cut up
the vegetables, put them in with the sugar and beer, and boil for 
hours. two hours before the soup is wanted, add the rice and raspings,
and keep stirring till it is well mixed in the soup, which simmer
gently. if the liquor reduces too much, fill up with water.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, -/d. per quart.
note.—the above recipe was used in the winter of  by the
editress, who made, each week, in her copper,  or  gallons of this
soup, for distribution amongst about a dozen families of the village
near which she lives. the cost, as will be seen, was not great; but she
has reason to believe that the soup was very much liked, and gave to the
members of those families, a dish of warm, comforting food, in place of
the cold meat and piece of bread which form, with too many cottagers,
their usual meal, when, with a little more knowledge of the "cooking."
art, they might have, for less expense, a warm dish, every day.
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef,  carrots,  turnips, a large
sprig of thyme,  onions,  head of celery, salt and pepper to taste, 
quarts water.
mode.—take the beef, cut off all the meat from the bone, in nice
square pieces, and boil the bone for  hours. strain the liquor, let it
cool, and take off the fat; then put the pieces of meat in the cold
liquor; cut small the carrots, turnips, and celery; chop the onions, add
them with the thyme and seasoning, and simmer till the meat is tender.
if not brown enough, colour it with browning.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
 thyme.—this sweet herb was known to the romans, who made use of
 it in culinary preparations, as well as in aromatic liqueurs.
 there are two species of it growing wild in britain, but the
 garden thyme is a native of the south of europe, and is more
 delicate in its perfume than the others. its young leaves give
 an agreeable flavour to soups and sauces; they are also used in
 stuffings.
. ingredients.—/ a calf's head,  onion stuck with cloves, a very
small bunch of sweet herbs,  blades of mace, salt and white pepper to
taste,  oz. of rice-flour,  tablespoonfuls of ketchup,  quarts of
white stock, no. , or pot-liquor, or water.
mode.—rub the head with salt, soak it for  hours, and clean it
thoroughly; put it in the stewpan, and cover it with the stock, or
pot-liquor, or water, adding the onion and sweet herbs. when well
skimmed and boiled for -/ hour, take out the head, and skim and
strain the soup. mix the rice-flour with the ketchup, thicken the soup
with it, and simmer for  minutes. now cut up the head into pieces about
two inches long, and simmer them in the soup till the meat and fat are
quite tender. season with white pepper and mace finely pounded, and
serve very hot. when the calf's head is taken out of the soup, cover it
up, or it will discolour.
time.—-/ hours. average cost,s. d. per quart, with stock no.
seasonable from may to october.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—force-meat balls can be added, and the soup may be flavoured
with a little lemon-juice, or a glass of sherry or madeira. the bones
from the head may be stewed down again, with a few fresh vegetables, and
it will make a very good common stock.
. ingredients.— sets of goose or duck giblets,  lbs. of shin of
beef, a few bones,  ox-tail,  mutton-shanks,  large onions, 
carrots,  large faggot of herbs, salt and pepper to taste, / pint of
cream,  oz. of butter mixed with a dessert-spoonful of flour,  quarts
of water.
mode.—scald the giblets, cut the gizzards in  pieces, and put them
in a stewpan with the beef, bones, ox-tail, mutton-shanks, onions,
herbs, pepper, and salt; add the  quarts of water, and simmer till the
giblets are tender, taking care to skim well. when the giblets are done,
take them out, put them in your tureen, strain the soup through a sieve,
add the cream and butter, mixed with a dessert-spoonful of flour, boil
it up a few minutes, and pour it over the giblets. it can be flavoured
with port wine and a little mushroom ketchup, instead of cream. add salt
to taste.
time.— hours. average cost,d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef, a knuckle of veal weighing 
lbs., a few pieces or trimmings,  slices of nicely-flavoured lean, ham;
/ lb. of butter,  onions,  carrots,  turnip, nearly a head of
celery,  blade of mace,  cloves, a hunch of savoury herb with endive,
seasoning of salt and pepper to taste,  lumps of sugar,  quarts of
boiling soft water. it can be flavoured with ketchup, leamington sauce
(see sauces), harvey's sauce, and a little soy.
mode.—slightly brown the meat and ham in the butter, but do not let
them burn. when this is done, pour to it the water, and as the scum
rises, take it off; when no more appears, add all the other ingredients,
and let the soup simmer slowly by the fire for  hours without stirring
it any more from the bottom; take it off, and let it settle; skim off
all the fat you can, and pass it through a tammy. when perfectly cold,
you can remove all the fat, and leave the sediment untouched, which
serves very nicely for thick gravies, hashes, &c.
time.— hours. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
 endive.—this plant belongs to the acetarious tribe of
 vegetables, and is supposed to have originally come from china
 and japan. it was known to the ancients; but was not introduced
 to england till about the middle of the th century. it is
 consumed in large quantities by the french, and in london,—in
 the neighbourhood of which it is grown in abundance;—it is
 greatly used as a winter salad, as well as in soups and stews.
. ingredients.—a hare fresh-killed,  lb. of lean gravy-beef, a
slice of ham,  carrot,  onions, a faggot of savoury herbs, / oz. of
whole black pepper, a little browned flour, / pint of port wine, the
crumb of two french rolls, salt and cayenne to taste,  quarts of water.
mode.—skin and paunch the hare, saving the liver and as much blood as
possible. cut it in pieces, and put it in a stewpan with all the
ingredients, and simmer gently for  hours. this soup should be made the
day before it is wanted. strain through a sieve, put the best parts of
the hare in the soup, and serve.
proceed as above; but, instead of putting the joints of the hare in the
soup, pick the meat from the bones, pound it in a mortar, and add it,
with the crumb of two french rolls, to the soup. rub all through a
sieve; heat slowly, but do not let it boil. send it to table
immediately.
time.- hours. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable from september to february.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: hare.]
 the common hare.—this little animal is found throughout europe,
 and, indeed, in most of the northern parts of the world; and as
 it is destitute of natural weapons of defence, providence has
 endowed it with an extraordinary amount of the passion of fear.
 as if to awaken the vigilance of this passion, too, he has
 furnished it with long and tubular ears, in order that it may
 catch the remotest sounds; and with full, prominent eyes, which
 enable it to see, at one and the same time, both before and
 behind it. the hare feeds in the evenings, and sleeps, in its
 form, during the day; and, as it generally lies on the ground,
 its feet, both below and above, are protected with a thick
 covering of hair. its flesh, though esteemed by the romans, was
 forbidden by the druids and by the earlier britons. it is now,
 though very dark and dry, and devoid of fat, much esteemed by
 europeans, on account of the peculiarity of its flavour. in
 purchasing this animal, it ought to be remembered that both
 hares and rabbits, when old, have their claws rugged and blunt,
 their haunches thick, and their ears dry and tough. the ears of
 a young hare easily tear, and it has a narrow cleft in the lip;
 whilst its claws are both smooth and sharp.
. ingredients.—half an ox's head,  pint of split peas,  carrots, 
turnips,  potatoes,  onions,  head of celery,  bunch of savoury
herbs, pepper and salt to taste,  blades of mace, a little allspice, 
cloves, the crumb of a french roll,  quarts of water.
mode.—clean the head, rub it with salt and water, and soak it for 
hours in warm water. simmer it in the water till tender, put it into a
pan and let it cool; skim off all the fat; take out the head, and add
the vegetables cut up small, and the peas which have been previously
soaked; simmer them without the meat, till they are done enough to pulp
through a sieve. add the seasoning, with pieces of the meat cut up; give
one boil, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—an excellent hash or ragoűt can be made by cutting up the
nicest parts of the head, thickening and seasoning more highly a little
of the soup, and adding a glass of port wine and  tablespoonfuls of
ketchup.
. ingredients.—/ a calf's head, / lb. of butter, / lb. of lean
ham,  tablespoonfuls of minced parsley, a little minced lemon thyme,
sweet marjoram, basil,  onions, a few chopped mushrooms (when
obtainable),  shallots,  tablespoonfuls of flour, / bottle of
madeira or sherry, force-meat balls, cayenne, salt and mace to taste,
the juice of  lemon and  seville orange,  dessert-spoonful of pounded
sugar,  quarts of best stock, no. .
mode.—scald the head with the skin on, remove the brain, tie the head
up in a cloth, and let it boil for  hour. then take the meat from the
bones, cut it into small square pieces, and throw them into cold water.
now take the meat, put it into a stewpan, and cover with stock; let it
boil gently for an hour, or rather more, if not quite tender, and set it
on one side. melt the butter in another stewpan, and add the ham, cut
small, with the herbs, parsley, onions, shallots, mushrooms, and nearly
a pint of stock; let these simmer slowly for  hours, and then dredge in
as much flour as will dry up the butter. fill up with the remainder of
the stock, add the wine, let it stew gently for  minutes, rub it
through a tammy, and put it to the calf's head; season with cayenne,
and, if required, a little salt; add the juice of the orange and lemon;
and when liked, / teaspoonful of pounded mace, and the sugar. put in
the force-meat balls, simmer  minutes, and serve very hot.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, s. d. per quart, or s. d.
without wine or force-meat balls.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—the bones of the head should be well stewed in the liquor it
was first boiled in, and will make good white stock, flavoured with
vegetables, etc.
(more economical.)
. ingredients.—a knuckle of veal weighing  or  lbs.,  cow-heels,
 large onions stuck with cloves,  bunch of sweet herbs,  blades of
mace, salt to taste,  peppercorns,  glass of sherry,  force-meat
balls, a little lemon-juice,  quarts of water.
mode.—put all the ingredients, except the force-meat balls and
lemon-juice, in an earthen jar, and stew for  hours. do not open it
till cold. when wanted for use, skim off all the fat, and strain
carefully; place it on the fire, cut up the meat into inch-and-a-half
squares, put it, with the force-meat balls and lemon-juice, into the
soup, and serve. it can be flavoured with a tablespoonful of anchovy, or
harvey's sauce.
time.— hours. average cost,s. d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
 the calf—the flesh of this animal is called veal, and when
 young, that is, under two months old, yields a large quantity of
 soluble extract, and is, therefore, much employed for soups and
 broths. the essex farmers have obtained a celebrity for
 fattening calves better than any others in england, where they
 are plentifully supplied with milk, a thing impossible to be
 done in the immediate neighbourhood of london.
 marjoram.—there are several species of this plant; but that
 which is preferred for cookery is a native of portugal, and is
 called sweet or knotted marjoram. when its leaves are dried,
 they have an agreeable aromatic flavour; and hence are used for
 soups, stuffings, &c.
 basil.—this is a native of the east indies, and is highly
 aromatic, having a perfume greatly resembling that of cloves. it
 is not much employed in english cookery, but is a favourite with
 french cooks, by whom its leaves are used in soups and salads.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of curry powder,  onions,  clove
of garlic,  oz. of pounded almonds, a little lemon-pickle, or
mango-juice, to taste;  fowl or rabbit,  slices of lean bacon; 
quarts of medium stock, or, if wanted very good, best stock.
mode.-=slice and fry the onions of a nice colour; line the stewpan
with the bacon; cut up the rabbit or fowl into small joints, and
slightly brown them; put in the fried onions, the garlic, and stock, and
simmer gently till the meat is tender; skim very carefully, and when the
meat is done, rub the curry powder to a smooth batter; add it to the
soup with the almonds, which must be first pounded with a little of the
stock. put in seasoning and lemon-pickle or mango-juice to taste, and
serve boiled rice with it.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d. per quart, with stock no. .
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this soup can also be made with breast of veal, or calf's head.
vegetable mullagatawny is made with veal stock, by boiling and pulping
chopped vegetable marrow, cucumbers, onions, and tomatoes, and seasoning
with curry powder and cayenne. nice pieces of meat, good curry powder,
and strong stock, are necessary to make this soup good.
[illustration: coriander.]
 coriander.—this plant, which largely enters into the
 composition of curry powder with turmeric, originally comes from
 the east; but it has long been cultivated in england, especially
 in essex, where it is reared for the use of confectioners and
 druggists. in private gardens, it is cultivated for the sake of
 its tender leaves, which are highly aromatic, and are employed
 in soups and salads. its seeds are used in large quantities for
 the purposes of distillation.
. ingredients.—a neck of mutton about  or  lbs.,  carrots, 
turnips,  onions, a large bunch of sweet herbs, including parsley; salt
and pepper to taste; a little sherry, if liked;  quarts of water.
mode.—lay the ingredients in a covered pan before the fire, and let
them remain there the whole day, stirring occasionally. the next day put
the whole into a stewpan, and place it on a brisk fire. when it
commences to boil, take the pan off the fire, and put it on one side to
simmer until the meat is done. when ready for use, take out the meat,
dish it up with carrots and turnips, and send it to table; strain the
soup, let it cool, skim off all the fat, season and thicken it with a
tablespoonful, or rather more, of arrowroot; flavour with a little
sherry, simmer for  minutes, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, including the meat, s. d. per
quart.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  persons.
 the sheep.—this animal formed the principal riches of the
 patriarchs, in the days of old, and, no doubt, multiplied, until
 its species were spread over the greater part of western asia;
 but at what period it was introduced to britain is not known. it
 is now found in almost every part of the globe, although, as a
 domestic animal, it depends almost entirely upon man for its
 support. its value, however, amply repays him for whatever care
 and kindness he may bestow upon it; for, like the ox, there is
 scarcely a part of it that he cannot convert to some useful
 purpose. the fleece, which serves it for a covering, is
 appropriated by man, to serve the same end to himself, whilst
 its skin is also applied to various purposes in civilized life.
 its entrails are used as strings for musical instruments, and
 its bones are calcined, and employed as tests in the trade of
 the refiner. its milk, being thicker than that of the cow,
 yields a greater quantity of butter and cheese, and its flesh is
 among the most wholesome and nutritive that can be eaten.
 thomson has beautifully described the appearance of the sheep,
 when bound to undergo the operation of being shorn of its wool.
"behold, where bound, and of its robe bereft
by needy man, that all-depending lord,
how meek, how patient, the mild creature lies!
what softness in his melancholy face,
what dumb complaining innocence appears!"
. ingredients.—an ox-cheek,  oz. of butter,  or  slices of lean
ham or bacon,  parsnip,  carrots,  onions,  heads of celery, 
blades of mace,  cloves, a faggot of savoury herbs,  bay-leaf, a
teaspoonful of salt, half that of pepper,  head of celery, browning,
the crust of a french roll,  quarts of water.
mode.—lay the ham in the bottom of the stewpan, with the butter;
break the bones of the cheek, wash it clean, and put it on the ham. cut
the vegetables small, add them to the other ingredients, and set the
whole over a slow fire for / of an hour. now put in the water, and
simmer gently till it is reduced to  quarts; take out the fleshy part
of the cheek, and strain the soup into a clean stewpan; thicken with
flour, put in a head of sliced celery, and simmer till the celery is
tender. if not a good colour, use a little browning. cut the meat into
small square pieces, pour the soup over, and serve with the crust of a
french roll in the tureen. a glass of sherry much improves this soup.
time.— to  hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
 the ox.—of the quadrupedal animals, the flesh of those that
 feed upon herbs is the most wholesome and nutritious for human
 food. in the early ages, the ox was used as a religious
 sacrifice, and, in the eyes of the egyptians was deemed so
 sacred as to be worthy of exaltation to represent taurus, one of
 the twelve signs of the zodiac. to this day, the hindoos
 venerate the cow, whose flesh is forbidden to be eaten, and
 whose fat, supposed to have been employed to grease the
 cartridges of the indian army, was one of the proximate causes
 of the great sepoy rebellion of . there are no animals of
 greater use to man than the tribe to which the ox belongs. there
 is hardly a part of them that does not enter into some of the
 arts and purposes of civilized life. of their horns are made
 combs, knife-handles, boxes, spoons, and drinking-cups. they are
 also made into transparent plates for lanterns; an invention
 ascribed, in england, to king alfred. glue is made from their
 gristles, cartilages, and portions of their hides. their bones
 often form a substitute for ivory; their skins, when calves, are
 manufactured into vellum; their blood is the basis of prussian
 blue; their sinews furnish fine and strong threads, used by
 saddlers; their hair enters into various manufactures; their
 tallow is made into candles; their flesh is eaten, and the
 utility of the milk and cream of the cow is well known.
. ingredients.— ox-tails,  slices of ham,  oz. of butter, 
carrots,  turnips,  onions,  leek,  head of celery,  bunch of
savoury herbs,  bay-leaf,  whole peppercorns,  cloves, a
tablespoonful of salt,  tablespoonfuls of ketchup, / glass of port
wine,  quarts of water.
mode.—cut up the tails, separating them at the joints; wash them, and
put them in a stewpan, with the butter. cut the vegetables in slices,
and add them, with the peppercorns and herbs. put in / pint of water,
and stir it over a sharp fire till the juices are drawn. fill up the
stewpan with the water, and, when boiling, add the salt. skim well, and
simmer very gently for  hours, or until the tails are tender. take them
out, skim and strain the soup, thicken with flour, and flavour with the
ketchup and port wine. put back the tails, simmer for  minutes, and
serve.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— partridges,  slices of lean ham,  shred onions, 
head of celery,  large carrot, and  turnip cut into any fanciful
shapes,  small lump of sugar,  oz. of butter, salt and pepper to
taste,  quarts of stock no. , or common, no. .
mode.—cut the partridges into pieces, and braise them in the butter
and ham until quite tender; then take out the legs, wings, and breast,
and set them by. keep the backs and other trimmings in the braise, and
add the onions and celery; any remains of cold game can be put in, and 
pints of stock. simmer slowly for  hour, strain it, and skim the fat
off as clean as possible; put in the pieces that were taken out, give it
one boil, and skim again to have it quite clear, and add the sugar and
seasoning. now simmer the cut carrot and turnip in  pint of stock; when
quite tender, put them to the partridges, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, s. or s. d. per quart.
seasonable from september to february.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—the meat of the partridges may be pounded with the crumb of a
french roll, and worked with the soup through a sieve. serve with stewed
celery cut in slices, and put in the tureen.
 the partridge.—this is a timorous bird, being easily taken. it
 became known to the greeks and romans, whose tables it helped to
 furnish with food. formerly, the red was scarce in italy, but
 its place was supplied by the white, which, at considerable
 expense, was frequently procured from the alps. the athenians
 trained this bird for fighting, and severus used to lighten the
 cares of royalty by witnessing the spirit of its combats. the
 greeks esteemed its leg most highly, and rejected the other
 portions as unfashionable to be eaten. the romans, however,
 ventured a little further, and ate the breast, whilst we
 consider the bird as wholly palatable. it is an inhabitant of
 all the temperate countries of europe, but, on account of the
 geniality of the climate, it abounds most in the ukraine.
. ingredients.— pheasants, / lb. of butter,  slices of ham, 
large onions sliced, / head of celery, the crumb of two french rolls,
the yolks of  eggs boiled hard, salt and cayenne to taste, a little
pounded mace, if liked;  quarts of stock no. .
mode.—cut up the pheasants, flour and braise them in the butter and
ham till they are of a nice brown, but not burnt. put them in a stewpan,
with the onions, celery, and seasoning, and simmer for  hours. strain
the soup; pound the breasts with the crumb of the roll previously
soaked, and the yolks of the eggs; put it to the soup, give one boil,
and serve.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, s. d. per quart, or, if made
with fragments of gold game, s.
seasonable from october to february.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—fragments, pieces and bones of cold game, may be used to great
advantage in this soup, and then  pheasant will suffice.
. ingredients.— knuckles of veal,  shins of beef,  large faggot
of herbs,  bay-leaves,  heads of celery,  onions,  carrots,  blades
of mace,  cloves, a teaspoonful of salt, sufficient water to cover all
the ingredients.
mode.—take the marrow from the bones; put all the ingredients in a
stock-pot, and simmer slowly for  hours, or more, if the meat be not
done to rags; strain it off, and put it in a very cool place; take off
all the fat, reduce the liquor in a shallow pan, by setting it over a
sharp fire, but be particular that it does not burn; boil it fast and
uncovered for  hours, and keep it stirred. put it into a deep dish, and
set it by for a day. have ready a stewpan of boiling water, place the
dish in it, and keep it boiling; stir occasionally, and when the soup is
thick and ropy, it is done. form it into little cakes by pouring a small
quantity on to the bottom of cups or basins; when cold, turn them out on
a flannel to dry. keep them from the air in tin canisters.
average cost of this quantity, s.
note.—soup can be made in  minutes with this, by dissolving a small
piece, about the size of a walnut, in a pint of warm water, and
simmering for  minutes. vermicelli, macaroni, or other italian pastes,
may be added.
 the laurel or bay.—the leaves of this tree frequently enter
 into the recipes of cookery; but they ought not to be used
 without the greatest caution, and not at all unless the cook is
 perfectly aware of their effects. it ought to be known, that
 there are two kinds of bay-trees,—the classic laurel, whose
 leaves are comparatively harmless, and the cherry-laurel, which
 is the one whose leaves are employed in cookery. they have a
 kernel-like flavour, and are used in blanc-mange, puddings,
 custards &c.; but when acted upon by water, they develop prussic
 acid, and, therefore, but a small number of the leaves should be
 used at a time.
. ingredients.— large rabbits, or  small ones; a faggot of savoury
herbs, / head of celery,  carrots,  onion,  blade of mace, salt and
white pepper to taste, a little pounded mace, / pint of cream, the
yolks of  eggs boiled hard, the crumb of a french roll, nearly  quarts
of water.
mode.—make the soup with the legs and shoulders of the rabbit, and
keep the nice pieces for a dish or entrée. put them into warm water,
and draw the blood; when quite clean, put them in a stewpan, with a
faggot of herbs, and a teacupful, or rather more, of veal stock or
water. simmer slowly till done through, and add the  quarts of water,
and boil for an hour. take out the rabbet, pick the meat from the bones,
covering it up to keep it white; put the bones back in the liquor, add
the vegetables, and simmer for  hours; skim and strain, and let it
cool. now pound the meat in a mortar, with the yolks of the eggs, and
the crumb of the roll previously soaked; rub it through a tammy, and
gradually add it to the strained liquor, and simmer for  minutes. mix
arrowroot or rice-flour with the cream (say  dessert-spoonfuls), and
stir in the soup; bring it to a boil, and serve. this soup must be very
white, and instead of thickening it with arrowroot or rice-flour,
vermicelli or pearl barley can be boiled in a little stock, and put in 
minutes before serving.
time.—nearly  hours. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable from september to march.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.—any bones and remains of any cold game, such as of
pheasants, partridges, &c.;  carrots,  small onions,  head of celery,
 turnip, / lb. of pearl barley, the yolks of  eggs boiled hard, /
pint of cream, salt to taste,  quarts of stock no. , or common
stock, no. .
mode.—place the bones or remains of game in the stewpan, with the
vegetables sliced; pour over the stock, and simmer for  hours; skim off
all the fat, and strain it. wash the barley, and boil it in  or 
waters before putting it to the soup; finish simmering in the soup, and
when the barley is done, take out half, and pound the other half with
the yolks of the eggs. when you have finished pounding, rub it through a
clean tammy, add the cream, and salt if necessary; give one boil, and
serve very hot, putting in the barley that was taken out first.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, s. per quart, if made with medium
stock, or d. per quart, with common stock.
seasonable from september to march.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— large fowl,  oz. of sweet almonds, the crumb of 
/ french roll, / pint of cream, salt to taste,  small lump of
sugar,  quarts of good white veal stock, no. .
mode.—boil the fowl gently in the stock till quite tender, which will
be in about an hour, or rather more; take out the fowl, pull the meat
from the bones, and put it into a mortar with the almonds, and pound
very fine. when beaten enough, put the meat back in the stock, with the
crumb of the rolls, and let it simmer for an hour; rub it through a
tammy, add the sugar, / pint of cream that has boiled, and, if you
prefer, cut the crust of the roll into small round pieces, and pour the
soup over it, when you serve.
time.— hours, or rather more. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—all white soups should be warmed in a vessel placed in another
of boiling water. (see bain marie, no. .)
ii. (economical.)
. ingredients.—any remains of roast chickens, / teacupful of rice,
salt and pepper to taste,  quart of stock no. .
mode.—take all the white meat and pound it with the rice, which has
been slightly cooked, but not much. when it is all well pounded, dilute
with the stock, and pass through a sieve. this soup should neither be
too clear nor too thick.
time.— hour. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—if stock is not at hand, put the chicken-bones in water, with
an onion, carrot, a few sweet herbs, a blade of mace, pepper and salt,
and stew for  hours.
. ingredients.—any pieces of salt beef or pork, say  lbs.; 
carrots,  parsnips,  turnips,  potatoes,  cabbage,  oz. of oatmeal
or ground rice, seasoning of salt and pepper,  quarts of water.
mode.—cut up the meat small, add the water, and let it simmer for
/ hours. now add the vegetables, cut in thin small slices; season,
and boil for  hour. thicken with the oatmeal, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart without the meat.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—if rice is used instead of oatmeal, put it in with the
vegetables.
. ingredients.— lbs. of beef,  onions,  turnips, / lb. of
rice, a large bunch of parsley, a few sweet herbs, pepper and salt, 
quarts of water.
mode.—cut the beef up in small pieces, add the other ingredients, and
boil gently for / hours. oatmeal or potatoes would be a great
improvement.
time.-/ hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of beef, mutton, or pork; / pint of split
peas,  turnips,  potatoes,  onions,  oz. of oatmeal or  oz. of
rice,  quarts of water.
mode.—cut the meat in small pieces, as also the vegetables, and add
them, with the peas, to the water. boil gently for  hours; thicken with
the oatmeal, boil for another / hour, stirring all the time, and
season with pepper and salt.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable in winter.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this soup may be made of the liquor in which tripe has been
boiled, by adding vegetables, seasoning, rice, &c.
turkey soup (a seasonable dish at christmas).
. ingredients.— quarts of medium stock, no. , the remains of a
cold roast turkey,  oz. of rice-flour or arrowroot, salt and pepper to
taste,  tablespoonful of harvey's sauce or mushroom ketchup.
mode.—cut up the turkey in small pieces, and put it in the stock; let
it simmer slowly until the bones are quite clean. take the bones out,
and work the soup through a sieve; when cool, skim well. mix the
rice-flour or arrowroot to a batter with a little of the soup; add it
with the seasoning and sauce, or ketchup. give one boil, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable at christmas.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—instead of thickening this soup, vermicelli or macaroni may be
served in it.
 the turkey.—the common turkey is a native of north america, and
 was thence introduced to england, in the reign of henry viii.
 according to tusser's "five hundred points of good husbandry,"
 about the year  it begun to form a dish at our rural
 christmas feasts.
"beef, mutton, and pork, shred pies of the best,
pig, veal, goose, and capon, and turkey well dress'd,
cheese, apples, and nuts, jolly carols to hear,
as then in the country is counted good cheer."
 it is one of the most difficult birds to rear, of any that we
 have; yet, in its wild state, is found in great abundance in the
 forests of canada, where, it might have been imagined that the
 severity of the climate would be unfavourable to its ever
 becoming plentiful. they are very fond of the seeds of nettles,
 and the seeds of the foxglove poison them.
turtle soup (founded on m. ude's recipe).
. ingredients.—a turtle,  slices of ham,  knuckles of veal, 
large bunch of sweet herbs,  bay-leaves, parsley, green onions, 
onion,  cloves,  blades of mace, / lb. of fresh butter,  bottle of
madeira,  lump of sugar. for the quenelles ŕ tortue,  lb. of veal, 
lb. of bread crumbs, milk,  eggs, cayenne, salt, spices, chopped
parsley, the juice of  lemons.
mode.—to make this soup with less difficulty, cut off the head of the
turtle the preceding day. in the morning open the turtle by leaning
heavily with a knife on the shell of the animal's back, whilst you cut
this off all round. turn it upright on its end, that all the water, &c.
may run out, when the flesh should be cut off along the spine, with the
knife sloping towards the bones, for fear of touching the gall, which
sometimes might escape the eye. when all the flesh about the members is
obtained, wash these clean, and let them drain. have ready, on the fire,
a large vessel full of boiling water, into which put the shells; and
when you perceive that they come easily off, take them out of the water,
and prick them all, with those of the back, belly, fins, head, &c. boil
the back and belly till the bones can be taken off, without, however,
allowing the softer parts to be sufficiently done, as they will be
boiled again in the soup. when these latter come off easily, lay them on
earthen dishes singly, for fear they should stick together, and put them
to cool. keep the liquor in which you have blanched the softer parts,
and let the bones stew thoroughly in it, as this liquor must be used to
moisten all the sauces.
all the flesh of the interior parts, the four legs and head, must be
drawn down in the following manner:—lay the slices of ham on the bottom
of a very large stewpan, over them the knuckles of veal, according to
the size of the turtle; then the inside flesh of the turtle, and over
the whole the members. now moisten with the water in which you are
boiling the shell, and draw it down thoroughly. it may now be
ascertained if it be thoroughly done by thrusting a knife into the
fleshy part of the meat. if no blood appears, it is time to moisten it
again with the liquor in which the bones, &c. have been boiling. put in
a large bunch of all such sweet herbs as are used in the cooking of a
turtle,—sweet basil, sweet marjoram, lemon thyme, winter savory,  or 
bay-leaves, common thyme, a handful of parsley and green onions, and a
large onion stuck with  cloves. let the whole be thoroughly done. with
respect to the members, probe them, to see whether they are done, and if
so, drain and send them to the larder, as they are to make their
appearance only when the soup is absolutely completed. when the flesh is
also completely done, strain it through a silk sieve, and make a very
thin white roux; for turtle soup must not be much thickened. when the
flour is sufficiently done on a slow fire, and has a good colour,
moisten it with the liquor, keeping it over the fire till it boils.
ascertain that the sauce is neither too thick nor too thin; then draw
the stewpan on the side of the stove, to skim off the white scum, and
all the fat and oil that rise to the surface of the sauce. by this time
all the softer parts will be sufficiently cold; when they must be cut to
about the size of one or two inches square, and thrown into the soup,
which must now be left to simmer gently. when done, skim off all the fat
and froth. take all the leaves of the herbs from the stock,—sweet
basil, sweet marjoram, lemon thyme, winter savory,  or  bay-leaves,
common thyme, a handful of parsley and green onions, and a large onion
cut in four pieces, with a few blades of mace. put these in a stewpan,
with about / lb. of fresh butter, and let it simmer on a slow fire
till quite melted, when pour in  bottle of good madeira, adding a small
bit of sugar, and let it boil gently for  hour. when done, rub it
through a tammy, and add it to the soup. let this boil, till no white
scum rises; then take with a skimmer all the bits of turtle out of the
sauce, and put them in a clean stewpan: when you have all out, pour the
soup over the bits of turtle, through a tammy, and proceed as follows:—
quenelles ŕ tortue.—make some quenelles ŕ tortue, which being
substitutes for eggs, do not require to be very delicate. take out the
fleshy part of a leg of veal, about  lb., scrape off all the meat,
without leaving any sinews or fat, and soak in milk about the same
quantity of crumbs of bread. when the bread is well soaked, squeeze it,
and put it into a mortar, with the veal, a small quantity of calf's
udder, a little butter, the yolks of  eggs, boiled hard, a little
cayenne pepper, salt, and spices, and pound the whole very fine; then
thicken the mixture with  whole eggs, and the yolk of another. next try
this farce or stuffing in boiling-hot water, to ascertain its
consistency: if it is too thin, add the yolk of an egg. when the farce
is perfected, take half of it, and put into it some chopped parsley. let
the whole cool, in order to roll it of the size of the yolk of an egg;
poach it in salt and boiling water, and when very hard, drain on a
sieve, and put it into the turtle. before you send up, squeeze the juice
of  or  lemons, with a little cayenne pepper, and pour that into the
soup. the fins may be served as a plat d'entrée with a little turtle
sauce; if not, on the following day you may warm the turtle au bain
marie, and serve the members entire, with a matelote sauce, garnished
with mushrooms, cocks' combs, quenelles, &c. when either lemon-juice
or cayenne pepper has been introduced, no boiling must take place.
note.—it is necessary to observe, that the turtle prepared a day
before it is used, is generally preferable, the flavour being more
uniform. be particular, when you dress a very large turtle, to preserve
the green fat (be cautious not to study a very brown colour,—the
natural green of the fish is preferred by every epicure and true
connoisseur) in a separate stewpan, and likewise when the turtle is
entirely done, to have as many tureens as you mean to serve each time.
you cannot put the whole in a large vessel, for many reasons: first, it
will be long in cooling; secondly, when you take some out, it will break
all the rest into rags. if you warm in a bain marie, the turtle will
always retain the same taste; but if you boil it often, it becomes
strong, and loses the delicacy of its flavour.
the cost of turtle soup.—this is the most expensive soup brought to
table. it is sold by the quart,—one guinea being the standard price for
that quantity. the price of live turtle ranges from d. to s. per lb.,
according to supply and demand. when live turtle is dear, many cooks use
the tinned turtle, which is killed when caught, and preserved by being
put in hermetically-sealed canisters, and so sent over to england. the
cost of a tin, containing  quarts, or  lbs., is about ł, and for a
small one, containing the green fat, s. d. from these about  quarts
of good soup may be made.
[illustration: the turtle.]
 the green turtle.—this reptile is found in large numbers on the
 coasts of all the islands and continents within the tropics, in
 both the old and new worlds. their length is often five feet and
 upwards, and they range in weight from  to  or  lbs. as
 turtles find a constant supply of food on the coasts which they
 frequent, they are not of a quarrelsome disposition, as the
 submarine meadows in which they pasture, yield plenty for them
 all. like other species of amphibia, too, they have the power of
 living many months without food; so that they live harmlessly
 and peaceably together, notwithstanding that they seem to have
 no common bond of association, but merely assemble in the same
 places as if entirely by accident. england is mostly supplied
 with them from the west indies, whence they are brought alive
 and in tolerable health. the green turtle is highly prized on
 account of the delicious quality of its flesh, the fat of the
 upper and lower shields of the animal being esteemed the richest
 and most delicate parts. the soup, however, is apt to disagree
 with weak stomachs. as an article of luxury, the turtle has only
 come into fashion within the last  years, and some hundreds
 of tureens of turtle soup are served annually at the lord
 mayor's dinner in guildhall.
. ingredients.—remains of a cold tongue,  lbs. of shin of beef, any
cold pieces of meat or beef-bones,  turnips,  carrots,  onions, 
parsnip,  head of celery,  quarts of water, / teacupful of rice;
salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—put all the ingredients in a stewpan, and simmer gently for 
hours, or until all the goodness is drawn from the meat. strain off the
soup, and let it stand to get cold. the kernels and soft parts of the
tongue must be saved. when the soup is wanted for use, skim off all the
fat, put in the kernels and soft parts of the tongue, slice in a small
quantity of fresh carrot, turnip, and onion; stew till the vegetables
are tender, and serve with toasted bread.
time.— hours. __average cost_,d. per quart.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef,  quarts of water,  pint of
table-beer,  onions,  carrots,  turnips,  head of celery; pepper and
salt to taste; thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—put the meat, beer, and water in a stewpan; simmer for a few
minutes, and skim carefully. add the vegetables and seasoning; stew
gently till the meat is tender. thicken with the butter and flour, and
serve with turnips and carrots, or spinach and celery.
time.— hours, or rather more. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable at any time. sufficient for  persons.
 table beer.—this is nothing more than a weak ale, and is not
 made so much with a view to strength, as to transparency of
 colour and an agreeable bitterness of taste. it is, or ought to
 be, manufactured by the london professional brewers, from the
 best pale malt, or amber and malt. six barrels are usually drawn
 from one quarter of malt, with which are mixed  or  lbs. of
 hops. as a beverage, it is agreeable when fresh; but it is not
 adapted to keep long.
. ingredients.— lbs. of beef or veal (these can be omitted), any
kind of white fish trimmings, of fish which are to be dressed for table,
 onions, the rind of / a lemon, a bunch of sweet herbs,  carrots, 
quarts of water.
mode.—cut up the fish, and put it, with the other ingredients, into
the water. simmer for  hours; skim the liquor carefully, and strain it.
when a richer stock is wanted, fry the vegetables and fish before adding
the water.
time.— hours. average cost, with meat, d. per quart; without,
d.
note.—do not make fish stock long before it is wanted, as it soon
turns sour.
. ingredients.— crayfish, / lb. of butter,  anchovies, the
crumb of  french roll, a little lobster-spawn, seasoning to taste, 
quarts of medium stock, no. , or fish stock, no. .
mode.—shell the crayfish, and put the fish between two plates until
they are wanted; pound the shells in a mortar, with the butter and
anchovies; when well beaten, add a pint of stock, and simmer for / of
an hour. strain it through a hair sieve, put the remainder of the stock
to it, with the crumb of the rolls; give it one boil, and rub it through
a tammy, with the lobster-spawn. put in the fish, but do not let the
soup boil, after it has been rubbed through the tammy. if necessary, add
seasoning.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d. or s. d. per quart.
seasonable from january to july.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: crayfish.]
 the crayfish.—this is one of those fishes that were highly
 esteemed by the ancients. the greeks preferred it when brought
 from alexandria, and the romans ate it boiled with cumin, and
 seasoned with pepper and other condiments. a recipe tells us,
 that crayfish can be preserved several days in baskets with
 fresh grass, such as the nettle, or in a bucket with about
 three-eighths of an inch of water. more water would kill them,
 because the large quantity of air they require necessitates the
 water in which they are kept, to be continually renewed.
. ingredients.— lbs. of eels,  onion,  oz. of butter,  blades of
mace,  bunch of sweet herbs, / oz. of peppercorns, salt to taste, 
tablespoonfuls of flour, / pint of cream,  quarts of water.
mode.—wash the eels, cut them into thin slices, and put them in the
stewpan with the butter; let them simmer for a few minutes, then pour
the water to them, and add the onion, cut in thin slices, the herbs,
mace, and seasoning. simmer till the eels are tender, but do not break
the fish. take them out carefully, mix the flour smoothly to a batter
with the cream, bring it to a boil, pour over the eels, and serve.
time.— hour, or rather more. average cost, d. per quart.
seasonable from june to march.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this soup may be flavoured differently by omitting the cream,
and adding a little ketchup or harvey's sauce.
. ingredients.— large lobsters, or  small ones; the crumb of a
french roll,  anchovies,  onion,  small bunch of sweet herbs,  strip
of lemon-peel,  oz. of butter, a little nutmeg,  teaspoonful of flour,
 pint of cream,  pint of milk; forcemeat balls, mace, salt and pepper
to taste, bread crumbs,  egg,  quarts of water.
mode.—pick the meat from the lobsters, and beat the fins, chine, and
small claws in a mortar, previously taking away the brown fin and the
bag in the head. put it in a stewpan, with the crumb of the roll,
anchovies, onions, herbs, lemon-peel, and the water; simmer gently till
all the goodness is extracted, and strain it off. pound the spawn in a
mortar, with the butter, nutmeg, and flour, and mix with it the cream
and milk. give one boil up, at the same time adding the tails cut in
pieces. make the forcemeat balls with the remainder of the lobster,
seasoned with mace, pepper, and salt, adding a little flour, and a few
bread crumbs; moisten them with the egg, heat them in the soup, and
serve.
time.— hours, or rather more. average cost, s d per quart.
seasonable from april to october.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— dozen of oysters,  quarts of white stock, / pint
of cream,  oz. of butter, -/ oz. of flour; salt, cayenne, and mace
to taste.
mode.—scald the oysters in their own liquor; take them out, beard
them, and put them in a tureen. take a pint of the stock, put in the
beards and the liquor, which must be carefully strained, and simmer for
/ an hour. take it off the fire, strain it again, and add the
remainder of the stock with the seasoning and mace. bring it to a boil,
add the thickening of butter and flour, simmer for  minutes, stir in
the boiling cream, pour it over the oysters, and serve.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d. per quart.
seasonable from september to april.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—this soup can be made less rich by using milk instead of cream,
and thickening with arrowroot instead of butter and flour.
. ingredients.— quarts of good mutton broth,  dozen oysters,  oz.
butter,  oz. of flour.
mode.—beard the oysters, and scald them in their own liquor; then add
it, well strained, to the broth; thicken with the butter and flour, and
simmer for / of an hour. put in the oysters, stir well, but do not let
it boil, and serve very hot.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. per quart.
seasonable from september to april.
sufficient for  persons.
 season of oysters.—from april and may to the end of july,
 oysters are said to be sick; but by the end of august they
 become healthy, having recovered from the effects of spawning.
 when they are not in season, the males have a black, and the
 females a milky substance in the gill. from some lines of
 oppian, it would appear that the ancients were ignorant that the
 oyster is generally found adhering to rocks. the starfish is one
 of the most deadly enemies of these bivalves. the poet says:—
the prickly star creeps on with full deceit
to force the oyster from his close retreat.
when gaping lids their widen'd void display,
the watchful star thrusts in a pointed ray,
of all its treasures spoils the rifled case,
and empty shells the sandy hillock grace.
. ingredients.— quarts of fish stock or water,  pints of prawns,
the crumbs of a french roll, anchovy sauce or mushroom ketchup to taste,
 blade of mace,  pint of vinegar, a little lemon-juice.
mode.—pick out the tails of the prawns, put the bodies in a stewpan
with  blade of mace, / pint of vinegar, and the same quantity of
water; stew them for / hour, and strain off the liquor. put the fish
stock or water into a stewpan; add the strained liquor, pound the prawns
with the crumb of a roll moistened with a little of the soup, rub them
through a tammy, and mix them by degrees with the soup; add ketchup or
anchovy sauce to taste, with a little lemon-juice. when it is well
cooked, put in a few picked prawns; let them get thoroughly hot, and
serve. if not thick enough, put in a little butter and flour.
time.—hour. average cost, s. d. per quart, if made with water.
seasonable at any time. sufficient for  persons.
note.—this can be thickened with tomatoes, and vermicelli served in
it, which makes it a very tasteful soup.
[illustration: the prawn.]
 the prawn.—this little fish bears a striking resemblance to the
 shrimp, but is neither so common nor so small. it is to be found
 on most of the sandy shores of europe. the isle of wight is
 famous for shrimps, where they are potted; but both the prawns
 and the shrimps vended in london, are too much salted for the
 excellence of their natural flavour to be preserved. they are
 extremely lively little animals, as seen in their native
 retreats.
[illustration]
. in natural history, fishes form the fourth class in the system of
linnaeus, and are described as having long under-jaws, eggs without
white, organs of sense, fins for supporters, bodies covered with concave
scales, gills to supply the place of lungs for respiration, and water
for the natural element of their existence. had mankind no other
knowledge of animals than of such as inhabit the land and breathe their
own atmosphere, they would listen with incredulous wonder, if told that
there were other kinds of beings which existed only in the waters, and
which would die almost as soon as they were taken from them. however
strongly these facts might be attested, they would hardly believe them,
without the operation of their own senses, as they would recollect the
effect produced on their own bodies when immersed in water, and the
impossibility of their sustaining life in it for any lengthened period
of time. experience, however, has taught them, that the "great deep" is
crowded with inhabitants of various sizes, and of vastly different
constructions, with modes of life entirely distinct from those which
belong to the animals of the land, and with peculiarities of design,
equally wonderful with those of any other works which have come from the
hand of the creator. the history of these races, however, must remain
for ever, more or less, in a state of darkness, since the depths in
which they live, are beyond the power of human exploration, and since
the illimitable expansion of their domain places them almost entirely
out of the reach of human accessibility.
. in studying the conformation of fishes, we naturally conclude that
they are, in every respect, well adapted to the element in which they
have their existence. their shape has a striking resemblance to the
lower part of a ship; and there is no doubt that the form of the fish
originally suggested the form of the ship. the body is in general
slender, gradually diminishing towards each of its extremities, and
flattened on each of its sides. this is precisely the form of the lower
part of the hull of a ship; and it enables both the animal and the
vessel, with comparative ease, to penetrate and divide the resisting
medium for which they have been adapted. the velocity of a ship,
however, in sailing before the wind, is by no means to be compared to
that of a fish. it is well known that the largest fishes will, with the
greatest ease, overtake a ship in full sail, play round it without
effort, and shoot ahead of it at pleasure. this arises from their great
flexibility, which, to compete with mocks the labours of art, and
enables them to migrate thousands of miles in a season, without the
slightest indications of languor or fatigue.
. the principal instruments employed by fishes to accelerate their
motion, are their air-bladder, fins, and tail. by means of the
air-bladder they enlarge or diminish the specific gravity of their
bodies. when they wish to sink, they compress the muscles of the
abdomen, and eject the air contained in it; by which, their weight,
compared with that of the water, is increased, and they consequently
descend. on the other hand, when they wish to rise, they relax the
compression of the abdominal muscles, when the air-bladder fills and
distends, and the body immediately ascends to the surface. how simply,
yet how wonderfully, has the supreme being adapted certain means to the
attainment of certain ends! those fishes which are destitute of the
air-bladder are heavy in the water, and have no great "alacrity" in
rising. the larger proportion of them remain at the bottom, unless they
are so formed as to be able to strike their native element downwards
with sufficient force to enable them to ascend. when the air-bladder of
a fish is burst, its power of ascending to the surface has for ever
passed away. from a knowledge of this fact, the fishermen of cod are
enabled to preserve them alive for a considerable time in their
well-boats. the means they adopt to accomplish this, is to perforate the
sound, or air-bladder, with a needle, which disengages the air, when the
fishes immediately descend to the bottom of the well, into which they
are thrown. without this operation, it would be impossible to keep the
cod under water whilst they had life. in swimming, the fins enable
fishes to preserve their upright position, especially those of the
belly, which act like two feet. without those, they would swim with
their bellies upward, as it is in their backs that the centre of gravity
lies. in ascending and descending, these are likewise of great
assistance, as they contract and expand accordingly. the tail is an
instrument of great muscular force, and largely assists the fish in all
its motions. in some instances it acts like the rudder of a ship, and
enables it to turn sideways; and when moved from side to side with a
quick vibratory motion, fishes are made, in the same manner as the
"screw" propeller makes a steamship, to dart forward with a celerity
proportioned to the muscular force with which it is employed.
. the bodies of fishes are mostly covered with a kind of horny
scales; but some are almost entirely without them, or have them so
minute as to be almost invisible; as is the case with the eel. the
object of these is to preserve them from injury by the pressure of the
water, or the sudden contact with pebbles, rocks, or sea-weeds. others,
again, are enveloped in a fatty, oleaginous substance, also intended as
a defence against the friction of the water; and those in which the
scales are small, are supplied with a larger quantity of slimy matter.
. the respiration of fishes is effected by means of those comb-like
organs which are placed on each side of the neck, and which are called
gills. it is curious to watch the process of breathing as it is
performed by the finny tribes. it seems to be so continuous, that it
might almost pass for an illustration of the vexed problem which
conceals the secret of perpetual motion. in performing it, they fill
their mouths with water, which they drive backwards with a force so
great as to open the large flap, to allow it to escape behind. in this
operation all, or a great portion, of the air contained in the water, is
left among the feather-like processes of the gills, and is carried into
the body, there to perform its part in the animal economy. in proof of
this, it has been ascertained that, if the water in which fishes are
put, is, by any means, denuded of its air, they immediately seek the
surface, and begin to gasp for it. hence, distilled water is to them
what a vacuum made by an air-pump, is to most other animals. for this
reason, when a fishpond, or other aqueous receptacle in which fishes are
kept, is entirely frozen over, it is necessary to make holes in the ice,
not so especially for the purpose of feeding them, as for that of giving
them air to breathe.
. the positions of the teeth of fishes are well calculated to excite
our amazement; for, in some cases, these are situated in the jaws,
sometimes on the tongue or palate, and sometimes even in the throat.
they are in general sharp-pointed and immovable; but in the carp they
are obtuse, and in the pike so easily moved as to seem to have no deeper
hold than such as the mere skin can afford. in the herring, the tongue
is set with teeth, to enable it the better, it is supposed, to retain
its food.
. although naturalists have divided fishes into two great tribes, the
osseous and the cartilaginous, yet the distinction is not very
precise; for the first have a great deal of cartilage, and the second,
at any rate, a portion of calcareous matter in their bones. it may,
therefore, be said that the bones of fishes form a kind of intermediate
substance between true bones and cartilages. the backbone extends
through the whole length of the body, and consists of vertebrae, strong
and thick towards the head, but weaker and more slender as it approaches
the tail. each species has a determinate number of vertebrae, which are
increased in size in proportion with the body. the ribs are attached to
the processes of the vertebrae, and inclose the breast and abdomen. some
kinds, as the rays, have no ribs; whilst others, as the sturgeon and
eel, have very short ones. between the pointed processes of the
vertebrae are situated the bones which support the dorsal (back) and the
anal (below the tail) fins, which are connected with the processes by a
ligament. at the breast are the sternum or breastbone, clavicles or
collar-bones, and the scapulae or shoulder-blades, on which the
pectoral or breast fins are placed. the bones which support the ventral
or belly fins are called the ossa pelvis. besides these principal
bones, there are often other smaller ones, placed between the muscles to
assist their motion.
. some of the organs of sense in fishes are supposed to be possessed
by them in a high degree, and others much more imperfectly. of the
latter kind are the senses of touch and taste, which are believed to be
very slightly developed. on the other hand, those of hearing, seeing,
and smelling, are ascertained to be acute, but the first in a lesser
degree than both the second and third. their possession of an auditory
organ was long doubted, and even denied by some physiologists; but it
has been found placed on the sides of the skull, or in the cavity which
contains the brain. it occupies a position entirely distinct and
detached from the skull, and, in this respect, differs in the local
disposition of the same sense in birds and quadrupeds. in some fishes,
as in those of the ray kind, the organ is wholly encompassed by those
parts which contain the cavity of the skull; whilst in the cod and
salmon kind it is in the part within the skull. its structure is, in
every way, much more simple than that of the same sense in those animals
which live entirely in the air; but there is no doubt that they have the
adaptation suitable to their condition. in some genera, as in the rays,
the external orifice or ear is very small, and is placed in the upper
surface of the head; whilst in others there is no visible external
orifice whatever. however perfect the sight of fishes may be,
experience has shown that this sense is of much less use to them than
that of smelling, in searching for their food. the optic nerves in
fishes have this peculiarity,—that they are not confounded with one
another in their middle progress between their origin and their orbit.
the one passes over the other without any communication; so that the
nerve which comes from the left side of the brain goes distinctly to the
right eye, and that which comes from the right goes distinctly to the
left. in the greater part of them, the eye is covered with the same
transparent skin that covers the rest of the head. the object of this
arrangement, perhaps, is to defend it from the action of the water, as
there are no eyelids. the globe in front is somewhat depressed, and is
furnished behind with a muscle, which serves to lengthen or flatten it,
according to the necessities of the animal. the crystalline humour,
which in quadrupeds is flattened, is, in fishes, nearly globular. the
organ of smelling in fishes is large, and is endued, at its entry,
with a dilating and contracting power, which is employed as the wants of
the animal may require. it is mostly by the acuteness of their smell
that fishes are enabled to discover their food; for their tongue is not
designed for nice sensation, being of too firm a cartilaginous substance
for this purpose.
. with respect to the food of fishes, this is almost universally
found in their own element. they are mostly carnivorous, though they
seize upon almost anything that comes in their way: they even devour
their own offspring, and manifest a particular predilection for all
living creatures. those, to which nature has meted out mouths of the
greatest capacity, would seem to pursue everything with life, and
frequently engage in fierce conflicts with their prey. the animal with
the largest mouth is usually the victor; and he has no sooner conquered
his foe than he devours him. innumerable shoals of one species pursue
those of another, with a ferocity which draws them from the pole to the
equator, through all the varying temperatures and depths of their
boundless domain. in these pursuits a scene of universal violence is the
result; and many species must have become extinct, had not nature
accurately proportioned the means of escape, the production, and the
numbers, to the extent and variety of the danger to which they are
exposed. hence the smaller species are not only more numerous, but more
productive than the larger; whilst their instinct leads them in search
of food and safety near the shores, where, from the shallowness of the
waters, many of their foes are unable to follow them.
. the fecundity of fishes has been the wonder of every natural
philosopher whose attention has been attracted to the subject. they are
in general oviparous, or egg-producing; but there are a few, such as the
eel and the blenny, which are viviparous, or produce their young alive.
the males have the milt and the females the roe; but some
individuals, as the sturgeon and the cod tribes, are said to contain
both. the greater number deposit their spawn in the sand or gravel; but
some of those which dwell in the depths of the ocean attach their eggs
to sea-weeds. in every instance, however, their fruitfulness far
surpasses that of any other race of animals. according to lewenhoeck,
the cod annually spawns upwards of nine millions of eggs, contained in a
single roe. the flounder produces one million; the mackerel above five
hundred thousand; a herring of a moderate size at least ten thousand; a
carp fourteen inches in length, according to petit, contained two
hundred and sixty-two thousand two hundred and twenty-four; a perch
deposited three hundred and eighty thousand six hundred and forty; and a
female sturgeon seven millions six hundred and fifty-three thousand two
hundred. the viviparous species are by no means so prolific; yet the
blenny brings forth two or three hundred at a time, which commence
sporting together round their parent the moment they have come into
existence.
. in reference to the longevity of fishes, it is affirmed to surpass
that of all other created beings; and it is supposed they are, to a
great extent, exempted from the diseases to which the flesh of other
animals is heir. in place of suffering from the rigidity of age, which
is the cause of the natural decay of those that "live and move and have
their being" on the land, their bodies continue to grow with each
succeeding supply of food, and the conduits of life to perform their
functions unimpaired. the age of fishes has not been properly
ascertained, although it is believed that the most minute of the species
has a longer lease of life than man. the mode in which they die has been
noted by the rev. mr. white, the eminent naturalist of selbourne. as
soon as the fish sickens, the head sinks lower and lower, till the
animal, as it were, stands upon it. after this, as it becomes weaker, it
loses its poise, till the tail turns over, when it comes to the surface,
and floats with its belly upwards. the reason for its floating in this
manner is on account of the body being no longer balanced by the fins of
the belly, and the broad muscular back preponderating, by its own
gravity, over the belly, from this latter being a cavity, and
consequently lighter.
. fishes are either solitary or gregarious, and some of them migrate
to great distances, and into certain rivers, to deposit their spawn. of
sea-fishes, the cod, herring, mackerel, and many others, assemble in
immense shoals, and migrate through different tracts of the ocean; but,
whether considered in their solitary or gregarious capacity, they are
alike wonderful to all who look through nature up to nature's god, and
consider, with due humility, yet exalted admiration, the sublime
variety, beauty, power, and grandeur of his productions, as manifested
in the creation.
. as the nutritive properties of fish are deemed inferior to those of
what is called butchers' meat, it would appear, from all we can learn,
that, in all ages, it has held only a secondary place in the estimation
of those who have considered the science of gastronomy as a large
element in the happiness of mankind. among the jews of old it was very
little used, although it seems not to have been entirely interdicted, as
moses prohibited only the use of such as had neither scales nor fins.
the egyptians, however, made fish an article of diet, notwithstanding
that it was rejected by their priests. egypt, however, is not a country
favourable to the production of fish, although we read of the people,
when hungry, eating it raw; of epicures among them having dried it in
the sun; and of its being salted and preserved, to serve as a repast on
days of great solemnity.
 the modern egyptians are, in general, extremely temperate in
 regard to food. even the richest among them take little pride,
 and, perhaps, experience as little delight, in the luxuries of
 the table. their dishes mostly consist of pilaus, soups, and
 stews, prepared principally of onions, cucumbers, and other cold
 vegetables, mixed with a little meat cut into small pieces. on
 special occasions, however, a whole sheep is placed on the
 festive board; but during several of the hottest months of the
 year, the richest restrict themselves entirely to a vegetable
 diet. the poor are contented with a little oil or sour milk, in
 which they may dip their bread.
. passing from africa to europe, we come amongst a people who have,
almost from time immemorial, occupied a high place in the estimation of
every civilized country; yet the greeks, in their earlier ages, made
very little use of fish as an article of diet. in the eyes of the heroes
of homer it had little favour; for menelaus complained that "hunger
pressed their digestive organs," and they had been obliged to live upon
fish. subsequently, however, fish became one of the principal articles
of diet amongst the hellenes; and both aristophanes and athenaeus allude
to it, and even satirize their countrymen for their excessive partiality
to the turbot and mullet.
 so infatuated were many of the greek gastronomes with the love
 of fish, that some of them would have preferred death from
 indigestion to the relinquishment of the precious dainties with
 which a few of the species supplied them. philoxenes of cythera
 was one of these. on being informed by his physician that he was
 going to die of indigestion, on account of the quantity he was
 consuming of a delicious fish, "be it so," he calmly observed;
 "but before i die, let me finish the remainder."
. the geographical situation of greece was highly favourable for the
development of a taste for the piscatory tribes; and the skill of the
greek cooks was so great, that they could impart every variety of relish
to the dish they were called upon to prepare. athenaeus has transmitted
to posterity some very important precepts upon their ingenuity in
seasoning with salt, oil, and aromatics.
 at the present day the food of the greeks, through the combined
 influence of poverty and the long fasts which their religion
 imposes upon them, is, to a large extent, composed of fish,
 accompanied with vegetables and fruit. caviare, prepared from
 the roes of sturgeons, is the national ragout, which, like all
 other fish dishes, they season with aromatic herbs. snails
 dressed in garlic are also a favourite dish.
. as the romans, in a great measure, took their taste in the fine
arts from the greeks, so did they, in some measure, their piscine
appetites. the eel-pout and the lotas's liver were the favourite fish
dishes of the roman epicures; whilst the red mullet was esteemed as one
of the most delicate fishes that could be brought to the table.
 with all the elegance, taste, and refinement of roman luxury, it
 was sometimes promoted or accompanied by acts of great
 barbarity. in proof of this, the mention of the red mullet
 suggests the mode in which it was sometimes treated for the, to
 us, horrible entertainment of the fashionable in roman
 circles. it may be premised, that as england has, rome, in her
 palmy days, had, her fops, who had, no doubt, through the medium
 of their cooks, discovered that when the scales of the red
 mullet were removed, the flesh presented a fine pink-colour.
 having discovered this, it was further observed that at the
 death of the animal, this colour passed through a succession of
 beautiful shades, and, in order that these might be witnessed
 and enjoyed in their fullest perfection, the poor mullet was
 served alive in a glass vessel.
. the love of fish among the ancient romans rose to a real mania.
apicius offered a prize to any one who could invent a new brine
compounded of the liver of red mullets; and lucullus had a canal cut
through a mountain, in the neighbourhood of naples, that fish might be
the more easily transported to the gardens of his villa. hortensius, the
orator, wept over the death of a turbot which he had fed with his own
hands; and the daughter of druses adorned one that she had, with rings
of gold. these were, surely, instances of misplaced affection; but there
is no accounting for tastes. it was but the other day that we read in
the "times" of a wealthy living english hermit, who delights in the
companionship of rats!
 the modern romans are merged in the general name of italians,
 who, with the exception of macaroni, have no specially
 characteristic article of food.
. from rome to gaul is, considering the means of modern locomotion,
no great way; but the ancient sumptuary laws of that kingdom give us
little information regarding the ichthyophagous propensities of its
inhabitants. louis xii. engaged six fishmongers to furnish his board
with fresh-water animals, and francis i. had twenty-two, whilst henry
the great extended his requirements a little further, and had
twenty-four. in the time of louis xiv. the cooks had attained to such a
degree of perfection in their art, that they could convert the form and
flesh of the trout, pike, or carp, into the very shape and flavour of
the most delicious game.
 the french long enjoyed a european reputation for their skill
 and refinement in the preparing of food. in place of plain
 joints, french cookery delights in the marvels of what are
 called made dishes, ragouts, stews, and fricassees, in which no
 trace of the original materials of which they are compounded is
 to be found.
. from gaul we cross to britain, where it has been asserted, by, at
least, one authority, that the ancient inhabitants ate no fish. however
this may be, we know that the british shores, particularly those of the
north sea, have always been well supplied with the best kinds of fish,
which we may reasonably infer was not unknown to the inhabitants, or
likely to be lost upon them for the lack of knowledge as to how they
tasted. by the time of edward ii., fish had, in england, become a
dainty, especially the sturgeon, which was permitted to appear on no
table but that of the king. in the fourteenth century, a decree of king
john informs us that the people ate both seals and porpoises; whilst in
the days of the troubadours, whales were fished for and caught in the
mediterranean sea, for the purpose of being used as human food.
 whatever checks the ancient british may have had upon their
 piscatory appetites, there are happily none of any great
 consequence upon the modern, who delight in wholesome food of
 every kind. their taste is, perhaps, too much inclined to that
 which is accounted solid and substantial; but they really eat
 more moderately, even of animal food, than either the french or
 the germans. roast beef, or other viands cooked in the plainest
 manner, are, with them, a sufficient luxury; yet they delight in
 living well, whilst it is easy to prove how largely their
 affections are developed by even the prospect of a substantial
 cheer. in proof of this we will just observe, that if a great
 dinner is to be celebrated, it is not uncommon for the appointed
 stewards and committee to meet and have a preliminary dinner
 among themselves, in order to arrange the great one, and after
 that, to have another dinner to discharge the bill which the
 great one cost. this enjoyable disposition we take to form a
 very large item in the aggregate happiness of the nation.
. the general use of fish, as an article of human food among
civilized nations, we have thus sufficiently shown, and will conclude
this portion of our subject with the following hints, which ought to be
remembered by all those who are fond of occasionally varying their
dietary with a piscine dish:—
i. fish shortly before they spawn are, in general, best in condition.
when the spawning is just over, they are out of season, and unfit for
human food.
ii. when fish is out of season, it has a transparent, bluish tinge,
however much it may be boiled; when it is in season, its muscles are
firm, and boil white and curdy.
iii. as food for invalids, white fish, such as the ling, cod, haddock,
coal-fish, and whiting, are the best; flat fish, as soles, skate,
turbot, and flounders, are also good.
iv. salmon, mackerel, herrings, and trout soon spoil or decompose after
they are killed; therefore, to be in perfection, they should be prepared
for the table on the day they are caught. with flat fish, this is not of
such consequence, as they will keep longer. the turbot, for example, is
improved by being kept a day or two.
. in dressing fish, of any kind, the first point to be attended to,
is to see that it be perfectly clean. it is a common error to wash it
too much; as by doing so the flavour is diminished. if the fish is to be
boiled, a little salt and vinegar should be put into the water, to give
it firmness, after it is cleaned. cod-fish, whiting, and haddock, are
far better if a little salted, and kept a day; and if the weather be not
very hot, they will be good for two days.
. when fish is cheap and plentiful, and a larger quantity is
purchased than is immediately wanted, the overplus of such as will bear
it should be potted, or pickled, or salted, and hung up; or it may be
fried, that it may serve for stewing the next day. fresh-water fish,
having frequently a muddy smell and taste, should be soaked in strong
salt and water, after it has been well cleaned. if of a sufficient size,
it may be scalded in salt and water, and afterwards dried and dressed.
. fish should be put into cold water, and set on the fire to do very
gently, or the outside will break before the inner part is done. unless
the fishes are small, they should never be put into warm water; nor
should water, either hot or cold, be poured on to the fish, as it is
liable to break the skin: if it should be necessary to add a little
water whilst the fish is cooking, it ought to be poured in gently at the
side of the vessel. the fish-plate may be drawn up, to see if the fish
be ready, which may be known by its easily separating from the bone. it
should then be immediately taken out of the water, or it will become
woolly. the fish-plate should be set crossways over the kettle, to keep
hot for serving, and a clean cloth over the fish, to prevent its losing
its colour.
. in garnishing fish, great attention is required, and plenty of
parsley, horseradish, and lemon should be used. if fried parsley be
used, it must be washed and picked, and thrown into fresh water. when
the lard or dripping boils, throw the parsley into it immediately from
the water, and instantly it will be green and crisp, and must be taken
up with a slice. when well done, and with very good sauce, fish is more
appreciated than almost any other dish. the liver and roe, in some
instances, should be placed on the dish, in order that they may be
distributed in the course of serving; but to each recipe will be
appended the proper mode of serving and garnishing.
. if fish is to be fried or broiled, it must be dried in a nice soft
cloth, after it is well cleaned and washed. if for frying, brush it over
with egg, and sprinkle it with some fine crumbs of bread. if done a
second time with the egg and bread, the fish will look so much the
better. if required to be very nice, a sheet of white blotting-paper
must be placed to receive it, that it may be free from all grease. it
must also be of a beautiful colour, and all the crumbs appear distinct.
butter gives a bad colour; lard and clarified dripping are most
frequently used; but oil is the best, if the expense be no objection.
the fish should be put into the lard when boiling, and there should be a
sufficiency of this to cover it.
. when fish is broiled, it must be seasoned, floured, and laid on a
very clean gridiron, which, when hot, should be rubbed with a bit of
suet, to prevent the fish from sticking. it must be broiled over a very
clear fire, that it may not taste smoky; and not too near, that it may
not be scorched.
. in choosing fish, it is well to remember that it is possible it may
be fresh, and yet not good. under the head of each particular fish
in this work, are appended rules for its choice and the months when it
is in season. nothing can be of greater consequence to a cook than to
have the fish good; as if this important course in a dinner does not
give satisfaction, it is rarely that the repast goes off well.
[nothing is more difficult than to give the average prices of fish,
inasmuch as a few hours of bad weather at sea will, in the space of one
day, cause such a difference in its supply, that the same fish—a turbot
for instance—which may be bought to-day for six or seven shillings,
will, to-morrow, be, in the london markets, worth, perhaps, almost as
many pounds. the average costs, therefore, which will be found appended
to each recipe, must be understood as about the average price for the
different kinds of fish, when the market is supplied upon an average,
and when the various sorts are of an average size and quality.
general rule in choosing fish.—a proof of freshness and goodness in
most fishes, is their being covered with scales; for, if deficient in
this respect, it is a sign of their being stale, or having been
ill-used.]
. ingredients.— tablespoonful of oil, / a glass of white wine,
sufficient flour to thicken;  anchovies.
mode.—mix the oil and wine together, with sufficient flour to make
them into a thickish paste; cleanse the anchovies, wipe them, dip them
in the paste, and fry of a nice brown colour.
time.—/ hour. average cost for this quantity, d.
seasonable all the year.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: the anchovy.]
 the anchovy.—in his book of "british fishes," mr. yarrell
 states that "the anchovy is a common fish in the mediterranean,
 from greece to gibraltar, and was well known to the greeks and
 romans, by whom the liquor prepared from it, called garum, was
 in great estimation. its extreme range is extended into the
 black sea. the fishing for them is carried on during the night,
 and lights are used with the nets. the anchovy is common on the
 coasts of portugal, spain, and france. it occurs, i have no
 doubt, at the channel islands, and has been taken on the
 hampshire coast, and in the bristol channel." other fish, of
 inferior quality, but resembling the real gorgona anchovy, are
 frequently sold for it, and passed off as genuine.
. ingredients.— dozen anchovies, / lb. of fresh butter.
mode.—wash the anchovies thoroughly; bone and dry them, and pound
them in a mortar to a paste. mix the butter gradually with them, and rub
the whole through a sieve. put it by in small pots for use, and
carefully exclude the air with a bladder, as it soon changes the colour
of anchovies, besides spoiling them.
average cost for this quantity, s.
potted anchovies are made in the same way, by adding pounded mace,
cayenne, and nutmeg to taste.
. ingredients.—toast  or  slices of bread, or, if wanted very
savoury, fry them in clarified butter, and spread on them the paste, no.
. made mustard, or a few grains of cayenne, may be added to the paste
before laying it on the toast.
 anchovy paste.—"when some delicate zest," says a work just
 issued on the adulterations of trade, "is required to make the
 plain english breakfast more palatable, many people are in the
 habit of indulging in what they imagine to be anchovies. these
 fish are preserved in a kind of pickling-bottle, carefully
 corked down, and surrounded by a red-looking liquor, resembling
 in appearance diluted clay. the price is moderate, one shilling
 only being demanded for the luxury. when these anchovies are
 what is termed potted, it implies that the fish have been
 pounded into the consistency of a paste, and then placed in flat
 pots, somewhat similar in shape to those used for pomatum. this
 paste is usually eaten spread upon toast, and is said to form an
 excellent bonne bouche, which enables gentlemen at
 wine-parties to enjoy their port with redoubled gusto.
 unfortunately, in six cases out of ten, the only portion of
 these preserved delicacies, that contains anything indicative of
 anchovies, is the paper label pasted on the bottle or pot, on
 which the word itself is printed…. all the samples of anchovy
 paste, analyzed by different medical men, have been found to be
 highly and vividly coloured with very large quantities of bole
 armenian." the anchovy itself, when imported, is of a dark dead
 colour, and it is to make it a bright "handsome-looking sauce"
 that this red earth is used.
. ingredients.—/ pint of port wine, a saltspoonful of salt, 
tablespoonfuls of vinegar,  sliced onions, a faggot of sweet herbs,
nutmeg and mace to taste, the juice of a lemon,  anchovies;  or 
barbels, according to size.
mode—boil the barbels in salt and water till done; pour off some of
the water, and, to the remainder, put the ingredients mentioned above.
simmer gently for / hour, or rather more, and strain. put in the fish;
heat it gradually; but do not let it boil, or it will be broken.
time.—altogether  hour. sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from september to november.
[illustration: the barbel.]
 the barbel,—this fish takes its name from the barbs or wattels
 at its mouth; and, in england, is esteemed as one of the worst
 of the fresh-water fish. it was, however, formerly, if not now,
 a favourite with the jews, excellent cookers of fish. others
 would boil with it a piece of bacon, that it might have a
 relish. it is to be met with from two to three or four feet
 long, and is said to live to a great age. from putney upwards,
 in the thames, some are found of large size; but they are valued
 only as affording sport to the brethren of the angle.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water; a little
vinegar.
mode.—clean the brill, cut off the fins, and rub it over with a
little lemon-juice, to preserve its whiteness. set the fish in
sufficient cold water to cover it; throw in salt, in the above
proportions, and a little vinegar, and bring it gradually to boil;
simmer very gently till the fish is done, which will be in about 
minutes; but the time for boiling, of course, depends entirely on the
size of the fish. serve it on a hot napkin, and garnish with cut lemon,
parsley, horseradish, and a little lobster coral sprinkled over the
fish. send lobster or shrimp sauce and plain melted butter to table with
it.
time.—after the water boils, a small brill,  minutes; a large
brill,  to  minutes.
average cost, from s. to s.
seasonable from august to april.
[illustration: the brill.]
 the brill.—this fish resembles the sole, but is broader, and
 when large, is esteemed by many in a scarcely less degree than
 the turbot, whilst it is much cheaper. it is a fine fish, and is
 abundant in the london market.
to choose brill.—the flesh of this fish, like that of turbot, should be
of a yellowish tint, and should be chosen on account of its thickness.
if the flesh has a bluish tint, it is not good.
. cod may be boiled whole; but a large head and shoulders are quite
sufficient for a dish, and contain all that is usually helped, because,
when the thick part is done, the tail is insipid and overdone. the
latter, cut in slices, makes a very good dish for frying; or it may be
salted down and served with egg sauce and parsnips. cod, when boiled
quite fresh, is watery; salting a little, renders it firmer.
[illustration: the cod.]
 the cod tribe.—the jugular, characterized by bony gills, and
 ventral fins before the pectoral ones, commences the second of
 the linnaean orders of fishes, and is a numerous tribe,
 inhabiting only the depths of the ocean, and seldom visiting the
 fresh waters. they have a smooth head, and the gill membrane has
 seven rays. the body is oblong, and covered with deciduous
 scales. the fins are all inclosed in skin, whilst their rays are
 unarmed. the ventral fins are slender, and terminate in a point.
 their habits are gregarious, and they feed on smaller fish and
 other marine animals.
. ingredients.—sufficient water to cover the fish;  oz. of salt to
each gallon of water.
mode.—cleanse the fish thoroughly, and rub a little salt over the
thick part and inside of the fish,  or  hours before dressing it, as
this very much improves the flavour. lay it in the fish-kettle, with
sufficient cold water to cover it. be very particular not to pour the
water on the fish, as it is liable to break it, and only keep it just
simmering. if the water should boil away, add a little by pouring it in
at the side of the kettle, and not on the fish. add salt in the above
proportion, and bring it gradually to a boil. skim very carefully, draw
it to the side of the fire, and let it gently simmer till done. take it
out and drain it; serve on a hot napkin, and garnish with cut lemon,
horseradish, the roe and liver. (see coloured plate c.)
time.—according to size, / an hour, more or less. average cost,
from s. to s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to march.
note.—oyster sauce and plain melted butter should be served with
this.
to choose cod.—the cod should be chosen for the table when it is plump
and round near the tail, when the hollow behind the head is deep, and
when the sides are undulated as if they were ribbed. the glutinous parts
about the head lose their delicate flavour, after the fish has been
twenty-four hours out of the water. the great point by which the cod
should be judged is the firmness of its flesh; and, although the cod is
not firm when it is alive, its quality may be arrived at by pressing the
finger into the flesh. if this rises immediately, the fish is good; if
not, it is stale. another sign of its goodness is, if the fish, when it
is cut, exhibits a bronze appearance, like the silver side of a round of
beef. when this is the case, the flesh will be firm when cooked.
stiffness in a cod, or in any other fish, is a sure sign of freshness,
though not always of quality. sometimes, codfish, though exhibiting
signs of rough usage, will eat much better than those with red gills, so
strongly recommended by many cookery-books. this appearance is generally
caused by the fish having been knocked about at sea, in the well-boats,
in which they are conveyed from the fishing-grounds to market.
. ingredients.—sufficient water to cover the fish.
mode.—wash the fish, and lay it all night in water, with a / pint
of vinegar. when thoroughly soaked, take it out, see that it is
perfectly clean, and put it in the fish-kettle with sufficient cold
water to cover it. heat it gradually, but do not let it boil much, or
the fish will be hard. skim well, and when done, drain the fish and put
it on a napkin garnished with hard-boiled eggs cut in rings.
time.—about  hour. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable in the spring.
sufficient for each person, / lb.
note.—serve with egg sauce and parsnips. this is an especial dish on
ash wednesday.
 preserving cod.—immediately as the cod are caught, their heads
 are cut off. they are then opened, cleaned, and salted, when
 they are stowed away in the hold of the vessel, in beds of five
 or six yards square, head to tail, with a layer of salt to each
 layer of fish. when they have lain in this state three or four
 days, in order that the water may drain from them, they are
 shifted into a different part of the vessel, and again salted.
 here they remain till the vessel is loaded, when they are
 sometimes cut into thick pieces and packed in barrels for the
 greater convenience of carriage.
should be well soaked in salt and water, and thoroughly washed before
dressing them. they are considered a great delicacy, and may either be
broiled, fried, or boiled: if they are boiled, mix a little milk with
the water.
. ingredients.—for forcemeat,  chopped oysters,  chopped
anchovies, / lb. of bread crumbs,  oz. of butter,  eggs; seasoning
of salt, pepper, nutmeg, and mace to taste;  cod sounds.
mode.—make the forcemeat by mixing the ingredients well together.
wash the sounds, and boil them in milk and water for / an hour; take
them out and let them cool. cover each with a layer of forcemeat, roll
them up in a nice form, and skewer them. rub over with lard, dredge with
flour, and cook them gently before the fire in a dutch oven.
time.— hour. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from november to march. sufficient for  persons.
 the sounds in codfish.—these are the air or swimming bladders,
 by means of which the fishes are enabled to ascend or descend in
 the water. in the newfoundland fishery they are taken out
 previous to incipient putrefaction, washed from their slime and
 salted for exportation. the tongues are also cured and packed up
 in barrels; whilst, from the livers, considerable quantities of
 oil are extracted, this oil having been found possessed of the
 most nourishing properties, and particularly beneficial in cases
 of pulmonary affections.
(economical.)
. ingredients.—any remains of cold cod,  oysters, sufficient
melted butter to moisten it; mashed potatoes enough to fill up the dish.
mode.—flake the fish from the bone, and carefully take away all the
skin. lay it in a pie-dish, pour over the melted butter and oysters (or
oyster sauce, if there is any left), and cover with mashed potatoes.
bake for / an hour, and send to table of a nice brown colour.
time.—/ hour.
seasonable from november to march.
. ingredients.— slices of cod; pepper and salt to taste; / a
teaspoonful of grated nutmeg,  large blade of pounded mace,  oz. of
butter, / pint of stock no. , a paste crust (see pastry). for
sauce,  tablespoonful of stock, / pint of cream or milk, thickening
of flour or butter; lemon-peel chopped very fine to taste;  oysters.
mode.—lay the cod in salt for  hours, then wash it and place it in a
dish; season, and add the butter and stock; cover with the crust, and
bake for  hour, or rather more. now make the sauce, by mixing the
ingredients named above; give it one boil, and pour it into the pie by a
hole made at the top of the crust, which can easily be covered by a
small piece of pastry cut and baked in any fanciful shape—such as a
leaf, or otherwise.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, with fresh fish, s. d.
seasonable from november to march.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—the remains of cold fish may be used for this pie.
. ingredients.— slices of large cod, or the remains of any cold
fish;  oz. of butter,  onion sliced, a teacupful of white stock,
thickening of butter and flour,  small teaspoonful of curry-powder,
/ pint of cream, salt and cayenne to taste.
mode.—flake the fish, and fry it of a nice brown colour with the
butter and onions; put this in a stewpan, add the stock and thickening,
and simmer for  minutes. stir the curry-powder into the cream; put it,
with the seasoning, to the other ingredients; give one boil, and serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost, with fresh fish, s.
seasonable from november to march.
sufficient for  persons.
 the food of the cod.—this chiefly consists of the smaller
 species of the scaly tribes, shell-fish, crabs, and worms. their
 voracity is very great, and they will bite at any small body
 they see moved by the water, even stones and pebbles, which are
 frequently found in their stomachs. they sometimes attain a
 great size, but their usual weight is from  to  lbs.
. ingredients.— large slice of cod,  oz. of butter,  chopped
shalot, a little minced parsley, / teacupful of white stock, / pint
of milk or cream, flour to thicken, cayenne and lemon-juice to taste,
/ teaspoonful of powdered sugar.
mode.—boil the cod, and while hot, break it into flakes; put the
butter, shalot, parsley, and stock into a stewpan, and let them boil for
 minutes. stir in sufficient flour to thicken, and pour to it the milk
or cream. simmer for  minutes, add the cayenne and sugar, and, when
liked, a little lemon-juice. put the fish in the sauce to warm
gradually, but do not let it boil. serve in a dish garnished with
croűtons.
time.—rather more than / hour. average cost, with cream, s.
seasonable from november to march.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—the remains of fish from the preceding day answer very well for
this dish.
. ingredients.—any remains of cold cod,  tablespoonfuls of béchamel
(see sauces),  oz. butter; seasoning to taste of pepper and salt;
fried bread, a few bread crumbs.
mode.—flake the cod carefully, leaving out all skin and bone; put the
béchamel in a stewpan with the butter, and stir it over the fire till
the latter is melted; add seasoning, put in the fish, and mix it well
with the sauce. make a border of fried bread round the dish, lay in the
fish, sprinkle over with bread crumbs, and baste with butter. brown
either before the fire or with a salamander, and garnish with toasted
bread cut in fanciful shapes.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the fish, d.
 the habitat of the cod.—this fish is found only in the seas of
 the northern parts of the world, between the latitudes of °
 and °. its great rendezvous are the sandbanks of newfoundland,
 nova scotia, cape breton, and new england. these places are its
 favourite resorts; for there it is able to obtain great
 quantities of worms, a food peculiarly grateful to it. another
 cause of its attachment to these places has been said to be on
 account of the vicinity to the polar seas, where it returns to
 spawn. few are taken north of iceland, and the shoals never
 reach so far south as the straits of gibraltar. many are taken
 on the coasts of norway, in the baltic, and off the orkneys,
 which, prior to the discovery of newfoundland, formed one of the
 principal fisheries. the london market is supplied by those
 taken between the dogger bank, the well bank, and cromer, on the
 east coast of england.
. ingredients.— slices of cod, / lb. of butter, a little chopped
shalot and parsley; pepper to taste, / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg,
or rather less, when the flavour is not liked; the juice of / lemon.
mode.—boil the cod, and either leave it whole, or, what is still
better, flake it from the bone, and take off the skin. put it into a
stewpan with the butter, parsley, shalot, pepper, and nutmeg. melt the
butter gradually, and be very careful that it does not become like oil.
when all is well mixed and thoroughly hot, add the lemon-juice, and
serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.; with remains of cold fish,
d.
seasonable from november to march.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—cod that has been left will do for this.
 the season for fishing cod.—the best season for catching cod is
 from the beginning of february to the end of april; and although
 each fisherman engaged in taking them, catches no more than one
 at a time, an expert hand will sometimes take four hundred in a
 day. the employment is excessively fatiguing, from the weight of
 the fish as well as from the coldness of the climate.
. ingredients.— slices of crimped cod,  shalot,  slice of ham
minced very fine, / pint of white stock, no. ; when liked, /
teacupful of cream; salt to taste; a few drops of garlic vinegar, a
little lemon-juice, / teaspoonful of powdered sugar.
mode.—chop the shalots, mince the ham very fine, pour on the stock,
and simmer for  minutes. if the colour should not be good, add cream
in the above proportion, and strain it through a fine sieve; season it,
and put in the vinegar, lemon-juice, and sugar. now boil the cod, take
out the middle bone, and skin it; put it on the dish without breaking,
and pour the sauce over it.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d., with fresh fish.
seasonable from november to march.
sufficient for  persons.
 the fecundity of the cod.—in our preceding remarks on the
 natural history of fishes, we have spoken of the amazing
 fruitfulness of this fish; but in this we see one more instance
 of the wise provision which nature has made for supplying the
 wants of man. so extensive has been the consumption of this
 fish, that it is surprising that it has not long ago become
 extinct; which would certainly have been the case, had it not
 been for its wonderful powers of reproduction. "so early as
 ," says dr. cloquet, "the inhabitants of amsterdam had
 dispatched fishermen to the coast of sweden; and in the first
 quarter of , from the ports of france only,  vessels went
 out to the cod-fisheries. every year, however, upwards of ,
 vessels, of all nations, are employed in this trade, and bring
 into the commercial world more than ,, of salted and
 dried cod. if we add to this immense number, the havoc made
 among the legions of cod by the larger scaly tribes of the great
 deep, and take into account the destruction to which the young
 are exposed by sea-fowls and other inhabitants of the seas,
 besides the myriads of their eggs destroyed by accident, it
 becomes a miracle to find that such mighty multitudes of them
 are still in existence, and ready to continue the exhaustless
 supply. yet it ceases to excite our wonder when we remember that
 the female can every year give birth to more than ,, at a
 time."
. ingredients— carp, forcemeat, bread crumbs,  oz. butter, /
pint of stock no. , / pint of port wine,  anchovies,  onions
sliced,  bay-leaf, a faggot of sweet herbs, flour to thicken, the juice
of  lemon; cayenne and salt to taste; / teaspoonful of powdered
sugar.
mode.—stuff the carp with a delicate forcemeat, after thoroughly
cleansing it, and sew it up to prevent the stuffing from falling out.
rub it over with an egg, and sprinkle it with bread crumbs, lay it in a
deep earthen dish, and drop the butter, oiled, over the bread crumbs.
add the stock, onions, bay-leaf, herbs, wine, and anchovies, and bake
for  hour. put  oz. of butter into a stewpan, melt it, and dredge in
sufficient flour to dry it up; put in the strained liquor from the carp,
stir frequently, and when it has boiled, add the lemon-juice and
seasoning. serve the carp on a dish garnished with parsley and cut
lemon, and the sauce in a boat.
time.—-/ hour. average cost. seldom bought.
seasonable from march to october.
sufficient for  or  persons.
[illustration: the carp.]
 the carp.—this species of fish inhabit the fresh waters, where
 they feed on worms, insects, aquatic plants, small fish, clay,
 or mould. some of them are migratory. they have very small
 mouths and no teeth, and the gill membrane has three rays. the
 body is smooth, and generally whitish. the carp both grows and
 increases very fast, and is accounted the most valuable of all
 fish for the stocking of ponds. it has been pronounced the queen
 of river-fish, and was first introduced to this country about
 three hundred years ago. of its sound, or air-bladder, a kind of
 glue is made, and a green paint of its gall.
. ingredients.— carp, salt, stock no. ,  onions,  cloves, 
peppercorns,  blade of mace, / pint of port wine, the juice of /
lemon, cayenne and salt to taste, a faggot of savoury herbs.
mode.—scale the fish, clean it nicely, and, if very large, divide it;
lay it in the stewpan, after having rubbed a little salt on it, and put
in sufficient stock to cover it; add the herbs, onions, and spices, and
stew gently for  hour, or rather more, should it be very large. dish up
the fish with great care, strain the liquor, and add to it the port
wine, lemon-juice, and cayenne; give one boil, pour it over the fish,
and serve.
time.—-/ hour. average cost. seldom bought.
seasonable from march to october.
sufficient for  or  persons.
note.—this fish can be boiled plain, and served with parsley and
butter. chub and char may be cooked in the same manner as the above, as
also dace and roach.
 the age of carp.—this fish has been found to live  years.
 the pond in the garden of emmanuel college, cambridge, contained
 one that had lived there  years, and gesner mentions an
 instance of one  years old. they are, besides, capable of
 being tamed. dr. smith, in his "tour on the continent," says, in
 reference to the prince of condé's seat at chantilly, "the most
 pleasing things about it were the immense shoals of very large
 carp, silvered over with age, like silver-fish, and perfectly
 tame; so that, when any passengers approached their watery
 habitation, they used to come to the shore in such numbers as to
 heave each other out of the water, begging for bread, of which a
 quantity was always kept at hand, on purpose to feed them. they
 would even allow themselves to be handled."
[illustration: the chub.]
[illustration: the char.]
 the chub.—this fish takes its name from its head, not only in
 england, but in other countries. it is a river-fish, and
 resembles the carp, but is somewhat longer. its flesh is not in
 much esteem, being coarse, and, when out of season, full of
 small hairy bones. the head and throat are the best parts. the
 roe is also good.
 the char.—this is one of the most delicious of fish, being
 esteemed by some superior to the salmon. it is an inhabitant of
 the deep lakes of mountainous countries. its flesh is rich and
 red, and full of fat. the largest and best kind is found in the
 lakes of westmoreland, and, as it is considered a rarity, it is
 often potted and preserved.
 the dace, or dare.—this fish is gregarious, and is seldom above
 ten inches long; although, according to linnaeus, it grows a
 foot and a half in length. its haunts are in deep water, near
 piles of bridges, where the stream is gentle, over gravelly,
 sandy, or clayey bottoms; deep holes that are shaded, water-lily
 leaves, and under the foam caused by an eddy. in the warm months
 they are to be found in shoals on the shallows near to streams.
 they are in season about the end of april, and gradually improve
 till february, when they attain their highest condition. in that
 month, when just taken, scotched (crimped), and broiled, they
 are said to be more palatable than a fresh herring.
 the roach.—this fish is found throughout europe, and the
 western parts of asia, in deep still rivers, of which it is an
 inhabitant. it is rarely more than a pound and a half in weight,
 and is in season from september till march. it is plentiful in
 england, and the finest are caught in the thames. the proverb,
 "as sound as a roach," is derived from the french name of this
 fish being roche, which also means rock.
[illustration: the dace.]
[illustration: the roach.]
. ingredients.— crab,  tablespoonfuls of vinegar,  ditto of oil;
salt, white pepper, and cayenne, to taste.
mode.—empty the shells, and thoroughly mix the meat with the above
ingredients, and put it in the large shell. garnish with slices of cut
lemon and parsley. the quantity of oil may be increased when it is much
liked. (see coloured plate i.)
average cost, from d. to s.
seasonable all the year; but not so good in may, june, and july.
sufficient for  persons.
to choose crab.—the middle-sized crab is the best; and the crab, like
the lobster, should be judged by its weight; for if light, it is watery.
. ingredients.— crab, nutmeg, salt and pepper to taste,  oz. of
butter, / lb. of bread crumbs,  tablespoonfuls of vinegar.
mode.—after having boiled the crab, pick the meat out from the
shells, and mix with it the nutmeg and seasoning. cut up the butter in
small pieces, and add the bread crumbs and vinegar. mix altogether, put
the whole in the large shell, and brown before the fire or with a
salamander.
time.— hour. average cost, from d. to s.
seasonable all the year; but not so good in may, june, and july.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: the crab.]
the crab tribe.—the whole of this tribe of animals have the
body covered with a hard and strong shell, and they live chiefly
in the sea. some, however, inhabit fresh waters, and a few live
upon land. they feed variously, on aquatic or marine plants,
small fish, molluscae, or dead bodies. the black-clawed
species is found on the rocky coasts of both europe and india,
and is the same that is introduced to our tables, being much
more highly esteemed as a food than many others of the tribe.
the most remarkable feature in their history, is the changing of
their shells, and the reproduction of their broken claws. the
former occurs once a year, usually between christmas and easter,
when the crabs retire to cavities in the rocks, or conceal
themselves under great stones. fishermen say that they will live
confined in a pot or basket for several months together, without
any other food than what is collected from the sea-water; and
that, even in this situation, they will not decrease in weight.
the hermit crab is another of the species, and has the
peculiarity of taking possession of the deserted shell of some
other animal, as it has none of its own. this circumstance was
known to the ancients, and is alluded to in the following lines
from oppian:—
the hermit fish, unarm'd by nature, left
helpless and weak, grow strong by harmless theft.
fearful they stroll, and look with panting wish
for the cast crust of some new-cover'd fish;
or such as empty lie, and deck the shore,
whose first and rightful owners are no more.
they make glad seizure of the vacant room,
and count the borrow'd shell their native home;
screw their soft limbs to fit the winding case,
and boldly herd with the crustaceous race.
. crayfish should be thrown into boiling water, to which has been
added a good seasoning of salt and a little vinegar. when done, which
will be in / hour, take them out and drain them. let them cool,
arrange them on a napkin, and garnish with plenty of double parsley.
note.—this fish is frequently used for garnishing boiled turkey,
boiled fowl, calf's head, turbot, and all kinds of boiled fish.
. ingredients.— crayfish; pounded mace, pepper and salt to taste,
 oz. butter.
mode.—boil the fish in salt and water; pick out all the meat and
pound it in a mortar to a paste. whilst pounding, add the butter
gradually, and mix in the spice and seasoning. put it in small pots, and
pour over it clarified butter, carefully excluding the air.
time.— minutes to boil the crayfish. average cost, s. d.
seasonable all the year.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—this fish, which is esteemed by most people a great delicacy,
is dressed in the same way as a turbot, which it resembles in firmness,
but not in richness. cleanse it thoroughly and cut off the fins; lay it
in a fish-kettle, cover with cold water, and add salt in the above
proportion. bring it gradually to a boil, and simmer gently for /
hour, or rather longer, should the fish be very large. serve on a hot
napkin, and garnish with cut lemon and parsley. lobster, anchovy, or
shrimp sauce, and plain melted butter, should be sent to table with it.
time.—after the water boils, / to / hour, according to size.
average cost, s. to s. seasonable all the year, but best from
september to january.
note.—small john dorie are very good, baked.
[illustration: the john dory.]
 the doru, or john dory.—this fish is of a yellowish golden
 colour, and is, in general, rare, although it is sometimes taken
 in abundance on the devon and cornish coasts. it is highly
 esteemed for the table, and its flesh, when dressed, is of a
 beautiful clear white. when fresh caught, it is tough, and,
 being a ground fish, it is not the worse for being kept two, or
 even three days before it is cooked.
. ingredients.— small eels, sufficient water to cover them; a large
bunch of parsley.
mode.—choose small eels for boiling; put them in a stewpan with the
parsley, and just sufficient water to cover them; simmer till tender.
take them out, pour a little parsley and butter over them, and serve
some in a tureen.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from june to march.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: the eel.]
 the eel tribe.—the apodal, or bony-gilled and ventral-finned
 fish, of which the eel forms the first linnaean tribe, in their
 general aspect and manners, approach, in some instances, very
 nearly to serpents. they have a smooth head and slippery skin,
 are in general naked, or covered with such small, soft, and
 distant scales, as are scarcely visible. their bodies are long
 and slender, and they are supposed to subsist entirely on animal
 substances. there are about nine species of them, mostly found
 in the seas. one of them frequents our fresh waters, and three
 of the others occasionally pay a visit to our shores.
. ingredients.— lbs. of eels,  pint of rich strong stock, no. ,
 onion,  cloves, a piece of lemon-peel,  glass of port or madeira, 
tablespoonfuls of cream; thickening of flour; cayenne and lemon-juice to
taste.
mode.—wash and skin the eels, and cut them into pieces about  inches
long; pepper and salt them, and lay them in a stewpan; pour over the
stock, add the onion stuck with cloves, the lemon-peel, and the wine.
stew gently for / hour, or rather more, and lift them carefully on a
dish, which keep hot. strain the gravy, stir to the cream sufficient
flour to thicken; mix altogether, boil for  minutes, and add the
cayenne and lemon-juice; pour over the eels and serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable from june to march.
sufficient for  or  persons.
 the common eel.—this fish is known frequently to quit its
 native element, and to set off on a wandering expedition in the
 night, or just about the close of clay, over the meadows, in
 search of snails and other prey. it also, sometimes, betakes
 itself to isolated ponds, apparently for no other pleasure than
 that which may be supposed to be found in a change of
 habitation. this, of course, accounts for eels being found in
 waters which were never suspected to contain them. this rambling
 disposition in the eel has been long known to naturalists, and,
 from the following lines, it seems to have been known to the
 ancients:—
"thus the mail'd tortoise, and the wand'ring; eel,
oft to the neighbouring beach will silent steal."
. ingredients.— lbs. of middling-sized eels,  pint of medium
stock, no. , / pint of port wine; salt, cayenne, and mace to taste;
 teaspoonful of essence of anchovy, the juice of / a lemon.
mode.—skin, wash, and clean the eels thoroughly; cut them into pieces
 inches long, and put them into strong salt and water for  hour; dry
them well with a cloth, and fry them brown. put the stock on with the
heads and tails of the eels, and simmer for / hour; strain it, and add
all the other ingredients. put in the eels, and stew gently for /
hour, when serve.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d.
seasonable from june to march.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.— lb. of eels,  egg, a few bread crumbs, hot lard.
mode.—wash the eels, cut them into pieces  inches long, trim and
wipe them very dry; dredge with flour, rub them over with egg, and cover
with bread crumbs; fry of a nice brown in hot lard. if the eels are
small, curl them round, instead of cutting them up. garnish with fried
parsley.
time.— minutes, or rather less. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from june to march.
note.—garfish may be dressed like eels, and either broiled or baked.
 the productiveness of the eel.—"having occasion," says dr.
 anderson, in the bee, "to be once on a visit to a friend's
 house on dee-side, in aberdeenshire, i frequently delighted to
 walk by the banks of the river. i, one day, observed something
 like a black string moving along the edge of the water where it
 was quite shallow. upon closer inspection, i discovered that
 this was a shoal of young eels, so closely joined together as to
 appear, on a superficial view, on continued body, moving briskly
 up against the stream. to avoid the retardment they experienced
 from the force of the current, they kept close along the water's
 edge the whole of the way, following all the bendings and
 sinuosities of the river. where they were embayed, and in still
 water, the shoal dilated in breadth, so as to be sometimes
 nearly a foot broad; but when they turned a cape, where the
 current was strong, they were forced to occupy less space and
 press close to the shore, struggling very hard till they passed
 it. this shoal continued to move on, night and day without
 interruption for several weeks. their progress might be at the
 rate of about a mile an hour. it was easy to catch the animals,
 though they were very active and nimble. they were eels
 perfectly well formed in every respect, but not exceeding two
 inches in length. i conceive that the shoal did not contain, on
 an average, less than from twelve to twenty in breadth; so that
 the number that passed, on the whole, must have been very great.
 whence they came or whither they went, i know not; but the place
 where i saw this, was six miles from the sea."
. ingredients.— lb. of eels, a little chopped parsley,  shalot;
grated nutmeg; pepper and salt to taste; the juice of / a lemon, small
quantity of forcemeat, / pint of béchamel (see sauces); puff paste.
mode.—skin and wash the eels, cut them into pieces  inches long, and
line the bottom of the pie-dish with forcemeat. put in the eels, and
sprinkle them with the parsley, shalots, nutmeg, seasoning, and
lemon-juice, and cover with puff-paste. bake for  hour, or rather more;
make the béchamel hot, and pour it into the pie.
time.—rather more than  hour.
seasonable from august to march.
. ingredients.— large eel; pepper and salt to taste;  blades of
mace,  cloves, a little allspice very finely pounded,  leaves of sage,
and a small bunch of herbs minced very small.
mode.—bone the eel and skin it; split it, and sprinkle it over with
the ingredients, taking care that the spices are very finely pounded,
and the herbs chopped very small. roll it up and bind with a broad piece
of tape, and boil it in water, mixed with a little salt and vinegar,
till tender. it may either be served whole or cut in slices; and when
cold, the eel should be kept in the liquor it was boiled in, but with a
little more vinegar put to it.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from august to march.
 haunts of the eel.—these are usually in mud, among weeds, under
 roots or stumps of trees, or in holes in the banks or the
 bottoms of rivers. here they often grow to an enormous size,
 sometimes weighing as much as fifteen or sixteen pounds. they
 seldom come forth from their hiding-places except in the night;
 and, in winter, bury themselves deep in the mud, on account of
 their great susceptibility of cold.
. ingredients.— lbs. of eels,  carrot,  onion, a little flour, 
glass of sherry; salt, pepper, and nutmeg to taste; bread crumbs,  egg,
 tablespoonfuls of vinegar.
mode.—rub the butter on the bottom of the stewpan; cut up the carrot
and onion, and stir them over the fire for  minutes; dredge in a little
flour, add the wine and seasoning, and boil for / an hour. skin and
wash the eels, cut them into pieces, put them to the other ingredients,
and simmer till tender. when they are done, take them out, let them get
cold, cover them with egg and bread crumbs, and fry them of a nice
brown. put them on a dish, pour sauce piquante over, and serve them hot.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d., exclusive of the sauce
piquante.
seasonable from august to march. sufficient for  or  persons.
 voracity of the eel.—we find in a note upon isaac walton, by
 sir john hawkins, that he knew of eels, when kept in ponds,
 frequently destroying ducks. from a canal near his house at
 twickenham he himself missed many young ducks; and on draining,
 in order to clean it, great numbers of large eels were caught in
 the mud. when some of these were opened, there were found in
 their stomachs the undigested heads of the quacking tribe which
 had become their victims.
. ingredients.— or  young onions, a few mushrooms, when
obtainable; salt, pepper, and nutmeg to taste;  laurel-leaf, / pint
of port wine, / pint of medium stock, no. ; butter and flour to
thicken;  lbs. of eels.
mode.—rub the stewpan with butter, dredge in a little flour, add the
onions cut very small, slightly brown them, and put in all the other
ingredients. wash, and cut up the eels into pieces  inches long; put
them in the stewpan, and simmer for / hour. make round the dish, a
border of croutons, or pieces of toasted bread; arrange the eels in a
pyramid in the centre, and pour over the sauce. serve very hot.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d. for this quantity.
seasonable from august to march. sufficient for  or  persons.
 tenacity of life in the eel.—there is no fish so tenacious of
 life as this. after it is skinned and cut in pieces, the parts
 will continue to move for a considerable time, and no fish will
 live so long out of water.
[illustration: the lamprey.]
 the lamprey.—with the romans, this fish occupied a respectable
 rank among the piscine tribes, and in britain it has at various
 periods stood high in public favour. it was the cause of the
 death of henry i. of england, who ate so much of them, that it
 brought on an attack of indigestion, which carried him off. it
 is an inhabitant of the sea, ascending rivers, principally about
 the end of winter, and, after passing a few months in fresh
 water, returning again to its oceanic residence. it is most in
 season in march, april, and may, but is, by some, regarded as an
 unwholesome food, although looked on by others as a great
 delicacy. they are dressed as eels.
. ingredients.—any remains of cold fish, such as cod or haddock; 
dozen oysters, pepper and salt to taste, bread crumbs sufficient for the
quantity of fish; / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg,  teaspoonful of
finely-chopped parsley.
mode.—clear the fish from the bones, and put a layer of it in a
pie-dish, which sprinkle with pepper and salt; then a layer of bread
crumbs, oysters, nutmeg, and chopped parsley. repeat this till the dish
is quite full. you may form a covering either of bread crumbs, which
should be browned, or puff-paste, which should be cut into long strips,
and laid in cross-bars over the fish, with a line of the paste first
laid round the edge. before putting on the top, pour in some made melted
butter, or a little thin white sauce, and the oyster-liquor, and bake.
time.—if made of cooked fish, / hour; if made of fresh fish and
puff-paste, / hour.
average cost, s. d.
seasonable from september to april.
note.—a nice little dish may be made by flaking any cold fish, adding
a few oysters, seasoning with pepper and salt, and covering with mashed
potatoes; / hour will bake it.
. ingredients.—the remains of any cold fish,  onion,  faggot of
sweet herbs; salt and pepper to taste,  pint of water, equal quantities
of bread crumbs and cold potatoes, / teaspoonful of parsley,  egg,
bread crumbs.
mode.—pick the meat from the bones of the fish, which latter put,
with the head and fins, into a stewpan with the water; add pepper and
salt, the onion and herbs, and stew slowly for gravy about  hours; chop
the fish fine, and mix it well with bread crumbs and cold potatoes,
adding the parsley and seasoning; make the whole into a cake with the
white of an egg, brush it over with egg, cover with bread crumbs, and
fry of a light brown; strain the gravy, pour it over, and stew gently
for / hour, stirring it carefully once or twice. serve hot, and
garnish with slices of lemon and parsley.
time—/ hour, after the gravy is made.
. ingredients.—sufficient water to cover the flounders, salt in the
proportion of  oz. to each gallon, a little vinegar.
mode.—pat on a kettle with enough water to cover the flounders, lay
in the fish, add salt and vinegar in the above proportions, and when it
boils, simmer very gently for  minutes. they must not boil fast, or
they will break. serve with plain melted butter, or parsley and butter.
time.—after the water boils,  minutes.
average cost, d. each.
seasonable from august to november.
[illustration: flounders.]
 the flounder.—this comes under the tribe usually denominated
 flat-fish, and is generally held in the smallest estimation of
 any among them. it is an inhabitant of both the seas and the
 rivers, while it thrives in ponds. on the english coasts it is
 very abundant, and the london market consumes it in large
 quantities. it is considered easy of digestion, and the thames
 flounder is esteemed a delicate fish.
. ingredients.—flounders, egg, and bread crumbs; boiling lard.
mode.—cleanse the fish, and, two hours before they are wanted, rub
them inside and out with salt, to render them firm; wash and wipe them
very dry, dip them into egg, and sprinkle over with bread crumbs; fry
them in boiling lard, dish on a hot napkin, and garnish with crisped
parsley.
time.—from  to  minutes, according to size.
average cost, d. each.
seasonable from august to november.
sufficient,  for each person.
. ingredients.—egg and bread crumbs sufficient for the quantity of
fish; hot lard.
mode.—do not scrape off the scales, but take out the gills and
inside, and cleanse thoroughly; wipe them dry, flour and dip them into
egg, and sprinkle over with bread crumbs. fry of a nice brown.
time.— or  minutes.
average cost. seldom bought.
seasonable from march to july.
sufficient,  for each person.
[illustration: the gudgeon.]
 the gudgeon.—this is a fresh-water fish, belonging to the carp
 genus, and is found in placid streams and lakes. it was highly
 esteemed by the greeks, and was, at the beginning of supper,
 served fried at rome. it abounds both in france and germany; and
 is both excellent and numerous in some of the rivers of england.
 its flesh is firm, well-flavoured, and easily digested.
gurnet, or gurnard.
. ingredients.— gurnet,  oz. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—cleanse the fish thoroughly, and cut off the fins; have ready
some boiling water, with salt in the above proportion; put the fish in,
and simmer very gently for / hour. parsley and butter, or anchovy
sauce, should be served with it.
time.—/ hour.
average cost. seldom bought.
seasonable from october to march, but in perfection in october.
sufficient, a middling sized one for  persons.
note.—this fish is frequently stuffed with forcemeat and baked.
[illustration: the gurnet.]
 the gurnet.-"if i be not ashamed of my soldiers, i am a souced
 gurnet," says falstaff; which shows that this fish has been long
 known in england. it is very common on the british coasts, and
 is an excellent fish as food.
. ingredients.—a nice forcemeat (see forcemeats), butter to taste,
egg and bread crumbs.
mode.—scale and clean the fish, without cutting it open much; put in
a nice delicate forcemeat, and sew up the slit. brush it over with egg,
sprinkle over bread crumbs, and baste frequently with butter. garnish
with parsley and cut lemon, and serve with a nice brown gravy, plain
melted butter, or anchovy sauce. the egg and bread crumbs can be
omitted, and pieces of butter placed over the fish.
time.—large haddock, / hour; moderate size, / hour.
seasonable from august to february.
average cost, from d. upwards.
note.—haddocks may be filleted, rubbed over with egg and bread
crumbs, and fried a nice brown; garnish with crisped parsley.
[illustration: the haddock.]
 the haddock.—this fish migrates in immense shoals, and arrives
 on the yorkshire coast about the middle of winter. it is an
 inhabitant of the northern seas of europe, but does not enter
 the baltic, and is not known in the mediterranean. on each side
 of the body, just beyond the gills, it has a dark spot, which
 superstition asserts to be the impressions of the finger and
 thumb of st. peter, when taking the tribute money out of a fish
 of this species.
. ingredients.—sufficient water to cover the fish; / lb. of salt
to each gallon of water.
mode.—scrape the fish, take out the inside, wash it thoroughly, and
lay it in a kettle, with enough water to cover it and salt in the above
proportion. simmer gently from  to  minutes, or rather more, should
the fish be very large. for small haddocks, fasten the tails in their
mouths, and put them into boiling water.  to  minutes will cook
them. serve with plain melted butter, or anchovy sauce.
time.—large haddock, / hour; small, / hour, or rather less.
average cost, from d. upwards.
seasonable from august to february.
 weight of the haddock.—the haddock seldom grows to any great
 size. in general, they do not weigh more than two or three
 pounds, or exceed ten or twelve inches in size. such are
 esteemed very delicate eating; but they have been caught three
 feet long, when their flesh is coarse.
. dried haddock should be gradually warmed through, either before or
over a nice clear fire. hub a little piece of butter over, just before
sending it to table.
. ingredients.— large thick haddock,  bay-leaves,  small bunch of
savoury herbs, not forgetting parsley, a little butter and pepper;
boiling water.
mode.—cut up the haddock into square pieces, make a basin hot by
means of hot water, which pour out. lay in the fish, with the bay-leaves
and herbs; cover with boiling water; put a plate over to keep in the
steam, and let it remain for  minutes. take out the slices, put them
in a hot dish, rub over with butter and pepper, and serve.
time.— minutes. seasonable at any time, but best in winter.
 the finnan haddock.—this is the common haddock cured and dried,
 and takes its name from the fishing-village of findhorn, near
 aberdeen, in scotland, where the art has long attained to
 perfection. the haddocks are there hung up for a day or two in
 the smoke of peat, when they are ready for cooking, and are
 esteemed, by the scotch, a great delicacy. in london, an
 imitation of them is made by washing the fish over with
 pyroligneous acid, and hanging it up in a dry place for a few
 days.
red herrings, or yarmouth bloaters.
. the best way to cook these is to make incisions in the skin across
the fish, because they do not then require to be so long on the fire,
and will be far better than when cut open. the hard roe makes a nice
relish by pounding it in a mortar, with a little anchovy, and spreading
it on toast. if very dry, soak in warm water  hour before dressing.
 the red herring.—red herrings lie twenty-four hours in the
 brine, when they are taken out and hung up in a smoking-house
 formed to receive them. a brushwood fire is then kindled beneath
 them, and when they are sufficiently smoked and dried, they are
 put into barrels for carriage.
. ingredients.— herrings,  bay-leaves,  cloves,  allspice, 
small blades of mace, cayenne pepper and salt to taste, sufficient
vinegar to fill up the dish.
mode.—take the herrings, cut off the heads, and gut them. put them in
a pie-dish, heads and tails alternately, and, between each layer,
sprinkle over the above ingredients. cover the fish with the vinegar,
and bake for / hour, but do not use it till quite cold. the herrings
may be cut down the front, the backbone taken out, and closed again.
sprats done in this way are very delicious.
time.—/ an hour.
average cost, d. each.
to choose the herring.—the more scales this fish has, the surer the
sign of its freshness. it should also have a bright and silvery look;
but if red about the head, it is a sign that it has been dead for some
time.
[illustration: the herring.]
 the herring.—the herring tribe are found in the greatest
 abundance in the highest northern latitudes, where they find a
 quiet retreat, and security from their numerous enemies. here
 they multiply beyond expression, and, in shoals, come forth from
 their icy region to visit other portions of the great deep. in
 june they are found about shetland, whence they proceed down to
 the orkneys, where they divide, and surround the islands of
 great britain and ireland. the principal british
 herring-fisheries are off the scotch and norfolk coasts; and the
 fishing is always carried on by means of nets, which are usually
 laid at night; for, if stretched by day, they are supposed to
 frighten the fish away. the moment the herring is taken out of
 the water it dies. hence the origin of the common saying, "dead
 as a herring."
. ingredients.—any cold fish,  teacupful of boiled rice,  oz. of
butter,  teaspoonful of mustard,  soft-boiled eggs, salt and cayenne
to taste.
mode.—pick the fish carefully from the bones, mix with the other
ingredients, and serve very hot. the quantities may be varied according
to the amount of fish used.
time.—/ hour after the rice is boiled.
average cost, d., exclusive of the fish.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—buy the lobsters alive, and choose those that are heavy and
full of motion, which is an indication of their freshness. when the
shell is incrusted, it is a sign they are old: medium-sized lobsters are
the best. have ready a stewpan of boiling water, salted in the above
proportion; put in the lobster, and keep it boiling quickly from 
minutes to / hour, according to its size, and do not forget to skim
well. if it boils too long, the meat becomes thready, and if not done
enough, the spawn is not red: this must be obviated by great attention.
hub the shell over with a little butter or sweet oil, which wipe off
again.
time.—small lobster,  minutes to / hour; large ditto, / to /
hour.
average cost, medium size, s. d. to s. d.
seasonable all the year, but best from march to october.
to choose lobsters.—this shell-fish, if it has been cooked alive, as it
ought to have been, will have a stiffness in the tail, which, if gently
raised, will return with a spring. care, however, must be taken in thus
proving it; for if the tail is pulled straight out, it will not return;
when the fish might be pronounced inferior, which, in reality, may not
be the case. in order to be good, lobsters should be weighty for their
bulk; if light, they will be watery; and those of the medium size, are
always the best. small-sized lobsters are cheapest, and answer very well
for sauce. in boiling lobsters, the appearance of the shell will be much
improved by rubbing over it a little butter or salad-oil on being
immediately taken from the pot.
[illustration: the lobster.]
 the lobster.—this is one of the crab tribe, and is found on
 most of the rocky coasts of great britain. some are caught with
 the hand, but the larger number in pots, which serve all the
 purposes of a trap, being made of osiers, and baited with
 garbage. they are shaped like a wire mousetrap; so that when the
 lobsters once enter them, they cannot get out again. they are
 fastened to a cord and sunk in the sea, and their place marked
 by a buoy. the fish is very prolific, and deposits of its eggs
 in the sand, where they are soon hatched. on the coast of
 norway, they are very abundant, and it is from there that the
 english metropolis is mostly supplied. they are rather
 indigestible, and, as a food, not so nurtritive as they are
 generally supposed to be.
. ingredients.— lobster,  oz. of butter, grated nutmeg; salt,
pepper, and pounded mace, to taste; bread crumbs,  eggs.
mode.—pound the meat of the lobster to a smooth paste with the butter
and seasoning, and add a few bread crumbs. beat the eggs, and make the
whole mixture into the form of a lobster; pound the spawn, and sprinkle
over it. bake / hour, and just before serving, lay over it the tail
and body shell, with the small claws underneath, to resemble a lobster.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.— hen lobster, lettuces, endive, small salad
(whatever is in season), a little chopped beetroot,  hard-boiled eggs,
a few slices of cucumber. for dressing, equal quantities of oil and
vinegar,  teaspoonful of made mustard, the yolks of  eggs; cayenne and
salt to taste;  teaspoonful of anchovy sauce. these ingredients should
be mixed perfectly smooth, and form a creamy-looking sauce.
mode.—wash the salad, and thoroughly dry it by shaking it in a cloth.
cut up the lettuces and endive, pour the dressing on them, and lightly
throw in the small salad. mix all well together with the pickings from
the body of the lobster; pick the meat from the shell, cut it up into
nice square pieces, put half in the salad, the other half reserve for
garnishing. separate the yolks from the whites of  hard-boiled eggs;
chop the whites very fine, and rub the yolks through a sieve, and
afterwards the coral from the inside. arrange the salad lightly on a
glass dish, and garnish, first with a row of sliced cucumber, then with
the pieces of lobster, the yolks and whites of the eggs, coral, and
beetroot placed alternately, and arranged in small separate bunches, so
that the colours contrast nicely.
average cost, s. d. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from april to october; may be had all the year, but salad
is scarce and expensive in winter.
note.—a few crayfish make a pretty garnishing to lobster salad.
 the shell of the lobster.—like the others of its tribe, the
 lobster annually casts its shell. previously to its throwing off
 the old one, it appears sick, languid, and restless, but in the
 course of a few days it is entirely invested in its new coat of
 armour. whilst it is in a defenceless state, however, it seeks
 some lonely place, where it may lie undisturbed, and escape the
 horrid fate of being devoured by some of its own species who
 have the advantage of still being encased in their mail.
lobster (a la mode francaise).
. ingredients.— lobster,  tablespoonfuls of white stock, 
tablespoonfuls of cream, pounded mace, and cayenne to taste; bread
crumbs.
mode.—pick the meat from the shell, and cut it up into small square
pieces; put the stock, cream, and seasoning into a stewpan, add the
lobster, and let it simmer gently for  minutes. serve it in the shell,
which must be nicely cleaned, and have a border of puff-paste; cover it
with bread crumbs, place small pieces of butter over, and brown before
the fire, or with a salamander.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
 celerity of the lobster.—in its element, the lobster is able to
 run with great speed upon its legs, or small claws, and, if
 alarmed, to spring, tail foremost, to a considerable distance,
 "even," it is said, "with the swiftness of a bird flying."
 fishermen have seen some of them pass about thirty feet with a
 wonderful degree of swiftness. when frightened, they will take
 their spring, and, like a chamois of the alps, plant themselves
 upon the very spot upon which they designed to hold themselves.
lobster curry (an entree).
. ingredients.— lobster,  onions,  oz. butter,  tablespoonful of
curry-powder, / pint of medium stock, no. , the juice of / lemon.
mode.—pick the meat from the shell, and cut it into nice square
pieces; fry the onions of a pale brown in the butter, stir in the
curry-powder and stock, and simmer till it thickens, when put in the
lobster; stew the whole slowly for / hour, and stir occasionally; and
just before sending to table, put in the lemon-juice. serve boiled rice
with it, the same as for other curries.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, s.
seasonable at any time.
lobster cutlets (an entree).
. ingredients.— large hen lobster,  oz. fresh butter, /
saltspoonful of salt, pounded mace, grated nutmeg, cayenne and white
pepper to taste, egg, and bread crumbs.
mode.—pick the meat from the shell, and pound it in a mortar with the
butter, and gradually add the mace and seasoning, well mixing the
ingredients; beat all to a smooth paste, and add a little of the spawn;
divide the mixture into pieces of an equal size, and shape them like
cutlets. they should not be very thick. brush them over with egg, and
sprinkle with bread crumbs, and stick a short piece of the small claw in
the top of each; fry them of a nice brown in boiling lard, and drain
them before the fire, on a sieve reversed; arrange them nicely on a
dish, and pour béchamel in the middle, but not over the cutlets.
time.—about  minutes after the cutlets are made.
average cost for this dish, s. d.
seasonable all the year. sufficient for  or  persons.
 ancient mode of cooking the lobster.—when this fish was to be
 served for the table, among the ancients, it was opened
 lengthwise, and filled with a gravy composed of coriander and
 pepper. it was then put on the gridiron and slowly cooked,
 whilst it was being basted with the same kind of gravy with
 which the flesh had become impregnated.
. when the lobster is boiled, rub it over with a little salad-oil,
which wipe off again; separate the body from the tail, break off the
great claws, and crack them at the joints, without injuring the meat;
split the tail in halves, and arrange all neatly in a dish, with the
body upright in the middle, and garnish with parsley. (see coloured
plate, h.)
lobster patties (an entree).
. ingredients.—minced lobster,  tablespoonfuls of béchamel,  drops
of anchovy sauce, lemon-juice, cayenne to taste.
mode.—line the patty-pans with puff-paste, and put into each a small
piece of bread: cover with paste, brush over with egg, and bake of a
light colour. take as much lobster as is required, mince the meat very
fine, and add the above ingredients; stir it over the fire for 
minutes; remove the lids of the patty-cases, take out the bread, fill
with the mixture, and replace the covers.
seasonable at any time.
 local attachment of the lobster.—it is said that the attachment
 of this animal is strong to some particular parts of the sea, a
 circumstance celebrated in the following lines:—
"nought like their home the constant lobsters prize,
and foreign shores and seas unknown despise.
though cruel hands the banish'd wretch expel,
and force the captive from his native cell,
he will, if freed, return with anxious care,
find the known rock, and to his home repair;
no novel customs learns in different seas,
but wonted food and home-taught manners please."
. ingredients.— lobsters; seasoning to taste, of nutmeg, pounded
mace, white pepper, and salt; / lb. of butter,  or  bay-leaves.
mode.—take out the meat carefully from the shell, but do not cut it
up. put some butter at the bottom of a dish, lay in the lobster as
evenly as possible, with the bay-leaves and seasoning between. cover
with butter, and bake for / hour in a gentle oven. when done, drain
the whole on a sieve, and lay the pieces in potting-jars, with the
seasoning about them. when cold, pour over it clarified butter, and, if
very highly seasoned, it will keep some time.
time.—/ hour. average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
note.—potted lobster may be used cold, or as fricassee with cream
sauce.
 how the lobster feeds.—the pincers of the lobster's large claws
 are furnished with nobs, and those of the other, are always
 serrated. with the former, it keeps firm hold of the stalks of
 submarine plants, and with the latter, it cuts and minces its
 food with great dexterity. the knobbed, or numb claw, as it is
 called by fishermen, is sometimes on the right and sometimes on
 the left, indifferently.
. ingredients.— middling-sized mackerel, a nice delicate forcemeat
(see forcemeats),  oz. of butter; pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—clean the fish, take out the roes, and fill up with forcemeat,
and sew up the slit. flour, and put them in a dish, heads and tails
alternately, with the roes; and, between each layer, put some little
pieces of butter, and pepper and salt. bake for / an hour, and either
serve with plain melted butter or a maître d'hôtel sauce.
time.—/ hour. average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable from april to july.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—baked mackerel may be dressed in the same way as baked herrings
(see no. ), and may also be stewed in wine.
 weight of the mackerel.—the greatest weight of this fish seldom
 exceeds  lbs., whilst their ordinary length runs between  and
  inches. they die almost immediately after they are taken from
 their element, and, for a short time, exhibit a phosphoric
 light.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—cleanse the inside of the fish thoroughly, and lay it in the
kettle with sufficient water to cover it with salt as above; bring it
gradually to boil, skim well, and simmer gently till done; dish them on
a hot napkin, heads and tails alternately, and garnish with fennel.
fennel sauce and plain melted butter are the usual accompaniments to
boiled mackerel; but caper or anchovy sauce is sometimes served with it.
(see coloured plate, f.)
time.—after the water boils,  minutes; for large mackerel, allow
more time.
average cost, from d.
seasonable from april to july.
note.—when variety is desired, fillet the mackerel, boil it, and pour
over parsley and butter; send some of this, besides, in a tureen.
. ingredients.—pepper and salt to taste, a small quantity of oil.
mode.—mackerel should never be washed when intended to be broiled,
but merely wiped very clean and dry, after taking out the gills and
insides. open the back, and put in a little pepper, salt, and oil; broil
it over a clear fire, turn it over on both sides, and also on the back.
when sufficiently cooked, the flesh can be detached from the bone, which
will be in about  minutes for a small mackerel. chop a little parsley,
work it up in the butter, with pepper and salt to taste, and a squeeze
of lemon-juice, and put it in the back. serve before the butter is quite
melted, with a maître d'hôtel sauce in a tureen.
time.—small mackerel  minutes. average cost, from d.
seasonable from april to july.
[illustration: the mackerel.]
 the mackerel.—this is not only one of the most
 elegantly-formed, but one of the most beautifully-coloured
 fishes, when taken out of the sea, that we have. death, in some
 degree, impairs the vivid splendour of its colours; but it does
 not entirely obliterate them. it visits the shores of great
 britain in countless shoals, appearing about march, off the
 land's end; in the bays of devonshire, about april; off brighton
 in the beginning of may; and on the coast of suffolk about the
 beginning of june. in the orkneys they are seen till august; but
 the greatest fishery is on the west coasts of england.
to choose mackerel.—in choosing this fish, purchasers should, to a
great extent, be regulated by the brightness of its appearance. if it
have a transparent, silvery hue, the flesh is good; but if it be red
about the head, it is stale.
. ingredients.— large mackerel,  oz. butter,  small bunch of
chopped herbs,  tablespoonfuls of medium stock, no. , 
tablespoonfuls of béchamel (see sauces); salt, cayenne, and
lemon-juice to taste.
mode.—clean the fish, and fillet it; scald the herbs, chop them fine,
and put them with the butter and stock into a stewpan. lay in the
mackerel, and simmer very gently for  minutes; take them out, and put
them on a hot dish. dredge in a little flour, add the other ingredients,
give one boil, and pour it over the mackerel.
time.— minutes. average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable from april to july.
sufficient for  persons.
note.—fillets of mackerel may be covered with egg and bread crumbs,
and fried of a nice brown. serve with maître d'hôtel sauce and plain
melted butter.
 the voracity of the mackerel.—the voracity of this fish is very
 great, and, from their immense numbers, they are bold in
 attacking objects of which they might, otherwise, be expected to
 have a wholesome dread. pontoppidan relates an anecdote of a
 sailor belonging to a ship lying in one of the harbours on the
 coast of norway, who, having gone into the sea to bathe, was
 suddenly missed by his companions; in the course of a few
 minutes, however, he was seen on the surface, with great numbers
 of mackerel clinging to him by their mouths. his comrades
 hastened in a boat to his assistance; but when they had struck
 the fishes from him and got him up, they found he was so
 severely bitten, that he shortly afterward expired.
. ingredients.— peppercorns,  bay-leaves, / pint of vinegar, 
mackerel.
mode.—boil the mackerel as in the recipe no. , and lay them in a
dish; take half the liquor they were boiled in; add as much vinegar,
peppercorns, and bay-leaves; boil for  minutes, and when cold, pour
over the fish.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, s. d.
 mackerel garum.—this brine, so greatly esteemed by the
 ancients, was manufactured from various kinds of fishes. when
 mackerel was employed, a few of them were placed in a small
 vase, with a large quantity of salt, which was well stirred, and
 then left to settle for some hours. on the following day, this
 was put into an earthen pot, which was uncovered, and placed in
 a situation to get the rays of the sun. at the end of two or
 three months, it was hermetically sealed, after having had added
 to it a quantity of old wine, equal to one third of the mixture.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—if the fish be very large, it should be laid in cold water, and
gradually brought to a boil; if small, put it in boiling water, salted
in the above proportion. serve with anchovy sauce and plain melted
butter.
time.—according to size, / to / hour.
average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from july to october.
[illustration: the grey mullet.]
 the grey mullet.—this is quite a different fish from the red
 mullet, is abundant on the sandy coasts of great britain, and
 ascends rivers for miles. on the south coast it is very
 plentiful, and is considered a fine fish. it improves more than
 any other salt-water fish when kept in ponds.
. ingredients.—oiled paper, thickening of butter and flour, /
teaspoonful of anchovy sauce,  glass of sherry; cayenne and salt to
taste.
mode.—clean the fish, take out the gills, but leave the inside, fold
in oiled paper, and bake them gently. when done, take the liquor that
flows from the fish, add a thickening of butter kneaded with flour; put
in the other ingredients, and let it boil for  minutes. serve the sauce
in a tureen, and the fish, either with or without the paper cases.
time.—about  minutes.
average cost, s. each.
seasonable at any time, but more plentiful in summer.
note.—red mullet may be broiled, and should be folded in oiled paper,
the same as in the preceding recipe, and seasoned with pepper and salt.
they may be served without sauce; but if any is required, use melted
butter, italian or anchovy sauce. they should never be plain boiled.
[illustration: the striped red mullet.]
 the striped red mullet.—this fish was very highly esteemed by
 the ancients, especially by the romans, who gave the most
 extravagant prices for it. those of  lbs. weight were valued at
 about ł each; those of  lbs. at ł, and, in the reign of
 tiberius, three of them were sold for ł. to witness the
 changing loveliness of their colour during their dying agonies,
 was one of the principal reasons that such a high price was paid
 for one of these fishes. it frequents our cornish and sussex
 coasts, and is in high request, the flesh being firm, white, and
 well flavoured.
. ingredients.— dozen oysters,  oz. butter,  tablespoonful of
ketchup, a little chopped lemon-peel, / teaspoonful of chopped
parsley.
mode.—boil the oysters for  minute in their own liquor, and drain
them; fry them with the butter, ketchup, lemon-peel, and parsley; lay
them on a dish, and garnish with fried potatoes, toasted sippets, and
parsley. this is a delicious delicacy, and is a favourite italian dish.
time.— minutes. average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable from september to april.
sufficient for  persons.
[illustration: the edible oyster.]
 the edible oyster:—this shell-fish is almost universally
 distributed near the shores of seas in all latitudes, and they
 especially abound on the coasts of france and britain. the
 coasts most celebrated, in england, for them, are those of essex
 and suffolk. here they are dredged up by means of a net with an
 iron scraper at the mouth, that is dragged by a rope from a boat
 over the beds. as soon as taken from their native beds, they are
 stored in pits, formed for the purpose, furnished with sluices,
 through which, at the spring tides, the water is suffered to
 flow. this water, being stagnant, soon becomes green in warm
 weather; and, in a few days afterwards, the oysters acquire the
 same tinge, which increases their value in the market. they do
 not, however, attain their perfection and become fit for sale
 till the end of six or eight weeks. oysters are not considered
 proper for the table till they are about a year and a half old;
 so that the brood of one spring are not to be taken for sale,
 till, at least, the september twelvemonth afterwards.
. ingredients.—oysters, say  pint,  oz. butter, flour, 
tablespoonfuls of white stock,  tablespoonfuls of cream; pepper and
salt to taste; bread crumbs, oiled butter.
mode.—scald the oysters in their own liquor, take them out, beard
them, and strain the liquor free from grit. put  oz. of batter into a
stewpan; when melted, dredge in sufficient flour to dry it up; add the
stock, cream, and strained liquor, and give one boil. put in the oysters
and seasoning; let them gradually heat through, but not boil. have ready
the scallop-shells buttered; lay in the oysters, and as much of the
liquid as they will hold; cover them over with bread crumbs, over which
drop a little oiled butter. brown them in the oven, or before the fire,
and serve quickly, and very hot.
time.—altogether, / hour.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
prepare the oysters as in the preceding recipe, and put them in a
scallop-shell or saucer, and between each layer sprinkle over a few
bread crumbs, pepper, salt, and grated nutmeg; place small pieces of
butter over, and bake before the fire in a dutch oven. put sufficient
bread crumbs on the top to make a smooth surface, as the oysters should
not be seen.
time.—about / hour.
average cost, s. d.
seasonable from september to april.
. ingredients.— pint of oysters,  oz. of butter, flour, / pint
of cream; cayenne and salt to taste;  blade of pounded mace.
mode.—scald the oysters in their own liquor, take them out, beard
them, and strain the liquor; put the butter into a stewpan, dredge in
sufficient flour to dry it up, add the oyster-liquor and mace, and stir
it over a sharp fire with a wooden spoon; when it comes to a boil, add
the cream, oysters, and seasoning. let all simmer for  or  minutes,
but not longer, or the oysters would harden. serve on a hot dish, and
garnish with croutons, or toasted sippets of bread. a small piece of
lemon-peel boiled with the oyster-liquor, and taken out before the cream
is added, will be found an improvement.
time.—altogether  minutes.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable from september to april.
sufficient for  persons.
 the oyster and the scallop.—the oyster is described as a
 bivalve shell-fish, having the valves generally unequal. the
 hinge is without teeth, but furnished with a somewhat oval
 cavity, and mostly with lateral transverse grooves. from a
 similarity in the structure of the hinge, oysters and scallops
 have been classified as one tribe; but they differ very
 essentially both in their external appearance and their habits.
 oysters adhere to rocks, or, as in two or three species, to
 roots of trees on the shore; while the scallops are always
 detached, and usually lurk in the sand.
oyster patties (an entree).
. ingredients.— dozen oysters,  oz. butter,  tablespoonfuls of
cream, a little lemon-juice,  blade of pounded mace; cayenne to taste.
mode.—scald the oysters in their own liquor, beard them, and cut each
one into  pieces. put the butter into a stewpan, dredge in sufficient
flour to dry it up; add the strained oyster-liquor with the other
ingredients; put in the oysters, and let them heat gradually, but not
boil fast. make the patty-cases as directed for lobster patties, no.
: fill with the oyster mixture, and replace the covers.
time.— minutes for the oysters to simmer in the mixture.
average cost, exclusive of the patty-cases, s. d.
seasonable from september to april.
 the oyster fishery.—the oyster fishery in britain is esteemed
 of so much importance, that it is regulated by a court of
 admiralty. in the month of may, the fishermen are allowed to
 take the oysters, in order to separate the spawn from the
 cultch, the latter of which is thrown in again, to preserve the
 bed for the future. after this month, it is felony to carry away
 the cultch, and otherwise punishable to take any oyster, between
 the shells of which, when closed, a shilling will rattle.
. put them in a tub, and cover them with salt and water. let them
remain for  hours, when they are to be taken out, and allowed to stand
for another  hours without water. if left without water every
alternate  hours, they will be much better than if constantly kept in
it. never put the same water twice to them.
. ingredients.—/ pint of oysters,  eggs, / pint of milk,
sufficient flour to make the batter; pepper and salt to taste; when
liked, a little nutmeg; hot lard.
mode.—scald the oysters in their own liquor, beard them, and lay them
on a cloth, to drain thoroughly. break the eggs into a basin, mix the
flour with them, add the milk gradually, with nutmeg and seasoning, and
put the oysters in the batter. make some lard hot in a deep frying-pan,
put in the oysters, one at a time; when done, take them up with a
sharp-pointed skewer, and dish them on a napkin. fried oysters are
frequently used for garnishing boiled fish, and then a few bread crumbs
should be added to the flour.
time.— or  minutes.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable from september to april.
sufficient for  persons.
 excellence of the english oyster.—the french assert that the
 english oysters, which are esteemed the best in europe, were
 originally procured from cancalle bay, near st. malo; but they
 assign no proof for this. it is a fact, however, that the
 oysters eaten in ancient rome were nourished in the channel
 which then parted the isle of thanet from england, and which has
 since been filled up, and converted into meadows.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—scale the fish, take out the gills and clean it thoroughly; lay
it in boiling water, salted as above, and simmer gently for  minutes.
if the fish is very large, longer time must be allowed. garnish with
parsley, and serve with plain melted butter, or dutch sauce. perch do
not preserve so good a flavour when stewed as when dressed in any other
way.
time.—middling-sized perch, / hour.
seasonable from september to november.
note.—tench may be boiled the same way, and served with the same
sauces.
[illustration: the perch.]
 the perch.—this is one of the best, as it is one of the most
 common, of our fresh-water fishes, and is found in nearly all
 the lakes and rivers in britain and ireland, as well as through
 the whole of europe within the temperate zone. it is extremely
 voracious, and it has the peculiarity of being gregarious, which
 is contrary to the nature of all fresh-water fishes of prey. the
 best season to angle for it is from the beginning of may to the
 middle of july. large numbers of this fish are bred in the
 hampton court and bushy park ponds, all of which are well
 supplied with running water and with plenty of food; yet they
 rarely attain a large size. in the regent's park they are also
 very numerous; but are seldom heavier than three quarters of a
 pound.
. ingredients.—egg and bread crumbs, hot lard.
mode.—scale and clean the fish, brush it over with egg, and cover
with bread crumbs. have ready some boiling lard; put the fish in, and
fry a nice brown. serve with plain melted butter or anchovy sauce.
time.— minutes.
seasonable from september to november.
note.—fry tench in the same way.
. ingredients.—equal quantities of stock no.  and sherry, 
bay-leaf,  clove of garlic, a small bunch of parsley,  cloves, salt to
taste; thickening of butter and flour, pepper, grated nutmeg, /
teaspoonful of anchovy sauce.
mode.—scale the fish and take out the gills, and clean them
thoroughly; lay them in a stewpan with sufficient stock and sherry just
to cover them. put in the bay-leaf, garlic, parsley, cloves, and salt,
and simmer till tender. when done, take out the fish, strain the liquor,
add a thickening of butter and flour, the pepper, nutmeg, and the
anchovy sauce, and stir it over the fire until somewhat reduced, when
pour over the fish, and serve.
time.—about  minutes.
seasonable from september to november.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water; a little
vinegar.
mode.—scale and clean the pike, and fasten the tail in its mouth by
means of a skewer. lay it in cold water, and when it boils, throw in the
salt and vinegar. the time for boiling depends, of course, on the size
of the fish; but a middling-sized pike will take about / an hour.
serve with dutch or anchovy sauce, and plain melted butter.
time.—according to size, / to  hour.—average cost. seldom
bought.
seasonable from september to march.
[illustration: the pike.]
 the pike.—this fish is, on account of its voracity, termed the
 freshwater shark, and is abundant in most of the european lakes,
 especially those of the northern parts. it grows to an immense
 size, some attaining to the measure of eight feet, in lapland
 and russia. the smaller lakes, of this country and ireland, vary
 in the kinds of fish they produce; some affording trout, others
 pike; and so on. where these happen to be together, however, the
 trout soon becomes extinct. "within a short distance of
 castlebar," says a writer on sports, "there is a small bog-lake
 called derreens. ten years ago it was celebrated for its
 numerous well-sized trouts. accidentally pike effected a passage
 into the lake from the minola river, and now the trouts are
 extinct, or, at least, none of them are caught or seen. previous
 to the intrusion of the pikes, half a dozen trouts would be
 killed in an evening in derreens, whose collective weight often
 amounted to twenty pounds." as an eating fish, the pike is in
 general dry.
. ingredients.— or  pike, a nice delicate stuffing (see
forcemeats),  egg, bread crumbs, / lb. butter.
mode.—scale the fish, take out the gills, wash, and wipe it
thoroughly dry; stuff it with forcemeat, sew it up, and fasten the tail
in the mouth by means of a skewer; brush it over with egg, sprinkle with
bread crumbs, and baste with butter, before putting it in the oven,
which must be well heated. when the pike is of a nice brown colour,
cover it with buttered paper, as the outside would become too dry. if 
are dressed, a little variety may be made by making one of them green
with a little chopped parsley mixed with the bread crumbs. serve anchovy
or dutch sauce, and plain melted butter with it.
time.—according to size,  hour, more or less.
average cost.—seldom bought.
seasonable from september to march.
note.—pike ŕ la génévese may be stewed in the same manner as salmon
ŕ la génévese.
.—ingredients.—hot lard, or clarified dripping; egg and bread
crumbs.
mode.—this fish is fried in the same manner as soles. wash and wipe
them thoroughly dry, and let them remain in a cloth until it is time to
dress them. brush them over with egg, and cover with bread crumbs mixed
with a little flour. fry of a nice brown in hot dripping or lard, and
garnish with fried parsley and cut lemon. send them to table with
shrimp-sauce and plain melted butter.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, d. each.
seasonable from may to november.
sufficient,  plaice for  persons.
note.—plaice may be boiled plain, and served with melted butter.
garnish with parsley and cut lemon.
. ingredients.— or  plaice,  onions, / oz. ground ginger, 
pint of lemon-juice, / pint water,  eggs; cayenne to taste.
mode.—cut the fish into pieces about  inches wide, salt them, and
let them remain / hour. slice and fry the onions a light brown; put
them in a stewpan, on the top of which put the fish without washing, and
add the ginger, lemon-juice, and water. cook slowly for / hour, and do
not let the fish boil, or it will break. take it out, and when the
liquor is cool, add  well-beaten eggs; simmer till it thickens, when
pour over the fish, and serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable from may to november.
sufficient for  persons; according to size.
[illustration: the plaice.]
 the plaice.—this fish is found both in the baltic and the
 mediterranean, and is also abundant on the coast of england. it
 keeps well, and, like all ground-fish, is very tenacious of
 life. its flesh is inferior to that of the sole, and, as it is a
 low-priced fish, it is generally bought by the poor. the best
 brought to the london market are called dowers plaice, from
 their being caught in the dowers, or flats, between hastings and
 folkstone.
. ingredients.—/ lb. salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—prawns should be very red, and have no spawn under the tail;
much depends on their freshness and the way in which they are cooked.
throw them into boiling water, salted as above, and keep them boiling
for about  or  minutes. shrimps should be done in the same way; but
less time must be allowed. it may easily be known when they are done by
their changing colour. care should be taken that they are not
over-boiled, as they then become tasteless and indigestible.
time.—prawns, about  minutes; shrimps, about  minutes.
average cost, prawns, s. per lb.; shrimps, d. per pint.
seasonable all the year.
. cover a dish with a large cup reversed, and over that lay a small
white napkin. arrange the prawns on it in the form of a pyramid, and
garnish with plenty of parsley.
. ingredients.— oz. of salt to each gallon of water,—sufficient
water to cover the fish.
mode.—scale and clean the fish, and be particular that no blood is
left inside; lay it in the fish-kettle with sufficient cold water to
cover it, adding salt in the above proportion. bring it quickly to a
boil, take off all the scum, and let it simmer gently till the fish is
done, which will be when the meat separates easily from the bone.
experience alone can teach the cook to fix the time for boiling fish;
but it is especially to be remembered, that it should never be
underdressed, as then nothing is more unwholesome. neither let it remain
in the kettle after it is sufficiently cooked, as that would render it
insipid, watery, and colourless. drain it, and if not wanted for a few
minutes, keep it warm by means of warm cloths laid over it. serve on a
hot napkin, garnish with cut lemon and parsley, and send lobster or
shrimp sauce, and plain melted butter to table with it. a dish of
dressed cucumber usually accompanies this fish.
time.— minutes to each lb. for large thick salmon;  minutes for
thin fish. average cost, in full season, s. d. per lb.
seasonable from april to august.
sufficient, / lb., or rather less, for each person.
note.—cut lemon should be put on the table with this fish; and a
little of the juice squeezed over it is considered by many persons a
most agreeable addition. boiled peas are also, by some connoisseurs,
considered especially adapted to be served with salmon.
to choose salmon.—to be good, the belly should be firm and thick, which
may readily be ascertained by feeling it with the thumb and finger. the
circumstance of this fish having red gills, though given as a standing
rule in most cookery-books, as a sign of its goodness, is not at all to
be relied on, as this quality can be easily given them by art.
. ingredients.— slices of salmon, / lb. batter, / teaspoonful
of chopped parsley,  shalot; salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg to taste.
mode.—lay the salmon in a baking-dish, place pieces of butter over
it, and add the other ingredients, rubbing a little of the seasoning
into the fish; baste it frequently; when done, take it out and drain for
a minute or two; lay it in a dish, pour caper sauce over it, and serve.
salmon dressed in this way, with tomato sauce, is very delicious.
time.—about / hour. average cost, s. d. per lb.
seasonable from april to august.
sufficient for  or  persons.
 the migratory habits of the salmon.—the instinct with which the
 salmon revisits its native river, is one of the most curious
 circumstances in its natural history. as the swallow returns
 annually to its nest, so it returns to the same spot to deposit
 its ova. this fact would seem to have been repeatedly proved. m.
 de lande fastened a copper ring round a salmon's tail, and found
 that, for three successive seasons, it returned to the same
 place. dr. bloch states that gold and silver rings have been
 attached by eastern princes to salmon, to prove that a
 communication existed between the persian gulf and the caspian
 and northern seas, and that the experiment succeeded.
. ingredients.—a piece of salmon, say  lbs., a high seasoning of
salt, pounded mace, and pepper; water and vinegar,  bay-leaves.
mode.—split the fish; scale, bone, and wash it thoroughly clean; wipe
it, and rub in the seasoning inside and out; roll it up, and bind
firmly; lay it in a kettle, cover it with vinegar and water (/
vinegar, in proportion to the water); add the bay-leaves and a good
seasoning of salt and whole pepper, and simmer till done. do not remove
the lid. serve with melted butter or anchovy sauce. for preserving the
collared fish, boil up the liquor in which it was cooked, and add a
little more vinegar. pour over when cold.
time.—/ hour, or rather more.
 habitat of the salmon.—the salmon is styled by walton the "king
 of fresh-water fish," and is found distributed over the north of
 europe and asia, from britain to kamschatka, but is never found
 in warm latitudes, nor has it ever been caught even so far south
 as the mediterranean. it lives in fresh as well as in salt
 waters, depositing its spawn in the former, hundreds of miles
 from the mouths of some of those rivers to which it has been
 known to resort. in , great efforts were made to introduce
 this fish into the australian colonies; and it is believed that
 the attempt, after many difficulties, which were very skilfully
 overcome, has been successful.
. salmon is frequently dressed in this way at many fashionable
tables, but must be very fresh, and cut into slices  or  inches thick.
lay these in cold salt and water for  hour; have ready some boiling
water, salted, as in recipe no. , and well skimmed; put in the fish,
and simmer gently for / hour, or rather more; should it be very thick,
garnish the same as boiled salmon, and serve with the same sauces.
time.—/ hour, more or less, according to size.
note.—never use vinegar with salmon, as it spoils the taste and
colour of the fish.
[illustration: the salmon.]
 the salmon tribe.—this is the abdominal fish, forming the
 fourth of the orders of linnaeus. they are distinguished from
 the other fishes by having two dorsal fins, of which the
 hindmost is fleshy and without rays. they have teeth both on the
 tongue and in the jaws, whilst the body is covered with round
 and minutely striated scales.
. ingredients.—any remains of boiled salmon, / pint of strong or
medium stock (no. ),  onion,  tablespoonful of curry-powder, 
teaspoonful of harvey's sauce,  teaspoonful of anchovy sauce,  oz. of
butter, the juice of / lemon, cayenne and salt to taste.
mode.—cut up the onions into small pieces, and fry them of a pale
brown in the butter; add all the ingredients but the salmon, and simmer
gently till the onion is tender, occasionally stirring the contents; cut
the salmon into small square pieces, carefully take away all skin and
bone, lay it in the stewpan, and let it gradually heat through; but do
not allow it to boil long.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the cold fish, d.
 growth of the salmon.—at the latter end of the year—some as
 soon as november—salmon begin to press up the rivers as far as
 they can reach, in order to deposit their spawn, which they do
 in the sand or gravel, about eighteen inches deep. here it lies
 buried till the spring, when, about the latter end of march, it
 begins to exclude the young, which gradually increase to four or
 five inches in length, and are then termed smelts or smouts.
 about the beginning of may, the river seems to be alive with
 them, and there is no forming an idea of their numbers without
 having seen them. a seasonable flood, however, comes, and
 hurries them to the "great deep;" whence, about the middle of
 june, they commence their return to the river again. by this
 time they are twelve or sixteen inches long, and progressively
 increase, both in number and size, till about the end of july,
 when they have become large enough to be denominated grilse.
 early in august they become fewer in numbers, but of greater
 size, haying advanced to a weight of from six to nine pounds.
 this rapidity of growth appears surprising, and realizes the
 remark of walton, that "the salmlet becomes a salmon in as short
 a time as a gosling becomes a goose." recent writers have,
 however, thrown considerable doubts on this quick growth of the
 salmon.
. cut the slices  inch thick, and season them with pepper and salt;
butter a sheet of white paper, lay each slice on a separate piece, with
their ends twisted; broil gently over a clear fire, and serve with
anchovy or caper sauce. when higher seasoning is required, add a few
chopped herbs and a little spice.
time.— to  minutes.
. ingredients.— slices of salmon,  chopped shalots, a little
parsley, a small bunch of herbs,  bay-leaves,  carrots, pounded mace,
pepper and salt to taste,  tablespoonfuls of madeira, / pint of white
stock (no. ), thickening of butter and flour,  teaspoonful of
essence of anchovies, the juice of  lemon, cayenne and salt to taste.
mode.—rub the bottom of a stewpan over with butter, and put in the
shalots, herbs, bay-leaves, carrots, mace, and seasoning; stir them for
 minutes over a clear fire, and add the madeira or sherry; simmer
gently for / hour, and strain through a sieve over the fish, which
stew in this gravy. as soon as the fish is sufficiently cooked, take
away all the liquor, except a little to keep the salmon moist, and put
it into another stewpan; add the stock, thicken with butter and flour,
and put in the anchovies, lemon-juice, cayenne, and salt; lay the salmon
on a hot dish, pour over it part of the sauce, and serve the remainder
in a tureen.
time.—-/ hour. average cost for this quantity, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—salmon, / oz. of whole pepper, / oz. of whole
allspice,  teaspoonful of salt,  bay-leaves, equal quantities of
vinegar and the liquor in which the fish was boiled.
mode.—after the fish comes from table, lay it in a nice dish with a
cover to it, as it should be excluded from the air, and take away the
bone; boil the liquor and vinegar with the other ingredients for 
minutes, and let it stand to get cold; pour it over the salmon, and in
 hours this will be fit for the table.
time.— minutes.
 to cure salmon.—this process consists in splitting the fish,
 rubbing it with salt, and then putting it into pickle in tubs
 provided for the purpose. here it is kept for about six weeks,
 when it is taken out, pressed and packed in casks, with layers
 of salt.
. ingredients.—salmon; pounded mace, cloves, and pepper to taste; 
bay-leaves, / lb. butter.
mode.—skin the salmon, and clean it thoroughly by wiping with a cloth
(water would spoil it); cut it into square pieces, which rub with salt;
let them remain till thoroughly drained, then lay them in a dish with
the other ingredients, and bake. when quite done, drain them from the
gravy, press into pots for use, and, when cold, pour over it clarified
butter.
time.—/ hour.
 an aversion in the salmon.—the salmon is said to have an
 aversion to anything red; hence, fishermen engaged in catching
 it do not wear jackets or caps of that colour. pontoppidan also
 says, that it has an abhorrence of carrion, and if any happens
 to be thrown into the places it haunts, it immediately forsakes
 them. the remedy adopted for this in norway, is to throw into
 the polluted water a lighted torch. as food, salmon, when in
 perfection, is one of the most delicious and nutritive of our
 fish.
. ingredients.— bream. seasoning to taste of salt, pepper, and
cayenne; / lb. of butter.
mode.—well wash the bream, but do not remove the scales, and wipe
away all moisture with a nice dry cloth. season it inside and out with
salt, pepper, and cayenne, and lay it in a baking-dish. place the
butter, in small pieces, upon the fish, and bake for rather more than
/ an hour. to stuff this fish before baking, will be found a great
improvement.
time.—rather more than / an hour.
seasonable in summer.
[illustration: the sea-bream.]
note.—this fish may be broiled over a nice clear fire, and served
with a good brown gravy or white sauce, or it may be stewed in wine.
 the sea-bream.—this is an abundant fish in cornwall, and it is
 frequently found in the fish-market of hastings during the
 summer months, but it is not in much esteem.
 "when thoroughly cleansed, the fish should be wiped dry, but
 none of the scales should be taken off. in this state it should
 be broiled, turning it often, and if the skin cracks, flour it a
 little to keep the outer case entire. when on table, the whole
 skin and scales turn off without difficulty, and the muscle
 beneath, saturated in its own natural juices, which the outside
 covering has retained, will be of good flavour."
. ingredients.— shad, oil, pepper, and salt.
mode.—scale, empty and wash the fish carefully, and make two or three
incisions across the back. season it with pepper and salt, and let it
remain in oil for / hour. broil it on both sides over a clear fire,
and serve with caper sauce. this fish is much esteemed by the french,
and by them is considered excellent.
time.—nearly  hour.
average cost.—seldom bought.
seasonable from april to june.
[illustration: the shad.]
 the shad.—this is a salt-water fish, but is held in little
 esteem. it enters our rivers to spawn in may, and great numbers
 of them are taken opposite the isle of dogs, in the thames.
. ingredients.— pint of shelled shrimps, / lb. of fresh butter, 
blade of pounded mace, cayenne to taste; when liked, a little nutmeg.
mode.—have ready a pint of picked shrimps, and put them, with the
other ingredients, into a stewpan; let them heat gradually in the
butter, but do not let it boil. pour into small pots, and when cold,
cover with melted butter, and carefully exclude the air.
time.—/ hour to soak in the butter.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
. ingredients.— pint of picked prawns or shrimps, / pint of stock
no. , thickening of butter and flour; salt, cayenne, and nutmeg to
taste.
mode.—pick the prawns or shrimps, and put them in a stewpan with the
stock; add a thickening of butter and flour; season, and simmer gently
for  minutes. serve on a dish garnished with fried bread or toasted
sippets. cream sauce may be substituted for the gravy.
time.— minutes.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
[illustration: the shrimp.]
 the shrimp.—this shell-fish is smaller than the prawn, and is
 greatly relished in london as a delicacy. it inhabits most of
 the sandy shores of europe, and the isle of wight is especially
 famous for them.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—cleanse and skin the skate, lay it in a fish-kettle, with
sufficient water to cover it, salted in the above proportion. let it
simmer very gently till done; then dish it on a hot napkin, and serve
with shrimp, lobster, or caper sauce.
time.—according to size, from / to  hour. average cost, d. per
lb.
seasonable from august to april.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—clean, skin, and cut the fish into slices, which roll and tie
round with string. have ready some water highly salted, put in the fish,
and boil till it is done. drain well, remove the string, dish on a hot
napkin, and serve with the same sauces as above. skate should never be
eaten out of season, as it is liable to produce diarrhoea and other
diseases. it may be dished without a napkin, and the sauce poured over.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from august to april.
to choose skate.—this fish should be chosen for its firmness, breadth,
and thickness, and should have a creamy appearance. when crimped, it
should not be kept longer than a day or two, as all kinds of crimped
fish soon become sour.
[illustration: thornback skate.]
 the skate.—this is one of the ray tribe, and is extremely
 abundant and cheap in the fishing towns of england. the flesh is
 white, thick, and nourishing; but, we suppose, from its being so
 plentiful, it is esteemed less than it ought to be on account of
 its nutritive properties, and the ease with which it is
 digested. it is much improved by crimping; in which state it is
 usually sold in london. the thornback differs from the true
 skate by having large spines in its back, of which the other is
 destitute. it is taken in great abundance during the spring and
 summer months, but its flesh is not so good as it is in
 november. it is, in regard to quality, inferior to that of the
 true skate.
skate with caper sauce (a la francaise)
. ingredients.— or  slices of skate, / pint of vinegar,  oz. of
salt, / teaspoonful of pepper,  sliced onion, a small bunch of
parsley,  bay-leaves,  or  sprigs of thyme, sufficient water to cover
the fish.
mode.—put in a fish-kettle all the above ingredients, and simmer the
skate in them till tender. when it is done, skin it neatly, and pour
over it some of the liquor in which it has been boiling. drain it, put
it on a hot dish, pour over it caper sauce, and send some of the latter
to table in a tureen.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from august to april.
note.—skate may also be served with onion sauce, or parsley and
butter.
. ingredients.—skate, sufficient vinegar to cover them, salt and
pepper to taste,  sliced onion, a small bunch of parsley, the juice of
/ lemon, hot dripping.
mode.—cleanse the skate, lay them in a dish, with sufficient vinegar
to cover them; add the salt, pepper, onion, parsley, and lemon-juice,
and let the fish remain in this pickle for -/ hour. then drain them
well, flour them, and fry of a nice brown, in hot dripping. they may be
served either with or without sauce. skate is not good if dressed too
fresh, unless it is crimped; it should, therefore, be kept for a day,
but not long enough to produce a disagreeable smell.
time.— minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from august to april.
 other species of skate.—besides the true skate, there are
 several other species found in our seas. these are known as the
 white skate, the long-nosed skate, and the homelyn ray, which
 are of inferior quality, though often crimped, and sold for true
 skate.
. ingredients.— smelts, bread crumbs, / lb. of fresh butter, 
blades of pounded mace; salt and cayenne to taste.
mode.—wash, and dry the fish thoroughly in a cloth, and arrange them
nicely in a flat baking-dish. cover them with fine bread crumbs, and
place little pieces of butter all over them. season and bake for 
minutes. just before serving, add a squeeze of lemon-juice, and garnish
with fried parsley and cut lemon.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. per dozen.
seasonable from october to may.
sufficient for  persons.
to choose smelts.—when good, this fish is of a fine silvery appearance,
and when alive, their backs are of a dark brown shade, which, after
death, fades to a light fawn. they ought to have a refreshing fragrance,
resembling that of a cucumber.
 the odour of the smelt.—this peculiarity in the smelt has been
 compared, by some, to the fragrance of a cucumber, and by
 others, to that of a violet. it is a very elegant fish, and
 formerly abounded in the thames. the atharine, or sand smelt,
 is sometimes sold for the true one; but it is an inferior fish,
 being drier in the quality of its flesh. on the south coast of
 england, where the true smelt is rare, it is plentiful.
. ingredients.—egg and bread crumbs, a little flour; boiling lard.
mode.—smelts should be very fresh, and not washed more than is
necessary to clean them. dry them in a cloth, lightly flour, dip them in
egg, and sprinkle over with very fine bread crumbs, and put them into
boiling lard. fry of a nice pale brown, and be careful not to take off
the light roughness of the crumbs, or their beauty will be spoiled. dry
them before the fire on a drainer, and servo with plain melted butter.
this fish is often used as a garnishing.
time.— minutes.
average cost, s. per dozen.
seasonable from october to may.
[illustration: the smelt.]
 the smelt.—this is a delicate little fish, and is in high
 esteem. mr. yarrell asserts that the true smelt is entirety
 confined to the western and eastern coasts of britain. it very
 rarely ventures far from the shore, and is plentiful in
 november, december, and january.
. ingredients.— soles, / lb. of butter, egg, and bread crumbs,
minced parsley,  glass of sherry, lemon-juice; cayenne and salt to
taste.
mode.—clean, skin, and well wash the fish, and dry them thoroughly in
a cloth. brush them over with egg, sprinkle with bread crumbs mixed with
a little minced parsley, lay them in a large flat baking-dish, white
side uppermost; or if it will not hold the two soles, they may each be
laid on a dish by itself; but they must not be put one on the top of the
other. melt the butter, and pour it over the whole, and bake for 
minutes. take a portion of the gravy that flows from the fish, add the
wine, lemon-juice, and seasoning, give it one boil, skim, pour it
under the fish, and serve.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. to s. per pair.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  or  persons.
to choose soles.—this fish should be both thick and firm. if the skin
is difficult to be taken off, and the flesh looks grey, it is good.
[illustration: the sole.]
 the sole.—this ranks next to the turbot in point of excellence
 among our flat fish. it is abundant on the british coasts, but
 those of the western shores are much superior in size to those
 taken on the northern. the finest are caught in torbay, and
 frequently weigh  or  lbs. per pair. its flesh being firm,
 white, and delicate, is greatly esteemed.
. ingredients.—/ lb. salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—cleanse and wash the fish carefully, cut off the fins, but do
not skin it. lay it in a fish-kettle, with sufficient cold water to
cover it, salted in the above proportion. let it gradually come to a
boil, and keep it simmering for a few minutes, according to the size of
the fish. dish it on a hot napkin after well draining it, and garnish
with parsley and cut lemon. shrimp, or lobster sauce, and plain melted
butter, are usually sent to table with this dish.
time.—after the water boils,  minutes for a middling-sized sole.
average cost, s. to s. per pair.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient,— middling-sized sole for  persons.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold boiled sole or cod, seasoning to
taste of pepper, salt, and pounded mace,  dozen oysters to each lb. of
fish,  tablespoonfuls of white stock,  teacupful of cream thickened
with flour, puff paste.
mode.—clear the fish from the bones, lay it in a pie-dish, and
between each layer put a few oysters and a little seasoning; add the
stock, and, when liked, a small quantity of butter; cover with puff
paste, and bake for / hour. boil the cream with sufficient flour to
thicken it; pour in the pie, and serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost for this quantity, d.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  persons.
. ingredients.— soles; salt, cayenne, and pounded mace to taste;
the juice of / lemon, salt and water, / pint of cream.
mode.—skin, wash, and fillet the soles, and divide each fillet in 
pieces; lay them in cold salt and water, which bring gradually to a
boil. when the water boils, take out the fish, lay it in a delicately
clean stewpan, and cover with the cream. add the seasoning, simmer very
gently for ten minutes, and, just before serving, put in the lemon-juice.
the fillets may be rolled, and secured by means of a skewer; but this is
not so economical a way of dressing them, as double the quantity of cream
is required.
time.— minutes in the cream.
average cost, from s. to s. per pair. seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  or  persons.
this will be found a most delicate and delicious dish.
 the sole a favourite with the ancient greeks.—this fish was
 much sought after by the ancient greeks on account of its light
 and nourishing qualities. the brill, the flounder, the diamond
 and dutch plaice, which, with the sole, were known under the
 general name of passeres, were all equally esteemed, and had
 generally the same qualities attributed to them.
. ingredients.— soles; salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg to taste;
egg and bread crumbs, butter, the juice of  lemon.
mode.—skin, and carefully wash the soles, separate the meat from the
bone, and divide each fillet in two pieces. brush them over with white
of egg, sprinkle with bread crumbs and seasoning, and put them in a
baking-dish. place small pieces of butter over the whole, and bake for
/ hour. when they are nearly done, squeeze the juice of a lemon over
them, and serve on a dish, with italian sauce (see sauces) poured over.
time.—/ hour. average cost, from s. to s. per pair.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  or  persons.
whiting may be dressed in the same manner, and will be found very
delicious.
 the flavour of the sole.—this, as a matter of course, greatly
 depends on the nature of the ground and bait upon which the
 animal feeds. its natural food are small crabs and shell-fish.
 its colour also depends on the colour of the ground where it
 feeds; for if this be white, then the sole is called the white,
 or lemon sole; but if the bottom be muddy, then it is called the
 black sole. small-sized soles, caught in shallow water on the
 coasts, are the best in flavour.
. ingredients.— middling-sized soles,  small one, / teaspoonful
of chopped lemon-peel,  teaspoonful of chopped parsley, a little grated
bread; salt, pepper, and nutmeg to taste;  egg,  oz. butter, / pint
of good gravy,  tablespoonfuls of port wine, cayenne and lemon-juice to
taste.
mode.—fry the soles of a nice brown, as directed in recipe no. ,
and drain them well from fat. take all the meat from the small sole,
chop it fine, and mix with it the lemon-peel, parsley, bread, and
seasoning; work altogether, with the yolk of an egg and the butter; make
this into small balls, and fry them. thicken the gravy with a
dessert-spoonful of flour, add the port wine, cayenne, and lemon-juice;
lay in the  soles and balls; let them simmer gently for  minutes;
serve hot, and garnish with cut lemon.
time.— minutes to fry the soles.
average cost for this quantity, s.
seasonable at any time. sufficient for  or  persons.
 how soles are caught.—the instrument usually employed is a
 trawl net, which is shaped like a pocket, of from sixty to
 eighty feet long, and open at the mouth from thirty-two to forty
 feet, and three deep. this is dragged along the ground by the
 vessel, and on the art of the fisherman in its employment, in a
 great measure depends the quality of the fish he catches. if,
 for example, he drags the net too quickly, all that are caught
 are swept rapidly to the end of the net, where they are
 smothered, and sometimes destroyed. a medium has to be observed,
 in order that as few as possible escape being caught in the net,
 and as many as possible preserved alive in it.
. soles for filleting should be large, as the flesh can be more
easily separated from the bones, and there is less waste. skin and wash
the fish, and raise the meat carefully from the bones, and divide it
into nice handsome pieces. the more usual way is to roll the fillets,
after dividing each one in two pieces, and either bind them round with
twine, or run a small skewer through them. brush over with egg, and
cover with bread crumbs; fry them as directed in the foregoing recipe,
and garnish with fried parsley and cut lemon. when a pretty dish is
desired, this is by far the most elegant mode of dressing soles, as they
look much better than when fried whole. (see coloured plate a.)
instead of rolling the fillets, they may be cut into square pieces, and
arranged in the shape of a pyramid on the dish.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, from s. to s. per pair.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient,— large soles for  persons.
. ingredients.— middling-sized soles, hot lard or clarified
dripping, egg, and bread crumbs.
mode.—skin and carefully wash the soles, and cut off the fins, wipe
them very dry, and let them remain in the cloth until it is time to
dress them. have ready some fine bread crumbs and beaten egg; dredge the
soles with a little flour, brush them over with egg, and cover with
bread crumbs. put them in a deep pan, with plenty of clarified dripping
or lard (when the expense is not objected to, oil is still better)
heated, so that it may neither scorch the fish nor make them sodden.
when they are sufficiently cooked on one side, turn them carefully, and
brown them on the other: they may be considered ready when a thick smoke
rises. lift them out carefully, and lay them before the fire on a
reversed sieve and soft paper, to absorb the fat. particular attention
should be paid to this, as nothing is more disagreeable than greasy
fish: this may be always avoided by dressing them in good time, and
allowing a few minutes for them to get thoroughly crisp, and free from
greasy moisture. dish them on a hot napkin, garnish with cut lemon and
fried parsley, and send them to table with shrimp sauce and plain melted
butter.
time.— minutes for large soles; less time for small ones.
average cost, from s. to s. per pair.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.— pint of milk,  pint of water,  oz. butter,  oz.
salt, a little lemon-juice,  middling-sized soles.
mode.—cleanse the soles, but do not skin them, and lay them in a
fish-kettle, with the milk, water, butter, salt, and lemon-juice. bring
them gradually to boil, and let them simmer very gently till done, which
will be in about  minutes. take them up, drain them well on a cloth,
put them on a hot dish, and pour over them a good mushroom sauce. (see
sauces.)
time.—after the water boils,  minutes.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for  persons.
. sprats should be cooked very fresh, which can be ascertained by
their bright and sparkling eyes. wipe them dry; fasten them in rows by a
skewer run through the eyes; dredge with flour, and broil them on a
gridiron over a nice clear fire. the gridiron should be rubbed with
suet. serve very hot.
time,— or  minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from november to march.
to choose sprats.—choose these from their silvery appearance, as the
brighter they are, so are they the fresher.
. ingredients.— eggs, flour, bread crumbs; seasoning of salt and
pepper to taste.
mode.—wipe the sprats, and dip them in a batter made of the above
ingredients. fry of a nice brown, serve very hot, and garnish with fried
parsley.
sprats may be baked like herrings. (see no. .)
. dried sprats should be put into a basin, and boiling water poured
over them; they may then be skinned and served, and this will be found a
much better way than boiling them.
[illustration: the sprat.]
 the sprat.—this migratory fish, is rarely found longer than
 four or five inches, and visits the shores of britain after the
 herring and other kinds of fish have taken their departure from
 them. on the coasts of suffolk, essex, and kent, they are very
 abundant, and from  to  boats are employed in catching
 them during the winter season. besides plentifully supplying the
 london market, they are frequently sold at sixpence a bushel to
 farmers for manuring purposes. they enter the thames about the
 beginning of november, and leave it in march. at yarmouth and
 gravesend they are cured like red herrings.
. ingredients.— small sturgeon, salt and pepper to taste,  small
bunch of herbs, the juice of / lemon, / lb. of butter,  pint of
white wine.
mode,—cleanse the fish thoroughly, skin it, and split it along the
belly without separating it; have ready a large baking-dish, in which
lay the fish, sprinkle over the seasoning and herbs very finely minced,
and moisten it with the lemon-juice and wine. place the butter in small
pieces over the whole of the fish, put it in the oven, and baste
frequently; brown it nicely, and serve with its own gravy.
time.—nearly  hour. average cost, s. to s. d. per lb.
seasonable from august to march.
[illustration: the sturgeon.]
 the sturgeon.—this fish commences the sixth of linnaean order,
 and all the species are large, seldom measuring, when
 full-grown, less than three or four feet in length. its flesh is
 reckoned extremely delicious, and, in the time of the emperor
 severus, was so highly valued by the ancients, that it was
 brought to table by servants crowned with coronets, and preceded
 by a band of music. it is an inhabitant of the baltic, the
 mediterranean, the caspian, and the black sea, and of the
 danube, the volga, the don, and other large rivers. it is
 abundant in the rivers of north america, and is occasionally
 taken in the thames, as well as in the eske and the eden. it is
 one of those fishes considered as royal property. it is from its
 roe that caviare, a favourite food of the russians, is
 prepared. its flesh is delicate, firm, and white, but is rare in
 the london market, where it sells for s. or s. d. per lb.
 the sterlet is a smaller species of sturgeon, found in the
 caspian sea and some russian rivers. it also is greatly prized
 on account of the delicacy of its flesh.
. ingredients.—veal stuffing, buttered paper, the tail-end of a
sturgeon.
mode.—cleanse the fish, bone and skin it; make a nice veal stuffing
(see forcemeats), and fill it with the part where the bones came from;
roll it in buttered paper, bind it up firmly with tape, like a fillet of
veal, and roast it in a dutch oven before a clear fire. serve with good
brown gravy, or plain melted butter.
time.—about  hour. average cost, s. to s. d. per lb.
seasonable from august to march.
note.—sturgeon may be plain-boiled, and served with dutch sauce. the
fish is very firm, and requires long boiling.
 estimate of the sturgeon by the ancients.—by the ancients, the
 flesh of this fish was compared to the ambrosia of the
 immortals. the poet martial passes a high eulogium upon it, and
 assigns it a place on the luxurious tables of the palatine
 mount. if we may credit a modern traveller in china, the people
 of that country generally entirely abstain from it, and the
 sovereign of the celestial empire confines it to his own
 kitchen, or dispenses it to only a few of his greatest
 favourites.
. ingredients.—/ pint of stock no. , / pint of port wine, 
dozen button onions, a few mushrooms, a faggot of herbs,  blades of
mace,  oz. of butter,  teaspoonful of minced parsley, thyme,  shalot,
 anchovies,  teacupful of stock no. , flour,  dozen oysters, the
juice of / lemon; the number of tench, according to size.
mode.—scale and clean the tench, cut them into pieces, and lay them
in a stewpan; add the stock, wine, onions, mushrooms, herbs, and mace,
and simmer gently for / hour. put into another stewpan all the
remaining ingredients but the oysters and lemon-juice, and boil slowly
for  minutes, when add the strained liquor from the tench, and keep
stirring it over the fire until somewhat reduced. rub it through a
sieve, pour it over the tench with the oysters, which must be previously
scalded in their own liquor, squeeze in the lemon-juice, and serve.
garnish with croutons.
time. / hour.
seasonable from october to june.
[illustration: the tench.]
 the tench.—this fish is generally found in foul and weedy
 waters, and in such places as are well supplied with rushes.
 they thrive best in standing waters, and are more numerous in
 pools and ponds than in rivers. those taken in the latter,
 however, are preferable for the table. it does not often exceed
 four or five pounds in weight, and is in england esteemed as a
 delicious and wholesome food. as, however, they are sometimes
 found in waters where the mud is excessively fetid, their
 flavour, if cooked immediately on being caught, is often very
 unpleasant; but if they are transferred into clear water, they
 soon recover from the obnoxious taint.
. ingredients.—/ pint of stock no. , / pint of madeira or
sherry, salt and pepper to taste,  bay-leaf, thickening of butter and
flour.
mode.—clean and crimp the tench; carefully lay it in a stewpan with
the stock, wine, salt and pepper, and bay-leaf; let it stew gently for
/ hour; then take it out, put it on a dish, and keep hot. strain the
liquor, and thicken it with butter and flour kneaded together, and stew
for  minutes. if not perfectly smooth, squeeze it through a tammy, add
a very little cayenne, and pour over the fish. garnish with balls of
veal forcemeat.
time.—rather more than / hour.
seasonable from october to june.
 a singular quality in the tench.—it is said that the tench is
 possessed of such healing properties among the finny tribes,
 that even the voracious pike spares it on this account.
the pike, fell tyrant of the liquid plain,
with ravenous waste devours his fellow train;
yet howsoe'er with raging famine pined,
the tench he spares, a medicinal kind;
for when by wounds distress'd, or sore disease,
he courts the salutary fish for ease;
close to his scales the kind physician glides,
and sweats a healing balsam from his sides.
 in our estimation, however, this self-denial in the pike may be
 attributed to a less poetical cause; namely, from the mud-loving
 disposition of the tench, it is enabled to keep itself so
 completely concealed at the bottom of its aqueous haunts, that
 it remains secure from the attacks of its predatory neighbour.
. ingredients.— middling-sized trout, / onion cut in thin slices,
a little parsley,  cloves,  blade of mace,  bay-leaves, a little
thyme, salt and pepper to taste,  pint of medium stock no. ,  glass
of port wine, thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—wash the fish very clean, and wipe it quite dry. lay it in a
stewpan, with all the ingredients but the butter and flour, and simmer
gently for / hour, or rather more, should not the fish be quite done.
take it out, strain the gravy, add the thickening, and stir it over a
sharp fire for  minutes; pour it over the trout, and serve.
time.—according to size, / hour or more.
average cost.—seldom bought.
seasonable from may to september, and fatter from the middle to the
end of august than at any other time.
sufficient for  persons.
trout may be served with anchovy or caper sauce, baked in buttered
paper, or fried whole like smelts. trout dressed a la génévese is
extremely delicate; for this proceed the same as with salmon, no. .
[illustration: the trout.]
 the trout.—this fish, though esteemed by the moderns for its
 delicacy, was little regarded by the ancients. although it
 abounded in the lakes of the roman empire, it is generally
 mentioned by writers only on account of the beauty of its
 colours. about the end of september, they quit the deep water to
 which they had retired during the hot weather, for the purpose
 of spawning. this they always do on a gravelly bottom, or where
 gravel and sand are mixed among stones, towards the end or by
 the sides of streams. at this period they become black about the
 head and body, and become soft and unwholesome. they are never
 good when they are large with roe; but there are in all trout
 rivers some barren female fish, which continue good throughout
 the winter. in the common trout, the stomach is uncommonly
 strong and muscular, shell-fish forming a portion of the food of
 the animal; and it takes into its stomach gravel or small stones
 in order to assist in comminuting it.
. ingredients.— oz. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode—choose a middling-sized turbot; for they are invariably the most
valuable: if very large, the meat will be tough and thready. three or
four hours before dressing, soak the fish in salt and water to take off
the slime; then thoroughly cleanse it, and with a knife make an incision
down the middle of the back, to prevent the skin of the belly from
cracking. rub it over with lemon, and be particular not to cut off the
fins. lay the fish in a very clean turbot-kettle, with sufficient cold
water to cover it, and salt in the above proportion. let it gradually
come to a boil, and skim very carefully; keep it gently simmering, and
on no account let it boil fast, as the fish would have a very unsightly
appearance. when the meat separates easily from the bone, it is done;
then take it out, let it drain well, and dish it on a hot napkin. rub a
little lobster spawn through a sieve, sprinkle it over the fish, and
garnish with tufts of parsley and cut lemon. lobster or shrimp sauce,
and plain melted butter, should be sent to table with it. (see coloured
plate e.)
time.—after the water boils, about / hour for a large turbot;
middling size, about  minutes.
average cost,—large turbot, from s. to s.; middling size, from
s. to s.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient,  middling-sized turbot for  persons.
note.—an amusing anecdote is related, by miss edgeworth, of a bishop,
who, descending to his kitchen to superintend the dressing of a turbot,
and discovering that his cook had stupidly cut off the fins, immediately
commenced sewing them on again with his own episcopal fingers. this
dignitary knew the value of a turbot's gelatinous appendages.
. take the crumb of a stale loaf, cut it into small pyramids with
flat tops, and on the top of each pyramid, put rather more than a
tablespoonful of white of egg beaten to a stiff froth. over this,
sprinkle finely-chopped parsley and fine raspings of a dark colour.
arrange these on the napkin round the fish, one green and one brown
alternately.
to choose turbot.—see that it is thick, and of a yellowish white; for
if of a bluish tint, it is not good.
[illustration: the turbot.]
 the turbot.—this is the most esteemed of all our flat fish. the
 northern parts of the english coast, and some places off the
 coast of holland, produce turbot in great abundance, and in
 greater excellence than any other parts of the world. the london
 market is chiefly supplied by dutch fishermen, who bring to it
 nearly , a year. the flesh is firm, white, rich, and
 gelatinous, and is the better for being kept a day or two
 previous to cooking it. in many parts of the country, turbot and
 halibut are indiscriminately sold for each other. they are,
 however, perfectly distinct; the upper parts of the former being
 marked with large, unequal, and obtuse tubercles, while those of
 the other are quite smooth, and covered with oblong soft scales,
 which firmly adhere to the body.
[illustration: turbot-kettle.]
 fish-kettles are made in an oblong form, and have two handles,
 with a movable bottom, pierced full of holes, on which the fish
 is laid, and on which it may be lifted from the water, by means
 of two long handles attached to each side of the movable bottom.
 this is to prevent the liability of breaking the fish, as it
 would necessarily be if it were cooked in a common saucepan. in
 the list of messrs. richard and john slack (see ), the price
 of two of these is set down at s. the turbot-kettle, as will
 be seen by our cut, is made differently from ordinary
 fish-kettles, it being less deep, whilst it is wider, and more
 pointed at the sides; thus exactly answering to the shape of the
 fish which it is intended should be boiled in it. it may be
 obtained from the same manufacturers, and its price is ł.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold turbot, lobster sauce left from
the preceding day, egg, and bread crumbs; cayenne and salt to taste;
minced parsley, nutmeg, lemon-juice.
mode.—after having cleared the fish from all skin and bone, divide it
into square pieces of an equal size; brush them over with egg, sprinkle
with bread crumbs mixed with a little minced parsley and seasoning. lay
the fillets in a baking-dish, with sufficient butter to baste with. bake
for / hour, and do not forget to keep them well moistened with the
butter. put a little lemon-juice and grated nutmeg to the cold lobster
sauce; make it hot, and pour over the fish, which must be well drained
from the butter. garnish with parsley and cut lemon.
time.—altogether, / hour.
seasonable at any time.
note.—cold turbot thus warmed in the remains of lobster sauce will be
found much nicer than putting the fish again in water.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold turbot, italian sauce. (see
sauces.)
mode.—clear the fish carefully from the bone, and take away all skin,
which gives an unpleasant flavour to the sauce. make the sauce hot, lay
in the fish to warm through, but do not let it boil. garnish with
croutons.
time.— minutes.
seasonable all the year.
 the ancient romans' estimate of turbot.—as this luxurious
 people compared soles to partridges, and sturgeons to peacocks,
 so they found a resemblance to the turbot in the pheasant. in
 the time of domitian, it is said one was taken of such
 dimensions as to require, in the imperial kitchen, a new stove
 to be erected, and a new dish to be made for it, in order that
 it might be cooked and served whole: not even imperial rome
 could furnish a stove or a dish large enough for the monstrous
 animal. where it was caught, we are not aware; but the turbot of
 the adriatic sea held a high rank in the "eternal city."
. ingredients.—the remains of cold turbot. for sauce,  oz. of
butter,  tablespoonfuls of cream; salt, cayenne, and pounded mace to
taste.
mode.—clear away all skin and bone from the flesh of the turbot,
which should be done when it comes from table, as it causes less waste
when trimmed hot. cut the flesh into nice square pieces, as equally as
possible; put into a stewpan the butter, let it melt, and add the cream
and seasoning; let it just simmer for one minute, but not boil. lay in
the fish to warm, and serve it garnished with croutons or a paste
border.
time.— minutes.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the remains of cold salmon may be dressed in this way, and the
above mixture may be served in a vol-au-vent.
. ingredients.—remains of cold turbot, béchamel (see sauces),
bread crumbs, butter.
mode.—cut the flesh of the turbot into small dice, carefully freeing
it from all skin and bone. put them into a stewpan, and moisten with 
or  tablespoonfuls of béchamel. let it get thoroughly hot, but do not
allow it to boil. spread the mixture on a dish, cover with finely-grated
bread crumbs, and place small pieces of butter over the top. brown it in
the oven, or with a salamander.
time.—altogether, / hour. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of salt to each gallon of water.
mode.—cleanse the fish, but do not skin them; lay them in a
fish-kettle, with sufficient cold water to cover them, and salt in the
above proportion. bring them gradually to a boil, and simmer gently for
about  minutes, or rather more should the fish be very large. dish them
on a hot napkin, and garnish with tufts of parsley. serve with anchovy
or caper sauce, and plain melted butter.
time.—after the water boils,  minutes.
average cost for small whitings, d. each.
seasonable all the year, but best from october to march.
sufficient,  small whiting for each person.
to choose whiting.—choose for the firmness of its flesh and the silvery
hue of its appearance.
[illustration: the whiting.]
 the whiting.—this fish forms a light, tender, and delicate
 food, easy of digestion. it appears in our seas in the spring,
 within three miles of the shores, where it arrives in large
 shoals to deposit its spawn. it is caught by line, and is
 usually between ten and twelve inches long, and seldom exceeding
 a pound and a half in weight. on the edge of the dogger bank,
 however, it has been caught so heavy as to weigh from three to
 seven or eight pounds. when less than six inches long, it is not
 allowed to be caught.
. ingredients.—salt and water, flour.
mode.—wash the whiting in salt and water, wipe them thoroughly, and
let them remain in the cloth to absorb all moisture. flour them well,
and broil over a very clear fire. serve with maître d'hôtel sauce, or
plain melted butter (see sauces). be careful to preserve the liver, as
by some it is considered very delicate.
time.— minutes for a small whiting. average cost, d. each.
seasonable all the year, but best from october to march.
sufficient,  small whiting for each person.
buckhorn.—whitings caught in cornwall are salted and dried, and in
winter taken to the markets, and sold under the singular name of
"buckhorn."
. ingredients.—egg and bread crumbs, a little flour, hot lard or
clarified dripping.
mode.—take off the skin, clean, and thoroughly wipe the fish free
from all moisture, as this is most essential, in order that the egg and
bread crumbs may properly adhere. fasten the tail in the mouth by means
of a small skewer, brush the fish over with egg, dredge with a little
flour, and cover with bread crumbs. fry them in hot lard or clarified
dripping of a nice colour, and serve them on a napkin, garnished with
fried parsley. (see coloured plate d.) send them to table with shrimp
sauce and plain melted butter.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, d. each.
seasonable all the year, but best from october to march.
sufficient,  small whiting for each person.
note.—large whitings may be filleted, rolled, and served as fried
filleted soles (see coloured plato a). small fried whitings are
frequently used for garnishing large boiled fish, such as turbot, cod,
etc.
whiting au gratin, or baked whiting.
. ingredients.— whiting, butter,  tablespoonful of minced parsley,
a few chopped mushrooms when obtainable; pepper, salt, and grated nutmeg
to taste; butter,  glasses of sherry or madeira, bread crumbs.
mode.—grease the bottom of a baking-dish with butter, and over it,
strew some minced parsley and mushrooms. scale, empty, and wash the
whitings, and wipe them thoroughly dry, carefully preserving the livers.
lay them in the dish, sprinkle them with bread crumbs and seasoning,
adding a little grated nutmeg, and also a little more minced parsley and
mushrooms. place small pieces of butter over the whiting, moisten with
the wine, and bake for  minutes in a hot oven. if there should be too
much sauce, reduce it by boiling over a sharp fire for a few minutes,
and pour under the fish. serve with a cut lemon, and no other sauce.
time.—- minutes. average cost, d. each.
seasonable all the year, but best from october to march.
sufficient.—this quantity for  or  persons.
. ingredients.- bunch of sweet herbs chopped very fine; butter.
mode.—clean and skin the fish, fasten the tails in the mouths; and lay
them in a baking-dish. mince the herbs very fine, strew them over the
fish, and place small pieces of butter over; cover with another dish,
and let them simmer in a dutch oven for / hour or  minutes. turn the
fish once or twice, and serve with the sauce poured over.
time.—/ hour or  minutes. average cost, d. each.
seasonable all the year, but best from october to march.
sufficient,  small whiting for each person.
 the whiting pout, and pollack.—about the mouth of the thames,
 and generally all round the english coasts, as well as in the
 northern seas, the pout is plentiful. it bears a striking
 resemblance to the whiting, and is esteemed as an excellent
 fish.—the pollack is also taken all round our coasts, and
 likewise bears a striking resemblance to the whiting; indeed, it
 is sometimes mistaken by the inexperienced for that fish; its
 flesh being considered by many equally delicate.
. ingredients.—a little flour, hot lard, seasoning of salt.
mode.—this fish should be put into iced water as soon as bought,
unless they are cooked immediately. drain them from the water in a
colander, and have ready a nice clean dry cloth, over which put  good
handfuls of flour. toss in the whitebait, shake them lightly in the
cloth, and put them in a wicker sieve to take away the superfluous
flour. throw them into a pan of boiling lard, very few at a time, and
let them fry till of a whitey-brown colour. directly they are done, they
must he taken out, and laid before the fire for a minute or two on a
sieve reversed, covered with blotting-paper to absorb the fat. dish them
on a hot napkin, arrange the fish very high in the centre, and sprinkle
a little salt over the whole.
time.— minutes.
_seasonable _from april to august.
[illustration: whitebait.]
 whitebait.—this highly-esteemed little fish appears in
 innumerable multitudes in the river thames, near greenwich and
 blackwall, during the month of july, when it forms, served with
 lemon and brown bread and butter, a tempting dish to vast
 numbers of londoners, who flock to the various taverns of these
 places, in order to gratify their appetites. the fish has been
 supposed be the fry of the shad, the sprat, the smelt, or the
 bleak. mr. yarrell, however, maintains that it is a species in
 itself, distinct from every other fish. when fried with flour,
 it is esteemed a great delicacy. the ministers of the crown have
 had a custom, for many years, of having a "whitebait dinner"
 just before the close of the session. it is invariably the
 precursor of the prorogation of parliament, and the repast is
 provided by the proprietor of the "trafalgar," greenwich.
. ingredients.— tench,  eels,  onions, a faggot of herbs, 
blades of mace,  anchovies,  pint of water, pepper and salt to taste,
 teaspoonful of chopped parsley, the yolks of  hard-boiled eggs, puff
paste.
mode.—clean and bone the tench, skin and bone the eels, and cut them
into pieces  inches long, and leave the sides of the tench whole. put
the bones into a stewpan with the onions, herbs, mace, anchovies, water,
and seasoning, and let them simmer gently for  hour. strain it off, put
it to cool, and skim off all the fat. lay the tench and eels in a
pie-dish, and between each layer put seasoning, chopped parsley, and
hard-boiled eggs; pour in part of the strained liquor, cover in with
puff paste, and bake for / hour or rather more. the oven should be
rather quick, and when done, heat the remainder of the liquor, which
pour into the pie.
time.—/ hour to bake, or rather more if the oven is slow.
. ingredients.—remains of cold fish of any sort, / pint of cream,
/ tablespoonful of anchovy sauce, / teaspoonful of made mustard,
ditto of walnut ketchup, pepper and salt to taste (the above quantities
are for / lb. of fish when picked); bread crumbs.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a stewpan, carefully picking the
fish from the bones; set it on the fire, let it remain till nearly hot,
occasionally stir the contents, but do not allow it to boil. when done,
put the fish into a deep dish or scallop shell, with a good quantity of
bread crumbs; place small pieces of butter on the top, set in a dutch
oven before the fire to brown, or use a salamander.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the cold fish, d.
. ingredients.—any cold fish,  egg, milk,  large blade of pounded
mace,  tablespoonful of flour,  teaspoonful of anchovy sauce, pepper
and salt to taste, bread crumbs, butter.
mode.—pick the fish carefully from the bones, and moisten with milk
and the egg; add the other ingredients, and place in a deep dish or
scallop shells; cover with bread crumbs, butter the top, and brown
before the fire; when quite hot, serve.
time.— minutes. average cost, exclusive of the cold fish, d.
. perch, tench, soles, eels, and flounders are considered the best
fish for this dish. for the souchy, put some water into a stewpan with a
bunch of chopped parsley, some roots, and sufficient salt to make it
brackish. let these simmer for  hour, and then stew the fish in this
water. when they are done, take them out to drain, have ready some
finely-chopped parsley, and a few roots cut into slices of about one
inch thick and an inch in length. put the fish in a tureen or deep dish,
strain the liquor over them, and add the minced parsley and roots. serve
with brown bread and butter.
. supply of fish to the london market.—from mr. mayhew's work on
"london labour and the london poor," and other sources, we are enabled
to give the following table of the total annual supply of fish to the
london market:—
description of fish. number of weight of
fish fish in lbs
salmon and salmon-trout(, boxes,
 fish per box) , ,,
turbot, from  to  lbs. , ,,
live cod, averaging  lbs. each , ,,
soles, averaging / lbs. each ,, ,,
brill and mullet, averaging  lbs. each ,, ,,
whiting, averaging  oz. each ,, ,,
haddock, averaging  lbs. each ,, ,,
plaice, averaging  lb. each ,, ,,
mackerel, averaging  lb ach ,, ,,
fresh herrings (, barrels, 
fish per barrel) ,, ,,
ditto in bulk ,,, ,,
sprats — ,,
eels (from holland principally)
england and ireland ,, ,,
flounders , ,
dabs , ,
 barrelled cod(, barrels,  fish
 per barrel) , ,,
 dried salt cod,  lbs each ,, ,,
 smoked haddock(, barrels, 
 fish per barrel) ,, ,,
 bloaters, , baskets( fish
 per basket) ,, ,,
 red herrings, , barrels(
 fish per barrel) ,, ,,
 dried sprats, , large bundles
 ( fish per bundle) , ,
oysters ,,
lobsters, averaging  lb each ,, ,,
crabs, averaging  lb each , ,
shrimps,  to a pint ,,
whelks,  to a half-bushel ,,
mussels,  to ditto ,,
cockles,  to ditto ,,
periwinkles,  to ditto ,,
the whole of the above may be, in round numbers, reckoned to amount to
the enormous number of ,,, fish, with a weight of ,
tons.
it will be seen, from the number and variety of the recipes which we
have been enabled to give under the head of fish, that there exists in
the salt ocean, and fresh-water rivers, an abundance of aliment, which
the present state of gastronomic art enables the cook to introduce to
the table in the most agreeable forms, and oftentimes at a very moderate
cost.
less nutritious as a food than the flesh of animals, more succulent than
vegetables, fish may be termed a middle dish, suited to all temperaments
and constitutions; and one which those who are recovering from illness
may partake of with safety and advantage.
as to which is the best fish, there has been much discussion. the old
latin proverb, however, de gustibus non disputandum, and the more
modern spanish one, sobre los gustos no hai disputa, declare, with
equal force, that where taste is concerned, no decision can be arrived
at. each person's palate may be differently affected—pleased or
displeased; and there is no standard by which to judge why a red mullet,
a sole, or a turbot, should be better or worse than a salmon, trout,
pike, or a tiny tench.
fish, as we have explained, is less nourishing than meat; for it is
lighter in weight, size for size, and contains no ozmazome (see no.
). shell-fish, oysters particularly, furnish but little nutriment;
and this is the reason why so many of the latter can be eaten without
injury to the system.
in brillat savarin's [footnote: brillat savarin was a french lawyer and
judge of considerable eminence and great talents, and wrote, under the
above title, a book on gastronomy, full of instructive information,
enlivened with a fund of pleasantly-told anecdote.] clever and amusing
volume, "the physiology of taste," he says, that towards the end of the
eighteenth century it was a most common thing for a well-arranged
entertainment in paris to commence with oysters, and that many guests
were not contented without swallowing twelve dozen. being anxious to
know the weight of this advanced-guard, he ascertained that a dozen
oysters, fluid included, weighed  ounces,—thus, the twelve dozen would
weigh about  lbs.; and there can be no doubt, that the same persons who
made no worse a dinner on account of having partaken of the oysters,
would have been completely satisfied if they had eaten the same weight
of chicken or mutton. an anecdote, perfectly well authenticated, is
narrated of a french gentleman (m. laperte), residing at versailles, who
was extravagantly fond of oysters, declaring he never had enough.
savarin resolved to procure him the satisfaction, and gave him an
invitation to dinner, which was duly accepted. the guest arrived, and
his host kept company with him in swallowing the delicious bivalves up
to the tenth dozen, when, exhausted, he gave up, and let m. laperte go
on alone. this gentleman managed to eat thirty-two dozen within an hour,
and would doubtless have got through more, but the person who opened
them is described as not being very skilful. in the interim savarin was
idle, and at length, tired with his painful state of inaction, he said
to laperte, whilst the latter was still in full career, "mon cher, you
will not eat as many oysters to-day as you meant; let us dine." they
dined, and the insatiable oyster-eater acted at the repast as if he had
fasted for a week.
in carving fish, care should be taken to help it in perfect flakes, as,
if these are broken, the beauty of the fish is lost. the carver should
be acquainted, too, with the choicest parts and morsels; and to give
each guest an equal share of these titbits should be his maxim. steel
knives and forks should on no account be used in helping fish, as these
are liable to impart to it a very disagreeable flavour. where silver
fish-carvers are considered too dear to be bought, good electro-plated
ones answer very well, and are inexpensive. the prices set down for them
by messrs. slack, of the strand, are from a guinea upwards.
(for recipe, see no. ; and for mode of serving, coloured plate c.)
[illustration]
first run the knife along the centre of the side of the fish, namely,
from d to b, down to the bone; then carve it in unbroken slices
downwards from d to e, or upwards from d to c, as shown in the
engraving. the carver should ask the guests if they would like a portion
of the roe and liver.
note.—of this fish, the parts about the backbone and shoulders are
the firmest, and most esteemed by connoisseurs. the sound, which lines
the fish beneath the backbone, is considered a delicacy, as are also the
gelatinous parts about the head and neck.
(for recipe, see no. ; and for mode of dressing, coloured plate b.)
[illustration]
first run the knife quite down to the bone, along the side of the fish,
from a to b, and also from c to d. then help the thick part
lengthwise, that is, in the direction of the lines from a to b; and
the thin part breadthwise, that is, in the direction of the lines from
e to f, as shown in the engraving. a slice of the thick part should
always be accompanied by a smaller piece of the thin from the belly,
where lies the fat of the fish.
note.—many persons, in carving salmon, make the mistake of slicing
the thick part of this fish in the opposite direction to that we have
stated; and thus, by the breaking of the flakes, the beauty of its
appearance is destroyed.
(for recipes, see nos.  and .)
the usual way of helping this fish is to cut it quite through, bone and
all, distributing it in nice and not too large pieces. a
moderately-sized sole will be sufficient for three slices; namely, the
head, middle, and tail. the guests should be asked which of these they
prefer. a small one will only give two slices. if the sole is very
large, the upper side may be raised from the bone, and then divided into
pieces; and the under side afterwards served in the same way.
in helping filleted soles, one fillet is given to each person. (for mode
of serving, see coloured plate a.)
(for recipe, see no. ; and for mode of serving, coloured plate e.)
first run the fish-slice down the thickest part of the fish, quite
through to the bone, from a to b, and then cut handsome and regular
slices in the direction of the lines downwards, from c to e, and
upwards from c to d, as shown in the engraving. when the carver has
removed all the meat from the upper side of the fish, the backbone
should be raised, put on one side of the dish, and the under side helped
as the upper.
a brill and john dory are carved in the same manner as a turbot.
[illustration]
note.—the thick parts of the middle of the back are the best slices
in a turbot; and the rich gelatinous skin covering the fish, as well as
a little of the thick part of the fins, are dainty morsels, and should
be placed on each plate.
whiting, &c.
whiting, pike, haddock, and other fish, when of a sufficiently large
size, may be carved in the same manner as salmon. when small, they may
be cut through, bone and all, and helped in nice pieces, a
middling-sized whiting serving for two slices.
note.—the thick part of the eel is reckoned the best; and this holds
good of all flat fish.
the tail of the lobster is the prime part, and next to that the claws.
[illustration: fish carvers.]
[illustration]
. an anecdote is told of the prince de soubise, who, intending to
give an entertainment, asked for the bill of fare. his chef came,
presenting a list adorned with vignettes, and the first article of
which, that met the prince's eye, was "fifty hams." "bertrand," said the
prince, "i think you must be extravagant; fifty hams! do you intend to
feast my whole regiment?" "no, prince, there will be but one on the
table, and the surplus i need for my espagnole, blondes, garnitures,
&c." "bertrand, you are robbing me: this item will not do."
"monseigneur," said the artiste, "you do not appreciate me. give me
the order, and i will put those fifty hams in a crystal flask no longer
than my thumb." the prince smiled, and the hams were passed. this was
all very well for the prince de soubise; but as we do not write for
princes and nobles alone, but that our british sisters may make the best
dishes out of the least expensive ingredients, we will also pass the
hams, and give a few general directions concerning sauces, &c.
. the preparation and appearance of sauces and gravies are of the
highest consequence, and in nothing does the talent and taste of the
cook more display itself. their special adaptability to the various
viands they are to accompany cannot be too much studied, in order that
they may harmonize and blend with them as perfectly, so to speak, as
does a pianoforte accompaniment with the voice of the singer.
. the general basis of most gravies and some sauces is the same stock
as that used for soups (see nos. , , , and ); and, by the
employment of these, with, perhaps, an additional slice of ham, a little
spice, a few herbs, and a slight flavouring from some cold sauce or
ketchup, very nice gravies may be made for a very small expenditure. a
milt (either of a bullock or sheep), the shank-end of mutton that has
already been dressed, and the necks and feet of poultry, may all be
advantageously used for gravy, where much is not required. it may, then,
be established as a rule, that there exists no necessity for good
gravies to be expensive, and that there is no occasion, as many would
have the world believe, to buy ever so many pounds of fresh meat, in
order to furnish an ever so little quantity of gravy.
. brown sauces, generally speaking, should scarcely be so thick as
white sauces; and it is well to bear in mind, that all those which are
intended to mask the various dishes of poultry or meat, should be of a
sufficient consistency to slightly adhere to the fowls or joints over
which they are poured. for browning and thickening sauces, &c., browned
flour may be properly employed.
. sauces should possess a decided character; and whether sharp or
sweet, savoury or plain, they should carry out their names in a distinct
manner, although, of course, not so much flavoured as to make them too
piquant on the one hand, or too mawkish on the other.
. gravies and sauces should be sent to table very hot; and there is
all the more necessity for the cook to see to this point, as, from their
being usually served in small quantities, they are more liable to cool
quickly than if they were in a larger body. those sauces, of which cream
or eggs form a component part, should be well stirred, as soon as these
ingredients are added to them, and must never be allowed to boil; as, in
that case, they would instantly curdle.
. although pickles may be purchased at shops at as low a rate as they
can usually be made for at home, or perhaps even for less, yet we would
advise all housewives, who have sufficient time and convenience, to
prepare their own. the only general rules, perhaps, worth stating
here,—as in the recipes all necessary details will be explained, are,
that the vegetables and fruits used should be sound, and not over ripe,
and that the very best vinegar should be employed.
. for forcemeats, special attention is necessary. the points which
cooks should, in this branch of cookery, more particularly observe, are
the thorough chopping of the suet, the complete mincing of the herbs,
the careful grating of the bread-crumbs, and the perfect mixing of the
whole. these are the three principal ingredients of forcemeats, and they
can scarcely be cut too small, as nothing like a lump or fibre should be
anywhere perceptible. to conclude, the flavour of no one spice or herb
should be permitted to predominate.
. ingredients.— anchovies,  oz. of butter, / pint of melted
butter, cayenne to taste.
mode.—bone the anchovies, and pound them in a mortar to a paste, with
 oz. of butter. make the melted butter hot, stir in the pounded
anchovies and cayenne; simmer for  or  minutes; and if liked, add a
squeeze of lemon-juice. a more general and expeditious way of making
this sauce is to stir in -/ tablespoonfuls of anchovy essence to /
pint of melted butter, and to add seasoning to taste. boil the whole up
for  minute, and serve hot.
time.— minutes. average cost, d. for / pint.
sufficient, this quantity, for a brill, small turbot,  or  soles,
&c.
anchovy butter (see no. ).
[illustration: the capiscum.]
 cayenne.—this is the most acrid and stimulating spice with
 which we are acquainted. it is a powder prepared from several
 varieties of the capsicum annual east-india plants, of which
 there are three so far naturalized in this country as to be able
 to grow in the open air: these are the guinea, the cherry, and
 the bell pepper. all the pods of these are extremely pungent to
 the taste, and in the green state are used by us as a pickle.
 when ripe, they are ground into cayenne pepper, and sold as a
 condiment. the best of this, however, is made in the west
 indies, from what is called the bird pepper, on account of
 hens and turkeys being extremely partial to it. it is imported
 ready for use. of the capiscum species of plants there are five;
 but the principal are,—. capsicum annuum, the common
 long-podded capsicum, which is cultivated in our gardens, and of
 which there are two varieties, one with red, and another with
 yellow fruit. . capsicum baccatum, or bird pepper, which
 rises with a shrubby stalk four or five feet high, with its
 berries growing at the division of the branches: this is small,
 oval-shaped, and of a bright-red colour, from which, as we have
 said, the best cayenne is made. . capsicum grossum, the
 bell-pepper: the fruit of this is red, and is the only kind fit
 for pickling.
apple sauce for geese, pork, &c.
. ingredients.— good-sized apples, sifted sugar to taste, a piece
of butter the size of a walnut, water.
mode.—pare, core, and quarter the apples, and throw them into cold
water to preserve their whiteness. put them in a saucepan, with
sufficient water to moisten them, and boil till soft enough to pulp.
beat them up, adding sugar to taste, and a small piece of butter this
quantity is sufficient for a good-sized tureen.
time.—according to the apples, about / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient, this quantity, for a goose or couple of ducks.
. ingredients.— good-sized apples, / pint of brown gravy, cayenne
to taste.
mode. put the gravy in a stewpan, and add the apples, after having
pared, cored, and quartered them. let them simmer gently till tender;
beat them to a pulp, and season with cayenne. this sauce is preferred by
many to the preceding.
time.—according to the apples, about / hour. average cost, d.
. ingredients.— bunch of green asparagus, salt,  oz. of fresh
butter,  small bunch of parsley,  or  green onions,  large lump of
sugar,  tablespoonfuls of sauce tournée.
mode.—break the asparagus in the tender part, wash well, and put them
into boiling salt and water to render them green. when they are tender,
take them out, and put them into cold water; drain them on a cloth till
all moisture is absorbed from them. put the butter in a stewpan, with
the parsley and onions; lay in the asparagus, and fry the whole over a
sharp fire for  minutes. add salt, the sugar and sauce tournée, and
simmer for another  minutes. rub all through a tammy, and if not a very
good colour, use a little spinach green. this sauce should be rather
sweet.
time.—altogether  minutes.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
aspic, or ornamental savoury jelly.
. ingredients.— lbs. of knuckle of veal,  cow-heel,  or  slices
of ham, any poultry trimmings,  carrots,  onion,  faggot of savoury
herbs,  glass of sherry,  quarts of water; seasoning to taste of salt
and whole white pepper;  eggs.
mode.—lay the ham on the bottom of a stewpan, cut up the veal and
cow-heel into small pieces, and lay them on the ham; add the poultry
trimmings, vegetables, herbs, sherry, and water, and let the whole
simmer very gently for  hours, carefully taking away all scum that may
rise to the surface; strain through a fine sieve, and pour into an
earthen pan to get cold. have ready a clean stewpan, put in the jelly,
and be particular to leave the sediment behind, or it will not be clear.
add the whites of  eggs, with salt and pepper, to clarify; keep
stirring over the fire, till the whole becomes very white; then draw it
to the side, and let it stand till clear. when this is the case, strain
it through a cloth or jelly-bag, and use it for moulding poultry, etc.
(see explanation of french terms, page .) tarragon vinegar may be
added to give an additional flavour.
time.—altogether -/ hours. average cost for this quantity, s.
 white pepper.—this is the produce of the same plant as that
 which produces the black pepper, from which it is manufactured
 by steeping this in lime and water, and rubbing it between the
 hands till the coats come off. the best berries only will bear
 this operation; hence the superior qualities of white pepper
 fetch a higher price than those of the other. it is less acrid
 than the black, and is much prized among the chinese. it is
 sometimes adulterated with rice-flour, as the black is with
 burnt bread. the berries of the pepper-plant grow in spikes of
 from twenty to thirty, and are, when ripe, of a bright-red
 colour. after being gathered, which is done when they are green,
 they are spread out in the sun, where they dry and become black
 and shrivelled, when they are ready for being prepared for the
 market.
bechamel, or french white sauce.
. ingredients.— small bunch of parsley,  cloves, / bay-leaf, 
small faggot of savoury herbs, salt to taste;  or  mushrooms, when
obtainable;  pints of white stock,  pint of cream,  tablespoonful of
arrowroot.
mode.—put the stock into a stewpan, with the parsley, cloves,
bay-leaf, herbs, and mushrooms; add a seasoning of salt, but no pepper,
as that would give the sauce a dusty appearance, and should be avoided.
when it has boiled long enough to extract the flavour of the herbs,
etc., strain it, and boil it up quickly again, until it is nearly
half-reduced. now mix the arrowroot smoothly with the cream, and let it
simmer very gently for  minutes over a slow fire; pour to it the
reduced stock, and continue to simmer slowly for  minutes, if the
sauce be thick. if, on the contrary, it be too thin, it must be stirred
over a sharp fire till it thickens. this is the foundation of many kinds
of sauces, especially white sauces. always make it thick, as you can
easily thin it with cream, milk, or white stock.
time.—altogether,  hours. average cost, s. per pint.
[illustration: the clove.]
 the clove.—the clove-tree is a native of the molucca islands,
 particularly amboyna, and attains the height of a laurel-tree,
 and no verdure is ever seen under it. from the extremities of
 the branches quantities of flowers grow, first white; then they
 become green, and next red and hard, when they have arrived at
 their clove state. when they become dry, they assume a yellowish
 hue, which subsequently changes into a dark brown. as an
 aromatic, the clove is highly stimulating, and yields an
 abundance of oil. there are several varieties of the clove; the
 best is called the royal clove, which is scarce, and which is
 blacker and smaller than the other kinds. it is a curious fact,
 that the flowers, when fully developed, are quite inodorous, and
 that the real fruit is not in the least aromatic. the form is
 that of a nail, having a globular head, formed of the four
 petals of the corolla, and four leaves of the calyx not
 expanded, with a nearly cylindrical germen, scarcely an inch in
 length, situate below.
bechamel maigre, or without meat.
. ingredients.— onions,  blade of mace, mushroom trimmings, a
small bunch of parsley,  oz. of butter, flour, / pint of water, 
pint of milk, salt, the juice of  lemon,  eggs.
mode.—put in a stewpan the milk, and / pint of water, with the
onions, mace, mushrooms, parsley, and salt. let these simmer gently for
 minutes. in the mean time, rub on a plate  oz. of flour and butter;
put it to the liquor, and stir it well till it boils up; then place it
by the side of the fire, and continue stirring until it is perfectly
smooth. now strain it through a sieve into a basin, after which put it
back in the stewpan, and add the lemon-juice. beat up the yolks of the
eggs with about  dessertspoonfuls of milk; strain this to the sauce,
keep stirring it over the fire, but do not let it boil, lest it curdle.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, d. per pint.
this is a good sauce to pour over boiled fowls when they are a bad
colour.
. ingredients.—sufficient vinegar to cover the beets,  oz. of whole
pepper,  oz. of allspice to each gallon of vinegar.
mode.—wash the beets free from dirt, and be very careful not to prick
the outside skin, or they would lose their beautiful colour. put them
into boiling water, let them simmer gently, and when about three parts
done, which will be in -/ hour, take them out and let them cool. boil
the vinegar with pepper and allspice, in the above proportion, for ten
minutes, and when cold, pour it on the beets, which must be peeled and
cut into slices about / inch thick. cover with bladder to exclude the
air, and in a week they will be fit for use.
average cost, s. per gallon.
[illustration: black pepper.]
 black pepper.—this well-known aromatic spice is the fruit of a
 species of climbing vine, and is a native of the east indies,
 and is extensively cultivated in malabar and the eastern islands
 of borneo, sumatra, and java, and others in the same latitude.
 it was formerly confined to these countries, but it has now been
 introduced to cayenne. it is generally employed as a condiment;
 but it should never be forgotten, that, even in small
 quantities, it produces detrimental effects on inflammatory
 constitutions. dr. paris, in his work on diet, says, "foreign
 spices were not intended by nature for the inhabitants of
 temperate climes; they are heating, and highly stimulant. i am,
 however, not anxious to give more weight to this objection than
 it deserves. man is no longer the child of nature, nor the
 passive inhabitant of any particular region. he ranges over
 every part of the globe, and elicits nourishment from the
 productions of every climate. nature is very kind in favouring
 the growth of those productions which are most likely to answer
 our local wants. those climates, for instance, which engender
 endemic diseases, are, in general, congenial to the growth of
 plants that operate as antidotes to them. but if we go to the
 east for tea, there is no reason why we should not go to the
 west for sugar. the dyspeptic invalid, however, should be
 cautious in their use; they may afford temporary benefit, at the
 expense of permanent mischief. it has been well said, that the
 best quality of spices is to stimulate the appetite, and their
 worst to destroy, by insensible degrees, the tone of the
 stomach. the intrinsic goodness of meats should always be
 suspected when they require spicy seasonings to compensate for
 their natural want of sapidity." the quality of pepper is known
 by rubbing it between the hands: that which withstands this
 operation is good, that which is reduced to powder by it is bad.
 the quantity of pepper imported into europe is very great.
benton sauce (to serve with hot or cold roast beef).
. ingredients.— tablespoonful of scraped horseradish,  teaspoonful
of made mustard,  teaspoonful of pounded sugar,  tablespoonfuls of
vinegar.
mode.—grate or scrape the horseradish very fine, and mix it with the
other ingredients, which must be all well blended together; serve in a
tureen. with cold meat, this sauce is a very good substitute for
pickles.
average cost for this quantity, d.
bread sauce (to serve with roast turkey, fowl, game, &c.).
. ingredients.— pint of milk, / of the crumb of a stale loaf, 
onion; pounded mace, cayenne, and salt to taste;  oz. of butter.
mode.—peel and quarter the onion, and simmer it in the milk till
perfectly tender. break the bread, which should be stale, into small
pieces, carefully picking out any hard outside pieces; put it in a very
clean saucepan, strain the milk over it, cover it up, and let it remain
for an hour to soak. now beat it up with a fork very smoothly, add a
seasoning of pounded mace, cayenne, and salt, with  oz. of butter; give
the whole one boil, and serve. to enrich this sauce, a small quantity of
cream may be added just before sending it to table.
time.—altogether, -/ hour.
average cost for this quantity, d.
sufficient to serve with a turkey, pair of fowls, or brace of
partridges.
[illustration: mace.]
 mace.—this is the membrane which surrounds the shell of the
 nutmeg. its general qualities are the same as those of the
 nutmeg, producing an agreeable aromatic odour, with a hot and
 acrid taste. it is of an oleaginous nature, is yellowish in its
 hue, and is used largely as a condiment. in "beeton's
 dictionary" we find that the four largest of the banda islands
 produce , lbs. of it annually, which, with nutmegs, are
 their principal articles of export.
. ingredients.—giblets of poultry, / lb. of the crumb of a stale
loaf,  onion,  whole peppers,  blade of mace, salt to taste, 
tablespoonfuls of cream or melted butter,  pint of water.
mode.—put the giblets, with the head, neck, legs, &c., into a
stewpan; add the onion, pepper, mace, salt, and rather more than  pint
of water. let this simmer for an hour, when strain the liquor over the
bread, which should be previously grated or broken into small pieces.
cover up the saucepan, and leave it for an hour by the side of the fire;
then beat the sauce up with a fork until no lumps remain, and the whole
is nice and smooth. let it boil for  or  minutes; keep stirring it
until it is rather thick; when add  tablespoonfuls of good melted
butter or cream, and serve very hot.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d.
. the browning for soups (see no. ) answers equally well for
sauces and gravies, when it is absolutely necessary to colour them in
this manner; but where they can be made to look brown by using ketchup,
wine, browned flour, tomatoes, or any colour sauce, it is far
preferable. as, however, in cooking, so much depends on appearance,
perhaps it would be as well for the inexperienced cook to use the
artificial means (no. ). when no browning is at hand, and you wish to
heighten the colour of your gravy, dissolve a lump of sugar in an iron
spoon over a sharp fire; when it is in a liquid state, drop it into the
sauce or gravy quite hot. care, however, must be taken not to put in too
much, as it would impart a very disagreeable flavour.
beurre noir, or browned butter (a french sauce).
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter,  tablespoonful of minced parsley,
 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—put the butter into a fryingpan over a nice clear fire, and
when it smokes, throw in the parsley, and add the vinegar and seasoning.
let the whole simmer for a minute or two, when it is ready to serve.
this is a very good sauce for skate.
time.—/ hour.
. put the butter in a basin before the fire, and when it melts, stir
it round once or twice, and let it settle. do not strain it unless
absolutely necessary, as it causes so much waste. pour it gently off
into a clean dry jar, carefully leaving all sediment behind. let it
cool, and carefully exclude the air by means of a bladder, or piece of
wash-leather, tied over. if the butter is salt, it may be washed before
melting, when it is to be used for sweet dishes.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter, a dessertspoonful of flour, 
wineglassful of water, salt to taste.
mode.—cut the butter up into small pieces, put it in a saucepan,
dredge over the flour, and add the water and a seasoning of salt; stir
it one way constantly till the whole of the ingredients are melted and
thoroughly blended. let it just boil, when it is ready to serve. if the
butter is to be melted with cream, use the same quantity as of water,
but omit the flour; keep stirring it, but do not allow it to boil.
time.— minute to simmer.
average cost for this quantity, d.
(more economical.)
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  dessertspoonful of flour, salt to
taste, / pint of water.
mode.—mix the flour and water to a smooth batter, which put into a
saucepan. add the butter and a seasoning of salt, keep stirring one
way till all the ingredients are melted and perfectly smooth; let the
whole boil for a minute or two, and serve.
time.— minutes to simmer.
average cost for this quantity, d.
melted butter (the french sauce blanche).
. ingredients.—/ lb. of fresh butter,  tablespoonful of flour,
salt to taste, / gill of water, / spoonful of white vinegar, a very
little grated nutmeg.
mode.—mix the flour and water to a smooth batter, carefully rubbing
down with the back of a spoon any lumps that may appear. put it in a
saucepan with all the other ingredients, and let it thicken on the fire,
but do not allow it to boil, lest it should taste of the flour.
time.— minute to simmer.
average cost, d. for this quantity.
[illustration: the nutmeg.]
 nutmeg.—this is a native of the moluccas, and was long kept
 from being spread in other places by the monopolizing spirit of
 the dutch, who endeavoured to keep it wholly to themselves by
 eradicating it from every other island. we find it stated in
 "beeton's dictionary of universal information," under the
 article "banda islands," that the four largest are appropriated
 to the cultivation of nutmegs, of which about , lbs. are
 annually produced. the plant, through the enterprise of the
 british, has now found its way into penang and bencooleu, where
 it flourishes and produces well. it has also been tried to be
 naturalized in the west indies, and it bears fruit all the year
 round. there are two kinds of nutmeg,—one wild, and long and
 oval-shaped, the other cultivated, and nearly round. the best is
 firm and hard, and has a strong aromatic odour, with a hot and
 acrid taste. it ought to be used with caution by those who are
 of paralytic or apoplectic habits.
.—ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter, no. , the yolks of 
eggs, a little lemon-juice.
mode.—make the butter quite hot, and be careful not to colour it.
well whisk the yolks of the eggs, pour them to the butter, beating them
all the while. make the sauce hot over the fire, but do not let it boil;
add a squeeze of lemon-juice.
. ingredients.— teaspoonful of flour,  oz. butter, / pint of
milk, a few grains of salt.
mode.—mix the butter and flour smoothly together on a plate, put it
into a lined saucepan, and pour in the milk. keep stirring it one way
over a sharp fire; let it boil quickly for a minute or two, and it is
ready to serve. this is a very good foundation for onion, lobster, or
oyster sauce: using milk instead of water makes it look so much whiter
and more delicate.
time.—altogether,  minutes. average cost for this quantity, d.
. ingredients.— head of garlic, / oz. cayenne,  teaspoonfuls of
soy,  ditto walnut ketchup,  pint of vinegar, cochineal to colour.
mode.—slice the garlic, and put it, with all the above ingredients,
into a clean bottle. let it stand to infuse for a month, when strain it
off quite clear, and it will be fit for use. keep it in small bottles
well sealed, to exclude the air.
average cost for this quantity, d.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter (no. ),  tablespoonfuls
of capers or nasturtiums,  tablespoonful of their liquor.
mode.—chop the capers twice or thrice, and add them, with their
liquor, to / pint of melted butter, made very smoothly; keep stirring
well; let the sauce just simmer, and serve in a tureen. pickled
nasturtium-pods are fine-flavoured, and by many are eaten in preference
to capers. they make an excellent sauce.
time.— minutes to simmer. average cost for this quantity, d.
sufficient to serve with a leg of mutton.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter no. ,  dessertspoonfuls
of capers,  dessertspoonful of their liquor, a small piece of glaze, if
at hand (this may be dispensed with), / teaspoonful of salt, ditto of
pepper,  tablespoonful of anchovy essence.
mode.—cut the capers across once or twice, but do not chop them fine;
put them in a saucepan with / pint of good melted butter, and add all
the other ingredients. keep stirring the whole until it just simmers,
when it is ready to serve.
time.— minute to simmer. average cost for this quantity, d.
sufficient to serve with a skate, or  or  slices of salmon.
[illustration: the caper.]
 capers.—these are the unopened buds of a low trailing shrub,
 which grows wild among the crevices of the rocks of greece, as
 well as in northern africa: the plant, however, has come to be
 cultivated in the south of europe. after being pickled in
 vinegar and salt, they are imported from sicily, italy, and the
 south of france. the best are from toulon.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter, no. ,  tablespoonfuls
of cut parsley, / teaspoonful of salt,  tablespoonful of vinegar.
mode.—boil the parsley slowly to let it become a bad colour; cut, but
do not chop it fine. add it to / pint of smoothly-made melted butter,
with salt and vinegar in the above proportions. boil up and serve.
time.— minutes to simmer. average cost for this quantity, d.
. ingredients.—vinegar, / oz. of pounded mace, and / oz. of
grated nutmeg, to each quart; brine.
mode.—gather the pods with the stalks on, before they turn red; slit
them down the side with a small-pointed knife, and remove the seeds
only; put them in a strong brine for  days, changing it every morning;
then take them out, lay them on a cloth, with another one over them,
until they are perfectly free from moisture. boil sufficient vinegar to
cover them, with mace and nutmeg in the above proportions; put the pods
in a jar, pour over the vinegar when cold, and exclude them from the air
by means of a wet bladder tied over.
cayenne vinegar, or essence of cayenne.
. ingredients.—/ oz. of cayenne pepper, / pint of strong spirit,
or  pint of vinegar.
mode.—put the vinegar, or spirit, into a bottle, with the above
proportion of cayenne, and let it steep for a month, when strain off and
bottle for use. this is excellent seasoning for soups or sauces, but
must be used very sparingly.
celery sauce, for boiled turkey, poultry, &c.
. ingredients.— heads of celery,  pint of white stock, no. , 
blades of mace,  small bunch of savoury herbs; thickening of butter and
flour, or arrowroot, / pint of cream, lemon-juice.
mode.—boil the celery in salt and water, until tender, and cut it
into pieces  inches long. put the stock into a stewpan with the mace
and herbs, and let it simmer for / hour to extract their flavour. then
strain the liquor, add the celery and a thickening of butter kneaded
with flour, or, what is still better, with arrowroot; just before
serving, put in the cream, boil it up and squeeze in a little
lemon-juice. if necessary, add a seasoning of salt and white pepper.
time.— minutes to boil the celery. average cost, s. d.
sufficient, this quantity, for a boiled turkey.
this sauce may be made brown by using gravy instead of white stock, and
flavouring it with mushroom ketchup or harvey's sauce.
[illustration: arrowroot.]
 arrowroot.—this nutritious fecula is obtained from the roots of
 a plant which is cultivated in both the east and west indies.
 when the roots are about a year old, they are dug up, and, after
 being well washed, are beaten to a pulp, which is afterwards, by
 means of water, separated from the fibrous part. after being
 passed through a sieve, once more washed, and then suffered to
 settle, the sediment is dried in the sun, when it has become
 arrowroot. the best is obtained from the west indies, but a
 large quantity of what is sold in london is adulterated with
 potato-starch. as a means of knowing arrowroot when it is good,
 it may be as well to state, that the genuine article, when
 formed into a jelly, will remain firm for three or four days,
 whilst the adulterated will become as thin as milk in the course
 of twelve hours.
celery sauce (a more simple recipe).
. ingredients.— heads of celery, / pint of melted butter, made
with milk (no. ),  blade of pounded mace; salt and white pepper to
taste.
mode.—wash the celery, boil it in salt and water till tender, and cut
it into pieces  inches long; make / pint melted butter by recipe no.
; put in the celery, pounded mace, and seasoning; simmer for three
minutes, when the sauce will be ready to serve.
time.— minutes to boil the celery. average cost, d.
sufficient, this quantity, for a boiled fowl.
. ingredients.—/ oz. of celery-seed,  pint of vinegar.
mode.—crush the seed by pounding it in a mortar; boil the vinegar,
and when cold, pour it to the seed; let it infuse for a fortnight, when
strain and bottle off for use. this is frequently used in salads.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of chestnuts, / pint of white stock, 
strips of lemon-peel, cayenne to taste, / pint of cream or milk.
mode.—peel off the outside skin of the chestnuts, and put them into
boiling water for a few minutes; take off the thin inside peel, and put
them into a saucepan, with the white stock and lemon-peel, and let them
simmer for -/ hour, or until the chestnuts are quite tender. rub the
whole through a hair-sieve with a wooden spoon; add seasoning and the
cream; let it just simmer, but not boil, and keep stirring all the time.
serve very hot; and quickly. if milk is used instead of cream, a very
small quantity of thickening may be required: that, of course, the cook
will determine.
time.—altogether nearly two hours. average cost, d.
sufficient, this quantity, for a turkey.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of chestnuts, / pint of stock no. , 
lumps of sugar,  tablespoonfuls of spanish sauce (see sauces).
mode.—prepare the chestnuts as in the foregoing recipe, by scalding
and peeling them; put them in a stewpan with the stock and sugar, and
simmer them till tender. when done, add spanish sauce in the above
proportion, and rub the whole through a tammy. keep this sauce rather
liquid, as it is liable to thicken.
time.—-/ hour to simmer the chestnuts. average cost, d.
. ingredients.—-/ lbs. of moist sugar, / lb. of salt, / lb.
of garlic, / lb. of onions, / lb. of powdered ginger, / lb. of
dried chilies, / lb. of mustard-seed, / lb. of stoned raisins, 
bottles of best vinegar,  large unripe sour apples.
mode.—the sugar must be made into syrup; the garlic, onions, and
ginger be finely pounded in a mortar; the mustard-seed be washed in cold
vinegar, and dried in the sun; the apples be peeled, cored, and sliced,
and boiled in a bottle and a half of the vinegar. when all this is done,
and the apples are quite cold, put them into a large pan, and gradually
mix the whole of the rest of the ingredients, including the remaining
half-bottle of vinegar. it must be well stirred until the whole is
thoroughly blended, and then put into bottles for use. tie a piece of
wet bladder over the mouths of the bottles, after they are well corked.
this chetney is very superior to any which can be bought, and one trial
will prove it to be delicious.
note.—this recipe was given by a native to an english lady, who had
long been a resident in india, and who, since her return to her native
country, has become quite celebrated amongst her friends for the
excellence of this eastern relish.
[illustration: garlic.]
 garlic.—the smell of this plant is generally considered
 offensive, and it is the most acrimonious in its taste of the
 whole of the alliaceous tribe. in  it was introduced to
 england from the shores of the mediterranean, where it is
 abundant, and in sicily it grows naturally. it was in greater
 repute with our ancestors than it is with ourselves, although it
 is still used as a seasoning herb. on the continent, especially
 in italy, it is much used, and the french consider it an
 essential in many made dishes.
. ingredients.— fresh red english chilies,  pint of vinegar.
mode.—pound or cut the chilies in half, and infuse them in the
vinegar for a fortnight, when it will be fit for use. this will be found
an agreeable relish to fish, as many people cannot eat it without the
addition of an acid and cayenne pepper.
. ingredients.- glass of port wine,  tablespoonfuls of harvey's
sauce,  dessertspoonful of mushroom ketchup, ditto of pounded white
sugar,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, / teaspoonful of cayenne
pepper, ditto of salt.
mode.—mix all the ingredients thoroughly together, and heat the sauce
gradually, by placing the vessel in which it is made in a saucepan of
boiling water. do not allow it to boil, and serve directly it is ready.
this sauce, if bottled immediately, will keep good for a fortnight, and
will be found excellent.
consomme, or white stock for many sauces.
. consommé is made precisely in the same manner as stock no. ,
and, for ordinary purposes, will be found quite good enough. when,
however, a stronger stock is desired, either put in half the quantity of
water, or double that of the meat. this is a very good foundation for
all white sauces.
crab sauce for fish (equal to lobster sauce).
. ingredients.— crab; salt, pounded mace, and cayenne to taste; /
pint of melted butter made with milk (see no. ).
mode.—choose a nice fresh crab, pick all the meat away from the
shell, and cut it into small square pieces. make / pint of melted
butter by recipe no. , put in the fish and seasoning; let it
gradually warm through, and simmer for  minutes. it should not boil.
average cost, s. d.
. ingredients.—/ pint of cream,  oz. of butter,  teaspoonful of
flour, salt and cayenne to taste; when liked, a small quantity of
pounded mace or lemon-juice.
mode.—put the butter in a very clean saucepan, dredge in the flour,
and keep shaking round till the butter is melted. add the seasoning and
cream, and stir the whole till it boils; let it just simmer for 
minutes, when add either pounded mace or lemon-juice to taste, to give
it a flavour.
time.— minutes to simmer. average cost for this quantity, d.
this sauce may be flavoured with very finely-shredded shalot.
. ingredients.— or  cucumbers,  oz. of butter,  tablespoonfuls
of brown gravy.
mode.—peel the cucumbers, quarter them, and take out the seeds; cut
them into small pieces; put them in a cloth, and rub them well, to take
out the water which hangs about them. put the butter in a saucepan, add
the cucumbers, and shake them over a sharp fire until they are of a good
colour. then pour over it the gravy, mix this with the cucumbers, and
simmer gently for  minutes, when it will be ready to serve.
time.—altogether, / hour.
. ingredients.— oz. of whole pepper,  oz. of bruised ginger;
sufficient vinegar to cover the cucumbers.
mode.—cut the cucumbers in thick slices, sprinkle salt over them, and
let them remain for  hours. the next day, drain them well for  hours,
put them into a jar, pour boiling vinegar over them, and keep them in a
warm place. in a short time, boil up the vinegar again, add pepper and
ginger in the above proportion, and instantly cover them up. tie them
down with bladder, and in a few days they will be fit for use.
[illustration: long pepper.]
 long pepper.—this is the produce of a different plant from that
 which produces the black, it consisting of the half-ripe
 flower-heads of what naturalists call piper longum and
 chaba. it is the growth, however, of the same countries;
 indeed, all the spices are the produce of tropical climates
 only. originally, the most valuable of these were found in the
 spice islands, or moluccas, of the indian ocean, and were highly
 prized by the nations of antiquity. the romans indulged in them
 to a most extravagant degree. the long pepper is less aromatic
 than the black, but its oil is more pungent.
. ingredients.— or four cucumbers, / pint of white stock, no.
, cayenne and salt to taste, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—cut the cucumbers into small pieces, after peeling them and
taking out the seeds. put them in a stewpan with the white stock and
seasoning; simmer gently till the cucumbers are tender, which will be in
about / hour. then add the yolks of the eggs well beaten; stir them to
the sauce, but do not allow it to boil, and serve very hot.
time.—altogether, / hour.
cucumber vinegar (a very nice addition to salads).
. ingredients.— large cucumbers, or  smaller ones,  quart of
vinegar,  onions,  shalots,  tablespoonful of salt,  tablespoonfuls
of pepper, / teaspoonful of cayenne.
mode.—pare and slice the cucumbers, put them in a stone jar or
wide-mouthed bottle, with the vinegar; slice the onions and shalots, and
add them, with all the other ingredients, to the cucumbers. let it stand
 or  days, boil it all up, and when cold, strain the liquor through a
piece of muslin, and store it away in small bottles well sealed. this
vinegar is a very nice addition to gravies, hashes, &e., as well as a
great improvement to salads, or to eat with cold meat.
. ingredients.—cucumbers, salt.
mode.—pare and slice the cucumbers (as for the table), sprinkle well
with salt, and let them remain for  hours; strain off the liquor, pack
in jars, a thick layer of cucumbers and salt alternately; tie down
closely, and, when wanted for use, take out the quantity required. now
wash them well in fresh water, and dress as usual with pepper, vinegar,
and oil.
[illustration: the cucumber.]
 the cucumber.—though the melon is far superior in point of
 flavour to this fruit, yet it is allied to the cucumber, which
 is known to naturalists as cucumia sativus. the modern
 egyptians, as did their forefathers, still eat it, and others of
 its class. cucumbers were observed, too, by bishop heber,
 beyond the ganges, in india; and burckhardt noticed them in
 palestine. (see no. .)
. ingredients.—salt and water;  lb. of lump sugar, the rind of 
lemon,  oz. of ginger, cucumbers.
mode.—choose the greenest cucumbers, and those that are most free
from seeds; put them in strong salt and water, with a cabbage-leaf to
keep them down; tie a paper over them, and put them in a warm place till
they are yellow; then wash them and set them over the fire in fresh
water, with a very little salt, and another cabbage-leaf over them;
cover very closely, but take care they do not boil. if they are not a
fine green, change the water again, cover them as before, and make them
hot. when they are a good colour, take them off the fire and let them
cool; cut them in quarters, take out the seeds and pulp, and put them
into cold water. let them remain for  days, changing the water twice
each day, to draw out the salt. put the sugar, with / pint of water,
in a saucepan over the fire; remove the scum as it rises, and add the
lemon-peel and ginger with the outside scraped off; when the syrup is
tolerably thick, take it off the fire, and when cold, wipe the
cucumbers dry, and put them in. boil the syrup once in  or  days for
 weeks; strengthen it if required, and let it be quite cold before the
cucumbers are put in. great attention must be paid to the directions in
the commencement of this recipe, as, if these are not properly carried
out, the result will be far from satisfactory.
seasonable.—this recipe should be used in june, july, or august.
[illustration: salt-mine at northwich.]
 common salt.—by this we mean salt used for cooking purposes,
 which is found in great abundance both on land and in the waters
 of the ocean. sea or salt water, as it is often called,
 contains, it has been discovered, about three per cent, of salt
 on an average. solid rocks of salt are also found in various
 parts of the world, and the county of chester contains many of
 these mines, and it is from there that much of our salt comes.
 some springs are so highly impregnated with salt, as to have
 received the name of "brine" springs, and are supposed to have
 become so by passing through the salt rocks below ground, and
 thus dissolving a portion of this mineral substance. we here
 give an engraving of a salt-mine at northwich, cheshire, where
 both salt-mines and brine-springs are exceedingly productive,
 and are believed to have been wrought so far back as during the
 occupation of britain by the romans.
. ingredients.— pint of milk,  eggs,  oz. of pounded sugar, 
tablespoonful of brandy.
mode.—put the milk in a very clean saucepan, and let it boil. beat
the eggs, stir to them the milk and pounded sugar, and put the mixture
into a jug. place the jug in a saucepan of boiling water; keep stirring
well until it thickens, but do not allow it to boil, or it will curdle.
serve the sauce in a tureen, stir in the brandy, and grate a little
nutmeg over the top. this sauce may be made very much nicer by using
cream instead of milk; but the above recipe will be found quite good
enough for ordinary purposes.
average cost, d. per pint.
sufficient, this quantity, for  fruit tarts, or  pudding.
. ingredients.—/ teaspoonful of flour,  oz. of butter, 
tablespoonfuls of vinegar, the yolks of  eggs, the juice of / lemon;
salt to taste.
mode.—put all the ingredients, except the lemon-juice, into a
stew-pan; set it over the fire, and keep continually stirring. when it
is sufficiently thick, take it off, as it should not boil. if, however,
it happens to curdle, strain the sauce through a tammy, add the
lemon-juice, and serve. tarragon vinegar may be used instead of plain,
and, by many, is considered far preferable.
average cost, d.
note.—this sauce may be poured hot over salad, and left to get quite
cold, when it should be thick, smooth, and somewhat stiff. excellent
salads may be made of hard eggs, or the remains of salt fish flaked
nicely from the bone, by pouring over a little of the above mixture when
hot, and allowing it to cool.
[illustration: the lemon.]
 the lemon.—this fruit is a native of asia, and is mentioned by
 virgil as an antidote to poison. it is hardier than the orange,
 and, as one of the citron tribe, was brought into europe by the
 arabians. the lemon was first cultivated in england in the
 beginning of the th century, and is now often to be found in
 our green-houses. the kind commonly sold, however, is imported
 from portugal, spain, and the azores. some also come from st.
 helena; but those from spain are esteemed the best. its juice is
 now an essential for culinary purposes; but as an antiscorbutic
 its value is still greater. this juice, which is called citric
 acid, may be preserved in bottles for a considerable time, by
 covering it with a thin stratum of oil. shrub is made from it
 with rum and sugar.
green dutch sauce, or hollandaise verte.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of béchamel, no. , seasoning to
taste of salt and cayenne, a little parsley-green to colour, the juice
of / a lemon.
mode.—put the béchamel into a saucepan with the seasoning, and bring
it to a boil. make a green colouring by pounding some parsley in a
mortar, and squeezing all the juice from it. let this just simmer, when
add it to the sauce. a moment before serving, put in the lemon-juice,
but not before; for otherwise the sauce would turn yellow, and its
appearance be thus spoiled.
average cost, d.
 béchamel sauce—this sauce takes its name from a monsieur
 béchamel, a rich french financier, who, according to borne
 authorities, invented it; whilst others affirm he only
 patronized it. be this as it may, it is one of the most pleasant
 sauces which come to table, and should be most carefully and
 intelligently prepared. it is frequently used, as in the above
 recipe, as a principal ingredient and basis for other sauces.
. ingredients.— eggs,  quart of vinegar, / oz. of black pepper,
/ oz. of jamaica pepper, / oz. of ginger.
mode.—boil the eggs for  minutes, then dip them into cold water,
and take off the shells. put the vinegar, with the pepper and ginger,
into a stewpan, and let it simmer for  minutes. now place the eggs in
a jar, pour over them the vinegar, &c., boiling hot, and, when cold, tie
them down with bladder to exclude the air. this pickle will be ready for
use in a month.
average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable.—this should be made about easter, as at this time eggs
are plentiful and cheap. a store of pickled eggs will be found very
useful and ornamental in serving with many first and second course
dishes.
[illustration: ginger.]
 the ginger-plant, known to naturalists as zingiber officinale,
 is a native, of the east and west indies. it grows somewhat like
 the lily of the valley, but its height is about three feet. in
 jamaica it flowers about august or september, fading about the
 end of the year. the fleshy creeping roots, which form the
 ginger of commerce, are in a proper state to be dug when the
 stalks are entirely withered. this operation is usually
 performed in january and february; and when the roots are taken
 out of the earth, each one is picked, scraped, separately
 washed, and afterwards very carefully dried. ginger is generally
 considered as less pungent and heating to the system than might
 he expected from its effects on the organs of taste, and it is
 frequently used, with considerable effect, as an anti-spasmodic
 and carminative.
. ingredients.— eggs, a little flour; seasoning to taste of salt.
mode.—boil  eggs for  minutes, strip off the shells, take the
yolks and pound them in a mortar. beat the yolks of the other  eggs;
add them, with a little flour and salt, to those pounded; mix all well
together, and roll into balls. boil them before they are put into the
soup or other dish they may be intended for.
time.— minutes to boil the eggs. average cost, for this quantity,
d.
sufficient,  dozen balls for  tureen of soup.
. ingredients.— eggs, / pint of melted butter, no. ; when
liked, a very little lemon-juice.
mode.—boil the eggs until quite hard, which will be in about 
minutes, and put them into cold water for / hour. strip off the
shells, chop the eggs into small pieces, not, however, too fine. make
the melted butter very smoothly, by recipe no. , and, when boiling,
stir in the eggs, and serve very hot. lemon-juice may be added at
pleasure.
time.— minutes to boil the eggs. average cost, d.
sufficient.—this quantity for  or  lbs. of fish.
note.—when a thicker sauce is required, use one or two more eggs to
the same quantity of melted butter.
. ingredients.—/ pint of walnut ketchup, / pint of mushroom
ditto,  tablespoonfuls of indian soy,  tablespoonfuls of port wine;
/ oz. of white pepper,  oz. of shalots, / oz. of cayenne, / oz.
of cloves, / pint of vinegar.
mode.—put the whole of the ingredients into a bottle, and let it
remain for a fortnight in a warm place, occasionally shaking up the
contents. strain, and bottle off for use. this sauce will be found an
agreeable addition to gravies, hashes, stews, &c.
average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
[illustration: shalot.]
 shalot, or eschalot.—this plant is supposed to have been
 introduced to england by the crusaders, who found it growing
 wild in the vicinity of ascalon. it is a bulbous root, and when
 full grown, its leaves wither in july. they ought to be taken up
 in the autumn, and when dried in the house, will keep till
 spring. it is called by old authors the "barren onion," and is
 used in sauces and pickles, soups and made dishes, and as an
 accompaniment to chops and steaks.
. ingredients.— slices of lean ham,  lb. of veal, -/ pint of
white stock, no. ;  or  sprigs of parsley, / a bay-leaf,  or 
sprigs of savoury herbs,  green onions,  shalots,  cloves,  blade of
mace,  glasses of sherry or madeira, thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—cut up the ham and veal into small square pieces, and put them
into a stewpan. moisten these with / pint of the stock no. , and
simmer till the bottom of the stewpan is covered with a nicely-coloured
glaze, when put in a few more spoonfuls to detach it. add the remainder
of the stock, with the spices, herbs, shalots, and onions, and simmer
very gently for  hour. strain and skim off every particle of fat, and
when required for use, thicken with butter and flour, or with a little
roux. add the wine, and, if necessary, a seasoning of cayenne; when it
will be ready to serve.
time.—-/ hour.
average cost, s. per pint.
note.—the wine in this sauce may be omitted, and an onion sliced and
fried of a nice brown substituted for it. this sauce or gravy is used
for many dishes, and with most people is a general favourite.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter, no. , rather more than
 tablespoonful of chopped fennel.
mode.—make the melted butter very smoothly, by recipe no. ; chop
the fennel rather small, carefully cleansing it from any grit or dirt,
and put it to the butter when this is on the point of boiling. simmer
for a minute or two, and serve in a tureen.
time.— minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient to serve with  or  mackerel.
[illustration: fennel.]
 fennel.—this elegantly-growing plant, of which the latin name
 is anethum foeniculum, grows best in chalky soils, where,
 indeed, it is often found wild. it is very generally cultivated
 in gardens, and has much improved on its original form. various
 dishes are frequently ornamented and garnished with its graceful
 leaves, and these are sometimes boiled in soups, although it is
 more usually confined, in english cookery, to the mackerel sauce
 as here given.
. ingredients.—-/ oz. of cayenne,  tablespoonfuls of walnut
ketchup,  tablespoonfuls of soy, a few shreds of garlic and shalot, 
quart of vinegar.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a large bottle, and shake well
every day for a fortnight. keep it in small bottles well sealed, and in
a few days it will be fit for use.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
. ingredients.— middling-sized lobster, / an anchovy,  head of
boiled celery, the yolk of a hard-boiled egg; salt, cayenne, and mace to
taste;  tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs,  oz. of butter,  eggs.
mode.—pick the meat from the shell of the lobster, and pound it, with
the soft parts, in a mortar; add the celery, the yolk of the hard-boiled
egg, seasoning, and bread crumbs. continue pounding till the whole is
nicely amalgamated. warm the butter till it is in a liquid state; well
whisk the eggs, and work these up with the pounded lobster-meat. make
into balls of about an inch in diameter, and fry of a nice pale brown.
sufficient, from  to  balls for  tureen of soup.
. ingredients.— lb. of veal,  lb. of fat bacon; salt, cayenne,
pepper, and pounded mace to taste; a very little nutmeg, the same of
chopped lemon-peel, / teaspoonful of chopped parsley, / teaspoonful
of minced savoury herbs,  or  eggs.
mode.—chop the veal and bacon together, and put them in a mortar with
the other ingredients mentioned above. pound well, and bind with  or 
eggs which have been previously beaten and strained. work the whole well
together, and the forcemeat will be ready for use. if the pie is not to
be eaten immediately, omit the herbs and parsley, as these would prevent
it from keeping. mushrooms or truffles may be added.
sufficient for  small pies.
[illustration: marjoram.]
 marjoram.—although there are several species of marjoram, that
 which is known as the sweet or knotted marjoram, is the one
 usually preferred in cookery. it is a native of portugal, and
 when its leaves are used as a seasoning herb, they have an
 agreeable aromatic flavour. the winter sweet marjoram used for
 the same purposes, is a native of greece, and the pot-marjoram
 is another variety brought from sicily. all of them are
 favourite ingredients in soups, stuffings, &c.
. ingredients.— oz. of fresh butter,  oz. of suet,  oz. of fat
bacon,  small teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs, including parsley; a
little onion, when liked, shredded very fine; salt, nutmeg, and cayenne
to taste;  oz. of bread crumbs,  egg.
mode.—mix all the ingredients well together, carefully mincing them
very finely; beat up the egg, moisten with it, and work the whole very
smoothly together. oysters or anchovies may be added to this forcemeat,
and will be found a great improvement.
average cost, d.
sufficient for a moderate-sized haddock or pike.
forcemeat for veal, turkeys, fowls, hare, &c.
. ingredients.— oz. of ham or lean bacon, / lb. of suet, the rind
of half a lemon,  teaspoonful of minced parsley,  teaspoonful of
minced sweet herbs; salt, cayenne, and pounded mace to taste;  oz. of
bread crumbs,  eggs.
mode.—shred the ham or bacon, chop the suet, lemon-peel, and herbs,
taking particular care that all be very finely minced; add a seasoning
to taste, of salt, cayenne, and mace, and blend all thoroughly together
with the bread crumbs, before wetting. now beat and strain the eggs,
work these up with the other ingredients, and the forcemeat will be
ready for use. when it is made into balls, fry of a nice brown, in
boiling lard, or put them on a tin and bake for / hour in a moderate
oven. as we have stated before, no one flavour should predominate
greatly, and the forcemeat should be of sufficient body to cut with a
knife, and yet not dry and heavy. for very delicate forcemeat, it is
advisable to pound the ingredients together before binding with the egg;
but for ordinary cooking, mincing very finely answers the purpose.
average cost, d.
sufficient for a turkey, a moderate-sized fillet of veal, or a hare.
note.—in forcemeat for hare, the liver of the animal is sometimes
added. boil for  minutes, mince it very small, and mix it with the
other ingredients. if it should be in an unsound state, it must be on no
account made use of.
[illustration: basil.]
 sweet herbs.—those most usually employed for purposes of
 cooking, such as the flavouring of soups, sauces, forcemeats,
 &c., are thyme, sage, mint, marjoram, savory, and basil. other
 sweet herbs are cultivated for purposes of medicine and
 perfumery: they are most grateful both to the organs of taste
 and smelling; and to the aroma derived from them is due, in a
 great measure, the sweet and exhilarating fragrance of our
 "flowery meads." in town, sweet herbs have to be procured at the
 greengrocers' or herbalists', whilst, in the country, the garden
 should furnish all that are wanted, the cook taking great care
 to have some dried in the autumn for her use throughout the
 winter months.
. ingredients.— oz. of bread crumbs,  teaspoonful of minced
savoury herbs,  oysters,  anchovies (these may be dispensed with), 
oz. of suet; salt, pepper, and pounded mace to taste;  tablespoonfuls
of cream or milk, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—beard and mince the oysters, prepare and mix the other
ingredients by recipe no. , and blend the whole thoroughly together.
moisten with the cream and eggs, put all into a stewpan, and stir it
over the fire till it thickens, when put it into the fish, which should
have previously been cut open, and sew it up.
time.— or  minutes to thicken.
average cost, d.
sufficient for a moderate-sized pike.
. it will be well to state, in the beginning of this recipe, that
french forcemeat, or quenelles, consist of the blending of three
separate processes; namely, panada, udder, and whatever meat you intend
using.
. ingredients.—the crumb of  penny rolls,  tablespoonfuls of white
stock, no. ,  oz. of butter,  slice of ham,  bay-leaf, a little
minced parsley,  shalots,  clove,  blades of mace, a few mushrooms
(when obtainable), butter, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—soak the crumb of the rolls in milk for about / hour, then
take it out, and squeeze so as to press the milk from it; put the soaked
bread into a stewpan with the above quantity of white stock, and set it
on one side; then put into a separate stewpan  oz. of butter, a slice
of lean ham cut small, with a bay-leaf, herbs, mushrooms, spices, &c.,
in the above proportions, and fry them gently over a slow fire. when
done, moisten with  teacupfuls of white stock, boil for  minutes, and
strain the whole through a sieve over the panada in the other stewpan.
place it over the fire, keep constantly stirring, to prevent its
burning, and when quite dry, put in a small piece of butter. let this
again dry up by stirring over the fire; then add the yolks of  eggs,
mix well, put the panada to cool on a clean plate, and use it when
required. panada should always be well flavoured, as the forcemeat
receives no taste from any of the other ingredients used in its
preparation.
boiled calf's udder for french forcemeats.
. put the udder into a stewpan with sufficient water to cover it; let
it stew gently till quite done, when take it out to cool. trim all the
upper parts, cut it into small pieces, and pound well in a mortar, till
it can be rubbed through a sieve. that portion which passes through the
strainer is one of the three ingredients of which french forcemeats are
generally composed; but many cooks substitute butter for this, being a
less troublesome and more expeditious mode of preparation.
[illustration: pestle and mortar.]
 pestle and mortar.—no cookery can be perfectly performed
 without the aid of the useful instruments shown in the
 engraving. for pounding things sufficiently fine, they are
 invaluable, and the use of them will save a good deal of time,
 besides increasing the excellence of the preparations. they are
 made of iron, and, in that material, can be bought cheap; but as
 these are not available, for all purposes, we should recommend,
 as more economical in the end, those made of wedgwood, although
 these are considerably more expensive than the former.
veal quenelles.
. ingredients.—equal quantities of veal, panada (no. ), and
calf's udder (no. ),  eggs; seasoning to taste of pepper, salt, and
pounded mace, or grated nutmeg; a little flour.
mode.—take the fleshy part of veal, scrape it with a knife, till all
the meat is separated from the sinews, and allow about / lb. for an
entrée. chop the meat, and pound it in a mortar till reduced to a paste;
then roll it into a ball; make another of panada (no. ), the same
size, and another of udder (no. ), taking care that these three balls
be of the same size. it is to be remembered, that equality of size,
and not of weight, is here necessary. when the three ingredients are
properly prepared, pound them altogether in a mortar for some time; for
the more quenelles are pounded, the more delicate they are. now moisten
with the eggs, whites and yolks, and continue pounding, adding a
seasoning of pepper, spices, &c. when the whole is well blended
together, mould it into balls, or whatever shape is intended, roll them
in flour, and poach in boiling water, to which a little salt should have
been added. if the quenelles are not firm enough, add the yolk of
another egg, but omit the white, which only makes them hollow and puffy
inside. in the preparation of this recipe, it would be well to bear in
mind that the ingredients are to be well pounded and seasoned, and must
be made hard or soft according to the dishes they are intended for. for
brown or white ragoűts they should be firm, and when the quenelles are
used very small, extreme delicacy will be necessary in their
preparation. their flavour may be varied by using the flesh of rabbit,
fowl, hare, pheasant, grouse, or an extra quantity of mushroom, parsley,
&c.
time,—about / hour to poach in boiling water.
sufficient, / lb. of veal or other meat, with other ingredients in
proportion, for  entrée.
note.—the french are noted for their skill in making forcemeats; one
of the principal causes of their superiority in this respect being, that
they pound all the ingredients so diligently and thoroughly. any one
with the slightest pretensions to refined cookery, must, in this
particular, implicitly follow the example of our friends across the
channel.
forcemeat, or quenelles, for turtle soup.
(see no. .)
. soyer's recipe for forcemeats.—take a pound and a half of lean
veal from the fillet, and cut it in long thin slices; scrape with a
knife till nothing but the fibre remains; put it in a mortar, pound it
 minutes, or until in a purée; pass it through a wire sieve (use the
remainder in stock); then take  pound of good fresh beef suet, which
skin, shred, and chop very fine; put it in a mortar and pound it; then
add  oz. of panada (that is, bread soaked in milk and boiled till
nearly dry) with the suet; pound them well together, and add the veal;
season with a teaspoonful of salt, a quarter one of pepper, half that of
nutmeg; work all well together; then add four eggs by degrees,
continually pounding the contents of the mortar. when well mixed, take a
small piece in a spoon, and poach it in some boiling water; and if it is
delicate, firm, and of a good flavour, it is ready for use.
. cut the bread into thin slices, place them in a cool oven
overnight, and when thoroughly dry and crisp, roll them down into fine
crumbs. put some lard, or clarified dripping, into a frying-pan; bring
it to the boiling-point, throw in the crumbs, and fry them very quickly.
directly they are done, lift them out with a slice, and drain them
before the fire from all greasy moisture. when quite crisp, they are
ready for use. the fat they are fried in should be clear, and the crumbs
should not have the slightest appearance or taste of having been, in the
least degree, burnt.
fried sippets of bread (for garnishing many dishes).
. cut the bread into thin slices, and stamp them out in whatever
shape you like,—rings, crosses, diamonds, &c. &c. fry them in the same
manner as the bread crumbs, in clear boiling lard, or clarified
dripping, and drain them until thoroughly crisp before the fire. when
variety is desired, fry some of a pale colour, and others of a darker
hue.
. proceed as above, by frying some slices of bread cut in any
fanciful shape. when quite crisp, dip one side of the sippet into the
beaten white of an egg mixed with a little flour, and place it on the
edge of the dish. continue in this manner till the border is completed,
arranging the sippets a pale and a dark one alternately.
genevese sauce for salmon, trout, &c.
. ingredients.— small carrot, a small faggot of sweet herbs,
including parsley,  onion,  or  mushrooms (when obtainable), 
bay-leaf,  cloves,  blade of mace,  oz. of butter,  glass of sherry,
-/ pint of white stock, no. , thickening of butter and flour, the
juice of half a lemon.
mode.—cut up the onion and carrot into small rings, and put them into
a stewpan with the herbs, mushrooms, bay-leaf, cloves, and mace; add the
butter, and simmer the whole very gently over a slow fire until the
onion is quite tender. pour in the stock and sherry, and stew slowly for
 hour, when strain it off into a clean saucepan. now make a thickening
of butter and flour, put it to the sauce, stir it over the fire until
perfectly smooth and mellow, add the lemon-juice, give one boil, when it
will be ready for table.
time.—altogether  hours.
average cost, s. d per pint.
sufficient, half this quantity for two slices of salmon.
[illustration: sage.]
 sage.—this was originally a native of the south of europe, but
 it has long been cultivated in the english garden. there are
 several kinds of it, known as the green, the red, the
 small-leaved, and the broad-leaved balsamic. in cookery, its
 principal use is for stuffings and sauces, for which purpose the
 red is the most agreeable, and the green the next. the others
 are used for medical purposes.
. ingredients.—salt and water,  oz. of bruised ginger, / oz. of
whole black pepper, / oz. of whole allspice,  cloves,  blades of
mace, a little horseradish. this proportion of pepper, spices, &c., for
 quart of vinegar.
mode.—let the gherkins remain in salt and water for  or  days, when
take them out, wipe perfectly dry, and put them into a stone jar. boil
sufficient vinegar to cover them, with spices and pepper, &c., in the
above proportion, for  minutes; pour it, quite boiling, over the
gherkins, cover the jar with vine-leaves, and put over them a plate,
setting them near the fire, where they must remain all night. next day
drain off the vinegar, boil it up again, and pour it hot over them.
cover up with fresh leaves, and let the whole remain till quite cold.
now tie down closely with bladder to exclude the air, and in a month or
two, they will be fit for use.
time.— days.
seasonable from the middle of july to the end of august.
[illustration: gherkins.]
 gherkins.—gherkins are young cucumbers; and the only way in
 which they are used for cooking purposes is pickling them, as by
 the recipe here given. not having arrived at maturity, they have
 not, of course, so strongly a developed flavour as cucumbers,
 and, as a pickle, they are very general favourites.
. ingredients.— pint of green gooseberries,  tablespoonfuls of
béchamel, no.  (veal gravy may be substituted for this),  oz. of
fresh butter; seasoning to taste of salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg.
mode.—boil the gooseberries in water until quite tender; strain them,
and rub them through a sieve. put into a saucepan the béchamel or gravy,
with the butter and seasoning; add the pulp from the gooseberries, mix
all well together, and heat gradually through. a little pounded sugar
added to this sauce is by many persons considered an improvement, as the
saccharine matter takes off the extreme acidity of the unripe fruit.
time.—boil the gooseberries from  minutes to / hour.
sufficient, this quantity, for a large dish of mackerel.
seasonable from may to july.
[illustration: the gooseberry.]
 the gooseberry.—this useful and wholesome fruit (ribes
 grossularia) is thought to be indigenous to the british isles,
 and may be occasionally found in a wild state in some of the
 eastern counties, although, when uncultivated, it is but a very
 small and inferior berry. the high state of perfection to which
 it has been here brought, is due to the skill of the english
 gardeners; for in no other country does it attain the same size
 and flavour. the humidity of the british climate, however, has
 doubtless something to do with the result; and it is said that
 gooseberries produced in scotland as far north as inverness, are
 of a very superior character. malic and citric acid blended with
 sugar, produce the pleasant flavour of the gooseberry; and upon
 the proper development of these properties depends the success
 of all cooking operations with which they are connected.
glaze for covering cold hams, tongues, &c.
. ingredients.—stock no.  or , doubling the quantity of meat
in each.
mode.—we may remark at the outset, that unless glaze is wanted in
very large quantities, it is seldom made expressly. either of the stocks
mentioned above, boiled down and reduced very considerably, will be
found to produce a very good glaze. put the stock into a stewpan, over a
nice clear fire; let it boil till it becomes somewhat stiff, when keep
stirring, to prevent its burning. the moment it is sufficiently reduced,
and comes to a glaze, turn it out into the glaze-pot, of which we have
here given an engraving. as, however, this is not to be found in every
establishment, a white earthenware jar would answer the purpose; and
this may be placed in a vessel of boiling water, to melt the glaze when
required. it should never be warmed in a saucepan, except on the
principle of the bain marie, lest it should reduce too much, and become
black and bitter. if the glaze is wanted of a pale colour, more veal
than beef should be used in making the stock; and it is as well to omit
turnips and celery, as these impart a disagreeable bitter flavour.
to glaze cold joints, &c.—melt the glaze by placing the vessel which
contains it, into the bain marie or saucepan of boiling water; brush it
over the meat with a paste-brush, and if in places it is not quite
covered, repeat the operation. the glaze should not be too dark a
colour. (see coloured cut of glazed ham, p.)
[illustration: glaze-kettle.]
[illustration: the bain marie.]
 glaze-kettle.—this is a kettle used for keeping the strong
 stock boiled down to a jelly, which is known by the name of
 glaze. it is composed of two tin vessels, as shown in the cut,
 one of which, the upper,—containing the glaze, is inserted into
 one of larger diameter and containing boiling water. a brush is
 put in the small hole at the top of the lid, and is employed for
 putting the glaze on anything that may require it.
 the bain marie.—so long ago as the time when emperors ruled in
 rome, and the yellow tiber passed through a populous and wealthy
 city, this utensil was extensively employed; and it is
 frequently mentioned by that profound culinary chemist of the
 ancients, apicius. it is an open kind of vessel (as shown in the
 engraving and explained in our paragraph no. , on the french
 terms used in modern cookery), filled with boiling or nearly
 boiling water; and into this water should be put all the
 stewpans containing those ingredients which it is desired to
 keep hot. the quantity and quality of the contents of these
 vessels are not at all affected; and if the hour of dinner is
 uncertain in any establishment, by reason of the nature of the
 master's business, nothing is so certain a means of preserving
 the flavour of all dishes as the employment of the bain marie.
. ingredients.—/ pint of sorrel-juice,  glass of sherry, / pint
of green gooseberries,  teaspoonful of pounded sugar,  oz. of fresh
butter.
mode.—boil the gooseberries in water until they are quite tender;
mash them and press them through a sieve; put the pulp into a saucepan
with the above ingredients; simmer for  or  minutes, and serve very
hot.
time.— or  minutes.
note.—we have given this recipe as a sauce for green geese, thinking
that some of our readers might sometimes require it; but, at the
generality of fashionable tables, it is now seldom or never served.
[illustration: sorrel.]
 sorrel.—we gather from the pages of pliny and apicius, that
 sorrel was cultivated by the romans in order to give it more
 strength and flavour, and that they also partook of it sometimes
 stewed with mustard, being seasoned with a little oil and
 vinegar. at the present day, english cookery is not much
 indebted to this plant (rumex acetosa), although the french
 make use of it to a considerable extent. it is found in most
 parts of great britain, and also on the continent, growing wild
 in the grass meadows, and, in a few gardens, it is cultivated.
 the acid of sorrel is very prononcé, and is what chemists term
 a binoxalate of potash; that is, a combination of oxalic acid
 with potash.
. either of the stocks, nos. , , or , will be found to
answer very well for the basis of many gravies, unless these are wanted
very rich indeed. by the addition of various store sauces, thickening
and flavouring, the stocks here referred to may be converted into very
good gravies. it should be borne in mind, however, that the goodness and
strength of spices, wines, flavourings, &c., evaporate, and that they
lose a great deal of their fragrance, if added to the gravy a long time
before they are wanted. if this point is attended to, a saving of one
half the quantity of these ingredients will be effected, as, with long
boiling, the flavour almost entirely passes away. the shank-bones of
mutton, previously well soaked, will be found a great assistance in
enriching gravies; a kidney or melt, beef skirt, trimmings of meat, &c.
&c., answer very well when only a small quantity is wanted, and, as we
have before observed, a good gravy need not necessarily be so very
expensive; for economically-prepared dishes are oftentimes found as
savoury and wholesome as dearer ones. the cook should also remember that
the fragrance of gravies should not be overpowered by too much spice, or
any strong essences, and that they should always be warmed in a bain
marie, after they are flavoured, or else in a jar or jug placed in a
saucepan full of boiling water. the remains of roast-meat gravy should
always be saved; as, when no meat is at hand, a very nice gravy in haste
may be made from it, and when added to hashes, ragoűts, &c., is a great
improvement.
[illustration: gravy-kettle.]
 gravy-kettle.—this is a utensil which will not be found in
 every kitchen; but it is a useful one where it is necessary to
 keep gravies hot for the purpose of pouring over various dishes
 as they are cooking. it is made of copper, and should,
 consequently, be heated over the hot plate, if there be one, or
 a charcoal stove. the price at which it can be purchased is set
 down by messrs. slack at s.
. ingredients.—gravy, salt.
mode.—put a common dish with a small quantity of salt in it under the
meat, about a quarter of an hour before it is removed from the fire.
when the dish is full, take it away, baste the meat, and pour the gravy
into the dish on which the joint is to be served.
 sauces and gravies in the middle ages.—neither poultry,
 butcher's meat, nor roast game were eaten dry in the middle
 ages, any more than fried fish is now. different sauces, each
 having its own peculiar flavour, were served with all these
 dishes, and even with the various parts of each animal.
 strange and grotesque sauces, as, for example, "eggs cooked on
 the spit," "butter fried and roasted," were invented by the
 cooks of those days; but these preparations had hardly any other
 merit than that of being surprising and difficult to make.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of shin of beef, / onion, / carrot,  or
 sprigs of parsley and savoury herbs, a piece of butter about the size
of a walnut; cayenne and mace to taste, / pint of water.
mode.—cut up the meat into very small pieces, slice the onion and
carrot, and put them into a small saucepan with the butter. keep
stirring over a sharp fire until they have taken a little colour, when
add the water and the remaining ingredients. simmer for / hour, skim
well, strain, and flavour, when it will be ready for use.
time.—/ hour. average cost, for this quantity, d.
 a hundred different dishes.—modern housewives know pretty well
 how much care, and attention, and foresight are necessary in
 order to serve well a little dinner for six or eight persons,—a
 dinner which will give credit to the ménage, and satisfaction
 and pleasure to the guests. a quickly-made gravy, under some
 circumstances that we have known occur, will be useful to many
 housekeepers when they have not much time for preparation. but,
 talking of speed, and time, and preparation, what a combination
 of all these must have been necessary for the feast at the
 wedding of charles vi. of france. on that occasion, as froissart
 the chronicler tells us, the art of cooking, with its
 innumerable paraphernalia of sauces, with gravy, pepper,
 cinnamon, garlic, scallion, brains, gravy soups, milk potage,
 and ragoűts, had a signal triumph. the skilful chef-de-cuisine
 of the royal household covered the great marble table of the
 regal palace with no less than a hundred different dishes,
 prepared in a hundred different ways.
a good beef gravy for poultry, game, &c.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of lean beef, / pint of cold water, 
shalot or small onion, / a teaspoonful of salt, a little pepper, 
tablespoonful of harvey's sauce or mushroom ketchup, / a teaspoonful
of arrowroot.
mode.—cut up the beef into small pieces, and put it, with the water,
into a stewpan. add the shalot and seasoning, and simmer gently for 
hours, taking care that it does not boil fast. a short time before it is
required, take the arrowroot, and having mixed it with a little cold
water, pour it into the gravy, which keep stirring, adding the harvey's
sauce, and just letting it boil. strain off the gravy in a tureen, and
serve very hot.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per pint.
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  large onions,  lbs. of shin of
beef,  small slices of lean bacon (if at hand), salt and whole pepper
to taste,  cloves,  quarts of water. for thickening,  oz. of butter,
 oz. of flour.
mode.—put the butter into a stewpan; set this on the fire, throw in
the onions cut in rings, and fry them a light brown; then add the beef
and bacon, which should be cut into small square pieces; season, and
pour in a teacupful of water; let it boil for about ten minutes, or
until it is of a nice brown colour, occasionally stirring the contents.
now fill up with water in the above proportion; let it boil up, when
draw it to the side of the fire to simmer very gently for -/ hour;
strain, and when cold, take off all the fat. in thickening this gravy,
melt  oz. of butter in a stewpan, add  oz. of flour, and stir till of
a light-brown colour; when cold, add it to the strained gravy, and boil
it up quickly. this thickening may be made in larger quantities, and
kept in a stone jar for use when wanted.
time.—altogether,  hours. average cost, d. per pint.
 cloves.—this very agreeable spice is the unexpanded flower-buds
 of the caryophyllus aromaticus, a handsome, branching tree, a
 native of the malacca islands. they take their name from the
 latin word clavus, or the french clou, both meaning a nail,
 and to which the clove has a considerable resemblance. cloves
 were but little known to the ancients, and pliny appears to be
 the only writer who mentions them; and he says, vaguely enough,
 that some were brought to rome, very similar to grains of
 pepper, but somewhat longer; that they were only to be found in
 india, in a wood consecrated to the gods; and that they served
 in the manufacture of perfumes. the dutch, as in the case of the
 nutmeg (see ), endeavoured, when they gained possession of
 the spice islands, to secure a monopoly of cloves, and, so that
 the cultivation of the tree might be confined to amboyna, their
 chief island, bribed the surrounding chiefs to cut down all
 trees found elsewhere. the amboyna, or royal clove, is said to
 be the best, and is rare; but other kinds, nearly equally good,
 are produced in other parts of the world, and they come to
 europe from mauritius, bourbon, cayenne, and martinique, as also
 from st. kitts, st. vincent's, and trinidad. the clove contains
 about  per cent. of volatile aromatic oil, to which it owes
 its peculiar pungent flavour, its other parts being composed of
 woody fibre, water, gum, and resin.
. ingredients.— large onions,  large carrot,  oz. of butter, 
pints of boiling water,  bunch of savoury herbs, a wineglassful of good
beer; salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—slice, flour, and fry the onions and carrots in the butter
until of a nice light-brown colour; then add the boiling water and the
remaining ingredients; let the whole stew gently for about an hour; then
strain, and when cold, skim off all the fat. thicken it in the same
manner as recipe no. , and, if thought necessary, add a few drops of
colouring no. .
time.— hour. average cost, d. per pint.
note.—the addition of a small quantity of mushroom ketchup or
harvey's sauce very much improves the flavour of this gravy.
rich gravy for hashes, ragouts, &c.
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef,  large onion or a few
shalots, a little flour, a bunch of savoury herbs,  blades of mace, 
or  cloves,  whole allspice, / teaspoonful of whole pepper,  slice
of lean ham or bacon, / a head of celery (when at hand),  pints of
boiling water; salt and cayenne to taste.
mode.—cut the beef into thin slices, as also the onions, dredge them
with flour, and fry of a pale brown, but do not allow them to get black;
pour in the boiling water, let it boil up; and skim. add the remaining
ingredients, and simmer the whole very gently for  hours, or until all
the juices are extracted from the meat; put it by to get cold, when take
off all the fat. this gravy may be flavoured with ketchup, store sauces,
wine, or, in fact, anything that may give additional and suitable relish
to the dish it is intended for.
time.—rather more than  hours.
average cost, d. per pint.
[illustration: pimento.]
 allspice.—this is the popular name given to pimento, or jamaica
 pepper, known to naturalists as eugenia pimenta, and belonging
 to the order of myrtaceae. it is the berry of a fine tree in the
 west indies and south america, which attains a height of from
 fifteen to twenty feet: the berries are not allowed to ripen,
 but, being gathered green, are then dried in the sun, and then
 become black. it is an inexpensive spice, and is considered more
 mild and innocent than most other spices; consequently, it is
 much used for domestic purposes, combining a very agreeable
 variety of flavours.
. ingredients.—the necks, feet, livers, and gizzards of the fowls, 
slice of toasted bread, / onion,  faggot of savoury herbs, salt and
pepper to taste, / pint of water, thickening of butter and flour, 
dessertspoonful of ketchup.
mode.—wash the feet of the fowls thoroughly clean, and cut them and
the neck into small pieces. put these into a stewpan with the bread,
onion, herbs, seasoning, livers, and gizzards; pour the water over them
and simmer gently for  hour. now take out the liver, pound it, and
strain the liquor to it. add a thickening of butter and flour, and a
flavouring of mushroom ketchup; boil it up and serve.
time.— hour. average cost, d. per pint.
a cheap gravy for hashes, &c.
. ingredients.—bones and trimmings of the cooked joint intended for
hashing, / teaspoonful of salt, / teaspoonful of whole pepper, /
teaspoonful of whole allspice, a small faggot of savoury herbs, / head
of celery,  onion,  oz. of butter, thickening, sufficient boiling
water to cover the bones.
mode.—chop the bones in small pieces, and put them in a stewpan, with
the trimmings, salt, pepper, spice, herbs, and celery. cover with
boiling water, and let the whole simmer gently for -/ or  hours.
slice and fry the onion in the butter till it is of a pale brown, and
mix it gradually with the gravy made from the bones; boil for / hour,
and strain into a basin; now put it back into the stewpan; flavour with
walnut pickle or ketchup, pickled-onion liquor, or any store sauce that
may be preferred. thicken with a little butter and flour, kneaded
together on a plate, and the gravy will be ready for use. after the
thickening is added, the gravy should just boil, to take off the rawness
of the flour.
time.— hours, or rather more.
average cost, d., exclusive of the bones and trimmings.
jugged gravy (excellent).
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef, / lb. of lean ham,  onion
or a few shalots,  pints of water, salt and whole pepper to taste, 
blade of mace, a faggot of savoury herbs, / a large carrot, / a
head of celery.
mode.—cut up the beef and ham into small pieces, and slice the
vegetables; take a jar, capable of holding two pints of water, and
arrange therein, in layers, the ham, meat, vegetables, and seasoning,
alternately, filling up with the above quantity of water; tie down the
jar, or put a plate over the top, so that the steam may not escape;
place it in the oven, and let it remain there from  to  hours; should,
however, the oven be very hot, less time will be required. when
sufficiently cooked, strain the gravy, and when cold, remove the fat. it
may be flavoured with ketchup, wines, or any other store sauce that may
be preferred.
it is a good plan to put the jar in a cool oven over-night, to draw the
gravy; and then it will not require so long baking the following day.
time.—from  to  hours, according to the oven.
average cost, d. per pint.
[illustration: celery.]
 celery.—as in the above recipe, the roots of celery are
 principally used in england for flavouring soups, sauces, and
 gravies, and for serving with cheese at the termination of a
 dinner, and as an ingredient for salad. in italy, however, the
 green leaves and stems are also employed for stews and soups,
 and the seeds are also more frequently made use of on the
 continent than in our own islands. in germany, celery is very
 highly esteemed; and it is there boiled and served up as a dish
 by itself, as well as used in the composition of mixed dishes.
 we ourselves think that this mild aromatic plant might oftener
 be cooked than it is; for there are very few nicer vegetable
 preparations brought to table than a well-dressed plate of
 stewed celery.
veal gravy for white sauces, fricassees, &c.
. ingredients.— slices of nicely flavoured lean ham, any poultry
trimmings,  lbs. of lean veal, a faggot of savoury herbs, including
parsley, a few green onions (or  large onion may be substituted for
these), a few mushrooms, when obtainable;  blade of mace, salt to
taste,  pints of water.
mode.—cut up the ham and veal into small square pieces, put these in
a stewpan, moistening them with a small quantity of water; place them
over the fire to draw down. when the bottom of the stewpan becomes
covered with a white glaze, fill up with water in the above proportion;
add the remaining ingredients, stew very slowly for  or  hours, and do
not forget to skim well the moment it boils. put it by, and, when cold,
take off all the fat. this may be used for béchamel, sauce tournée, and
many other white sauces.
time.— or  hours. average cost, d. per pint.
. ingredients.—bones and trimmings of cold roast or boiled veal,
-/ pint of water,  onion, / teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel, /
teaspoonful of salt,  blade of pounded mace, the juice of / lemon;
thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a stewpan, except the thickening
and lemon-juice, and let them simmer very gently for rather more than 
hour, or until the liquor is reduced to a pint, when strain through a
hair-sieve. add a thickening of butter and flour, and the lemon-juice;
set it on the fire, and let it just boil up, when it will be ready for
use. it may be flavoured with a little tomato sauce, and, where a rather
dark-coloured gravy is not objected to, ketchup, or harvey's sauce, may
be added at pleasure.
time.—rather more than  hour. average cost, d.
. ingredients.—trimmings of venison,  or  mutton shank-bones, salt
to taste,  pint of water,  teaspoonfuls of walnut ketchup.
mode.—brown the trimmings over a nice clear fire, and put them in a
stewpan with the shank-bones and water; simmer gently for  hours,
strain and skim, and add the walnut ketchup and a seasoning of salt. let
it just boil, when it is ready to serve.
time.— hours.
[illustration: the deer.]
 venison.—far, far away in ages past, our fathers loved the
 chase, and what it brought; and it is usually imagined that when
 isaac ordered his son esau to go out with his weapons, his
 quiver and his bow, and to prepare for him savoury meat, such as
 he loved, that it was venison he desired. the wise solomon, too,
 delighted in this kind of fare; for we learn that, at his table,
 every day were served the wild ox, the roebuck, and the stag.
 xenophon informs us, in his history, that cyrus, king of persia,
 ordered that venison should never be wanting at his repasts; and
 of the effeminate greeks it was the delight. the romans, also,
 were devoted admirers of the flesh of the deer; and our own
 kings and princes, from the great alfred down to the prince
 consort, have hunted, although, it must be confessed, under
 vastly different circumstances, the swift buck, and relished
 their "haunch" all the more keenly, that they had borne
 themselves bravely in the pursuit of the animal.
. on a very dry day, gather the herbs, just before they begin to
flower. if this is done when the weather is damp, the herbs will not be
so good a colour. (it is very necessary to be particular in little
matters like this, for trifles constitute perfection, and herbs nicely
dried will be found very acceptable when frost and snow are on the
ground. it is hardly necessary, however, to state that the flavour and
fragrance of fresh herbs are incomparably finer.) they should be
perfectly freed from dirt and dust, and be divided into small bunches,
with their roots cut off. dry them quickly in a very hot oven, or before
the fire, as by this means most of their flavour will be preserved, and
be careful not to burn them; tie them up in paper bags, and keep in a
dry place. this is a very general way of preserving dried herbs; but we
would recommend the plan described in a former recipe.
seasonable.—from the month of july to the end of september is the
proper time for storing herbs for winter use.
herb powder for flavouring, when fresh herbs are not obtainable.
. ingredients.— oz. of dried lemon-thyme,  oz. of dried winter
savory,  oz. of dried sweet marjoram and basil,  oz. of dried parsley,
 oz. of dried lemon-peel.
mode.—prepare and dry the herbs by recipe no. ; pick the leaves
from the stalks, pound them, and sift them through a hair-sieve; mix in
the above proportions, and keep in glass bottles, carefully excluding
the air. this, we think, a far better method of keeping herbs, as the
flavour and fragrance do not evaporate so much as when they are merely
put in paper bags. preparing them in this way, you have them ready for
use at a moment's notice.
mint, sage, parsley, &c., dried, pounded, and each put into separate
bottles, will be found very useful in winter.
[illustration: cork with wooden top.]
 corks with wooden tops.—these are the best corks to use when it
 is indispensable that the air should not be admitted to the
 ingredients contained in bottles which are in constant use. the
 top, which, as will be seen by the accompanying little cut, is
 larger than the cork, is made of wood; and, besides effectually
 covering the whole top of the bottle, can be easily removed and
 again used, as no corkscrew is necessary to pull it out.
 savory.—this we find described by columella, a voluminous roman
 writer on agriculture, as an odoriferous herb, which, "in the
 brave days of old," entered into the seasoning of nearly every
 dish. verily, there are but few new things under the sun, and we
 don't find that we have made many discoveries in gastronomy, at
 least beyond what was known to the ancient inhabitants of italy.
 we possess two varieties of this aromatic herb, known to
 naturalists as satureja. they are called summer and winter
 savory, according to the time of the year when they are fit for
 gathering. both sorts are in general cultivation throughout
 england.
horseradish sauce, to serve with roast beef.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of grated horseradish,  teaspoonful
of pounded sugar,  teaspoonful of salt, / teaspoonful of pepper, 
teaspoonfuls of made mustard; vinegar.
mode.—grate the horseradish, and mix it well with the sugar, salt,
pepper, and mustard; moisten it with sufficient vinegar to give it the
consistency of cream, and serve in a tureen:  or  tablespoonfuls of
cream added to the above, very much improve the appearance and flavour
of this sauce. to heat it to serve with hot roast beef, put it in a bain
marie or a jar, which place in a saucepan of boiling water; make it hot,
but do not allow it to boil, or it will curdle.
note.—this sauce is a great improvement on the old-fashioned way of
serving cold-scraped horseradish with hot roast beef. the mixing of the
cold vinegar with the warm gravy cools and spoils everything on the
plate. of course, with cold meat, the sauce should be served cold.
[illustration: the horseradish.]
 the horseradish.—this has been, for many years, a favourite
 accompaniment of roast beef, and is a native of england. it
 grows wild in wet ground, but has long been cultivated in the
 garden, and is, occasionally, used in winter salads and in
 sauces. on account of the great volatility of its oil, it should
 never be preserved by drying, but should be kept moist by being
 buried in sand. so rapidly does its volatile oil evaporate, that
 even when scraped for the table, it almost immediately spoils by
 exposure to the air.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of scraped horseradish,  oz. of minced
shalot,  drachm of cayenne,  quart of vinegar.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a bottle, which shake well every
day for a fortnight. when it is thoroughly steeped, strain and bottle,
and it will be fit for use immediately. this will be found an agreeable
relish to cold beef, &c.
seasonable.—this vinegar should be made either in october or
november, as horseradish is then in its highest perfection.
indian curry-powder, founded on dr. kitchener's recipe.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of coriander-seed, / lb. of turmeric,  oz.
of cinnamon-seed, / oz. of cayenne,  oz. of mustard,  oz. of ground
ginger, / ounce of allspice,  oz. of fenugreek-seed.
mode.—put all the ingredients in a cool oven, where they should
remain one night; then pound them in a mortar, rub them through a sieve,
and mix thoroughly together; keep the powder in a bottle, from which the
air should be completely excluded.
note.—we have given this recipe for curry-powder, as some persons
prefer to make it at home; but that purchased at any respectable shop
is, generally speaking, far superior, and, taking all things into
consideration, very frequently more economical.
indian mustard, an excellent relish to bread and butter, or any cold
meat.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of the best mustard, / lb. of flour, /
oz. of salt,  shalots,  tablespoonfuls of vinegar,  tablespoonfuls of
ketchup, / bottle of anchovy sauce.
mode.—put the mustard, flour, and salt into a basin, and make them
into a stiff paste with boiling water. boil the shalots with the
vinegar, ketchup, and anchovy sauce, for  minutes, and pour the whole,
boiling, over the mixture in the basin; stir well, and reduce it to a
proper thickness; put it into a bottle, with a bruised shalot at the
bottom, and store away for use. this makes an excellent relish, and if
properly prepared will keep for years.
[illustration: mustard.]
 mustard.—before the year , mustard was not known at english
 tables. about that time an old woman, of the name of clements,
 residing in durham, began to grind the seed in a mill, and to
 pass the flour through several processes necessary to free the
 seed from its husks. she kept her secret for many years to
 herself, during which she sold large quantities of mustard
 throughout the country, but especially in london. here it was
 introduced to the royal table, when it received the approval of
 george i. from the circumstance of mrs. clements being a
 resident at durham, it obtained the name of durham mustard. in
 the county of that name it is still principally cultivated, and
 the plant is remarkable for the rapidity of its growth. it is
 the best stimulant employed to impart strength to the digestive
 organs, and even in its previously coarsely-pounded state, had a
 high reputation with our ancestors.
indian pickle (very superior).
. ingredients.—to each gallon of vinegar allow  cloves of garlic,
 shalots,  sticks of sliced horseradish, / lb. of bruised ginger, 
oz. of whole black pepper,  oz. of long pepper,  oz. of allspice, 
cloves, / oz. of cayenne,  oz. of mustard-seed, / lb. of mustard, 
oz. of turmeric; a white cabbage, cauliflowers, radish-pods, french
beans, gherkins, small round pickling-onions, nasturtiums, capsicums,
chilies, &c.
mode.—cut the cabbage, which must be hard and white, into slices, and
the cauliflowers into small branches; sprinkle salt over them in a large
dish, and let them remain two days; then dry them, and put them into a
very large jar, with garlic, shalots, horseradish, ginger, pepper,
allspice, and cloves, in the above proportions. boil sufficient vinegar
to cover them, which pour over, and, when cold, cover up to keep them
free from dust. as the other things for the pickle ripen at different
times, they may be added as they are ready: these will be radish-pods,
french beans, gherkins, small onions, nasturtiums, capsicums, chilies,
&c. &c. as these are procured, they must, first of all, be washed in a
little cold vinegar, wiped, and then simply added to the other
ingredients in the large jar, only taking care that they are covered
by the vinegar. if more vinegar should be wanted to add to the pickle,
do not omit first to boil it before adding it to the rest. when you have
collected all the things you require, turn all out in a large pan, and
thoroughly mix them. now put the mixed vegetables into smaller jars,
without any of the vinegar; then boil the vinegar again, adding as much
more as will be required to fill the different jars, and also cayenne,
mustard-seed, turmeric, and mustard, which must be well mixed with a
little cold vinegar, allowing the quantities named above to each gallon
of vinegar. pour the vinegar, boiling hot, over the pickle, and when
cold, tie down with a bladder. if the pickle is wanted for immediate
use, the vinegar should be boiled twice more, but the better way is to
make it during one season for use during the next. it will keep for
years, if care is taken that the vegetables are quite covered by the
vinegar.
this recipe was taken from the directions of a lady whose pickle was
always pronounced excellent by all who tasted it, and who has, for many
years, exactly followed the recipe given above.
__note_.—for small families, perhaps the above quantity of pickle will
be considered too large; but this may be decreased at pleasure, taking
care to properly proportion the various ingredients.
[illustration: india pickle.]
 keeping pickles.—nothing shows more, perhaps, the difference
 between a tidy thrifty housewife and a lady to whom these
 desirable epithets may not honestly be applied, than the
 appearance of their respective store-closets. the former is
 able, the moment anything; is wanted, to put her hand on it at
 once; no time is lost, no vexation incurred, no dish spoilt for
 the want of "just little something,"—the latter, on the
 contrary, hunts all over her cupboard for the ketchup the cook
 requires, or the pickle the husband thinks he should like a
 little of with his cold roast beef or mutton-chop, and vainly
 seeks for the embden groats, or arrowroot, to make one of her
 little boys some gruel. one plan, then, we strenuously advise
 all who do not follow, to begin at once, and that is, to label
 all their various pickles and store sauces, in the same way as
 the cut here shows. it will occupy a little time at first, but
 there will be economy of it in the long run.
 vinegar.—this term is derived from the two french words vin
 aigre, 'sour wine,' and should, therefore, be strictly applied
 to that which is made only from wine. as the acid is the same,
 however it is procured, that made from ale also takes the same
 name. nearly all ancient nations were acquainted with the use of
 vinegar. we learn in ruth, that the reapers in the east soaked
 their bread in it to freshen it. the romans kept large
 quantities of it in their cellars, using it, to a great extent,
 in their seasonings and sauces. this people attributed very
 beneficial qualities to it, as it was supposed to be digestive,
 antibilious, and antiscorbutic, as well as refreshing.
 spartianus, a latin historian, tells us that, mixed with water,
 it was the drink of the soldiers, and that, thanks to this
 beverage, the veterans of the roman army braved, by its use, the
 inclemency and variety of all the different seasons and climates
 of europe, asia, and africa. it is said, the spanish peasantry,
 and other inhabitants of the southern parts of europe, still
 follow this practice, and add to a gallon of water about a gill
 of wine vinegar, with a little salt; and that this drink, with a
 little bread, enables them, under the heat of their burning sun,
 to sustain the labours of the field.
. ingredients.— oz. of sharp, sour apples, pared and cored;  oz.
of tomatoes,  oz. of salt,  oz. of brown, sugar,  oz. of stoned
raisins,  oz. of cayenne,  oz. of powdered ginger,  oz. of garlic, 
oz. of shalots,  quarts of vinegar,  quart of lemon-juice.
mode.—chop the apples in small square pieces, and add to them the
other ingredients. mix the whole well together, and put in a
well-covered jar. keep this in a warm place, and stir every day for a
month, taking care to put on the lid after this operation; strain, but
do not squeeze it dry; store it away in clean jars or bottles for use,
and the liquor will serve as an excellent sauce for meat or fish.
seasonable.—make this sauce when tomatoes are in full season, that
is, from the beginning of september to the end of october.
 pickles.—the ancient greeks and romans held their pickles in
 high estimation. they consisted of flowers, herbs, roots, and
 vegetables, preserved in vinegar, and which were kept, for a
 long time, in cylindrical vases with wide mouths. their cooks
 prepared pickles with the greatest care, and the various
 ingredients were macerated in oil, brine, and vinegar, with
 which they were often impregnated drop by drop. meat, also,
 after having been cut into very small pieces, was treated in the
 same manner.
italian sauce (brown).
. ingredients.—a few chopped mushrooms and shalots, / pint of
stock, no. , / glass of madeira, the juice of / lemon, /
teaspoonful of pounded sugar,  teaspoonful of chopped parsley.
mode.—put the stock into a stewpan with the mushrooms, shalots, and
madeira, and stew gently for / hour, then add the remaining
ingredients, and let them just boil. when the sauce is done enough, put
it in another stewpan, and warm it in a bain marie. (see no. .)
the mushrooms should not be chopped long before they are wanted, as they
will then become black.
time.—/ hour. average cost, for this quantity, d.
sufficient for a small dish.
italian sauce (white).
. ingredients.—/ pint of white stock, no. ;  tablespoonfuls of
chopped mushrooms,  dessertspoonful of chopped shalots,  slice of ham,
minced very fine; / pint of béchamel, no. ; salt to taste, a few
drops of garlic vinegar, / teaspoonful of pounded sugar, a squeeze of
lemon-juice.
mode.—put the shalots and mushrooms into a stewpan with the stock and
ham, and simmer very gently for / hour, when add the béchamel. let it
just boil up, and then strain it through a tammy; season with the above
ingredients, and serve very hot. if this sauce should not have retained
a nice white colour, a little cream may be added.
time.—/ hour. average cost, for this quantity, d.
sufficient for a moderate-sized dish.
note.—to preserve the colour of the mushrooms after pickling, throw
them into water to which a little lemon-juice has been added.
. ingredients.— lemons,  quarts of boiling water; to each quart of
vinegar allow / oz. of cloves, / oz. of white pepper,  oz. of
bruised ginger, / oz. of mace and chilies,  oz. of mustard-seed, /
stick of sliced horseradish, a few cloves of garlic.
mode.—put the lemons into a brine that will bear an egg; let them
remain in it  days, stirring them every day; have ready  quarts of
boiling water, put in the lemons, and allow them to boil for / hour;
take them out, and let them lie in a cloth until perfectly dry and cold.
boil up sufficient vinegar to cover the lemons, with all the above
ingredients, allowing the same proportion as stated to each quart of
vinegar. pack the lemons in a jar, pour over the vinegar, &c. boiling
hot, and tie down with a bladder. they will be fit for use in about 
months, or rather sooner.
seasonable.—this should be made from november to april.
 the lemon.—in the earlier ages of the world, the lemon does not
 appear to have been at all known, and the romans only became
 acquainted with it at a very late period, and then only used it
 to keep moths from their garments. its acidity would seem to
 have been unpleasant to them; and in pliny's time, at the
 commencement of the christian era, this fruit was hardly
 accepted, otherwise than as an excellent antidote against the
 effects of poison. many anecdotes have been related concerning
 the anti-venomous properties of the lemon; athenaeus, a latin
 writer, telling us, that on one occasion, two men felt no
 effects from the bites of dangerous serpents, because they had
 previously eaten of this fruit.
. ingredients.— lemons,  lb. of fine salt; to each quart of
vinegar, the same ingredients as no. .
mode.—peel the lemons, slit each one down  times, so as not to
divide them, and rub the salt well into the divisions; place them in a
pan, where they must remain for a week, turning them every other day;
then put them in a dutch oven before a clear fire until the salt has
become perfectly dry; then arrange them in a jar. pour over sufficient
boiling vinegar to cover them, to which have been added the ingredients
mentioned in the foregoing recipe; tie down closely, and in about 
months they will be fit for use.
seasonable.—the best time to make this is from november to april.
note.—after this pickle has been made from  to  months, the liquor
may be strained and bottled, and will be found an excellent lemon
ketchup.
 lemon-juice.—citric acid is the principal component part of
 lemon-juice, which, in addition to the agreeableness of its
 flavour, is also particularly cooling and grateful. it is
 likewise an antiscorbutic; and this quality enhances its value.
 in order to combat the fatal effects of scurvy amongst the crews
 of ships at sea, a regular allowance of lemon-juice is served
 out to the men; and by this practice, the disease has almost
 entirely disappeared. by putting the juice into bottles, and
 pouring on the top sufficient oil to cover it, it may be
 preserved for a considerable time. italy and turkey export great
 quantities of it in this manner.
. ingredients.— small lemon, / pint of melted butter, no. .
mode.—cut the lemon into very thin slices, and these again into very
small dice. have ready / pint of melted butter, made by recipe no.
; put in the lemon; let it just simmer, but not boil, and pour it
over the fowls.
time.— minute to simmer. average cost, d.
sufficient for a pair of large fowls.
lemon white sauce, for fowls, fricassees, &c.
. ingredients.—/ pint of cream, the rind and juice of  lemon, /
teaspoonful of whole white pepper,  sprig of lemon thyme,  oz. of
butter,  dessertspoonful of flour,  teacupful of white stock; salt to
taste.
mode.—put the cream into a very clean saucepan (a lined one is best),
with the lemon-peel, pepper, and thyme, and let these infuse for /
hour, when simmer gently for a few minutes, or until there is a nice
flavour of lemon. strain it, and add a thickening of butter and flour in
the above proportions; stir this well in, and put in the lemon-juice at
the moment of serving; mix the stock with the cream, and add a little
salt. this sauce should not boil after the cream and stock are mixed
together.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient, this quantity, for a pair of large boiled fowls.
note.—where the expense of the cream is objected to, milk may be
substituted for it. in this case, an additional dessertspoonful, or
rather more, of flour must be added.
[illustration: lemon thyme.]
 lemon thyme.—two or three tufts of this species of thyme,
 thymus citriodorus, usually find a place in the herb
 compartment of the kitchen-garden. it is a trailing evergreen,
 is of smaller growth than the common kind (see no. ), and
 is remarkable for its smell, which closely resembles that of the
 rind of a lemon. hence its distinctive name. it is used for some
 particular dishes, in which the fragrance of the lemon is
 desired to slightly predominate.
leamington sauce (an excellent sauce for flavouring gravies, hashes,
soups, &c.).
(author's recipe.)
. ingredients.—walnuts. to each quart of walnut-juice allow  quarts
of vinegar,  pint of indian soy,  oz. of cayenne,  oz. of shalots,
/ oz. of garlic, / pint of port wine.
mode.—be very particular in choosing the walnuts as soon as they
appear in the market; for they are more easily bruised before they
become hard and shelled. pound them in a mortar to a pulp, strew some
salt over them, and let them remain thus for two or three days,
occasionally stirring and moving them about. press out the juice, and to
each quart of walnut-liquor allow the above proportion of vinegar,
soy, cayenne, shalots, garlic, and port wine. pound each ingredient
separately in a mortar, then mix them well together, and store away for
use in small bottles. the corks should be well sealed.
seasonable.—this sauce should be made as soon as walnuts are
obtainable, from the beginning to the middle of july.
. ingredients.— pint of brandy, the rind of two small lemons,  oz.
of loaf-sugar, / pint of water.
mode.—peel the lemons rather thin, taking care to have none of the
white pith. put the rinds into a bottle with the brandy, and let them
infuse for  hours, when they should be strained. now boil the sugar
with the water for a few minutes, skim it, and, when cold, add it to the
brandy. a dessertspoonful of this will be found an excellent flavouring
for boiled custards.
 lemon rind or peel.—this contains an essential oil of a very
 high flavour and fragrance, and is consequently esteemed both a
 wholesome and agreeable stomachic. it is used, as will be seen
 by many recipes in this book, as an ingredient for flavouring a
 number of various dishes. under the name of candied lemon-peel,
 it is cleared of the pulp and preserved by sugar, when it
 becomes an excellent sweetmeat. by the ancient medical
 philosopher galen, and others, it may be added, that dried
 lemon-peel was considered as one of the best digestives, and
 recommended to weak and delicate persons.
. ingredients.—the yolks of  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of milk or
cream.
mode.—beat up the yolks of the eggs, to which add the milk, and
strain the whole through a hair-sieve. when the liaison is being added
to the sauce it is intended to thicken, care must be exercised to keep
stirring it during the whole time, or, otherwise, the eggs will curdle.
it should only just simmer, but not boil.
. ingredients.—the liver of a fowl, one lemon, salt to taste, /
pint of melted butter. no. .
mode.—wash the liver, and let it boil for a few minutes; peel the
lemon very thin, remove the white part and pips, and cut it into very
small dice; mince the liver and a small quantity of the lemon rind very
fine; add these ingredients to / pint of smoothly-made melted butter;
season with a little salt, put in the cut lemon, heat it gradually, but
do not allow it to boil, lest the butter should oil.
time.— minute to simmer.
sufficient to serve with a pair of small fowls.
. ingredients.—the liver of a fowl, one tablespoonful of minced
parsley, / pint of melted butter, no. .
mode.—wash and score the liver, boil it for a few minutes, and mince
it very fine; blanch or scald a small bunch of parsley, of which there
should be sufficient when chopped to fill a tablespoon; add this, with
the minced liver, to / pint of smoothly-made melted butter; let it
just boil; when serve.
time.— minute to simmer.
sufficient for a pair of small fowls.
lobster sauce, to serve with turbot, salmon, brill, &c.
(very good.)
. ingredients.— middling-sized hen lobster, / pint of melted
butter, no. ;  tablespoonful of anchovy sauce, / oz. of butter,
salt and cayenne to taste, a little pounded mace when liked,  or 
tablespoonfuls of cream.
mode.—choose a hen lobster, as this is indispensable, in order to
render this sauce as good as it ought to be. pick the meat from the
shells, and cut it into small square pieces; put the spawn, which will
be found under the tail of the lobster, into a mortar with / oz. of
butter, and pound it quite smooth; rub it through a hair-sieve, and
cover up till wanted. make / pint of melted butter by recipe no. ;
put in all the ingredients except the lobster-meat, and well mix the
sauce before the lobster is added to it, as it should retain its square
form, and not come to table shredded and ragged. put in the meat, let it
get thoroughly hot, but do not allow it to boil, as the colour would
immediately be spoiled; for it should be remembered that this sauce
should always have a bright red appearance. if it is intended to be
served with turbot or brill, a little of the spawn (dried and rubbed
through a sieve without butter) should be saved to garnish with; but as
the goodness, flavour, and appearance of the sauce so much depend on
having a proper quantity of spawn, the less used for garnishing the
better.
time.— minute to simmer. average cost, for this quantity, s.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient to serve with a small turbot, a brill, or salmon for 
persons.
note.—melted butter made with milk, no. , will be found to answer
very well for lobster sauce, as by employing it a nice white colour will
be obtained. less quantity than the above may be made by using a very
small lobster, to which add only / pint of melted butter, and season
as above. where economy is desired, the cream may be dispensed with, and
the remains of a cold lobster left from table, may, with a little care,
be converted into a very good sauce.
maitre d'hotel butter, for putting into broiled fish just before it is
sent to table.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter,  dessertspoonfuls of minced
parsley, salt and pepper to taste, the juice of  large lemon.
mode.—work the above ingredients well together, and let them be
thoroughly mixed with a wooden spoon. if this is used as a sauce, it may
be poured either under or over the meat or fish it is intended to be
served with.
average cost, for this quantity, d.
note.— tablespoonfuls of béchamel, no. ,  do. of white stock, no.
, with  oz. of the above maître d'hôtel butter stirred into it, and
just allowed to simmer for  minute, will be found an excellent hot
maître d'hôtel sauce.
 the maître d'hôtel.—the house-steward of england is synonymous
 with the maître d'hôtel of france; and, in ancient times,
 amongst the latins, he was called procurator, or major-domo. in
 rome, the slaves, after they had procured the various articles
 necessary for the repasts of the day, would return to the
 spacious kitchen laden with meat, game, sea-fish, vegetables,
 fruit, &c. each one would then lay his basket at the feet of the
 major-domo, who would examine its contents and register them on
 his tablets, placing in the pantry contiguous to the
 dining-room, those of the provisions which need no preparation,
 and consigning the others to the more immediate care of the
 cooks.
maitre d'hotel sauce (hot), to serve with calf's head, boiled eels, and
different fish.
. ingredients.— slice of minced ham, a few poultry-trimmings, 
shalots,  clove of garlic,  bay-leaf, / pint of water,  oz. of
butter,  dessertspoonful of flour,  heaped tablespoonful of chopped
parsley; salt, pepper, and cayenne to taste; the juice of / large
lemon, / teaspoonful of pounded sugar.
mode.—put at the bottom of a stewpan the minced ham, and over it the
poultry-trimmings (if these are not at hand, veal should be
substituted), with the shalots, garlic, and bay-leaf. pour in the water,
and let the whole simmer gently for  hour, or until the liquor is
reduced to a full / pint. then strain this gravy, put it in another
saucepan, make a thickening of butter and flour in the above
proportions, and stir it to the gravy over a nice clear fire, until it
is perfectly smooth and rather thick, care being taken that the butter
does not float on the surface. skim well, add the remaining ingredients,
let the sauce gradually heat, but do not allow it to boil. if this sauce
is intended for an entrée, it is necessary to make it of a sufficient
thickness, so that it may adhere to what it is meant to cover.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d. per pint.
sufficient for re-warming the remains of / calf's head, or a small
dish of cold flaked turbot, cod, &c.
(made without meat.)
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter, no. ;  heaped
tablespoonful of chopped parsley, salt and pepper to taste, the juice of
/ large lemon; when liked,  minced shalots.
mode.—make / pint of melted butter, by recipe no. ; stir in the
above ingredients, and let them just boil; when it is ready to serve.
time.— minute to simmer. average cost, d. per pint.
mayonnaise, a sauce or salad-dressing for cold chicken, meat, and other
cold dishes.
. ingredients.—the yolks of  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of salad-oil, 
tablespoonfuls of vinegar, salt and white pepper to taste, 
tablespoonful of white stock, no. ,  tablespoonfuls of cream.
mode.—put the yolks of the eggs into a basin, with a seasoning of
pepper and salt; have ready the above quantities of oil and vinegar, in
separate vessels; add them very gradually to the eggs; continue
stirring and rubbing the mixture with a wooden spoon, as herein consists
the secret of having a nice smooth sauce. it cannot be stirred too
frequently, and it should be made in a very cool place, or, if ice is at
hand, it should be mixed over it. when the vinegar and oil are well
incorporated with the eggs, add the stock and cream, stirring all the
time, and it will then be ready for use.
for a fish mayonnaise, this sauce may be coloured with lobster-spawn,
pounded; and for poultry or meat, where variety is desired, a little
parsley-juice may be used to add to its appearance. cucumber, tarragon,
or any other flavoured vinegar, may be substituted for plain, where they
are liked.
average cost, for this quantity, d.
sufficient for a small salad.
note.—in mixing the oil and vinegar with the eggs, put in first a few
drops of oil, and then a few drops of vinegar, never adding a large
quantity of either at one time. by this means, you can be more certain
of the sauce not curdling. patience and practice, let us add, are two
essentials for making this sauce good.
mint sauce, to serve with roast lamb.
. ingredients.— dessertspoonfuls of chopped mint, 
dessertspoonfuls of pounded white sugar, / pint of vinegar.
mode.—wash the mint, which should be young and fresh-gathered, free
from grit; pick the leaves from the stalks, mince them very fine, and
put them into a tureen; add the sugar and vinegar, and stir till the
former is dissolved. this sauce is better by being made  or  hours
before wanted for table, as the vinegar then becomes impregnated with
the flavour of the mint. by many persons, the above proportion of sugar
would not be considered sufficient; but as tastes vary, we have given
the quantity which we have found to suit the general palate.
average cost, d.
sufficient to serve with a middling-sized joint of lamb.
note.—where green mint is scarce and not obtainable, mint vinegar may
be substituted for it, and will be found very acceptable in early
spring.
[illustration: mint.]
 mint.—the common mint cultivated in our gardens is known as the
 mentha viridis, and is employed in different culinary
 processes, being sometimes boiled with certain dishes, and
 afterwards withdrawn. it has an agreeable aromatic flavour, and
 forms an ingredient in soups, and sometimes is used in spring
 salads. it is valuable as a stomachic and antispasmodic; on
 which account it is generally served at table with pea-soup.
 several of its species grow wild in low situations in the
 country.
. ingredients.—vinegar, mint.
mode.—procure some nice fresh mint, pick the leaves from the stalks,
and fill a bottle or jar with them. add vinegar to them until the bottle
is full; cover closely to exclude the air, and let it infuse for a
fortnight. then strain the liquor, and put it into small bottles for
use, of which the corks should be sealed.
seasonable.—this should be made in june, july, or august.
(very good.)
. ingredients.—to each gallon of vinegar allow / lb. of bruised
ginger, / lb. of mustard, / lb. of salt,  oz. of mustard-seed,
-/ oz. of turmeric,  oz. of ground black pepper, / oz. of cayenne,
cauliflowers, onions, celery, sliced cucumbers, gherkins, french beans,
nasturtiums, capsicums.
mode.—have a large jar, with a tightly-fitting lid, in which put as
much vinegar as required, reserving a little to mix the various powders
to a smooth paste. put into a basin the mustard, turmeric, pepper, and
cayenne; mix them with vinegar, and stir well until no lumps remain; add
all the ingredients to the vinegar, and mix well. keep this liquor in a
warm place, and thoroughly stir every morning for a month with a wooden
spoon, when it will be ready for the different vegetables to be added to
it. as these come into season, have them gathered on a dry day, and,
after merely wiping them with a cloth, to free them from moisture, put
them into the pickle. the cauliflowers, it may be said, must be divided
into small bunches. put all these into the pickle raw, and at the end of
the season, when there have been added as many of the vegetables as
could be procured, store it away in jars, and tie over with bladder. as
none of the ingredients are boiled, this pickle will not be fit to eat
till  months have elapsed. whilst the pickle is being made, keep a
wooden spoon tied to the jar; and its contents, it may be repeated, must
be stirred every morning.
seasonable.—make the pickle-liquor in may or june, as the season
arrives for the various vegetables to be picked.
. ingredients.—to each peck of mushrooms / lb. of salt; to each
quart of mushroom-liquor / oz. of cayenne, / oz. of allspice, /
oz. of ginger,  blades of pounded mace.
mode.—choose full-grown mushroom-flaps, and take care they are
perfectly fresh-gathered when the weather is tolerably dry; for, if
they are picked during very heavy rain, the ketchup from which they are
made is liable to get musty, and will not keep long. put a layer of them
in a deep pan, sprinkle salt over them, and then another layer of
mushrooms, and so on alternately. let them remain for a few hours, when
break them up with the hand; put them in a nice cool place for  days,
occasionally stirring and mashing them well, to extract from them as
much juice as possible. now measure the quantity of liquor without
straining, and to each quart allow the above proportion of spices, &c.
put all into a stone jar, cover it up very closely, put it in a saucepan
of boiling water, set it over the fire, and let it boil for  hours.
have ready a nice clean stewpan; turn into it the contents of the jar,
and let the whole simmer very gently for / hour; pour it into a jug,
where it should stand in a cool place till the next day; then pour it
off into another jug, and strain it into very dry clean bottles, and do
not squeeze the mushrooms. to each pint of ketchup add a few drops of
brandy. be careful not to shake the contents, but leave all the sediment
behind in the jug; cork well, and either seal or rosin the cork, so as
perfectly to exclude the air. when a very clear bright ketchup is
wanted, the liquor must be strained through a very fine hair-sieve, or
flannel bag, after it has been very gently poured off; if the
operation is not successful, it must be repeated until you have quite a
clear liquor. it should be examined occasionally, and if it is spoiling,
should be reboiled with a few peppercorns.
seasonable from the beginning of september to the middle of october,
when this ketchup should be made.
note.—this flavouring ingredient, if genuine and well prepared, is
one of the most useful store sauces to the experienced cook, and no
trouble should be spared in its preparation. double ketchup is made by
reducing the liquor to half the quantity; for example,  quart must be
boiled down to  pint. this goes farther than ordinary ketchup, as so
little is required to flavour a good quantity of gravy. the sediment may
also be bottled for immediate use, and will be found to answer for
flavouring thick soups or gravies.
 how to distinguish mushrooms from toadstools.—the cultivated
 mushroom, known as agaricus campestris, may be distinguished
 from other poisonous kinds of fungi by its having pink or
 flesh-coloured gills, or under-side, and by its invariably
 having an agreeable smell, which the toadstool has not. when
 young, mushrooms are like a small round button, both the stalk
 and head being white. as they grow larger, they expand their
 heads by degrees into a flat form, the gills underneath being at
 first of a pale flesh-colour, but becoming, as they stand
 longer, dark brown or blackish. nearly all the poisonous kinds
 are brown, and have in general a rank and putrid smell. edible
 mushrooms are found in closely-fed pastures, but seldom grow in
 woods, where most of the poisonous sorts are to be found.
. mode.—wipe them clean, take away the brown part, and peel off
the skin; lay them on sheets of paper to dry, in a cool oven, when they
will shrivel considerably. keep them in paper bags, which hang in a dry
place. when wanted for use, put them into cold gravy, bring them
gradually to simmer, and it will be found that they will regain nearly
their usual size.
[illustration: the mushroom.]
 the mushroom.—the cultivated or garden mushroom is a species of
 fungus, which, in england, is considered the best, and is there
 usually eaten. the tribe, however, is numerous, and a large
 proportion of them are poisonous; hence it is always dangerous
 to make use of mushrooms gathered in their wild state. in some
 parts of europe, as in germany, russia, and poland, many species
 grow wild, and are used as food; but in britain, two only are
 generally eaten. these are mostly employed for the flavouring of
 dishes, and are also dried and pickled. catsup, or ketchup, is
 made from them by mixing spices and salt with their juice. the
 young, called buttons, are the best for pickling when in the
 globular form.
brown mushroom sauce, to serve with roast meat, &c.
. ingredients.—/ pint of button mushrooms, / pint of good beef
gravy, no. ,  tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup (if at hand),
thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—put the gravy into a saucepan, thicken it, and stir over the
fire until it boils. prepare the mushrooms by cutting off the stalks and
wiping them free from grit and dirt; the large flap mushrooms cut into
small pieces will answer for a brown sauce, when the buttons are not
obtainable; put them into the gravy, and let them simmer very gently for
about  minutes; then add the ketchup, and serve.
time.—rather more than  minutes.
seasonable from august to october.
note.—when fresh mushrooms are not obtainable, the powder no.  may
be used as a substitute for brown sauce.
white mushroom sauce, to serve with boiled fowls, cutlets, &c.
. ingredients.—rather more than / pint of button mushrooms,
lemon-juice and water,  oz. of butter, / pint of béchamel, no. ,
/ teaspoonful of pounded sugar.
mode.—turn the mushrooms white by putting them into lemon-juice and
water, having previously cut off the stalks and wiped them perfectly
free from grit. chop them, and put them in a stewpan with the butter.
when the mushrooms are softened, add the béchamel, and simmer for about
 minutes; should they, however, not be done enough, allow rather more
time. they should not boil longer than necessary, as they would then
lose their colour and flavour. rub the whole through a tammy, and serve
very hot. after this, it should be warmed in a bain marie.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, s.
seasonable from august to october.
a more simple method.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter, made with milk, no. ;
/ pint of button mushrooms,  dessertspoonful of mushroom ketchup, if
at hand; cayenne and salt to taste.
mode.—make the melted butter by recipe no. , and add to it the
mushrooms, which must be nicely cleaned, and free from grit, and the
stalks cut off. let them simmer gently for about  minutes, or until
they are quite tender. put in the seasoning and ketchup; let it just
boil, when serve.
time.—rather more than  minutes. average cost, d.
seasonable from august to october.
 growth of the mushroom and other fungi.—the quick growth of the
 mushroom and other fungi is no less wonderful than the length of
 time they live, and the numerous dangers they resist while they
 continue in the dormant state. to spring up "like a mushroom in
 a night" is a scriptural mode of expressing celerity; and this
 completely accords with all the observations which have been
 made concerning this curious class of plants. mr. sowerby
 remarks—"i have often placed specimens of the phallus caninus
 by a window over-night, while in the egg-form, and they have
 been fully grown by the morning."
mushroom powder (a valuable addition to sauces and gravies, when fresh
mushrooms are not obtainable).
. ingredients.—/ peck of large mushrooms,  onions,  cloves, /
oz. of pounded mace,  teaspoonfuls of white pepper.
mode.—peel the mushrooms, wipe them perfectly free from grit and
dirt, remove the black fur, and reject all those that are at all
worm-eaten; put them into a stewpan with the above ingredients, but
without water; shake them over a clear fire, till all the liquor is
dried up, and be careful not to let them burn; arrange them on tins, and
dry them in a slow oven; pound them to a fine powder, which put into
small dry bottles; cork well, seal the corks, and keep it in a dry
place. in using this powder, add it to the gravy just before serving,
when it will merely require one boil-up. the flavour imparted by this
means to the gravy, ought to be exceedingly good.
seasonable.—this should be made in september, or at the beginning of
october.
note.—if the bottles in which it is stored away are not perfectly
dry, as, also the mushroom powder, it will keep good but a very short
time.
. ingredients.—sufficient vinegar to cover the mushrooms; to each
quart of mushrooms,  blades of pounded mace,  oz. of ground pepper,
salt to taste.
mode.—choose some nice young button mushrooms for pickling, and rub
off the skin with a piece of flannel and salt, and cut off the stalks;
if very large, take out the red inside, and reject the black ones, as
they are too old. put them in a stewpan, sprinkle salt over them, with
pounded mace and pepper in the above proportion; shake them well over a
clear fire until the liquor flows, and keep them there until it is all
dried up again; then add as much vinegar as will cover them; just let it
simmer for  minute, and store it away in stone jars for use. when cold,
tie down with bladder and keep in a dry place; they will remain good for
a length of time, and are generally considered delicious.
seasonable.—make this the same time as ketchup, from the beginning of
september to the middle of october.
 nature of the mushroom.—locality has evidently a considerable
 influence on the nature of the juices of the mushroom; for it
 has been discovered, after fatal experience, that some species,
 which are perfectly harmless when raised in open meadows and
 pasturelands, become virulently poisonous when they happen to
 grow in contact with stagnant water or putrescent animal and
 vegetable substances. what the precise nature of the poison in
 fungi may be, has not been accurately ascertained.
a very rich and good mushroom sauce, to serve with fowls or rabbits.
. ingredients.— pint of mushroom-buttons, salt to taste, a little
grated nutmeg,  blade of pounded mace,  pint of cream,  oz. of
butter, flour to thicken.
mode.—rub the buttons with a piece of flannel and salt, to take off
the skin; cut off the stalks, and put them in a stewpan with the above
ingredients, previously kneading together the butter and flour; boil the
whole for about ten minutes, stirring all the time. pour some of the
sauce over the fowls, and the remainder serve in a tureen.
time.— minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient to serve with a pair of fowls.
seasonable from august to october.
. ingredients.—mustard, salt, and water.
mode.—mustard should be mixed with water that has been boiled and
allowed to cool; hot water destroys its essential properties, and raw
cold water might cause it to ferment. put the mustard in a cup, with a
small pinch of salt, and mix with it very gradually sufficient boiled
water to make it drop from the spoon without being watery. stir and mix
well, and rub the lumps well down with the back of a spoon, as
well-mixed mustard should be perfectly free from these. the mustard-pot
should not be more than half full, or rather less if it will not be used
in a day or two, as it is so much better when freshly mixed.
. ingredients.—horseradish vinegar, cayenne, / a teacupful of
mustard.
mode.—have ready sufficient horseradish vinegar to mix with the above
proportion of mustard; put the mustard in a cup, with a slight seasoning
of cayenne; mix it perfectly smooth with the vinegar, adding this a
little at a time; rub down with the back of a spoon any lumps that may
appear, and do not let it be too thin. mustard may be flavoured in
various ways, with tarragon, shalot, celery, and many other vinegars,
herbs, spices, &c.; but this is more customary in france than in
england, as there it is merely considered a "vehicle of flavours," as it
has been termed.
pickled nasturtiums (a very good substitute for capers)
. ingredients.—to each pint of vinegar,  oz. of salt, 
peppercorns, nasturtiums.
mode.—gather the nasturtium-pods on a dry day, and wipe them clean
with a cloth; put them in a dry glass bottle, with vinegar, salt, and
pepper in the above proportion. if you cannot find enough ripe to fill a
bottle, cork up what you have got until you have some more fit: they may
be added from day to day. bung up the bottles, and seal or rosin the
tops. they will be fit for use in  or  months; and the best way is
to make them one season for the next.
seasonable.—look for nasturtium-pods from the end of july to the end
of august.
[illustration: nasturtiums.]
 nasturtiums.—the elegant nasturtium-plant, called by
 naturalists tropoeolum, and which sometimes goes by the name
 of indian cress, came originally from peru, but was easily made
 to grow in these islands. its young leaves and flowers are of a
 slightly hot nature, and many consider them a good adjunct to
 salads, to which they certainly add a pretty appearance. when
 the beautiful blossoms, which may be employed with great effect
 in garnishing dishes, are off, then the fruit is used as
 described in the above recipe.
french onion sauce, or soubise.
. ingredients.—/ pint of béchamel, no. ,  bay-leaf, seasoning
to taste of pounded mace and cayenne,  onions, a small piece of ham.
mode.—peel the onions and cut them in halves; put them in a stewpan,
with just sufficient water to cover them, and add the bay-leaf, ham,
cayenne, and mace; be careful to keep the lid closely shut, and simmer
them until tender. take them out and drain thoroughly; rub them through
a tammy or sieve (an old one does for the purpose) with a wooden spoon,
and put them to / pint of béchamel; keep stirring over the fire until
it boils, when serve. if it should require any more seasoning, add it to
taste.
time.—/ hour to boil the onions.
average cost, d. for this quantity.
sufficient for a moderate-sized dish.
white onion sauce, for boiled rabbits, roast shoulder of mutton, &c.
. ingredients.— large onions, or  middling-sized ones,  pint of
melted butter made with milk (no. ), / teaspoonful of salt, or
rather more.
mode.—peel the onions and put them into water to which a little salt
has been added, to preserve their whiteness, and let them remain for /
hour. then put them in a stewpan, cover them with water, and let them
boil until tender, and, if the onions should be very strong, change the
water after they have been boiling for / hour. drain them thoroughly,
chop them, and rub them through a tammy or sieve. make  pint of melted
butter, by recipe no. , and when that boils, put in the onions, with
a seasoning of salt; stir it till it simmers, when it will be ready to
serve. if these directions are carefully attended to, this onion sauce
will be delicious.
time.—from / to  hour, to boil the onions.
average cost, d. per pint.
sufficient to serve with a roast shoulder of mutton, or boiled rabbit.
seasonable from august to march.
note.—to make this sauce very mild and delicate, use spanish onions,
which can be procured from the beginning of september to christmas.  or
 tablespoonfuls of cream added just before serving, will be found to
improve its appearance very much. small onions, when very young, may be
cooked whole, and served in melted butter. a sieve or tammy should be
kept expressly for onions: an old one answers the purpose, as it is
liable to retain the flavour and smell, which of course would be
excessively disagreeable in delicate preparations.
. ingredients.— large onions, rather more than / pint of good
gravy,  oz. of butter, salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—slice and fry the onions of a pale brown in a stewpan, with the
above quantity of butter, keeping them well stirred, that they do not
get black. when a nice colour, pour over the gravy, and let them simmer
gently until tender. now skim off every particle of fat, add the
seasoning, and rub the whole through a tammy or sieve; put it back in
the saucepan to warm, and when it boils, serve.
time.—altogether  hour.
seasonable from august to march.
note.—where a very high flavouring is liked, add  tablespoonful of
mushroom ketchup, or a small quantity of port wine.
 history of the onion.—it is not supposed that any variety of
 the onion is indigenous to britain, as when the large and mild
 roots imported from warmer climates, have been cultivated in
 these islands a few years, they deteriorate both in size and
 sweetness. it is therefore most likely that this plant was first
 introduced into england from continental europe, and that it
 originally was produced in a southern climate, and has gradually
 become acclimatized to a colder atmosphere. (see no. .)
pickled onions (a very simple method, and exceedingly good).
. ingredients.—pickling onions; to each quart of vinegar, 
teaspoonfuls of allspice,  teaspoonfuls of whole black pepper.
mode.—have the onions gathered when quite dry and ripe, and, with the
fingers, take off the thin outside skin; then, with a silver knife
(steel should not be used, as it spoils the colour of the onions),
remove one more skin, when the onion will look quite clear. have ready
some very dry bottles or jars, and as fast as they are peeled, put them
in. pour over sufficient cold vinegar to cover them, with pepper and
allspice in the above proportions, taking care that each jar has its
share of the latter ingredients. tie down with bladder, and put them in
a dry place, and in a fortnight they will be fit for use. this is a most
simple recipe and very delicious, the onions being nice and crisp. they
should be eaten within  or  months after being done, as the onions are
liable to become soft.
seasonable from the middle of july to the end of august.
. ingredients.— gallon of pickling onions, salt and water, milk; to
each / gallon of vinegar,  oz. of bruised ginger, / teaspoonful of
cayenne,  oz. of allspice,  oz. of whole black pepper, / oz. of
whole nutmeg bruised,  cloves, / oz. of mace.
mode.—gather the onions, which should not be too small, when they are
quite dry and ripe; wipe off the dirt, but do not pare them; make a
strong solution of salt and water, into which put the onions, and change
this, morning and night, for  days, and save the last brine they were
put in. then take the outside skin off, and put them into a tin saucepan
capable of holding them all, as they are always better done together.
now take equal quantities of milk and the last salt and water the onions
were in, and pour this to them; to this add  large spoonfuls of salt,
put them over the fire, and watch them very attentively. keep constantly
turning the onions about with a wooden skimmer, those at the bottom to
the top, and vice versâ; and let the milk and water run through the
holes of the skimmer. remember, the onions must never boil, or, if they
do, they will be good for nothing; and they should be quite transparent.
keep the onions stirred for a few minutes, and, in stirring them, be
particular not to break them. then have ready a pan with a colander,
into which turn the onions to drain, covering them with a cloth to keep
in the steam. place on a table an old cloth,  or  times double; put
the onions on it when quite hot, and over them an old piece of blanket;
cover this closely over them, to keep in the steam. let them remain till
the next day, when they will be quite cold, and look yellow and
shrivelled; take off the shrivelled skins, when they should be as white
as snow. put them in a pan, make a pickle of vinegar and the remaining
ingredients, boil all these up, and pour hot over the onions in the pan.
cover very closely to keep in all the steam, and let them stand till the
following day, when they will be quite cold. put them into jars or
bottles well bunged, and a tablespoonful of the best olive-oil on the
top of each jar or bottle. tie them down with bladder, and let them
stand in a cool place for a month or six weeks, when they will be fit
for use. they should be beautifully white, and eat crisp, without the
least softness, and will keep good many months.
seasonable from the middle of july to the end of august.
orange gravy, for wildfowl, widgeon, teal, &c.
. ingredients.—/ pint of white stock, no. ,  small onion,  or
 strips of lemon or orange peel, a few leaves of basil, if at hand, the
juice of a seville orange or lemon, salt and pepper to taste,  glass of
port wine.
mode.—put the onion, cut in slices, into a stewpan with the stock,
orange-peel, and basil, and let them simmer very gently for / hour or
rather longer, should the gravy not taste sufficiently of the peel.
strain it off, and add to the gravy the remaining ingredients; let the
whole heat through, and, when on the point of boiling, serve very hot in
a tureen which should have a cover to it.
time.—altogether / hour.
sufficient for a small tureen.
oyster forcemeat, for roast or boiled turkey.
. ingredients.—/ pint of bread crumbs, -/ oz. of chopped suet
or butter,  faggot of savoury herbs, / saltspoonful of grated nutmeg,
salt and pepper to taste,  eggs,  oysters.
mode.—grate the bread very fine, and be careful that no large lumps
remain; put it into a basin with the suet, which must be very finely
minced, or, when butter is used, that must be cut up into small pieces.
add the herbs, also chopped as small as possible, and seasoning; mix all
these well together, until the ingredients are thoroughly mingled. open
and beard the oysters, chop them, but not too small, and add them to the
other ingredients. beat up the eggs, and, with the hand, work
altogether, until it is smoothly mixed. the turkey should not be stuffed
too full: if there should be too much forcemeat, roll it into balls, fry
them, and use them as a garnish.
sufficient for  turkey.
. ingredients.—sufficient oysters to fill a pint measure,  pint of
sherry,  oz. of salt,  drachm of cayenne,  drachms of pounded mace.
mode.—procure the oysters very fresh, and open sufficient to fill a
pint measure; save the liquor, and scald the oysters in it with the
sherry; strain the oysters, and put them in a mortar with the salt,
cayenne, and mace; pound the whole until reduced to a pulp, then add it
to the liquor in which they were scalded; boil it again five minutes,
and skim well; rub the whole through a sieve, and, when cold, bottle and
cork closely. the corks should be sealed.
seasonable from september to april.
note.—cider may be substituted for the sherry.
. ingredients.— oysters; to each / pint of vinegar,  blade of
pounded mace,  strip of lemon-peel,  black peppercorns.
mode.—get the oysters in good condition, open them, place them in a
saucepan, and let them simmer in their own liquor for about  minutes,
very gently; then take them out, one by one, and place them in a jar,
and cover them, when cold, with a pickle made as follows:—measure the
oyster-liquor; add to it the same quantity of vinegar, with mace,
lemon-peel, and pepper in the above proportion, and boil it for 
minutes; when cold, pour over the oysters, and tie them down very
closely, as contact with the air spoils them.
seasonable from september to april.
note.—put this pickle away in small jars; because directly one is
opened, its contents should immediately be eaten, as they soon spoil.
the pickle should not be kept more than  or  months.
oyster sauce, to serve with fish, boiled poultry, &c.
. ingredients.— dozen oysters, / pint of melted butter, made with
milk, no. .
mode.—open the oysters carefully, and save their liquor; strain it
into a clean saucepan (a lined one is best), put in the oysters, and let
them just come to the boiling-point, when they should look plump. take
them off the fire immediately, and put the whole into a basin. strain
the liquor from them, mix with it sufficient milk to make / pint
altogether, and follow the directions of no. . when the melted butter
is ready and very smooth, put in the oysters, which should be previously
bearded, if you wish the sauce to be really nice. set it by the side of
the fire to get thoroughly hot, but do not allow it to boil, or the
oysters will immediately harden. using cream instead of milk makes this
sauce extremely delicious. when liked, add a seasoning of cayenne, or
anchovy sauce; but, as we have before stated, a plain sauce should be
plain, and not be overpowered by highly-flavoured essences; therefore we
recommend that the above directions be implicitly followed, and no
seasoning added.
average cost for this quantity, s.
sufficient for  persons. never allow fewer than  oysters to 
person, unless the party is very large.
seasonable from september to april.
a more economical sauce may be made by using a smaller quantity of
oysters, and not bearding them before they are added to the sauce: this
may answer the purpose, but we cannot undertake to recommend it as a
mode of making this delicious adjunct to fish, &c.
parsley and butter, to serve with calf's head. boiled fowls, &c.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of minced parsley, / pint of
melted butter, no. .
mode.—put into a saucepan a small quantity of water, slightly salted,
and when it boils, throw in a good bunch of parsley which has been
previously washed and tied together in a bunch; let it boil for 
minutes, drain it, mince the leaves very fine, and put the above
quantity in a tureen; pour over it / pint of smoothly-made melted
butter; stir once, that the ingredients may be thoroughly mixed, and
serve.
time.— minutes to boil the parsley. average cost, d.
sufficient for  large fowl; allow rather more for a pair.
seasonable at any time.
note.—sometimes, in the middle of winter, parsley-leaves are not to
be had, when the following will be found an excellent substitute:—tie
up a little parsley-seed in a small piece of muslin, and boil it for 
minutes in a small quantity of water; use this water to make the melted
butter with, and throw into it a little boiled spinach, minced rather
fine, which will have an appearance similar to that of parsley.
[illustration: parsley.]
 parsley.—if there be nothing new under the sun, there are, at
 any rate, different uses found for the same thing; for this
 pretty aromatic herb was used in ancient times, as we learn from
 mythological narrative, to adorn the head of a hero, no less
 than hercules; and now—was ever fall so great?—we moderns use
 it in connection with the head of—a calf. according to homer's
 "iliad," warriors fed their chariot-steeds on parsley; and pliny
 acquaints us with the fact that, as a symbol of mourning, it was
 admitted to furnish the funeral tables of the romans. egypt,
 some say, first produced this herb; thence it was introduced, by
 some unknown voyager, into sardinia, where the carthaginians
 found it, and made it known to the inhabitants of marseilles.
 (see no. .)
fried parsley, for garnishing.
. ingredients.—parsley, hot lard or clarified dripping.
mode.—gather some young parsley; wash, pick, and dry it thoroughly in
a cloth; put it into the wire basket of which we have given an
engraving, and hold it in boiling lard or dripping for a minute or two.
directly it is done, lift out the basket, and let it stand before the
fire, that the parsley may become thoroughly crisp; and the quicker it
is fried the better. should the kitchen not be furnished with the above
article, throw the parsley into the frying-pan, and when crisp, lift it
out with a slice, dry it before the fire, and when thoroughly crisp, it
will be ready for use.
[illustration: wire basket.]
 wire basket.—for this recipe, a wire basket, as shown in the
 annexed engraving, will be found very useful. it is very light
 and handy, and may be used for other similar purposes besides
 that described above.
parsley juice, for colouring various dishes.
. procure some nice young parsley; wash it and dry it thoroughly in a
cloth; pound the leaves in a mortar till all the juice is extracted, and
put the juice in a teacup or small jar; place this in a saucepan of
boiling water, and warm it on the bain marie principle just long
enough to take off its rawness; let it drain, and it will be ready for
colouring.
. use freshly-gathered parsley for keeping, and wash it perfectly
free from grit and dirt; put it into boiling water which has been
slightly salted and well skimmed, and then let it boil for  or 
minutes; take it out, let it drain, and lay it on a sieve in front of
the fire, when it should be dried as expeditiously as possible. store it
away in a very dry place in bottles, and when wanted for use, pour over
it a little warm water, and let it stand for about  minutes.
seasonable.—this may be done at any time between june and october.
. ingredients.—equal quantities of medium-sized onions, cucumbers,
and sauce-apples; -/ teaspoonful of salt, / teaspoonful of cayenne,
 wineglassful of soy,  wineglassful of sherry; vinegar.
mode.—slice sufficient cucumbers, onions, and apples to fill a pint
stone jar, taking care to cut the slices very thin; arrange them in
alternate layers, shaking in as you proceed salt and cayenne in the
above proportion; pour in the soy and wine, and fill up with vinegar. it
will be fit for use the day it is made.
seasonable in august and september.
[this recipe was forwarded to the editress of this work by a subscriber
to the "englishwoman's domestic magazine." mrs. beeton, not having
tested it, cannot vouch for its excellence; but the contributor spoke
very highly in its favour.]
 soy.—this is a sauce frequently made use of for fish, and comes
 from japan, where it is prepared from the seeds of a plant
 called dolichos soja. the chinese also manufacture it; but
 that made by the japanese is said to be the best. all sorts of
 statements have been made respecting the very general
 adulteration of this article in england, and we fear that many
 of them are too true. when genuine, it is of an agreeable
 flavour, thick, and of a clear brown colour.
. ingredients.—red cabbages, salt and water; to each quart of
vinegar, / oz. of ginger well bruised,  oz. of whole black pepper,
and, when liked, a little cayenne.
mode.—take off the outside decayed leaves of a nice red cabbage, cut
it in quarters, remove the stalks, and cut it across in very thin
slices. lay these on a dish, and strew them plentifully with salt,
covering them with another dish. let them remain for  hours, turn into
a colander to drain, and, if necessary, wipe lightly with a clean soft
cloth. put them in a jar; boil up the vinegar with spices in the above
proportion, and, when cold, pour it over the cabbage. it will be fit for
use in a week or two, and, if kept for a very long time, the cabbage is
liable get soft and to discolour. to be really nice and crisp, and of a
good red colour, it should be eaten almost immediately after it is made.
a little bruised cochineal boiled with the vinegar adds much to the
appearance of this pickle. tie down with bladder, and keep in a dry
place.
seasonable in july and august, but the pickle will be much more crisp
if the frost has just touched the leaves.
 red cabbage.—this plant, in its growth, is similar in form to
 that of the white, but is of a bluish-purple colour, which,
 however, turns red on the application of acid, as is the case
 with all vegetable blues. it is principally from the white
 vegetable that the germans make their sauer kraut; a dish held
 in such high estimation with the inhabitants of vaderland, but
 which requires, generally speaking, with strangers, a long
 acquaintance in order to become sufficiently impressed with its
 numerous merits. the large red dutch is the kind generally
 recommended for pickling.
. ingredients.— wineglassful of brandy,  oz. of very fresh butter,
 glass of madeira, pounded sugar to taste.
mode.—put the pounded sugar in a basin, with part of the brandy and
the butter; let it stand by the side of the fire until it is warm and
the sugar and butter are dissolved; then add the rest of the brandy,
with the madeira. either pour it over the pudding, or serve in a tureen.
this is a very rich and excellent sauce.
average cost, s. d. for this quantity.
sufficient for a pudding made for  persons.
quin's sauce, an excellent fish sauce.
. ingredients.—/ pint of walnut pickle, / pint of port wine, 
pint of mushroom ketchup,  dozen anchovies,  dozen shalots, / pint
of soy, / teaspoonful of cayenne.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a saucepan, having previously
chopped the shalots and anchovies very small; simmer for  minutes,
strain, and, when cold, bottle off for use: the corks should be well
sealed to exclude the air.
time.—/ hour.
seasonable at any time.
ravigotte, a french salad sauce.
mons. ude's recipe.
. ingredients.— teaspoonful of mushroom ketchup,  teaspoonful of
cavice,  teaspoonful of chili vinegar,  teaspoonful of reading sauce,
a piece of butter the size of an egg,  tablespoonfuls of thick
béchamel, no. ,  tablespoonful of minced parsley,  tablespoonfuls
of cream; salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—scald the parsley, mince the leaves very fine, and add it to
all the other ingredients; after mixing the whole together thoroughly,
the sauce will be ready for use.
average cost, for this quantity, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ pints of walnut pickle, -/ oz. of shalots, 
quart of spring water, / pint of indian soy, / oz. of bruised
ginger, / oz. of long pepper,  oz. of mustard-seed,  anchovy, /
oz. of cayenne, / oz. of dried sweet bay-leaves.
mode.—bruise the shalots in a mortar, and put them in a stone jar
with the walnut-liquor; place it before the fire, and let it boil until
reduced to  pints. then, into another jar, put all the ingredients
except the bay-leaves, taking care that they are well bruised, so that
the flavour may be thoroughly extracted; put this also before the fire,
and let it boil for  hour, or rather more. when the contents of both
jars are sufficiently cooked, mix them together, stirring them well as
you mix them, and submit them to a slow boiling for / hour; cover
closely, and let them stand  hours in a cool place; then open the jar
and add the bay-leaves; let it stand a week longer closed down, when
strain through a flannel bag, and it will be ready for use. the above
quantities will make / gallon.
time.—altogether,  hours.
seasonable.—this sauce may be made at any time.
remoulade, or french salad-dressing.
. ingredients.— eggs, / tablespoonful of made mustard, salt and
cayenne to taste,  tablespoonfuls of olive-oil,  tablespoonful of
tarragon or plain vinegar.
mode.—boil  eggs quite hard for about / hour, put them into cold
water, and let them remain in it for a few minutes; strip off the
shells, put the yolks in a mortar, and pound them very smoothly; add to
them, very gradually, the mustard, seasoning, and vinegar, keeping all
well stirred and rubbed down with the back of a wooden spoon. put in the
oil drop by drop, and when this is thoroughly mixed with the other
ingredients, add the yolk of a raw egg, and stir well, when it will be
ready for use. this sauce should not be curdled; and to prevent this,
the only way is to mix a little of everything at a time, and not to
cease stirring. the quantities of oil and vinegar may be increased or
diminished according to taste, as many persons would prefer a smaller
proportion of the former ingredient.
green remoulade is made by using tarragon vinegar instead of plain, and
colouring with a little parsley-juice, no. . harvey's sauce, or chili
vinegar, may be added at pleasure.
time.—/ hour to boil the eggs.
average cost, for this quantity, d.
sufficient for a salad made for  or  persons.
[illustration: tarragon.]
 tarragon.—the leaves of this plant, known to naturalists as
 artemisia dracunculus, are much used in france as a flavouring
 ingredient for salads. from it also is made the vinegar known as
 tarragon vinegar, which is employed by the french in mixing
 their mustard. it originally comes from tartary, and does not
 seed in france.
sage-and-onion stuffing, for geese, ducks, and pork.
. ingredients.— large onions,  sage-leaves, / lb. of bread
crumbs, -/ oz. of butter, salt and pepper to taste,  egg.
mode.—peel the onions, put them into boiling water, let them simmer
for  minutes or rather longer, and, just before they are taken out, put
in the sage-leaves for a minute or two to take off their rawness. chop
both these very fine, add the bread, seasoning, and butter, and work the
whole together with the yolk of an egg, when the stuffing will be ready
for use. it should be rather highly seasoned, and the sage-leaves should
be very finely chopped. many cooks do not parboil the onions in the
manner just stated, but merely use them raw. the stuffing then, however,
is not nearly so mild, and, to many tastes, its strong flavour would be
very objectionable. when made for goose, a portion of the liver of the
bird, simmered for a few minutes and very finely minced, is frequently
added to this stuffing; and where economy is studied, the egg may be
dispensed with.
time.—rather more than  minutes to simmer the onions.
average cost, for this quantity, d.
sufficient for  goose, or a pair of ducks.
. soyer's recipe for goose stuffing.—take  apples, peeled and
cored,  onions,  leaves of sage, and  leaves of lemon thyme not
broken, and boil them in a stewpan with sufficient water to cover them;
when done, pulp them through a sieve, removing the sage and thyme; then
add sufficient pulp of mealy potatoes to cause it to be sufficiently dry
without sticking to the hand; add pepper and salt, and stuff the bird.
salad dressing (excellent).
. ingredients.— teaspoonful of mixed mustard,  teaspoonful of
pounded sugar,  tablespoonfuls of salad oil,  tablespoonfuls of milk,
 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, cayenne and salt to taste.
mode.—put the mixed mustard into a salad-bowl with the sugar, and add
the oil drop by drop, carefully stirring and mixing all these
ingredients well together. proceed in this manner with the milk and
vinegar, which must be added very gradually, or the sauce will curdle.
put in the seasoning, when the mixture will be ready for use. if this
dressing is properly made, it will have a soft creamy appearance, and
will be found very delicious with crab, or cold fried fish (the latter
cut into dice), as well as with salads. in mixing salad dressings, the
ingredients cannot be added too gradually, or stirred too much.
average cost, for this quantity, d.
sufficient for a small salad.
this recipe can be confidently recommended by the editress, to whom it
was given by an intimate friend noted for her salads.
 scarcity of salads in england.—three centuries ago, very few
 vegetables were cultivated in england, and an author writing of
 the period of henry viii.'s reign, tells us that neither salad,
 nor carrots, nor cabbages, nor radishes, nor any other
 comestibles of a like nature, were grown in any part of the
 kingdom: they came from holland and flanders. we further learn,
 that queen catharine herself, with all her royalty, could not
 procure a salad of english growth for her dinner. the king was
 obliged to mend this sad state of affairs, and send to holland
 for a gardener in order to cultivate those pot-herbs, in the
 growth of which england is now, perhaps, not behind any other
 country in europe.
[illustration: the olive.]
 the olive and olive oil.—this tree assumes a high degree of
 interest from the historical circumstances with which it is
 connected. a leaf of it was brought into the ark by the dove,
 when that vessel was still floating on the waters of the great
 deep, and gave the first token that the deluge was subsiding.
 among the greeks, the prize of the victor in the olympic games
 was a wreath of wild olive; and the "mount of olives" is
 rendered familiar to our ears by its being mentioned in the
 scriptures as near to jerusalem. the tree is indigenous in the
 north of africa, syria, and greece; and the romans introduced it
 to italy. in spain and the south of france it is now cultivated;
 and although it grows in england, its fruit does not ripen in
 the open air. both in greece and portugal the fruit is eaten in
 its ripe state; but its taste is not agreeable to many palates.
 to the italian shepherd, bread and olives, with a little wine,
 form a nourishing diet; but in england, olives are usually only
 introduced by way of dessert, to destroy the taste of the viands
 which have been previously eaten, that the flavour of the wine
 may be the better enjoyed. there are three kinds of olives
 imported to london,—the french, spanish, and italian: the first
 are from provence, and are generally accounted excellent; the
 second are larger, but more bitter; and the last are from lucca,
 and are esteemed the best. the oil extracted from olives, called
 olive oil, or salad oil, is, with the continentals, in continual
 request, more dishes being prepared with than without it, we
 should imagine. with us, it is principally used in mixing a
 salad, and when thus employed, it tends to prevent fermentation,
 and is an antidote against flatulency.
. ingredients.— eggs,  teaspoonful of mixed mustard, /
teaspoonful of white pepper, half that quantity of cayenne, salt to
taste,  tablespoonfuls of cream, vinegar.
mode.—boil the eggs until hard, which will be in about / hour or 
minutes; put them into cold water, take off the shells, and pound the
yolks in a mortar to a smooth paste. then add all the other ingredients,
except the vinegar, and stir them well until the whole are thoroughly
incorporated one with the other. pour in sufficient vinegar to make it
of the consistency of cream, taking care to add but little at a time.
the mixture will then be ready for use.
average cost, for this quantity, d.
sufficient for a moderate-sized salad.
note.—the whites of the eggs, cut into rings, will serve very well as
a garnishing to the salad.
. ingredients.— egg,  teaspoonful of salad oil,  teaspoonful of
mixed mustard, / teaspoonful of salt, / teaspoonful of pounded
sugar,  tablespoonfuls of vinegar,  tablespoonfuls of cream.
mode.—prepare and mix the ingredients by the preceding recipe, and be
very particular that the whole is well stirred.
note.—in making salads, the vegetables, &c., should never be added to
the sauce very long before they are wanted for table; the dressing,
however, may always be prepared some hours before required. where salads
are much in request, it is a good plan to bottle off sufficient dressing
for a few days' consumption, as, thereby, much time and trouble are
saved. if kept in a cool place, it will remain good for  or  days.
 poetic recipe for salad.—the rev. sydney smith, the witty canon
 of st. paul's, who thought that an enjoyment of the good things
 of this earth was compatible with aspirations for things higher,
 wrote the following excellent recipe for salad, which we should
 advise our readers not to pass by without a trial, when the hot
 weather invites to a dish of cold lamb. may they find the
 flavour equal to the rhyme.—
"two large potatoes, pass'd through kitchen sieve,
smoothness and softness to the salad give:
of mordent mustard add a single spoon,
distrust the condiment that bites too soon;
but deem it not, thou man of herbs, a fault.
to add a double quantity of salt:
four times the spoon with oil of lucca crown,
and twice with vinegar procured from 'town;
true flavour needs it, and your poet begs,
the pounded yellow of two well-boil'd eggs.
let onion's atoms lurk within the bowl,
and, scarce suspected, animate the whole;
and, lastly, in the flavour'd compound toss
a magic spoonful of anchovy sauce.
oh! great and glorious, and herbaceous treat,
'twould tempt the dying anchorite to eat.
back to the world he'd turn his weary soul,
and plunge his fingers in the salad-bowl."
sauce allemande, or german sauce.
. ingredients.—/ pint of sauce tournée (no. ), the yolks of 
eggs.
mode.—put the sauce into a stewpan, heat it, and stir to it the
beaten yolks of  eggs, which have been previously strained. let it just
simmer, but not boil, or the eggs will curdle; and after they are added
to the sauce, it must be stirred without ceasing. this sauce is a
general favourite, and is used for many made dishes.
time.— minute to simmer.
average cost, d.
sauce aristocratique (a store sauce).
. ingredients.—green walnuts. to every pint of juice,  lb. of
anchovies,  drachm of cloves,  drachm of mace,  drachm of jamaica
ginger bruised,  shalots. to every pint of the boiled liquor, / pint
of vinegar, / pint of port wine,  tablespoonfuls of soy.
mode.—pound the walnuts in a mortar, squeeze out the juice through a
strainer, and let it stand to settle. pour off the clear juice, and to
every pint of it, add anchovies, spices, and cloves in the above
proportion. boil all these together till the anchovies are dissolved,
then strain the juice again, put in the shalots ( to every pint), and
boil again. to every pint of the boiled liquor add vinegar, wine, and
soy, in the above quantities, and bottle off for use. cork well, and
seal the corks.
seasonable.—make this sauce from the beginning to the middle of july,
when walnuts are in perfection for sauces and pickling.
average cost, s. d. for a quart.
 manufacture of sauces.—in france, during the reign of louis
 xii., at the latter end of the th century, there was formed a
 company of sauce-manufacturers, who obtained, in those days of
 monopolies, the exclusive privilege of making sauces. the
 statutes drawn up by this company inform us that the famous
 sauce ŕ la cameline, sold by them, was to be composed or "good
 cinnamon, good ginger, good cloves, good grains of paradise,
 good bread, and good vinegar." the sauce tence, was to be made
 of "good sound almonds, good ginger, good wine, and good
 verjuice." may we respectfully express a hope—not that we
 desire to doubt it in the least—that the english
 sauce-manufacturers of the th century are equally considerate
 and careful in choosing their ingredients for their various
 well-known preparations.
sauce a l'aurore, for trout, soles, &c.
. ingredients.—the spawn of  lobster,  oz. of butter, / pint of
béchamel (no. ), the juice of / lemon, a high seasoning of salt and
cayenne.
mode.—take the spawn and pound it in a mortar with the butter, until
quite smooth, and work it through a hair sieve. put the béchamel into a
stewpan, add the pounded spawn, the lemon-juice, which must be strained,
and a plentiful seasoning of cayenne and salt; let it just simmer, but
do not allow it to boil, or the beautiful red colour of the sauce will
be spoiled. a small spoonful of anchovy essence may be added at
pleasure.
time.— minute to simmer. average cost, for this quantity, s.
sufficient for a pair of large soles.
seasonable at any time.
sauce a la matelote, for fish.
. ingredients.—/ pint of espagnole (no. ),  onions, 
tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup, / glass of port wine, a bunch of
sweet herbs, / bay-leaf, salt and pepper to taste,  clove,  berries
of allspice, a little liquor in which the fish has been boiled,
lemon-juice, and anchovy sauce.
mode.—slice and fry the onions of a nice brown colour, and put them
into a stewpan with the espagnole, ketchup, wine, and a little liquor in
which the fish has been boiled. add the seasoning, herbs, and spices,
and simmer gently for  minutes, stirring well the whole time; strain
it through a fine hair sieve, put in the lemon-juice and anchovy sauce,
and pour it over the fish. this sauce may be very much enriched by
adding a few small quenelles, or forcemeat balls made of fish, and also
glazed onions or mushrooms. these, however, should not be added to the
matelote till it is dished.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
note.—this sauce originally took its name as being similar to that
which the french sailor (matelot) employed as a relish to the fish he
caught and ate. in some cases, cider and perry were substituted for the
wine. the norman matelotes were very celebrated.
[illustration: the bay.]
 the bay.—we have already described (see no. ) the difference
 between the cherry-laurel (prunus laurus cerasus) and the
 classic laurel (laurus nobilis), the former only being used
 for culinary purposes. the latter beautiful evergreen was
 consecrated by the ancients to priests and heroes, and used in
 their sacrifices. "a crown of bay" was the earnestly-desired
 reward for great enterprises, and for the display of uncommon
 genius in oratory or writing. it was more particularly sacred to
 apollo, because, according to the fable, the nymph daphne was
 changed into a laurel-tree. the ancients believed, too, that the
 laurel had the power of communicating the gift of prophecy, as
 well as poetic genius; and, when they wished to procure pleasant
 dreams, would place a sprig under the pillow of their bed. it
 was the symbol, too, of victory, and it was thought that the
 laurel could never be struck by lightning. from this word comes
 that of "laureate;" alfred tennyson being the present poet
 laureate, crowned with laurel as the first of living bards.
sauce piquante, for cutlets, roast meat, &c.
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  small carrot,  shalots,  small
bunch of savoury herbs, including parsley, / a bay-leaf,  slices of
lean ham,  cloves,  peppercorns,  blade of mace,  whole allspice, 
tablespoonfuls of vinegar, / pint of stock (no.  or ),  small
lump of sugar, / saltspoonful of cayenne, salt to taste.
mode.—put into a stewpan the butter, with the carrot and shalots,
both of which must be cut into small slices; add the herbs, bay-leaf,
spices, and ham (which must be minced rather finely), and let these
ingredients simmer over a slow fire, until the bottom of the stewpan is
covered with a brown glaze. keep stirring with a wooden spoon, and put
in the remaining ingredients. simmer very gently for / hour, skim off
every particle of fat, strain the sauce through a sieve, and serve very
hot. care must be taken that this sauce be not made too acid, although
it should possess a sharpness indicated by its name. of course the above
quantity of vinegar may be increased or diminished at pleasure,
according to taste.
time.—altogether / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for a medium-sized dish of cutlets.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter, / lb. of pounded sugar, a
wineglassful of brandy or rum.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream, until no lumps remain; add the
pounded sugar, and brandy or rum; stir once or twice until the whole is
thoroughly mixed, and serve. this sauce may either be poured round the
pudding or served in a tureen, according to the taste or fancy of the
cook or mistress.
average cost, d. for this quantity.
sufficient for a pudding.
sauce robert, for steaks, &c.
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  onions,  teaspoonful of flour, 
tablespoonfuls of gravy, or stock no. , salt and pepper to taste, 
teaspoonful of made mustard,  teaspoonful of vinegar, the juice of /
lemon.
mode.—put the butter into a stewpan, set it on the fire, and, when
browning, throw in the onions, which must be cut into small slices. fry
them brown, but do not burn them; add the flour, shake the onions in it,
and give the whole another fry. put in the gravy and seasoning, and boil
it gently for  minutes; skim off the fat, add the mustard, vinegar,
and lemon-juice; give it one boil, and pour round the steaks, or
whatever dish the sauce has been prepared for.
time.—-altogether / hour. average cost, for this quantity, d.
seasonable at any time.
sufficient for about  lbs. of steak.
note.—this sauce will be found an excellent accompaniment to roast
goose, pork, mutton cutlets, and various other dishes.
. ingredients.— oz. of whole black pepper, / oz. of allspice, 
oz. of salt, / oz. grated horseradish, / oz. of pickled shalots, 
pint of mushroom ketchup or walnut pickle.
mode.—pound all the ingredients finely in a mortar, and put them into
the ketchup or walnut-liquor. let them stand for a fortnight, when
strain off the liquor and bottle for use. either pour a little of the
sauce over the steaks or mix it in the gravy.
seasonable.—this can be made at any time.
note.—in using a jar of pickled walnuts, there is frequently left a
large quantity of liquor; this should be converted into a sauce like the
above, and will be found a very useful relish.
 the growth of the pepper-plant.—our readers will see at nos.
  and , a description, with engravings, of the qualities of
 black and long pepper, and an account of where these spices are
 found. we will here say something of the manner of the growth of
 the pepper-plant. like the vine, it requires support, and it is
 usual to plant a thorny tree by its side, to which it may cling.
 in malabar, the chief pepper district of india, the jacca-tree
 (artocarpus integrifolia) is made thus to yield its
 assistance, the same soil being adapted to the growth of both
 plants. the stem of the pepper-plant entwines round its support
 to a considerable height; the flexile branches then droop
 downwards, bearing at their extremities, as well as at other
 parts, spikes of green flowers, which are followed by the
 pungent berries. these hang in large bunches, resembling in
 shape those of grapes; but the fruit grows distinct, each on a
 little stalk, like currants. each berry contains a single seed,
 of a globular form and brownish colour, but which changes to a
 nearly black when dried; and this is the pepper of commerce. the
 leaves are not unlike those of the ivy, but are larger and of
 rather lighter colour; they partake strongly of the peculiar
 smell and pungent taste of the berry.
. ingredients.— pint of white stock (no. ), thickening of flour
and butter, or white roux (no. ), a faggot of savoury herbs,
including parsley,  chopped mushrooms,  green onions.
mode.—put the stock into a stewpan with the herbs, onions, and
mushrooms, and let it simmer very gently for about / hour; stir in
sufficient thickening to make it of a proper consistency; let it boil
for a few minutes, then skim off all the fat, strain and serve. this
sauce, with the addition of a little cream, is now frequently called
velouté.
time.—/ hour. average cost, for this quantity, d.
note.—if poultry trimmings are at hand, the stock should be made of
these; and the above sauce should not be made too thick, as it does not
then admit of the fat being nicely removed.
sweet sauce, for venison.
. ingredients.—a small jar of red-currant jelly,  glass of port
wine.
mode.—put the above ingredients into a stewpan, set them over the
fire, and, when melted, pour in a tureen and serve. it should not be
allowed to boil.
time.— minutes to melt the jelly.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
. ingredients.— glass of port wine,  tablespoonful of leamington
sauce (no. ),  tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice,  slice of lemon-peel,  large shalot cut in slices, 
blade of mace, cayenne to taste.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a stewpan, set it over the fire,
and let it simmer for about  minutes; then strain and serve the sauce
in a tureen.
time.— minutes. average cost, for this quantity, d.
sausage-meat stuffing, for turkey.
. ingredients.— oz. of lean pork,  oz. of fat pork, both weighed
after being chopped (beef suet may be substituted for the latter),  oz.
of bread crumbs,  small tablespoonful of minced sage,  blade of
pounded mace, salt and pepper to taste,  egg.
mode.—chop the meat and fat very finely, mix with them the other
ingredients, taking care that the whole is thoroughly incorporated.
moisten with the egg, and the stuffing will be ready for use. equal
quantities of this stuffing and forcemeat, no. , will be found to
answer very well, as the herbs, lemon-peel, &c. in the latter, impart a
very delicious flavour to the sausage-meat. as preparations, however,
like stuffings and forcemeats, are matters to be decided by individual
tastes, they must be left, to a great extent, to the discrimination of
the cook, who should study her employer's taste in this, as in every
other respect.
average cost, d.
sufficient for a small turkey.
. ingredients.— lbs. of shin of beef,  calf's-foot,  lbs. of
knuckle of veal, poultry trimmings (if for game pies, any game
trimmings),  onions stuck with cloves,  carrots,  shalots, a bunch of
savoury herbs,  bay-leaves; when liked,  blades of mace and a little
spice;  slices of lean ham, rather more than  quarts of water.
mode.—cut up the meat and put it into a stewpan with all the
ingredients except the water; set it over a slow fire to draw down, and,
when the gravy ceases to flow from the meat, pour in the water. let it
boil up, then carefully take away all scum from the top. cover the
stewpan closely, and let the stock simmer very gently for  hours: if
rapidly boiled, the jelly will not be clear. when done, strain it
through a fine sieve or flannel bag; and when cold, the jelly should be
quite transparent. if this is not the case, clarify it with the whites
of eggs, as described in recipe no. .
time.— hours. average cost, for this quantity, s.
shrimp sauce, for various kinds of fish.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter (no. ), / pint of
picked shrimps, cayenne to taste.
mode.—make the melted butter very smoothly by recipe no. , shell
the shrimps (sufficient to make / pint when picked), and put them into
the butter; season with cayenne, and let the sauce just simmer, but do
not allow it to boil. when liked, a teaspoonful of anchovy sauce may be
added.
time.— minute to simmer. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.— handfuls of spinach.
mode.—pick and wash the spinach free from dirt, and pound the leaves
in a mortar to extract the juice; then press it through a hair sieve,
and put the juice into a small stewpan or jar. place this in a bain
marie, or saucepan of boiling water, and let it set. watch it closely,
as it should not boil; and, as soon as it is done, lay it in a sieve, so
that all the water may drain from it, and the green will then be ready
for colouring. if made according to this recipe, the spinach-green will
be found far superior to that boiled in the ordinary way.
hot spice, a delicious adjunct to chops, steaks, gravies, &c.
. ingredients.— drachms each of ginger, black pepper, and cinnamon,
 cloves, / oz. mace, / oz. of cayenne,  oz. grated nutmeg, -/
oz. white pepper.
mode.—pound the ingredients, and mix them thoroughly together, taking
care that everything is well blended. put the spice in a very dry glass
bottle for use. the quantity of cayenne may be increased, should the
above not be enough to suit the palate.
[illustration: cinnamon.]
 cinnamon.—the cinnamon-tree (laurus cinnamomum) is a valuable
 and beautiful species of the laurel family, and grows to the
 height of  or  feet. the trunk is short and straight, with
 wide-spreading branches, and it has a smooth ash-like bark. the
 leaves are upon short stalks, and are of an oval shape, and  to
  inches long. the flowers are in panicles, with six small
 petals, and the fruit is about the size of an olive, soft,
 insipid, and of a deep blue. this incloses a nut, the kernel of
 which germinates soon after it falls. the wood of the tree is
 white and not very solid, and its root is thick and branching,
 exuding a great quantity of camphor. the inner bark of the tree
 forms the cinnamon of commerce. ceylon was thought to be its
 native island; but it has been found in malabar, cochin-china,
 sumatra, and the eastern islands; also in the brazils, the
 mauritius, jamaica, and other tropical localities.
brown roux, a french thickening for gravies and sauces.
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  oz. of flour.
mode.—melt the butter in a stewpan over a slow fire, and dredge in,
very gradually, the flour; stir it till of a light-brown colour—to
obtain this do it very slowly, otherwise the flour will burn and impart
a bitter taste to the sauce it is mixed with. pour it in a jar, and keep
it for use: it will remain good some time.
time.—about / hour. average cost, d.
white roux, for thickening white sauces.
. allow the same proportions of butter and flour as in the preceding
recipe, and proceed in the same manner as for brown roux, but do not
keep it on the fire too long, and take care not to let it colour. this
is used for thickening white sauce. pour it into a jar to use when
wanted.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient,—a dessertspoonful will thicken a pint of gravy.
note.—besides the above, sauces may be thickened with potato flour,
ground rice, baked flour, arrowroot, &c.: the latter will be found far
preferable to the ordinary flour for white sauces. a slice of bread,
toasted and added to gravies, answers the two purposes of thickening and
colouring them.
. ingredients.—onions, vinegar; salt and cayenne to taste.
mode.—cut the onions in thin slices; put a layer of them in the
bottom of a jar; sprinkle with salt and cayenne; then add another layer
of onions, and season as before. proceeding in this manner till the jar
is full, pour in sufficient vinegar to cover the whole, and the pickle
will be fit for use in a month.
seasonable.—may be had in england from september to february.
store sauce, or cherokee.
. ingredients.—/ oz. of cayenne pepper,  cloves of garlic, 
tablespoonfuls of soy,  tablespoonful of walnut ketchup,  pint of
vinegar.
mode.—boil all the ingredients gently for about / hour; strain
the liquor, and bottle off for use.
time.—/ hour.
seasonable.—this sauce can be made at any time.
tomato sauce—hot, to serve with cutlets, roast meats, &c.
. ingredients.— tomatoes,  shalots,  clove,  blade of mace, salt
and cayenne to taste, / pint of gravy, no. , or stock no. .
mode.—cut the tomatoes in two, and squeeze the juice and seeds out;
put them in a stewpan with all the ingredients, and let them simmer
gently until the tomatoes are tender enough to pulp; rub the whole
through a sieve, boil it for a few minutes, and serve. the shalots and
spices may be omitted when their flavour is objected to.
time.— hour, or rather more, to simmer the tomatoes.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
in full season in september and october.
[illustration: the tomato.]
 tomato, or love-apple.—the plant which bears this fruit is a
 native of south america, and takes its name from a portuguese
 word. the tomato fruit is about the size of a small potato, and
 is chiefly used in soups, sauces, and gravies. it is sometimes
 served to table roasted or boiled, and when green, makes a good
 ketchup or pickle. in its unripe state, it is esteemed as
 excellent sauce for roast goose or pork, and when quite ripe, a
 good store sauce may be prepared from it.
tomato sauce for keeping (excellent).
. ingredients.—to every quart of tomato-pulp allow  pint of cayenne
vinegar (no. ), / oz. of shalots, / oz. of garlic, peeled and cut
in slices; salt to taste. to every six quarts of liquor,  pint of soy,
 pint of anchovy sauce.
mode.—gather the tomatoes quite ripe; bake them in a slow oven till
tender; rub them through a sieve, and to every quart of pulp add cayenne
vinegar, shalots, garlic, and salt, in the above proportion; boil the
whole together till the garlic and shalots are quite soft; then rub it
through a sieve, put it again into a saucepan, and, to every six quarts
of the liquor, add  pint of soy and the same quantity of anchovy sauce,
and boil altogether for about  minutes; bottle off for use, and
carefully seal or rosin the corks. this will keep good for  or  years,
but will be fit for use in a week. a useful and less expensive sauce may
be made by omitting the anchovy and soy.
time.—altogether  hour.
seasonable.—make this from the middle of september to the end of
october.
. ingredients.— dozen tomatoes,  teaspoonfuls of the best powdered
ginger,  dessertspoonful of salt,  head of garlic chopped fine, 
tablespoonfuls of vinegar,  dessertspoonful of chili vinegar (a small
quantity of cayenne may be substituted for this).
mode.—choose ripe tomatoes, put them into a stone jar, and stand them
in a cool oven until quite tender; when cold, take the skins and stalks
from them, mix the pulp with the liquor which is in the jar, but do not
strain it; add all the other ingredients, mix well together, and put it
into well-sealed bottles. stored away in a cool dry place, it will keep
good for years. it is ready for use as soon as made, but the flavour is
better after a week or two. should it not appear to keep, turn it out,
and boil it up with a little additional ginger and cayenne. for
immediate use, the skins should be put into a wide-mouthed bottle with a
little of the different ingredients, and they will be found very nice
for hashes or stews.
time.— or  hours in a cool oven.
seasonable from the middle of september to the end of october.
. ingredients.— dozen tomatoes; to every pound of tomato-pulp allow
 pint of chili vinegar,  oz. of garlic,  oz. of shalot,  oz. of
salt,  large green capsicum, / teaspoonful of cayenne,  pickled
gherkins,  pickled onions,  pint of common vinegar, and the juice of 
lemons.
mode.—choose the tomatoes when quite ripe and red; put them in a jar
with a cover to it, and bake them till tender. the better way is to put
them in the oven overnight, when it will not be too hot, and examine
them in the morning to see if they are tender. do not allow them to
remain in the oven long enough to break them; but they should be
sufficiently soft to skin nicely and rub through the sieve. measure the
pulp, and to each pound of pulp, add the above proportion of vinegar and
other ingredients, taking care to chop very fine the garlic, shalot,
capsicum, onion, and gherkins. boil the whole together till everything
is tender; then again rub it through a sieve, and add the lemon-juice.
now boil the whole again till it becomes as thick as cream, and keep
continually stirring; bottle it when quite cold, cork well, and seal the
corks. if the flavour of garlic and shalot is very much disliked,
diminish the quantities.
time.—bake the tomatoes in a cool oven all night.
seasonable from the middle of september to the end of october.
note.—a quantity of liquor will flow from the tomatoes, which must be
put through the sieve with the rest. keep it well stirred while on the
fire, and use a wooden spoon.
. ingredients.—to  quarts of vinegar allow  lb. of salt, / lb.
of ginger,  oz. of mace, / lb. of shalots,  tablespoonful of
cayenne,  oz. of mustard-seed, -/ oz. of turmeric.
mode.—boil all the ingredients together for about  minutes; when
cold, put them into a jar with whatever vegetables you choose, such as
radish-pods, french beans, cauliflowers, gherkins, &c. &c., as these
come into season; put them in fresh as you gather them, having
previously wiped them perfectly free from moisture and grit. this pickle
will be fit for use in about  or  months.
time.— minutes.
seasonable.—make the pickle in may or june, to be ready for the
various vegetables.
note.—as this pickle takes  or  months to make,—that is to say,
nearly that time will elapse before all the different vegetables are
added,—care must be taken to keep the jar which contains the pickle
well covered, either with a closely-fitting lid, or a piece of bladder
securely tied over, so as perfectly to exclude the air.
pickled walnuts (very good).
. ingredients.— walnuts, salt and water. to each quart of vinegar
allow  oz. of whole black pepper,  oz. of allspice,  oz. of bruised
ginger.
mode.—procure the walnuts while young; be careful they are not woody,
and prick them well with a fork; prepare a strong brine of salt and
water ( lbs. of salt to each gallon of water), into which put the
walnuts, letting them remain  days, and changing the brine every third
day; drain them off, put them on a dish, place it in the sun until they
become perfectly black, which will be in  or  days; have ready dry
jars, into which place the walnuts, and do not quite fill the jars. boil
sufficient vinegar to cover them, for  minutes, with spices in the
above proportion, and pour it hot over the walnuts, which must be quite
covered with the pickle; tie down with bladder, and keep in a dry place.
they will be fit for use in a month, and will keep good  or  years.
time.— minutes.
seasonable.—make this from the beginning to the middle of july,
before the walnuts harden.
note.—when liked, a few shalots may be added to the vinegar, and
boiled with it.
. ingredients.— walnuts,  handful of salt,  quart of vinegar,
/ oz. of mace, / oz. of nutmeg, / oz. of cloves, / oz. of
ginger, / oz. of whole black pepper, a small piece of horseradish, 
shalots, / lb. of anchovies,  pint of port wine.
mode.—procure the walnuts at the time you can run a pin through them,
slightly bruise, and put them into a jar with the salt and vinegar, let
them stand  days, stirring every day; then drain the liquor from them,
and boil it, with the above ingredients, for about / hour. it may be
strained or not, as preferred, and, if required, a little more vinegar
or wine can be added, according to taste. when bottled well, seal the
corks.
time.—/ hour.
seasonable.—make this from the beginning to the middle of july, when
walnuts are in perfection for pickling purposes.
. ingredients.—/ sieve of walnut-shells,  quarts of water, salt,
/ lb. of shalots,  oz. of cloves,  oz. of mace,  oz. of whole
pepper,  oz. of garlic.
mode.—put the walnut-shells into a pan, with the water, and a large
quantity of salt; let them stand for  days, then break the shells up
in the water, and let it drain through a sieve, putting a heavy weight
on the top to express the juice; place it on the fire, and remove all
scum that may arise. now boil the liquor with the shalots, cloves, mace,
pepper, and garlic, and let all simmer till the shalots sink; then put
the liquor into a pan, and, when cold, bottle, and cork closely. it
should stand  months before using: should it ferment during that time,
it must be again boiled and skimmed.
time.—about / hour.
seasonable in september, when the walnut-shells are obtainable.
[illustration: the walnut.]
 the walnut.—this nut is a native of persia, and was introduced
 into england from france. as a pickle, it is much used in the
 green state; and grated walnuts in spain are much employed, both
 in tarts and other dishes. on the continent it is occasionally
 employed as a substitute for olive oil in cooking; but it is
 apt, under such circumstances, to become rancid. the matter
 which remains after the oil is extracted is considered highly
 nutritious for poultry. it is called mare, and in switzerland
 is eaten under the name of pain amer by the poor. the oil is
 frequently manufactured into a kind of soap, and the leaves and
 green husks yield an extract, which, as a brown dye, is used to
 stain hair, wool, and wood.
white sauce (good).
. ingredients.—/ pint of white stock (no. ), / pint of cream,
 dessertspoonful of flour, salt to taste.
mode.—have ready a delicately-clean saucepan, into which put the
stock, which should be well flavoured with vegetables, and rather
savoury; mix the flour smoothly with the cream, add it to the stock,
season with a little salt, and boil all these ingredients very gently
for about  minutes, keeping them well stirred the whole time, as this
sauce is very liable to burn.
time.— minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for a pair of fowls.
seasonable at any time.
white sauce, made without meat.
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  small onions,  carrot, / a
small teacupful of flour,  pint of new milk, salt and cayenne to taste.
mode.—cut up the onions and carrot very small, and put them into a
stewpan with the butter; simmer them till the butter is nearly dried up;
then stir in the flour, and add the milk; boil the whole gently until it
thickens, strain it, season with salt and cayenne, and it will be ready
to serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for a pair of fowls.
seasonable at any time.
white sauce (a very simple and inexpensive method).
. ingredients.—-/ pint of milk, -/ oz. of rice,  strip of
lemon-peel,  small blade of pounded mace, salt and cayenne to taste.
mode.—boil the milk with the lemon-peel and rice until the latter is
perfectly tender, then take out the lemon-peel and pound the milk and
rice together; put it back into the stewpan to warm, add the mace and
seasoning, give it one boil, and serve. this sauce should be of the
consistency of thick cream.
time.—about -/ hour to boil the rice.
average cost, d.
sufficient for a pair of fowls.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: the leamington stove, or kitchener.]
. in our "introduction to cookery" (see no. ) we have described
the gradual progress of mankind in the art of cookery, the probability
being, that the human race, for a long period, lived wholly on fruits.
man's means of attacking animals, even if he had the desire of
slaughtering them, were very limited, until he acquired the use of arms.
he, however, made weapons for himself, and, impelled by a carnivorous
instinct, made prey of the animals that surrounded him. it is natural
that man should seek to feed on flesh; he has too small a stomach to be
supported alone by fruit, which has not sufficient nourishment to
renovate him. it is possible he might subsist on vegetables; but their
preparation needs the knowledge of art, only to be obtained after the
lapse of many centuries. man's first weapons were the branches of trees,
which were succeeded by bows and arrows, and it is worthy of remark,
that these latter weapons have been found with the natives of all
climates and latitudes. it is singular how this idea presented itself to
individuals so differently placed.
. brillat savarin says, that raw flesh has but one
inconvenience,—from its viscousness it attaches itself to the teeth. he
goes on to say, that it is not, however, disagreeable; but, when
seasoned with salt, that it is easily digested. he tells a story of a
croat captain, whom he invited to dinner in , during the occupation
of paris by the allied troops. this officer was amazed at his host's
preparations, and said, "when we are campaigning, and get hungry, we
knock over the first animal we find, cut off a steak, powder it with
salt, which we always have in the sabretasche, put it under the saddle,
gallop over it for half a mile, and then dine like princes." again, of
the huntsmen of dauphiny it is said, that when they are out shooting in
september, they take with them both pepper and salt. if they kill a very
fat bird, they pluck and season it, and, after carrying it some time in
their caps, eat it. this, they declare, is the best way of serving it
up.
. subsequently to the croat mode, which, doubtless, was in fashion in
the earlier ages of the world, fire was discovered. this was an
accident; for fire is not, although we are accustomed to call it so, an
element, or spontaneous. many savage nations have been found utterly
ignorant of it, and many races had no other way of dressing their food
than by exposing it to the rays of the sun.
. the inhabitants of the marian islands, which were discovered in
, had no idea of fire. never was astonishment greater than theirs
when they first saw it, on the descent of magellan, the navigator, on
one of their isles. at first they thought it a kind of animal, that
fixed itself to and fed upon wood. some of them, who approached too
near, being burnt, the rest were terrified, and durst only look upon it
at a distance. they were afraid, they said, of being bit, or lest that
dreadful animal should wound with his violent respiration and dreadful
breath; for these were the first notions they formed of the heat and
flame. such, too, probably, were the notions the greeks originally
formed of them.
. fire having been discovered, mankind endeavoured to make use of it
for drying, and afterwards for cooking their meat; but they were a
considerable time before they hit upon proper and commodious methods of
employing it in the preparation of their food.
. meat, then, placed on burning fuel was found better than when raw:
it had more firmness, was eaten with less difficulty, and the ozmazome
being condensed by the carbonization, gave it a pleasing perfume and
flavour. still, however, the meat cooked on the coal would become
somewhat befouled, certain portions of the fuel adhering to it. this
disadvantage was remedied by passing spits through it, and placing it at
a suitable height above the burning fuel. thus grilling was invented;
and it is well known that, simple as is this mode of cookery, yet all
meat cooked in this way is richly and pleasantly flavoured. in homer's
time, the, art of cookery had not advanced much beyond this; for we read
in the "iliad," how the great achilles and his friend patroclus regaled
the three grecian leaders on bread, wine, and broiled meat. it is
noticeable, too, that homer does not speak of boiled meat anywhere in
his poems. later, however, the jews, coming out of their captivity in
egypt, had made much greater progress. they undoubtedly possessed
kettles; and in one of these, esau's mess of pottage, for which he sold
his birthright, must have been prepared.
we will now proceed to describe the various methods of cooking meat, and
make a few observations on the chemical changes which occur in each of
the operations.
. in this country, plain boiling, roasting, and baking are the usual
methods of cooking animal food. to explain the philosophy of these
simple culinary operations, we must advert to the effects that are
produced by heat on the principal constituents of flesh. when
finely-chopped mutton or beef is steeped for some time in a small
quantity of clean water, and then subjected to slight pressure, the
juice of the meat is extracted, and there is left a white tasteless
residue, consisting chiefly of muscular fibres. when this residue is
heated to between ° and ° fahrenheit, the fibres shrink together,
and become hard and horny. the influence of an elevated temperature on
the soluble extract of flesh is not less remarkable. when the watery
infusion, which contains all the savoury constituents of the meat, is
gradually heated, it soon becomes turbid; and, when the temperature
reaches °, flakes of whitish matter separate. these flakes are
albumen, a substance precisely similar, in all its properties, to the
white of egg (see no. ). when the temperature of the watery extract
is raised to °, the colouring matter of the blood coagulates, and the
liquid, which was originally tinged red by this substance, is left
perfectly clear, and almost colourless. when evaporated, even at a
gentle heat, this residual liquid gradually becomes brown, and acquires
the flavour of roast meat.
. these interesting facts, discovered in the laboratory, throw a
flood of light upon the mysteries of the kitchen. the fibres of meat are
surrounded by a liquid which contains albumen in its soluble state, just
as it exists in the unboiled egg. during the operation of boiling or
roasting, this substance coagulates, and thereby prevents the
contraction and hardening of the fibres. the tenderness of well-cooked
meat is consequently proportioned to the amount of albumen deposited in
its substance. meat is underdone when it has been heated throughout only
to the temperature of coagulating albumen: it is thoroughly done when it
has been heated through its whole mass to the temperature at which the
colouring matter of the blood coagulates: it is overdone when the heat
has been continued long enough to harden the fibres.
. the juice of flesh is water, holding in solution many substances
besides albumen, which are of the highest possible value as articles of
food. in preparing meat for the table, great care should be taken to
prevent the escape of this precious juice, as the succulence and
sapidity of the meat depend on its retention. the meat to be cooked
should be exposed at first to a quick heat, which immediately coagulates
the albumen on and near the surface. a kind of shell is thus formed,
which effectually retains the whole of the juice within the meat.
. during the operations of boiling, boasting, and baking, fresh beef
and mutton, when moderately fat, lose, according to johnston, on an
average about—
 in boiling. in baking. in roasting.
  lbs. of beef lose  lb.  lb.  oz.  lb.  oz.
  lbs. of mutton lose  oz.  lb.  oz.  lb.  oz.
[illustration: baking dish.]
. the difference between roasting meat and baking it, may be
generally described as consisting in the fact, that, in baking it, the
fumes caused by the operation are not carried off in the same way as
occurs in roasting. much, however, of this disadvantage is obviated by
the improved construction of modern ovens, and of especially those in
connection with the leamington kitchener, of which we give an engraving
here, and a full description of which will be seen at paragraph no. ,
with the prices at which they can be purchased of messrs. r. and j.
slack, of the strand. with meat baked in the generality of ovens,
however, which do not possess ventilators on the principle of this
kitchener, there is undoubtedly a peculiar taste, which does not at all
equal the flavour developed by roasting meat. the chemistry of baking
may be said to be the same as that described in roasting.
. should the oven be very brisk, it will be found necessary to cover
the joint with a piece of white paper, to prevent the meat from being
scorched and blackened outside, before the heat can penetrate into the
inside. this paper should be removed half an hour before the time of
serving dinner, so that the joint may take a good colour.
. by means of a jar, many dishes, which will be enumerated under
their special heads, may be economically prepared in the oven. the
principal of these are soup, gravies, jugged hare, beef tea; and this
mode of cooking may be advantageously adopted with a ham, which has
previously been covered with a common crust of flour and water.
. all dishes prepared for baking should be more highly seasoned than
when intended to be roasted. there are some dishes which, it may be
said, are at least equally well cooked in the oven as by the roaster;
thus, a shoulder of mutton and baked potatoes, a fillet or breast of
veal, a sucking pig, a hare, well basted, will be received by
connoisseurs as well, when baked, as if they had been roasted. indeed,
the baker's oven, or the family oven, may often, as has been said, be
substituted for the cook and the spit with greater economy and
convenience.
. a baking-dish, of which we give an engraving, should not be less
than  or  inches deep; so that the meat, which of course cannot be
basted, can stew in its own juices. in the recipe for each dish, full
explanations concerning any special points in relation to it will be
given.
. boiling, or the preparation of meat by hot water, though one of the
easiest processes in cookery, requires skilful management. boiled meat
should be tender, savoury, and full of its own juice, or natural gravy;
but, through the carelessness and ignorance of cooks, it is too often
sent to table hard, tasteless, and innutritious. to insure a successful
result in boiling flesh, the heat of the fire must be judiciously
regulated, the proper quantity of water must be kept up in the pot, and
the scum which rises to the surface must be carefully removed.
. many writers on cookery assert that the meat to be boiled should be
put into cold water, and that the pot should be heated gradually; but
liebig, the highest authority on all matters connected with the
chemistry of food, has shown that meat so treated loses some of its most
nutritious constituents. "if the flesh," says the great chemist, "be
introduced into the boiler when the water is in a state of brisk
ebullition, and if the boiling be kept up for a few minutes, and the pot
then placed in a warm place, so that the temperature of the water is
kept at ° to °, we have the united conditions for giving to the
flesh the qualities which best fit it for being eaten." when a piece of
meat is plunged into boiling water, the albumen which is near the
surface immediately coagulates, forming an envelope, which prevents the
escape of the internal juice, and most effectually excludes the water,
which, by mixing with this juice, would render the meat insipid. meat
treated thus is juicy and well-flavoured, when cooked, as it retains
most of its savoury constituents. on the other hand, if the piece of
meat be set on the fire with cold water, and this slowly heated to
boiling, the flesh undergoes a loss of soluble and nutritious
substances, while, as a matter of course, the soup becomes richer in
these matters. the albumen is gradually dissolved from the surface to
the centre; the fibre loses, more or less, its quality of shortness or
tenderness, and becomes hard and tough: the thinner the piece of meat
is, the greater is its loss of savoury constituents. in order to obtain
well-flavoured and eatable meat, we must relinquish the idea of making
good soup from it, as that mode of boiling which yields the best soup
gives the driest, toughest, and most vapid meat. slow boiling whitens
the meat; and, we suspect, that it is on this account that it is in such
favour with the cooks. the wholesomeness of food is, however, a matter
of much greater moment than the appearance it presents on the table. it
should be borne in mind, that the whiteness of meat that has been boiled
slowly, is produced by the loss of some important alimentary properties.
. the objections we have raised to the practice of putting meat on
the fire in cold water, apply with equal force to the practice of
soaking meat before cooking it, which is so strongly recommended by some
cooks. fresh meat ought never to be soaked, as all its most nutritive
constituents are soluble in water. soaking, however, is an operation
that cannot be entirely dispensed with in the preparation of animal
food. salted and dried meats require to be soaked for some time in water
before they are cooked.
. for boiling meat, the softer the water is, the better. when spring
water is boiled, the chalk which gives to it the quality of hardness, is
precipitated. this chalk stains the meat, and communicates to it an
unpleasant earthy taste. when nothing but hard water can be procured, it
should be softened by boiling it for an hour or two before it is used
for culinary purposes.
. the fire must be watched with great attention during the operation
of boiling, so that its heat may be properly regulated. as a rule, the
pot should be kept in a simmering state; a result which cannot be
attained without vigilance.
. the temperature at which water boils, under usual circumstances, is
° fahr. water does not become hotter after it has begun to boil,
however long or with whatever violence the boiling is continued. this
fact is of great importance in cookery, and attention to it will save
much fuel. water made to boil in a gentle way by the application of a
moderate heat is just as hot as when it is made to boil on a strong fire
with the greatest possible violence. when once water has been brought to
the boiling point, the fire may be considerably reduced, as a very
gentle heat will suffice to keep the water at its highest temperature.
. the scum which rises to the surface of the pot during the operation
of boiling must be carefully removed, otherwise it will attach itself to
the meat, and thereby spoil its appearance. the cook must not neglect to
skim during the whole process, though by far the greater part of the
scum rises at first. the practice of wrapping meat in a cloth may be
dispensed with if the skimming be skillfully managed. if the scum be
removed as fast as it rises, the meat will be cooked clean and pure, and
come out of the vessel in which it was boiled, much more delicate and
firm than when cooked in a cloth.
. when taken from the pot, the meat must be wiped with a clean cloth,
or, what will be found more convenient, a sponge previously dipped in
water and wrung dry. the meat should not be allowed to stand a moment
longer than necessary, as boiled meat, as well as roasted, cannot be
eaten too hot.
. the time allowed for the operation of boiling must be regulated
according to the size and quality of the meat. as a general rule, twenty
minutes, reckoning from the moment when the boiling commences, may be
allowed for every pound of meat. all the best authorities, however,
agree in this, that the longer the boiling the more perfect the
operation.
. a few observations on the nutritive value of salted meat may be
properly introduced in this place. every housewife knows that dry salt
in contact with fresh meat gradually becomes fluid brine. the
application of salt causes the fibres of the meat to contract, and the
juice to flow out from its pores: as much as one-third of the juice of
the meat is often forced out in this manner. now, as this juice is pure
extract of meat, containing albumen, osmazome, and other valuable
principles, it follows that meat which has been preserved by the action
of salt can never have the nutritive properties of fresh meat.
. the vessels used for boiling should be made of cast-iron, well
tinned within, and provided with closely-fitting lids. they must be kept
scrupulously clean, otherwise they will render the meat cooked in them
unsightly and unwholesome. copper pans, if used at all, should be
reserved for operations that are performed with rapidity; as, by long
contact with copper, food may become dangerously contaminated. the
kettle in which a joint is dressed should be large enough to allow room
for a good supply of water; if the meat be cramped and be surrounded
with but little water, it will be stewed, not boiled.
. in stewing, it is not requisite to have so great a heat as in
boiling. a gentle simmering in a small quantity of water, so that the
meat is stewed almost in its own juices, is all that is necessary. it is
a method much used on the continent, and is wholesome and economical.
[illustration: boiling-pot.]
[illustration: stewpan.]
 two useful culinary vessels are represented above. one is a
 boiling-pot, in which large joints may be boiled; the other is a
 stewpan, with a closely-fitting lid, to which is attached a long
 handle; so that the cover can be removed without scalding the
 fingers.
[illustration: hot-plate.]
. the hot-plate is a modern improvement on the old kitchen ranges,
being used for boiling and stewing. it is a plate of cast iron, having a
closed fire burning beneath it, by which it is thoroughly well heated.
on this plate are set the various saucepans, stewpans, &c.; and, by this
convenient and economical method, a number of dishes may be prepared at
one time. the culinary processes of braising and stewing are, in this
manner, rendered more gradual, and consequently the substance acted on
becomes more tender, and the gravy is not so much reduced.
[illustration: revolving gridiron.]
. generally speaking, small dishes only are prepared by this mode of
cooking; amongst these, the beef-steak and mutton chop of the solitary
english diner may be mentioned as celebrated all the world over. our
beef-steak, indeed, has long crossed the channel; and, with a view of
pleasing the britons, there is in every carte at every french
restaurant, by the side of ŕ la marengo, and ŕ la mayonnaise,—bifteck
d'angleterre. in order to succeed in a broil, the cook must have a
bright, clear fire; so that the surface of the meat may be quickly heated.
the result of this is the same as that obtained in roasting; namely, that
a crust, so to speak, is formed outside, and thus the juices of the meat
are retained. the appetite of an invalid, so difficult to minister to, is
often pleased with a broiled dish, as the flavour and sapidity of the meat
are so well preserved.
. the utensils used for broiling need but little description. the
common gridiron, for which see engraving at no. , is the same as it
has been for ages past, although some little variety has been introduced
into its manufacture, by the addition of grooves to the bars, by means
of which the liquid fat is carried into a small trough. one point it is
well to bear in mind, viz., that the gridiron should be kept in a
direction slanting towards the cook, so that as little fat as possible
may fall into the fire. it has been observed, that broiling is the most
difficult manual office the general cook has to perform, and one that
requires the most unremitting attention; for she may turn her back upon
the stewpan or the spit, but the gridiron can never be left with
impunity. the revolving gridiron, shown in the engraving, possesses some
advantages of convenience, which will be at once apparent.
[illustration: sauté pan.]
. this very favourite mode of cooking may be accurately described as
boiling in fat or oil. substances dressed in this way are generally well
received, for they introduce an agreeable variety, possessing, as they
do, a peculiar flavour. by means of frying, cooks can soon satisfy many
requisitions made on them, it being a very expeditious mode of preparing
dishes for the table, and one which can be employed when the fire is not
sufficiently large for the purposes of roasting and boiling. the great
point to be borne in mind in frying, is that the liquid must be hot
enough to act instantaneously, as all the merit of this culinary
operation lies in the invasion of the boiling liquid, which carbonizes
or burns, at the very instant of the immersion of the body placed in it.
it may be ascertained if the fat is heated to the proper degree, by
cutting a piece of bread and dipping it in the frying-pan for five or
six seconds; and if it be firm and of a dark brown when taken out, put
in immediately what you wish to prepare; if it be not, let the fat be
heated until of the right temperature. this having been effected,
moderate the fire, so that the action may not be too hurried, and that
by a continuous heat the juices of the substance may be preserved, and
its flavour enhanced.
. the philosophy of frying consists in this, that liquids subjected
to the action of fire do not all receive the same quantity of heat.
being differently constituted in their nature, they possess different
"capacities for caloric." thus, you may, with impunity, dip your finger
in boiling spirits of wine; you would take it very quickly from boiling
brandy, yet more rapidly from water; whilst the effects of the most
rapid immersion in boiling oil need not be told. as a consequence of
this, heated fluids act differently on the sapid bodies presented to
them. those put in water, dissolve, and are reduced to a soft mass; the
result being bouillon, stock, &c. (see no. ). those substances,
on the contrary, treated with oil, harden, assume a more or less deep
colour, and are finally carbonized. the reason of these different
results is, that, in the first instance, water dissolves and extracts
the interior juices of the alimentary substances placed in it; whilst,
in the second, the juices are preserved; for they are insoluble in oil.
. it is to be especially remembered, in connection with frying, that
all dishes fried in fat should be placed before the fire on a piece of
blotting-paper, or sieve reversed, and there left for a few minutes, so
that any superfluous greasy moisture may be removed.
. the utensils used for the purposes of frying are confined to
frying-pans, although these are of various sizes; and, for small and
delicate dishes, such as collops, fritters, pancakes, &c., the sauté
pan, of which we give an engraving, is used.
[illustration: gas stove.]
. gas-cooking can scarcely now be considered a novelty,—many
establishments, both small and large, have been fitted with apparatus
for cooking by this mode, which undoubtedly exhibits some advantages.
thus the heat may be more regularly supplied to the substance cooking,
and the operation is essentially a clean one, because there can be no
cinders or other dirt to be provided for. some labour and attention
necessary, too, with a coal fire or close stove, may be saved; and,
besides this, it may, perhaps, be said that culinary operations are
reduced, by this means, to something like a certainty.
. there are, however, we think, many objections to this mode of
cooking, more especially when applied to small domestic establishments.
for instance, the ingenious machinery necessary for carrying it out,
requires cooks perfectly conversant with its use; and if the gas, when
the cooking operations are finished, be not turned off, there will be a
large increase in the cost of cooking, instead of the economy which it
has been supposed to bring. for large establishments, such as some of
the immense london warehouses, where a large number of young men have to
be catered for daily, it may be well adapted, as it is just possible
that a slight increase in the supply of gas necessary for a couple of
joints, may serve equally to cook a dozen dishes.
. of the various methods of preparing meat, roasting is that which
most effectually preserves its nutritive qualities. meat is roasted by
being exposed to the direct influence of the fire. this is done by
placing the meat before an open grate, and keeping it in motion to
prevent the scorching on any particular part. when meat is properly
roasted, the outer layer of its albumen is coagulated, and thus presents
a barrier to the exit of the juice. in roasting meat, the heat must be
strongest at first, and it should then be much reduced. to have a good
juicy roast, therefore, the fire must be red and vigorous at the very
commencement of the operation. in the most careful roasting, some of the
juice is squeezed out of the meat: this evaporates on the surface of the
meat, and gives it a dark brown colour, a rich lustre, and a strong
aromatic taste. besides these effects on the albumen and the expelled
juice, roasting converts the cellular tissue of the meat into gelatine,
and melts the fat out of the fat-cells.
. if a spit is used to support the meat before the fire, it should be
kept quite bright. sand and water ought to be used to scour it with, for
brickdust and oil may give a disagreeable taste to the meat. when well
scoured, it must be wiped quite dry with a clean cloth; and, in spitting
the meat, the prime parts should be left untouched, so as to avoid any
great escape of its juices.
. kitchens in large establishments are usually fitted with what are
termed "smoke-jacks." by means of these, several spits, if required, may
be turned at the same time. this not being, of course, necessary in
smaller establishments, a roasting apparatus, more economical in its
consumption of coal, is more frequently in use.
[illustration: bottle-jack, with wheel and hook.]
. the bottle-jack, of which we here give an illustration, with the
wheel and hook, and showing the precise manner of using it, is now
commonly used in many kitchens. this consists of a spring inclosed in a
brass cylinder, and requires winding up before it is used, and
sometimes, also, during the operation of roasting. the joint is fixed to
an iron hook, which is suspended by a chain connected with a wheel, and
which, in its turn, is connected with the bottle-jack. beneath it stands
the dripping-pan, which we have also engraved, together with the
basting-ladle, the use of which latter should not be spared; as there
can be no good roast without good basting. "spare the rod, and spoil the
child," might easily be paraphrased into "spare the basting, and spoil
the meat." if the joint is small and light, and so turns unsteadily,
this may be remedied by fixing to the wheel one of the kitchen weights.
sometimes this jack is fixed inside a screen; but there is this
objection to this apparatus,—that the meat cooked in it resembles the
flavour of baked meat. this is derived from its being so completely
surrounded with the tin, that no sufficient current of air gets to it.
it will be found preferable to make use of a common meat-screen, such as
is shown in the woodcut. this contains shelves for warming plates and
dishes; and with this, the reflection not being so powerful, and more
air being admitted to the joint, the roast may be very excellently
cooked.
[illustration: dripping-pan and basting-ladle.]
. in stirring the fire, or putting fresh coals on it, the
dripping-pan should always be drawn back, so that there may be no danger
of the coal, cinders, or ashes falling down into it.
. under each particular recipe there is stated the time required for
roasting each joint; but, as a general rule, it may be here given, that
for every pound of meat, in ordinary-sized joints, a quarter of an hour
may be allotted.
[illustration: heat-screen.]
. white meats, and the meat of young animals, require to be very well
roasted, both to be pleasant to the palate and easy of digestion. thus
veal, pork, and lamb, should be thoroughly done to the centre.
. mutton and beef, on the other hand, do not, generally speaking,
require to be so thoroughly done, and they should be dressed to the
point, that, in carving them, the gravy should just run, but not too
freely. of course in this, as in most other dishes, the tastes of
individuals vary; and there are many who cannot partake, with
satisfaction, of any joint unless it is what others would call
overdressed.
[illustration]
[illustration]
. by the general assent of mankind, the empire of nature has been
divided into three kingdoms; the first consisting of minerals, the
second of vegetables, and the third of animals. the mineral kingdom
comprises all substances which are without those organs necessary to
locomotion, and the due performance of the functions of life. they are
composed of the accidental aggregation of particles, which, under
certain circumstances, take a constant and regular figure, but which are
more frequently found without any definite conformation. they also
occupy the interior parts of the earth, as well as compose those huge
masses by which we see the land in some parts guarded against the
encroachments of the sea. the vegetable kingdom covers and beautifies
the earth with an endless variety of form and colour. it consists of
organized bodies, but destitute of the power of locomotion. they are
nourished by means of roots; they breathe by means of leaves; and
propagate by means of seed, dispersed within certain limits. the animal
kingdom consists of sentient beings, that enliven the external parts of
the earth. they possess the powers of voluntary motion, respire air, and
are forced into action by the cravings of hunger or the parching of
thirst, by the instincts of animal passion, or by pain. like the
vegetable kingdom, they are limited within the boundaries of certain
countries by the conditions of climate and soil; and some of the species
prey upon each other. linnaeus has divided them into six
classes;—mammalia, birds, fishes, amphibious animals, insects, and
worms. the three latter do not come within the limits of our domain; of
fishes we have already treated, of birds we shall treat, and of mammalia
we will now treat.
. this class of animals embraces all those that nourish their young
by means of lacteal glands, or teats, and are so constituted as to have
a warm or red blood. in it the whale is placed,—an order which, from
external habits, has usually been classed with the fishes; but, although
this animal exclusively inhabits the water, and is supplied with fins,
it nevertheless exhibits a striking alliance to quadrupeds. it has warm
blood, and produces its young alive; it nourishes them with milk, and,
for that purpose, is furnished with teats. it is also supplied with
lungs, and two auricles and two ventricles to the heart; all of which
bring it still closer into an alliance with the quadrupedal species of
the animal kingdom.
. the general characteristics of the mammalia have been frequently
noticed. the bodies of nearly the whole species are covered with hair, a
kind of clothing which is both soft and warm, little liable to injury,
and bestowed in proportion to the necessities of the animal and the
nature of the climate it inhabits. in all the higher orders of animals,
the head is the principal seat of the organs of sense. it is there that
the eyes, the ears, the nose, and the mouth are placed. through the last
they receive their nourishment. in it are the teeth, which, in most of
the mammalia, are used not only for the mastication of food, but as
weapons of offence. they are inserted into two movable bones called
jaws, and the front teeth are so placed that their sharp edges may
easily be brought in contact with their food, in order that its fibres
may readily be separated. next to these, on each side, are situated the
canine teeth, or tusks, which are longer than the other teeth, and,
being pointed, are used to tear the food. in the back jaws are placed
another form of teeth, called grinders. these are for masticating the
food; and in those animals that live on vegetables, they are flattened
at the top; but, in carnivora, their upper surfaces are furnished with
sharp-pointed protuberances. from the numbers, form, and disposition of
the teeth, the various genera of quadrupeds have been arranged. the
nose is a cartilaginous body, pierced with two holes, which are called
nostrils. through these the animal is affected by the sense of smell;
and in some it is prominent, whilst in others it is flat, compressed,
turned upwards, or bent downwards. in beasts of prey, it is frequently
longer than the lips; and in some other animals it is elongated into a
movable trunk or proboscis, whilst, in the rhinoceros tribe, it is armed
with a horn. the eyes of quadrupeds are generally defended by movable
lids, on the outer margins of which are fringes of hair, called
eyelashes. the opening of the pupil is in general circular; but to some
species, as in those of the cat and hare, it is contracted into a
perpendicular line, whilst in the horse, the ox, and a few others, it
forms a transverse bar. the ears are openings, generally accompanied
with a cartilage which defends and covers them, called the external
ears. in water-animals the latter are wanting; sound, in them, being
transmitted merely through orifices in the head, which have the name of
auditory-holes. the most defenceless animals are extremely delicate in
the sense of hearing, as are likewise most beasts of prey. most of the
mammiferous animals walk on four feet, which, at the extremities, are
usually divided into toes or fingers. in some, however, the feet end in
a single corneous substance called a hoof. the toes of a few end in
broad, flat nails, and of most others, in pointed claws. some, again,
have the toes connected by a membrane, which is adapted to those that
are destined to pass a considerable portion of their lives in water.
others, again, as in the bat, have the digitations of the anterior feet
greatly elongated, the intervening space being filled by a membrane,
which extends round the hinder legs and tail, and by means of which they
are enabled to rise into the air. in man, the hand alone comprises
fingers, separate, free, and flexible; but apes, and some other kinds of
animals, have fingers both to the hands and feet. these, therefore, are
the only animals that can hold movable objects in a single hand. others,
such as rats and squirrels, have the fingers sufficiently small and
flexible to enable them to pick up objects; but they are compelled to
hold them in both hands. others, again, have the toes shorter, and must
rest on the fore-feet, as is the case with dogs and cats when they wish
to hold a substance firmly on the ground with their paws. there are
still others that have their toes united and drawn under the skin, or
enveloped in corneous hoofs, and are thereby enabled to exercise no
prehensile power whatever.
. according to the design and end of nature, mammiferous animals are
calculated, when arrived at maturity, to subsist on various kinds of
food,—some to live wholly upon flesh, others upon grain, herbs, or
fruits; but in their infant state, milk is the appropriate food of the
whole. that this food may never fail them, it is universally ordained,
that the young should no sooner come into the world, than the milk
should flow in abundance into the members with which the mother is
supplied for the secretion of that nutritious fluid. by a wonderful
instinct of nature, too, the young animal, almost as soon as it has come
into life, searches for the teat, and knows perfectly, at the first,
how, by the process of suction, it will be able to extract the fluid
necessary to its existence.
. in the general economy of nature, this class of animals seems
destined to preserve a constant equilibrium in the number of animated
beings that hold their existence on the surface of the earth. to man
they are immediately useful in various ways. some of their bodies afford
him food, their skin shoes, and their fleece clothes. some of them unite
with him in participating the dangers of combat with an enemy, and
others assist him in the chase, in exterminating wilder sorts, or
banishing them from the haunts of civilization. many, indeed, are
injurious to him; but most of them, in some shape or other, he turns to
his service. of these there is none he has made more subservient to his
purposes than the common ox, of which there is scarcely a part that he
has not been able to convert into some useful purpose. of the horns he
makes drinking-vessels, knife-handles, combs, and boxes; and when they
are softened by means of boiling water, he fashions them into
transparent plates for lanterns. this invention is ascribed to king
alfred, who is said to have been the first to use them to preserve his
candle time-measures from the wind. glue is made of the cartilages,
gristles, and the finer pieces of the parings and cuttings of the hides.
their bone is a cheap substitute for ivory. the thinnest of the
calf-skins are manufactured into vellum. their blood is made the basis
of prussian blue, and saddlers use a fine sort of thread prepared from
their sinews. the hair is used in various valuable manufactures; the
suet, fat, and tallow, are moulded into candles; and the milk and cream
of the cow yield butter and cheese. thus is every part of this animal
valuable to man, who has spared no pains to bring it to the highest
state of perfection.
[illustration: short-horn cow.]
[illustration: short-horn bull.]
. among the various breeds of the ox, upon which man has bestowed his
highest powers of culture, there is now none takes a higher place than
that known by the name of short-horns. from the earliest ages, great
britain has been distinguished for the excellence of her native breeds
of cattle, and there are none in england that have obtained greater
celebrity than those which have this name, and which originated, about
seventy years ago, on the banks of the tees. thence they have spread
into the valleys of the tweed; thence to the lothians, in scotland; and
southward, into the fine pastures of england. they are now esteemed the
most profitable breed of cattle, as there is no animal which attains
sooner to maturity, and none that supplies meat of a superior quality.
the value of some of the improved breeds is something enormous. at the
sale of mr. charles colling, a breeder in yorkshire, in , his bull
"comet" sold for , guineas. at the sale of earl spencer's herd in
,  cows, heifers, and calves, with nineteen bulls, fetched
ł,. s.; being an average of ł. s. apiece. the value of such
animals is scarcely to be estimated by those who are unacquainted with
the care with which they are tended, and with the anxious attention
which is paid to the purity of their breed. a modern writer, well
acquainted with this subject, says, "there are now, at least, five
hundred herds, large and small, in this kingdom, and from six to seven
thousand head registered every alternate year in the herd-book." the
necessity for thus recording the breeds is greater than might, at first
sight, be imagined, as it tends directly to preserve the character of
the cattle, while it sometimes adds to the value and reputation of the
animal thus entered. besides, many of the americans, and large
purchasers for the foreign market, will not look at an animal without
the breeder has taken care to qualify him for such reference. of
short-horned stock, there is annually sold from ł, to ł, worth
by public auction, independent of the vast numbers disposed of by
private contract. the brood is highly prized in belgium, prussia,
france, italy, and russia; it is imported into most of the british
colonies, and is greatly esteemed both for its meat and its dairy
produce, wherever it is known. the quickness with which it takes on
flesh, and the weight which it frequently makes, are well known; but we
may mention that it is not uncommon to tee steers of from four to five
years old realize a weight of from  to , lbs. such animals
command from the butcher from ł to ł per head, according to the
quality; whilst others, of two or three years old, and, of course, of
less weight, bring as much as ł apiece.
[illustration: long-horn bull.]
[illustration: long-horn cow.]
. long-horns.—this is the prevailing breed in our midland counties
and in ireland; but they are greatly inferior to the short-horns, and
are fast being supplanted by them. even where they have been cultivated
with the nicest care and brought to the greatest perfection, they are
inferior to the others, and must ultimately be driven from the farm.
[illustration: alderney cow.]
[illustration: alderney bull.]
. the alderney.—among the dairy breeds of england, the alderney
takes a prominent place, not on account of the quantity of milk which it
yields, but on account of the excellent quality of the cream and butter
which are produced from it. its docility is marvellous, and in
appearance it greatly resembles the ayrshire breed of scotland, the
excellence of which is supposed to be, in some degree, derived from a
mixture of the alderney blood with that breed. the distinction between
them, however, lies both in the quantity and quality of the milk which
they severally produce; that of the alderney being rich in quality, and
that of the ayrshire abundant in quantity. the merit of the former,
however, ends with its milk, for as a grazer it is worthless.
[illustration: galloway bull.]
[illustration: galloway cow.]
. scottish breeds.—of these the kyloe, which belongs to the
highlands of scotland; the galloway, which has been called the kyloe
without horns; and the ayrshire, are the breeds most celebrated. the
first has kept his place, and on account of the compactness of his form,
and the excellent quality of his flesh, he is a great favourite with
butchers who have a select family trade. it is alike unsuitable for the
dairy and the arable farm; but in its native highlands it attains to
great perfection, thriving upon the scanty and coarse herbage which it
gathers on the sides of the mountains. the galloway has a larger frame,
and when fattened makes excellent beef. but it has given place to the
short-horns in its native district, where turnip-husbandry is pursued
with advantage. the ayrshire is peculiarly adapted for the dairy, and
for the abundance of its milk cannot be surpassed in its native
district. in this it stands unrivalled, and there is no other breed
capable of converting the produce of a poor soil into such fine butter
and cheese. it is difficult to fatten, however, and its beef is of a
coarse quality. we have chosen these as among the principal
representative breeds of the ox species; but there are other breeds
which, at all events, have a local if not a general celebrity.
[illustration: side of beef, showing the several joints.]
. the general mode of slaughtering oxen in this country is by
striking them a smart blow with a hammer or poleaxe on the head, a
little above the eyes. by this means, when the blow is skilfully given,
the beast is brought down at one blow, and, to prevent recovery, a cane
is generally inserted, by which the spinal cord is perforated, which
instantly deprives the ox of all sensation of pain. in spain, and some
other countries on the continent, it is also usual to deprive oxen of
life by the operation of pithing or dividing the spinal cord in the
neck, close to the back part of the head. this is, in effect, the same
mode as is practised in the celebrated spanish bull-fights by the
matador, and it is instantaneous in depriving the animal of sensation,
if the operator be skilful. we hope and believe that those men whose
disagreeable duty it is to slaughter the "beasts of the field" to
provide meat for mankind, inflict as little punishment and cause as
little suffering as possible.
. the manner in which a side of beef is cut up in london, is shown in
the engraving on this page. in the metropolis, on account of the large
number of its population possessing the means to indulge in the "best of
everything," the demand for the most delicate joints of meat is great,
the price, at the same time, being much higher for these than for the
other parts. the consequence is, that in london the carcass is there
divided so as to obtain the greatest quantity of meat on the most
esteemed joints. in many places, however, where, from a greater equality
in the social condition and habits of the inhabitants, the demand and
prices for the different parts of the carcasses are more equalized,
there is not the same reason for the butcher to cut the best joints so
large.
. the meat on those parts of the animal in which the muscles are
least called into action, is most tender and succulent; as, for
instance, along the back, from the rump to the hinder part of the
shoulder; whilst the limbs, shoulder, and neck, are the toughest,
driest, and least-esteemed.
. the names of the several joints in the hind and fore quarters of a
side of beef, and the purposes for which they are used, are as
follows:—
. sirloin.—the two sirloins, cut together in one joint, form a baron;
this, when roasted, is the famous national dish of englishmen, at
entertainments, on occasion of rejoicing.
. rump,—the finest part for steaks.
. aitch-bone,—boiling piece.
. buttock,—prime boiling piece.
. mouse-round,—boiling or stewing.
. hock,—stewing.
. thick flank, cut with the udder-fat,—primest boiling piece.
. thin flank,—boiling.
. five ribs, called the fore-rib.—this is considered the primest
roasting piece.
. four ribs, called the middle-rib,—greatly esteemed by housekeepers
as the most economical joint for roasting.
. two ribs, called the chuck-rib,—used for second quality of steaks.
. leg-of-mutton piece,—the muscles of the shoulder dissected from the
breast.
. brisket, or breast,—used for boiling, after being salted.
. neck, clod, and sticking-piece,—used for soups, gravies, stocks,
pies, and mincing for sausages.
. shin,—stewing.
the following is a classification of the qualities of meat, according to
the several joints of beef, when cut up in the london manner.
first class.—includes the sirloin, with the kidney suet (), the
rump-steak piece (), the fore-rib ().
second class.—the buttock (), the thick flank (), the middle-rib
third class.—the aitch-bone (), the mouse-round (), the thin flank
(), the chuck (), the leg-of-mutton piece (), the brisket ().
fourth class.—the neck, clod, and sticking-piece ().
fifth class.—the hock (), the shin ().
baked beef (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of cold roast beef,  small onions, 
large carrot or two small ones,  turnip, a small bunch of savoury
herbs, salt and pepper to taste,  tablespoonfuls of gravy, 
tablespoonfuls of ale, crust or mashed potatoes.
mode.—cut the beef in slices, allowing a small amount of fat to each
slice; place a layer of this in the bottom of a pie-dish, with a portion
of the onions, carrots, and turnips, which must be sliced; mince the
herbs, strew them over the meat, and season with pepper and salt. then
put another layer of meat, vegetables, and seasoning; and proceed in
this manner until all the ingredients are used. pour in the gravy and
ale (water may be substituted for the former, but it is not so nice),
cover with a crust or mashed potatoes, and bake for / hour, or rather
longer.
time.—rather more than / hour.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—it is as well to parboil the carrots and turnips before adding
them to the meat, and to use some of the liquor in which they were
boiled as a substitute for gravy; that is to say, when there is no gravy
at hand. be particular to cut the onions in very thin slices.
. ingredients.—slices of cold roast beef, salt and pepper to taste,
 sliced onion,  teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs,  or 
tablespoonfuls of gravy or sauce of any kind, mashed potatoes.
mode.—butter the sides of a deep dish, and spread mashed potatoes
over the bottom of it; on this place layers of beef in thin slices (this
may be minced if there is not sufficient beef to cut into slices), well
seasoned with pepper and salt, and a very little onion end herbs, which
should be previously fried of a nice brown; then put another layer of
mashed potatoes, and beef, and other ingredients, as before; pour in the
gravy or sauce, cover the whole with another layer of potatoes, and bake
for / hour. this may be served in the dish, or turned out.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the cold beef, d.
sufficient.—a large pie-dish full for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 beef.—the quality of beef depends on various circumstances;
 such as the age, the sex, the breed of the animal, and also on
 the food upon which it has been raised. bull beef is, in
 general, dry and tough, and by no means possessed of an
 agreeable flavour; whilst the flesh of the ox is not only highly
 nourishing and digestible, but, if not too old, extremely
 agreeable. the flesh of the cow is, also, nourishing, but it is
 not so agreeable as that of the ox, although that of a heifer is
 held in high estimation. the flesh of the smaller breeds is much
 sweeter than that of the larger, which is best when the animal
 is about seven years old. that of the smaller breeds is best at
 about five years, and that of the cow can hardly be eaten too
 young.
. ingredients.— oz. of flour,  eggs, not quite  pint of milk,
salt to taste, -/ lb. of rump-steaks,  kidney, pepper and salt.
mode.—cut the steaks into nice square pieces, with a small quantity
of fat, and the kidney divide into small pieces. make a batter of flour,
eggs, and milk in the above proportion; lay a little of it at the bottom
of a pie-dish; then put in the steaks and kidney, which should be well
seasoned with pepper and salt, and pour over the remainder of the
batter, and bake for -/ hour in a brisk but not fierce oven.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
(economical.)
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of clod or sticking of beef,  oz. of
clarified dripping,  large onion, flour,  quarts of water,  berries
of allspice,  bay-leaves, / teaspoonful of whole black pepper, salt
to taste.
mode.—cut the beef into small pieces, and roll them in flour; put the
dripping into a stewpan with the onion, which should be sliced thin. let
it get quite hot; lay in the pieces of beef, and stir them well about.
when nicely browned all over, add by degrees boiling water in the
above proportion, and, as the water is added, keep the whole well
stirred. put in the spice, bay-leaves, and seasoning, cover the stewpan
closely, and set it by the side of the fire to stew very gently, till
the meat becomes quite tender, which will be in about  hours, when it
will be ready to serve. remove the bay-leaves before it is sent to
table.
time.— hours.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— or  lbs. of the thick flank of beef, a few slices
of fat bacon,  teacupful of vinegar, black pepper, allspice,  cloves
well mixed and finely pounded, making altogether  heaped teaspoonful;
salt to taste,  bunch of savoury herbs, including parsley, all finely
minced and well mixed;  onions,  large carrots,  turnip,  head of
celery, -/ pint of water,  glass of port wine.
mode.—slice and fry the onions of a pale brown, and cut up the other
vegetables in small pieces, and prepare the beef for stewing in the
following manner:—choose a fine piece of beef, cut the bacon into long
slices, about an inch in thickness, dip them into vinegar, and then into
a little of the above seasoning of spice, &c., mixed with the same
quantity of minced herbs. with a sharp knife make holes deep enough to
let in the bacon; then rub the beef over with the remainder of the
seasoning and herbs, and bind it up in a nice shape with tape. have
ready a well-tinned stewpan (it should not be much larger than the piece
of meat you are cooking), into which put the beef, with the vegetables,
vinegar, and water. let it simmer very gently for  hours, or rather
longer, should the meat not be extremely tender, and turn it once or
twice. when ready to serve, take out the beef, remove the tape, and put
it on a hot dish. skim off every particle of fat from the gravy, add the
port wine, just let it boil, pour it over the beef, and it is ready to
serve. great care must be taken that this does not boil fast, or the
meat will be tough and tasteless; it should only just bubble. when
convenient, all kinds of stews, &c., should be cooked on a hot-plate, as
the process is so much more gradual than on an open fire.
time.— hours, or rather more.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year, but more suitable for a winter dish.
 good meat.—the lyer of meat when freshly killed, and the
 animal, when slaughtered, being in a state of perfect health,
 adheres firmly to the bones. beef of the best quality is of a
 deep-red colour; and when the animal has approached maturity,
 and been well fed, the lean is intermixed with fat, giving it
 the mottled appearance which is so much esteemed. it is also
 full of juice, which resembles in colour claret wine. the fat of
 the best beef is of a firm and waxy consistency, of a colour
 resembling that of the finest grass butter; bright in
 appearance, neither greasy nor friable to the touch, but
 moderately unctuous, in a medium degree between the
 last-mentioned properties.
. ingredients.— dozen oysters, ingredients for oyster sauce (see
no. ),  lbs. of rump-steak, seasoning to taste of pepper and salt.
mode.—make the oyster sauce by recipe no. , and when that is
ready, put it by the side of the fire, but do not let it keep boiling.
have the steaks cut of an equal thickness, broil them over a very clear
fire, turning them often, that the gravy may not escape. in about 
minutes they will be done, then put them on a very hot dish; smother
with the oyster sauce, and the remainder send to table in a tureen.
serve quickly.
time.—about  to  minutes, according to the thickness of the steak.
average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from september to april.
. ingredients.— lbs. of rump-steak, seasoning to taste of salt,
cayenne, and black pepper, crust, water, the yolk of an egg.
mode.—have the steaks cut from a rump that has hung a few days, that
they may be tender, and be particular that every portion is perfectly
sweet. cut the steaks into pieces about  inches long and  wide,
allowing a small piece of fat to each piece of lean, and arrange the
meat in layers in a pie-dish. between each layer sprinkle a seasoning of
salt, pepper, and, when liked, a few grains of cayenne. fill the dish
sufficiently with meat to support the crust, and to give it a nice
raised appearance when baked, and not to look flat and hollow. pour in
sufficient water to half fill the dish, and border it with paste (see
pastry); brush it over with a little water, and put on the cover;
slightly press down the edges with the thumb, and trim off close to the
dish. ornament the pie with leaves, or pieces of paste cut in any shape
that fancy may direct, brush it over with the beaten yolk of an egg;
make a hole in the top of the crust, and bake in a hot oven for about
-/ hour.
time.—in a hot oven, -/ hour.
average cost, for this size, s d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—beef-steak pies may be flavoured in various ways, with oysters
and their liquor, mushrooms, minced onions, &c. for family pies, suet
may be used instead of butter or lard for the crust, and clarified
beef-dripping answers very well where economy is an object. pieces of
underdone roast or boiled meat may in pies be used very advantageously;
but always remove the bone from pie-meat, unless it be chicken or game.
we have directed that the meat shall be cut smaller than is usually the
case; for on trial we have found it much more tender, more easily
helped, and with more gravy, than when put into the dish in one or two
large steaks.
[illustration: sherry pudding dish.]
. ingredients.— lbs. of rump-steak,  kidneys, seasoning to taste
of salt and black pepper, suet crust made with milk (see pastry), in the
proportion of  oz. of suet to each  lb. of flour.
mode.—procure some tender rump steak (that which has been hung a
little time), and divide it into pieces about an inch square, and cut
each kidney into  pieces. line the dish (of which we have given an
engraving) with crust made with suet and flour in the above proportion,
leaving a small piece of crust to overlap the edge. then cover the
bottom with a portion of the steak and a few pieces of kidney; season
with salt and pepper (some add a little flour to thicken the gravy, but
it is not necessary), and then add another layer of steak, kidney, and
seasoning. proceed in this manner till the dish is full, when pour in
sufficient water to come within  inches of the top of the basin.
moisten the edges of the crust, cover the pudding over, press the two
crusts together, that the gravy may not escape, and turn up the
overhanging paste. wring out a cloth in hot water, flour it, and tie up
the pudding; put it into boiling water, and let it boil for at least 
hours. if the water diminishes, always replenish with some, hot in a
jug, as the pudding should be kept covered all the time, and not allowed
to stop boiling. when the cloth is removed, cut out a round piece in the
top of the crust, to prevent the pudding bursting, and send it to table
in the basin, either in an ornamental dish, or with a napkin pinned
round it. serve quickly.
time.—for a pudding with  lbs. of steak and  kidneys allow  hours.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year, but more suitable in winter.
note.—beef-steak pudding may be very much enriched by adding a few
oysters or mushrooms. the above recipe was contributed to this work by a
sussex lady, in which county the inhabitants are noted for their savoury
puddings. it differs from the general way of making them, as the meat is
cut up into very small pieces and the basin is differently shaped: on
trial, this pudding will be found far nicer, and more full of gravy,
than when laid in large pieces in the dish.
 bad meat. in the flesh of animals slaughtered whilst suffering
 acute inflammation or fever, the hollow fibres, or capillaries,
 as they are called, which form the substance of the lyer, are
 filled with congested and unassimilated animal fluid, which,
 from its impurity, gives the lyer a dark colour, and produces a
 tendency to rapid putrefaction. in a more advanced stage of such
 disease, serous, and sometimes purulent matter, is formed in the
 cellular tissues between the muscles of the flesh; and when such
 is the case, nothing can be more poisonous than such abominable
 carrion. in the flesh of animals killed whilst under the
 influence of any disease of an emaciating effect, the lyer
 adheres but slightly to the bones, with its fibres contracted
 and dry; and the little fat that there may be is friable, and
 shrunk within its integuments. the flesh of animals slaughtered
 whilst under considerable depression of vital energy (as from
 previous bleeding) has a diminished tendency to stiffen after
 death, the feebleness of this tendency being in proportion to
 the degree of depression. it presents, also, an unnatural blue
 or pallid appearance, has a faint and slightly sour smell, and
 soon becomes putrid. when an animal has died otherwise than by
 slaughtering, its flesh is flaccid and clammy, emits a peculiar
 faint and disagreeable smell, and, it need scarcely be added,
 spontaneous decomposition proceeds very rapidly.
beef-steaks with fried potatoes, or biftek aux pommes-de-terre (a la
mode francaise).
. ingredients.— lbs. of steak,  potatoes, / lb. of butter, salt
and pepper to taste,  teaspoonful of minced herbs.
mode.—put the butter into a frying or sauté pan, set it over the
fire, and let it get very hot; peel, and cut the potatoes into long thin
slices; put them into the hot butter, and fry them till of a nice brown
colour. now broil the steaks over a bright clear fire, turning them
frequently, that every part may be equally done: as they should not be
thick,  minutes will broil them. put the herbs and seasoning in the
butter the potatoes were fried in, pour it under the steak, and place
the fried potatoes round, as a garnish. to have this dish in perfection,
a portion of the fillet of the sirloin should be used, as the meat is
generally so much more tender than that of the rump, and the steaks
should be cut about / of an inch in thickness.
time.— minutes to broil the steaks, and about the same time to fry
the potatoes. average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year; but not so good in warm weather, as the meat
cannot hang to get tender.
[illustration: aitch-bone of beef.]
. ingredients.—beef, water.
mode.—after this joint has been in salt  or  days, it will be ready
for use, and will not take so long boiling: as a round, for it is not so
solid. wash the meat, and, if too salt, soak it for a few hours,
changing the water once or twice, till the required freshness is
obtained. put into a saucepan, or boiling-pot, sufficient water to cover
the meat; set it over the fire, and when it boils, plunge in the joint
(see no. ), and let it boil up quickly. now draw the pot to the side
of the fire, and let the process be very gradual, as the water must only
simmer, or the meat will be hard and tough. carefully remove the scum
from the surface of the water, and continue doing this for a few minutes
after it first boils. carrots and turnips are served with this dish, and
sometimes suet dumplings, which may be boiled with the beef. garnish
with a few of the carrots and turnips, and serve the remainder in a
vegetable-dish.
time.—an aitch-bone of  lbs., -/ hours after the water boils;
one of  lbs.,  hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient.— lbs. for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year, but best from september to march.
note.—the liquor in which the meat has been boiled may be easily
converted into a very excellent pea-soup. it will require very few
vegetables, as it will be impregnated with the flavour of those boiled
with the meat.
 the action of salt on meat.—the manner in which salt acts in
 preserving meat is not difficult to understand. by its strong
 affinity, it, in the first place, extracts the juices from the
 substance of meat in sufficient quantity to form a saturated
 solution with the water contained in the juice, and the meat
 then absorbs the saturated brine in place of the juice extracted
 by the salt. in this way, matter incapable of putrefaction takes
 the places of that portion in the meat which is most perishable.
 such, however, is not the only office of salt as a means of
 preserving meat; it acts also by its astringency in contracting
 the fibres of the muscles, and so excludes the action of air on
 the interior of the substance of the meat. the last-mentioned
 operation of salt as an antiseptic is evinced by the diminution
 of the volume of meat to which it is applied. the astringent
 action of saltpetre on meat is much greater than that of salt,
 and thereby renders meat to which it is applied very hard; but,
 in small quantities, it considerably assists the antiseptic
 action of salt, and also prevents the destruction of the florid
 colour of meat, which is caused by the application of salt.
 thus, it will be perceived, from the foregoing statement, that
 the application of salt and saltpetre diminishes, in a
 considerable degree, the nutritive, and, to some extent, the
 wholesome qualities of meat; and, therefore, in their use, the
 quantity applied should be as small as possible, consistent with
 the perfect preservation of the meat.
. ingredients.—beef, water.
mode.—as a whole round of beef, generally speaking, is too large for
small families, and very seldom required, we here give the recipe for
dressing a portion of the silver side of the round. take from  to 
lbs., after it has been in salt about  days; just wash off the salt,
skewer it up in a nice round-looking form, and bind it with tape to keep
the skewers in their places. put it in a saucepan of boiling water, as
in the preceding recipe, set it upon a good fire, and when it begins to
boil, carefully remove all scum from the surface, as, if this is not
attended to, it sinks on to the meat, and when brought to table,
presents a very unsightly appearance. when it is well skimmed, draw the
pot to the corner of the fire, and let it simmer very gently until done.
remove the tape and skewers, which should be replaced by a silver one;
pour over a little of the pot-liquor, and garnish with carrots. (see
coloured plate .) carrots, turnips, parsnips, and sometimes suet
dumplings, accompany this dish; and these may all be boiled with the
beef. the pot-liquor should be saved, and converted into pea-soup; and
the outside slices, which are generally hard, and of an uninviting
appearance, may be out off before being sent to table, and potted. these
make an excellent relish for the breakfast or luncheon table.
time.—part of a round of beef weighing  lbs., about  hours after
the water boils. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year, but more suitable for winter.
be served cold.—fill two tubs with cold water, into which throw a few
pounds of rough ice; and when the meat is done, put it into one of the
tubs of ice-water; let it remain  minute, when take out, and put it
into the other tub. fill the first tub again with water, and continue
this process for about  minutes; then set it upon a dish, and let it
remain until quite cold. when cut, the fat will be as white as possible,
besides having saved the whole, of the gravy. if there is no ice, spring
water will answer the same purpose, but will require to be more
frequently changed.
note.—the brisket and rump may be boiled by the above recipe; of
course allowing more or less time, according to the size of the joint.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast beef; to each pound of cold
meat allow / lb. of bacon or ham; seasoning to taste of pepper and
salt,  small bunch of minced savoury herbs,  or  eggs.
mode.—mince the beef very finely (if underdone it will be better),
add to it the bacon, which must also be chopped very small, and mix well
together. season, stir in the herbs, and bind with an egg, or  should 
not be sufficient. make it into small square cakes, about / inch
thick, fry them in hot dripping, and serve in a dish with good gravy
poured round them.
time.— minutes.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
broiled beef-steaks or rump-steaks.
. ingredients.—steaks, a piece of butter the size of a walnut, salt
to taste,  tablespoonful of good mushroom ketchup or harvey's sauce.
mode.—as the success of a good broil so much depends on the state of
the fire, see that it is bright and clear, and perfectly free from
smoke, and do not add any fresh fuel just before you require to use the
gridiron. sprinkle a little salt over the fire, put on the gridiron for
a few minutes, to get thoroughly hot through; rub it with a piece of
fresh, suet, to prevent the meat from sticking, and lay on the steaks,
which should be cut of an equal thickness, about / of an inch, or
rather thinner, and level them by beating them as little as possible
with a rolling-pin. turn them frequently with steak-tongs (if these are
not at hand, stick a fork in the edge of the fat, that no gravy
escapes), and in from  to  minutes they will be done. have ready a
very hot dish, into which put the ketchup, and, when liked, a little
minced shalot; dish up the steaks, rub them over with butter, and season
with pepper and salt. the exact time for broiling steaks must be
determined by taste, whether they are liked underdone or well done; more
than from  to  minutes for a steak / inch in thickness, we think,
would spoil and dry up the juices of the meat. great expedition is
necessary in sending broiled steaks to table; and, to have them in
perfection, they should not be cooked till everything else prepared for
dinner has been dished up, as their excellence entirely depends on their
being served very hot. garnish with scraped horseradish, or slices of
cucumber. oyster, tomato, onion, and many other sauces, are frequent
accompaniments to rump-steak, but true lovers of this english dish
generally reject all additions but pepper and salt.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient.—allow / lb. to each person; if the party consist
entirely of gentlemen, / lb. will not be too much.
seasonable all the year, but not good in the height of summer, as the
meat cannot hang long enough to be tender.
 different seasons for beef.—we have already stated (see no.
 ) that the scots breed of oxen, like the south-down in
 mutton, stands first in excellence. it should be borne in mind,
 however, that each county has its particular season, and that
 the london and other large markets are always supplied by those
 counties whose meat, from local circumstances, is in the best
 condition at the time. thus, the season in norfolk, from which
 the scots come (these being the principal oxen bred by the
 norfolk and suffolk graziers), commences about christmas and
 terminates about june, when this breed begins to fall off, their
 place being taken by grass-fed oxen. a large quantity of most
 excellent meat is sent to the "dead markets" from scotland, and
 some of the best london butchers are supplied from this source.
(cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.— or  dozen small button mushrooms,  oz. of butter,
salt and cayenne to taste,  tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup, mashed
potatoes, slices of cold roast beef.
mode.—wipe the mushrooms free from grit with a piece of flannel, and
salt; put them in a stewpan with the butter, seasoning, and ketchup;
stir over the fire until the mushrooms are quite done, when pour it in
the middle of mashed potatoes, browned. then place round the potatoes
slices of cold roast beef, nicely broiled, over a clear fire. in making
the mushroom sauce, the ketchup may be dispensed with, if there is
sufficient gravy.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable from august to october.
broiled beef and oyster sauce (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.— dozen oysters,  cloves,  blade of mace,  oz. of
butter, / teaspoonful of flour, cayenne and salt to taste, mashed
potatoes, a few slices of cold roast beef.
mode.—put the oysters in a stewpan, with their liquor strained; add
the cloves, mace, butter, flour, and seasoning, and let them simmer
gently for  minutes. have ready in the centre of a dish round walls of
mashed potatoes, browned; into the middle pour the oyster sauce, quite
hot, and round the potatoes place, in layers, slices of the beef, which
should be previously broiled over a nice clear fire.
time.— minutes. average cost, s, d., exclusive of the cold meat.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to april.
. ingredients.—the bones of ribs or sirloin; salt, pepper, and
cayenne.
mode.—separate the bones, taking care that the meat on them is not
too thick in any part; sprinkle them well with the above seasoning, and
broil over a very clear fire. when nicely browned they are done; but do
not allow them to blacken.
. ingredients.— heart, stuffing of veal forcemeat, no. .
mode.—put the heart into warm water to soak for  hours; then wipe it
well with a cloth, and, after cutting off the lobes, stuff the inside
with a highly-seasoned forcemeat (no. ). fasten it in, by means of a
needle and coarse thread; tie the heart up in paper, and set it before a
good fire, being very particular to keep it well basted, or it will eat
dry, there being very little of its own fat. two or three minutes before
serving, remove the paper, baste well, and serve with good gravy and
red-currant jelly or melted butter. if the heart is very large, it will
require  hours, and, covered with a caul, may be baked as well as
roasted.
time.—large heart,  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year.
note.—this is an excellent family dish, is very savoury, and, though
not seen at many good tables, may be recommended for its cheapness and
economy.
bubble-and-squeak (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few thin slices of cold boiled beef; butter,
cabbage,  sliced onion, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—fry the slices of beef gently in a little butter, taking care
not to dry them up. lay them on a flat dish, and cover with fried
greens. the greens may be prepared from cabbage sprouts or green savoys.
they should be boiled till tender, well drained, minced, and placed,
till quite hot, in a frying-pan, with butter, a sliced onion, and
seasoning of pepper and salt. when the onion is done, it is ready to
serve.
time.—altogether, / hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold beef, d.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: collared beef.]
. ingredients.— lbs. of the thin end of the flank of beef,  oz. of
coarse sugar,  oz. of salt,  oz, of saltpetre,  large handful of
parsley minced,  dessertspoonful of minced sage, a bunch of savoury
herbs, / teaspoonful of pounded allspice; salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—choose fine tender beef, but not too fat; lay it in a dish; rub
in the sugar, salt, and saltpetre, and let it remain in the pickle for a
week or ten days, turning and rubbing it every day. then bone it, remove
all the gristle and the coarse skin of the inside part, and sprinkle it
thickly with parsley, herbs, spice, and seasoning in the above
proportion, taking care that the former are finely minced, and the
latter well pounded. roll the meat up in a cloth as tightly as possible,
in the same shape as shown in the engraving; bind it firmly with broad
tape, and boil it gently for  hours. immediately on taking it out of
the pot, put it under a good weight, without undoing it, and let it
remain until cold. this dish is a very nice addition to the
breakfast-table.
time.— hours. average cost, for this quantity, s.
seasonable at any time.
note.—during the time the beef is in pickle, it should be kept cool,
and regularly rubbed and turned every day.
. ingredients.— lbs. of rump-steak, / lb. of butter,  pint of
gravy (water may be substituted for this), salt and pepper to taste, 
shalot finely minced, / pickled walnut,  teaspoonful of capers.
mode.—have the steak cut thin, and divide it in pieces about  inches
long; beat these with the blade of a knife, and dredge with flour. put
them in a frying-pan with the butter, and let them fry for about 
minutes; then lay them in a small stewpan, and pour over them the gravy.
add a piece of butter, kneaded with a little flour, put in the seasoning
and all the other ingredients, and let the whole simmer, but not boil,
for  minutes. serve in a hot covered dish.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
minced collops (an entree).
. ingredients.— lb. of rump-steak, salt and pepper to taste,  oz.
of butter,  onion minced, / pint of water,  tablespoonful of
harvey's sauce, or lemon-juice, or mushroom ketchup;  small bunch of
savoury herbs.
mode.—mince the beef and onion very small, and fry the latter in
butter until of a pale brown. put all the ingredients together in a
stewpan, and boil gently for about  minutes; garnish with sippets of
toasted bread, and serve very hot.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
curried beef (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few slices of tolerably lean cold roast or boiled
beef,  oz. of butter,  onions,  wineglassful of beer, 
dessertspoonful of curry powder.
mode.—cut up the beef into pieces about  inch square, put the butter
into a stewpan with the onions sliced, and fry them of a lightly-brown
colour. add all the other ingredients, and stir gently over a brisk fire
for about  minutes. should this be thought too dry, more beer, or a
spoonful or two of gravy or water, may be added; but a good curry should
not be very thin. place it in a deep dish, with an edging of dry boiled
rice, in the same manner as for other curries.
time.— minutes. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable in winter.
. good and fresh dripping answers very well for basting everything
except game and poultry, and, when well clarified, serves for frying
nearly as well as lard; it should be kept in a cool place, and will
remain good some time. to clarify it, put the dripping into a basin,
pour over it boiling water, and keep stirring the whole to wash away the
impurities. let it stand to cool, when the water and dirty sediment will
settle at the bottom of the basin. remove the dripping, and put it away
in jars or basins for use.
. put the dripping into a clean saucepan, and let it boil for a few
minutes over a slow fire, and be careful to skim it well. let it stand
to cool a little, then strain it through a piece of muslin into jars for
use. beef dripping is preferable to any other for cooking purposes, as,
with mutton dripping, there is liable to be a tallowy taste and smell.
roast fillet of beef (larded).
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the inside fillet of the sirloin, 
onion, a small bunch of parsley, salt and pepper to taste, sufficient
vinegar to cover the meat, glaze, spanish sauce, no. .
mode.—lard the beef with bacon, and put it into a pan with sufficient
vinegar to cover it, with an onion sliced, parsley, and seasoning, and
let it remain in this pickle for  hours. roast it before a nice clear
fire for about -/ hour, and, when done, glaze it. pour some spanish
sauce round the beef, and the remainder serve in a tureen. it may be
garnished with spanish onions boiled and glazed.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the sauce, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the inside fillet of the sirloin (a
piece of the rump may be substituted for this), pepper and salt to
taste,  cloves,  blades of mace,  whole allspice,  pint of stock no.
, or water,  glass of sherry,  bunch of savoury herbs,  shalots,
bacon.
mode.—cut some bacon into thin strips, and sprinkle over them a
seasoning of pepper and salt, mixed with cloves, mace, and allspice,
well pounded. lard the beef with these, put it into a stewpan with the
stock or water, sherry, herbs, shalots,  cloves, and more pepper and
salt. stew the meat gently until tender, when take it out, cover it
closely, skim off all the fat from the gravy, and strain it. set it on
the fire, and boil, till it becomes a glaze. glaze the larded side of
the beef with this, and serve on sorrel sauce, which is made as
follows:—wash and pick some sorrel, and put it into a stewpan with only
the water that hangs about it. keep stirring, to prevent its burning,
and when done, lay it in a sieve to drain. chop it, and stew it with a
small piece of butter and  or  tablespoonfuls of good gravy, for an
hour, and rub it through a tammy. if too acid, add a little sugar; and a
little cabbage-lettuce boiled with the sorrel will be found an
improvement.
time.— hours to gently stew the meat.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
fried salt beef (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few slices of cold salt beef, pepper to taste, /
lb. of butter, mashed potatoes.
mode.—cut any part of cold salt beef into thin slices, fry them
gently in butter, and season with a little pepper. have ready some very
hot mashed potatoes, lay the slices of beef on them, and garnish with 
or  pickled gherkins. cold salt beef, warmed in a little liquor from
mixed pickle, drained, and served as above, will be found good.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—steaks, butter or clarified dripping.
mode. although broiling is a far superior method of cooking steaks to
frying them, yet, when the cook is not very expert, the latter mode may
be adopted; and, when properly done, the dish may really look very
inviting, and the flavour be good. the steaks should be cut rather
thinner than for broiling, and with a small quantity of fat to each. put
some butter or clarified dripping into a frying-pan; let it get quite
hot, then lay in the steaks. turn them frequently until done, which will
be in about  minutes, or rather more, should the steaks be very thick.
serve on a very hot dish, in which put a small piece of butter and a
tablespoonful of ketchup, and season with pepper and salt. they should
be sent to table quickly, as, when cold, the steaks are entirely
spoiled.
time.— minutes for a medium-sized steak, rather longer for a very
thick one.
average cost, s. per lb.
seasonable all the year, but not good in summer, as the meat cannot
hang to get tender.
note.—where much gravy is liked, make it in the following manner:—as
soon as the steaks are done, dish them, pour a little boiling water into
the frying-pan, add a seasoning of pepper and salt, a small piece of
butter, and a tablespoonful of harvey's sauce or mushroom ketchup. hold
the pan over the fire for a minute or two, just let the gravy simmer,
then pour on the steak, and serve.
 a frenchman's opinion of beef. the following is translated from
 a celebrated modern french work, the production of one who in
 paris enjoys a great reputation as cook and chemist:—the flesh
 of the ox, to be in the best condition, should be taken from an
 animal of from four to six years old, and neither too fat nor
 too lean. this meat, which possesses in the highest degree the
 most nutritive qualities, is generally easily digested; stock is
 made from it, and it is eaten boiled, broiled, roasted, stewed,
 braised, and in a hundred other different ways. beef is the
 foundation of stock, gravies, braises, &c.; its nutritious and
 succulent gravy gives body and flavour to numberless ragoűts. it
 is an exhaustless mine in the hands of a skilful artist, and is
 truly the king of the kitchen. without it, no soup, no gravy;
 and its absence would produce almost a famine in the civilized
 world!
beef fritters (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast beef, pepper and salt to
taste, / lb. of flour, / pint of water,  oz. of butter, the whites
of  eggs.
mode.—mix very smoothly, and by degrees, the flour with the above
proportion of water; stir in  oz. of butter, which must be melted, but
not oiled, and, just before it is to be used, add the whites of two
well-whisked eggs. should the batter be too thick, more water must be
added. pare down the cold beef into thin shreds, season with pepper and
salt, and mix it with the batter. drop a small quantity at a time into a
pan of boiling lard, and fry from  to  minutes, according to the
size. when done on one side, turn and brown them on the other. let them
dry for a minute or two before the fire, and serve on a folded napkin. a
small quantity of finely-minced onions, mixed with the batter, is an
improvement.
time.—from  to  minutes.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d. seasonable at any time.
hashed beef (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—gravy saved from the meat,  teaspoonful of tomato
sauce,  teaspoonful of harvey's sauce,  teaspoonful of good mushroom
ketchup, / glass of port wine or strong ale, pepper and salt to taste,
a little flour to thicken,  onion finely minced, a few slices of cold
roast beef.
mode.—put all the ingredients but the beef into a stewpan with
whatever gravy may have been saved from the meat the day it was roasted;
let these simmer gently for  minutes, then take the stewpan off the
fire; let the gravy cool, and skim off the fat. cut the beef into thin
slices, dredge them with flour, and lay them in the gravy; let the whole
simmer gently for  minutes, but not boil, or the meat will be tough and
hard. serve very hot, and garnish with sippets of toasted bread.
time.— minutes. average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—the remains of ribs or sirloin of beef,  onions, 
carrot,  bunch of savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste, / blade of
pounded mace, thickening of flour, rather more than  pint of water.
mode.—take off all the meat from the bones of ribs or sirloin of
beef; remove the outside brown and gristle; place the meat on one side,
and well stew the bones and pieces, with the above ingredients, for
about  hours, till it becomes a strong gravy, and is reduced to rather
more than / pint; strain this, thicken with a teaspoonful of flour,
and let the gravy cool; skim off all the fat; lay in the meat, let it
get hot through, but do not allow it to boil, and garnish with sippets
of toasted bread. the gravy may be flavoured as in the preceding recipe.
time.—rather more than  hours.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
note.—either of the above recipes may be served in walls of mashed
potatoes browned; in which case the sippets should be omitted. be
careful that hashed meat does not boil, or it will become tough.
. this is preserved by salting and drying, either with or without
smoke. hang up the beef  or  days, till it becomes tender, but take
care it does not begin to spoil; then salt it in the usual way, either
by dry-salting or by brine, with bay-salt, brown sugar, saltpetre, and a
little pepper and allspice; afterwards roll it tight in a cloth, and
hang it up in a warm, but not hot place, for a fortnight or more, till
it is sufficiently hard. if required to have a little of the smoky
flavour, it may be hung for some time in a chimney-corner, or smoked in
any other way: it will keep a long time.
. ingredients.—for a round of beef weighing  lbs. allow  oz. of
saltpetre,  oz. of coarse sugar,  oz. of cloves,  grated nutmeg, /
oz. of allspice,  lb. of salt, / lb. bay-salt.
mode.—let the beef hang for  or  days, and remove the bone. pound
spices, salt, &c. in the above proportion, and let them be reduced to
the finest powder. put the beef into a pan, rub all the ingredients well
into it, and turn and rub it every day for rather more than a fortnight.
when it has been sufficiently long in pickle, wash the meat, bind it up
securely with tape, and put it into a pan with / pint of water at the
bottom; mince some suet, cover the top of the meat with it, and over the
pan put a common crust of flour and water; bake for  hours, and, when
cold, remove the paste. save the gravy that flows from it, as it adds
greatly to the flavour of hashes, stews, &c. the beef may be glazed and
garnished with meat jelly.
time.— hours.
seasonable all the year.
note.—in salting or pickling beef or pork for family consumption, it
not being generally required to be kept for a great length of time, a
less quantity of salt and a larger quantity of other matters more
adapted to retain mellowness in meat, may be employed, which could not
be adopted by the curer of the immense quantities of meat required to be
preserved for victualling the shipping of this maritime country. sugar,
which is well known to possess the preserving principle in a very great
degree, without the pungency and astringency of salt, may be, and is,
very generally used in the preserving of meat for family consumption.
although it acts without corrugating or contracting the fibres of meat,
as is the case in the action of salt, and, therefore, does not impair
its mellowness, yet its use in sufficient quantities for preservative
effect, without the addition of other antiseptics, would impart a
flavour not agreeable to the taste of many persons. it may be used,
however, together with salt, with the greatest advantage in imparting
mildness and mellowness to cured meat, in a proportion of about one part
by weight to four of the mixture; and, perhaps, now that sugar is so
much lower in price than it was in former years, one of the obstructions
to its more frequent use is removed.
. ingredients.— kidney, clarified butter, pepper and salt to taste,
a small quantity of highly-seasoned gravy,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice, / teaspoonful of powdered sugar.
mode.—cut the kidneys into neat slices, put them into warm water to
soak for  hours, and change the water  or  times; then put them on a
clean cloth to dry the water from them, and lay them in a frying-pan
with some clarified butter, and fry them of a nice brown; season each
side with pepper and salt, put them round the dish, and the gravy in the
middle. before pouring the gravy in the dish, add the lemon-juice and
sugar.
time.—from  to  minutes. average cost, d. each.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— kidney,  dessertspoonful of minced parsley, 
teaspoonful of minced shalot, salt and pepper to taste, / pint of
gravy, no. ,  tablespoonfuls of sherry.
mode.—take off a little of the kidney fat, mince it very fine, and
put it in a frying-pan; slice the kidney, sprinkle over it parsley and
shalots in the above proportion, add a seasoning of pepper and salt, and
fry it of a nice brown. when it is done enough, dredge over a little
flour, and pour in the gravy and sherry. let it just simmer, but not
boil any more, or the kidney would harden; serve very hot, and garnish
with croűtons. where the flavour of the shalot is disliked, it may be
omitted, and a small quantity of savoury herbs substituted for it.
time.—from  to  minutes, according to the thickness of the slices.
average cost, d. each. sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
a more simple method.
. cut the kidney into thin slices, flour them, and fry of a nice
brown. when done, make a gravy in the pan by pouring away the fat,
putting in a small piece of butter, / pint of boiling water, pepper
and salt, and a tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup. let the gravy just
boil up, pour over the kidney, and serve.
. ingredients.—bones, a small piece of common paste, a floured
cloth.
mode.—have the bones neatly sawed into convenient sizes, and cover
the ends with a small piece of common crust, made with flour and water.
over this tie a floured cloth, and place them upright in a saucepan of
boiling water, taking care there is sufficient to cover the bones. boil
them for  hours, remove the cloth and paste, and serve them upright on
a napkin with dry toast. many persons clear the marrow from the bones
after they are cooked, spread it over a slice of toast and add a
seasoning of pepper; when served in this manner, it must be very
expeditiously sent to table, as it so soon gets cold.
time.— hours.
seasonable at any time.
note.—marrow-bones may be baked after preparing them as in the
preceding recipe; they should be laid in a deep dish, and baked for 
hours.
[illustration: marrow-bones.]
 marrow-bones.—bones are formed of a dense cellular tissue of
 membranous matter, made stiff and rigid by insoluble earthy
 salts; of which, phosphate of lime is the most abundant. in a
 large bone, the insoluble matter is generally deposited in such
 a manner as to leave a cavity, into which a fatty substance,
 distinguished by the name of marrow, is thrown. hollow
 cylindrical bones possess the qualities of strength and
 lightness in a remarkable degree. if bones were entirely solid,
 they would be unnecessarily heavy; and if their materials were
 brought into smaller compass, they would be weaker, because the
 strength of a bone is in proportion to the distance at which its
 fibres are from the centre. some animals, it must, however, be
 observed, have no cavities in the centre of their bones; such as
 the whale tribe, skate, and turtles.
minced beef (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.— oz. of butter,  small onion,  tablespoonfuls of
gravy left from the meat,  tablespoonful of strong ale, / a
teaspoonful of flour, salt and pepper to taste, a few slices of lean
roast beef.
mode.—put into a stewpan the butter with an onion chopped fine; add
the gravy, ale, and / a teaspoonful of flour to thicken; season with
pepper and salt, and stir these ingredients over the fire until the
onion is a rich brown. cut, but do not chop the meat very fine, add it
to the gravy, stir till quite hot, and serve. garnish with sippets of
toasted bread. be careful in not allowing the gravy to boil after the
meat is added, as it would render it hard and tough.
time.—about / hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—a few slices of cold roast beef,  oz. of butter,
salt and pepper to taste,  onions, / pint of gravy.
mode.—slice the onions and put them into a frying-pan with the cold
beef and butter; place it over the fire, and keep turning and stirring
the ingredients to prevent them burning. when of a pale brown, add the
gravy and seasoning; let it simmer for a few minutes, and serve very
hot. this dish is excellent and economical.
time.— minutes. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— cheek, salt and water,  or  onions, butter and
flour,  cloves,  turnips,  carrots,  bay-leaf,  head of celery, 
bunch of savoury herbs, cayenne, black pepper and salt to taste,  oz.
of butter,  dessertspoonfuls of flour,  tablespoonfuls of chili
vinegar,  tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup,  tablespoonfuls of port
wine,  tablespoonfuls of harvey's sauce.
mode.—have the cheek boned, and prepare it the day before it is to be
eaten, by cleaning and putting it to soak all night in salt and water.
the next day, wipe it dry and clean, and put it into a stewpan. just
cover it with water, skim well when it boils, and let it gently simmer
till the meat is quite tender. slice and fry  onions in a little butter
and flour, and put them into the gravy; add  whole onions, each stuck
with  cloves,  turnips quartered,  carrots sliced, a bay-leaf,  head
of celery, a bunch of herbs, and seasoning to taste of cayenne, black
pepper, and salt. let these stew till perfectly tender; then take out
the cheek, divide into pieces fit to help at table, skim and strain the
gravy, and thicken -/ pint of it with butter and flour in the above
proportions. add the vinegar, ketchup, and port wine; put in the pieces
of cheek; let the whole boil up, and serve quite hot. send it to table
in a ragout-dish. if the colour of the gravy should not be very good,
add a tablespoonful of the browning, no. .
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
fried ox-feet, or cow-heel.
. ingredients.—ox-feet, the yolk of  egg, bread crumbs, parsley,
salt and cayenne to taste, boiling butter.
mode.—wash, scald, and thoroughly clean the feet, and cut them into
pieces about  inches long; have ready some fine bread crumbs mixed with
a little minced parsley, cayenne, and salt; dip the pieces of heel into
the yolk of egg, sprinkle them with the bread crumbs, and fry them until
of a nice brown in boiling butter.
time.- hour. average cost, d. each.
seasonable at any time.
note.—ox-feet may be dressed in various ways, stowed in gravy or
plainly boiled and served with melted butter. when plainly boiled, the
liquor will answer for making sweet or relishing jellies, and also to
give richness to soups or gravies.
. ingredients.— ox-tails,  onion,  cloves,  blade of mace, 
teaspoonful of whole black pepper,  teaspoonful of allspice, / a
teaspoonful of salt, a small bunch of savoury herbs, thickening of
butter and flour,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice,  tablespoonful of
mushroom ketchup.
mode.—divide the tails at the joints, wash, and put them into a
stewpan with sufficient water to cover them, and set them on the fire;
when the water boils, remove the scum, and add the onion cut into rings,
the spice, seasoning, and herbs. cover the stewpan closely, and let the
tails simmer very gently until tender, which will be in about -/
hours. take them out, make a thickening of butter and flour, add it to
the gravy, and let it boil for / hour. strain it through a sieve into
a saucepan, put back the tails, add the lemon-juice and ketchup; let the
whole just boil up, and serve. garnish with croűtons or sippets of
toasted bread.
time.—-/ hours to stew the tails.
average cost, d. to s. d., according to the season.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year.
 the tails of animals.—in the class mammalia, the vertebral
 column or backbone presents only slight modifications, and
 everywhere shows the same characteristics as in man, who stands
 at the head of this division of the animal kingdom. the length
 of this column, however, varies much, and the number of
 vertebrae of which it is composed is far from being uniform.
 these numerical differences principally depend on the unequal
 development of the caudal portion, or tail-end, of the column.
 thus, the tail-forming vertebrae sometimes do not exist at
 all,—amongst certain bats for example; in other instances we
 reckon forty, fifty, and even upwards of sixty of these bones.
 among the greater number of mammals, the tail is of little use
 for locomotion, except that it acts in many cases as does the
 rudder of a ship, steadying the animal in his rapid movements,
 and enabling him to turn more easily and quickly. among some
 animals, it becomes a very powerful instrument of progression.
 thus, in the kangaroos and jerboas, the tail forms, with the
 hind feet, a kind of tripod from which the animal makes its
 spring. with most of the american monkeys it is prehensile, and
 serves the animal as a fifth hand to suspend itself from the
 branches of trees; and, lastly, among the whales, it grows to an
 enormous size, and becomes the principal instrument for
 swimming.
a pickle for tongues or beef (newmarket recipe).
. ingredients.— gallon of soft water,  lbs. of coarse salt,  oz.
of coarse brown sugar, / oz. of saltpetre.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a saucepan, and let them boil for
/ hour, clear off the scum as it rises, and when done pour the pickle
into a pickling-pan. let it get cold, then put in the meat, and allow it
to remain in the pickle from  to  days, according to the size. it
will keep good for  months if well boiled once a fortnight. tongues
will take  month or  weeks to be properly cured; and, in salting meat,
beef and tongues should always be put in separate vessels.
time.—a moderate-sized tongue should remain in the pickle about a
month, and be turned every day.
[illustration: potting-jar.]
. ingredients.— lbs. of lean beef,  tablespoonful of water, /
lb. of butter, a seasoning to taste of salt, cayenne, pounded mace, and
black pepper.
mode.—procure a nice piece of lean beef, as free as possible from
gristle, skin, &c., and put it into a jar (if at hand, one with a lid)
with  tablespoonful of water. cover it closely, and put the jar into
a saucepan of boiling water, letting the water come within  inches of
the top of the jar. boil gently for -/ hours, then take the beef,
chop it very small with a chopping-knife, and pound it thoroughly in a
mortar. mix with it by degrees all, or a portion, of the gravy that will
have run from it, and a little clarified butter; add the seasoning, put
it in small pots for use, and cover with a little butter just warmed and
poured over. if much gravy is added to it, it will keep but a short
time; on the contrary, if a large proportion of butter is used, it may
be preserved for some time.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
potted beef (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast or boiled beef, / lb. of
butter, cayenne to taste,  blades of pounded mace.
mode.—as we have stated in recipe no. , the outside slices of
boiled beef may, with a little trouble, be converted into a very nice
addition to the breakfast-table. cut up the meat into small pieces and
pound it well, with a little butter, in a mortar; add a seasoning of
cayenne and mace, and be very particular that the latter ingredient is
reduced to the finest powder. when all the ingredients are thoroughly
mixed, put it into glass or earthen potting-pots, and pour on the top a
coating of clarified butter.
seasonable at any time.
note.—if cold roast beef is used, remove all pieces of gristle and
dry outside pieces, as these do not pound well.
 preserved meats.—when an organic substance, like the flesh of
 animals, is heated to the boiling-point, it loses the property
 of passing into a state of fermentation and decay. fresh animal
 milk, as is well known, coagulates, after having been kept for
 two or three days, into a gelatinous mass; but it may be
 preserved for an indefinite period, as a perfectly sweet liquid,
 if it be heated daily to the boiling-point. the knowledge of
 this effect of an elevated temperature has given rise to a most
 important branch of industry,—namely, the preparation of
 preserved meats for the use of the navy and merchant service. at
 leith, in the neighbourhood of edinburgh, at aberdeen, at
 bordeaux, at marseilles, and in many parts of germany,
 establishments of enormous magnitude exist, in which soup,
 vegetables, and viands of every description are prepared, in
 such a manner that they retain their freshness for years. the
 prepared aliments are inclosed in canisters of tinned iron
 plate, the covers are soldered air-tight, and the canisters
 exposed to the temperature of boiling water for three or four
 hours. the aliments thus acquire a stability, which one may
 almost say is eternal; and when a canister is opened, after the
 lapse of several years, its contents are found to be unaltered
 in taste, colour, and smell. we are indebted to the french
 philosopher gay-lussac for this beautiful practical application
 of the discovery that boiling checks fermentation. an exclusive
 salt-meat diet is extremely injurious to the health; and, in
 former times, thousands of mariners lost their lives for the
 want of fresh aliments during long voyages. we are sorry to say
 that the preserved meats are sometimes carelessly prepared, and,
 though the statement seems incredible, sometimes adulterated.
 dr. lankester, who has done so much to expose the frauds of
 trade, that he ought to be regarded as a public benefactor, says
 that he has seen things which were utterly unfit for food,
 shipped as preserved meats. surely, as he observes, there ought
 to be some superintendent to examine the so-called articles of
 food that are taken on board ship, so that the poor men who have
 been fighting our battles abroad may run no risk of being
 starved or poisoned on their way home.
(a pretty dish.)
. ingredients.—rib of beef bones,  onion chopped fine, a few slices
of carrot and turnip, / pint of gravy.
mode.—the bones for this dish should have left on them a slight
covering of meat; saw them into pieces  inches long; season them with
pepper and salt, and put them into a stewpan with the remaining
ingredients. stew gently, until the vegetables are tender, and serve on
a flat dish within walls of mashed potatoes.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the bones, d.
seasonable at any time.
beef rissoles (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast beef; to each pound of meat
allow / lb. of bread crumbs, salt and pepper to taste, a few chopped
savoury herbs, / a teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel,  or  eggs,
according to the quantity of meat.
mode.—mince the beef very fine, which should be rather lean, and mix
with this bread crumbs, herbs, seasoning, and lemon-peel, in the above
proportion, to each pound of meat. make all into a thick paste with  or
 eggs; divide into balls or cones, and fry a rich brown. garnish the
dish with fried parsley, and send with them to table some good brown
gravy in a tureen. instead of garnishing with fried parsley, gravy may
be poured in the dish, round the rissoles: in this case, it will not be
necessary to send any in a tureen.
time.—from  to  minutes, according to size.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
rolled beef, to eat like hare.
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the inside of the sirloin,  glasses
of port wine,  glasses of vinegar, a small quantity of forcemeat (no.
),  teaspoonful of pounded allspice.
mode.—take the inside of a large sirloin, soak it in  glass of port
wine and  glass of vinegar, mixed, and let it remain for  days. make a
forcemeat by recipe no. , lay it on the meat, and bind it up
securely. roast it before a nice clear fire, and baste it with  glass
each of port wine and vinegar, with which mix a teaspoonful of pounded
allspice. serve, with a good gravy in the dish, and send red-currant
jelly to table with it.
time.—a piece of  lbs. about -/ hour before a brisk fire.
average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
beef rolls (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast or boiled beef, seasoning
to taste of salt, pepper, and minced herbs; puff paste.
mode.—mince the beef tolerably fine with a small amount of its own
fat; add a seasoning of pepper, salt, and chopped herbs; put the whole
into a roll of puff paste, and bake for / hour, or rather longer,
should the roll be very large. beef patties may be made of cold meat, by
mincing and seasoning beef as directed above, and baking in a rich puff
paste in patty-tins.
time,—/ hour.
seasonable at any time.
miniature round of beef. (an excellent dish for a small family.)
. ingredients.—from  to  lbs. of rib of beef, sufficient brine to
cover the meat.
mode.—choose a fine rib, have the bone removed, rub some salt over
the inside, and skewer the meat up into a nice round form, and bind it
with tape. put it into sufficient brine to cover it (the brine should be
made by recipe no. ), and let it remain for  days, turning the meat
every day. when required to be dressed, drain from the pickle, and put
the meat into very hot water; let it boil rapidly for a few minutes,
when draw the pot to the side of the fire, and let it simmer very gently
until done. remove the skewer, and replace it by a plated or silver one.
carrots and turnips should be served with this dish, and may be boiled
with the meat.
time.—a small round of  lbs., about  hours after the water boils;
one of  lbs., about  hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—should the joint be very small,  or  days will be sufficient
time to salt it.
brisket of beef, a la flamande.
. ingredients.—about  or  lbs. of the brisket of beef,  or 
slices of bacon,  carrots,  onion, a bunch of savoury herbs, salt and
pepper to taste,  cloves,  whole allspice,  blades of mace.
mode.—choose that portion of the brisket which contains the gristle,
trim it, and put it into a stewpan with the slices of bacon, which
should be put under and over the meat. add the vegetables, herbs,
spices, and seasoning, and cover with a little weak stock or water;
close the stewpan as hermetically as possible, and simmer very gently
for  hours. strain the liquor, reserve a portion of it for sauce, and
the remainder boil quickly over a sharp fire until reduced to a glaze,
with which glaze the meat. garnish the dish with scooped carrots and
turnips, and when liked, a little cabbage; all of which must be cooked
separately. thicken and flavour the liquor that was saved for sauce,
pour it round the meat, and serve. the beef may also be garnished with
glazed onions, artichoke-bottoms, &c.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 french beef.—it has been all but universally admitted, that the
 beef of france is greatly inferior in quality to that of
 england, owing to inferiority of pasturage. m. curmer, however,
 one of the latest writers on the culinary art, tells us that
 this is a vulgar error, and that french beef is far superior to
 that of england. this is mere vaunting on the part of our
 neighbours, who seem to want la gloire in everything; and we
 should not deign to notice it, if it had occurred in a work of
 small pretensions; but m. curmer's book professes to be a
 complete exposition of the scientific principles of cookery, and
 holds a high rank in the didactic literature of france. we half
 suspect that m. curmer obtained his knowledge of english beef in
 the same way as did the poor frenchman, whom the late mr.
 mathews, the comedian, so humorously described. mr. lewis, in
 his "physiology of common life," has thus revived the story of
 the beef-eating son of france:—"a frenchman was one day blandly
 remonstrating against the supercilious scorn expressed by
 englishmen for the beef of france, which he, for his part, did
 not find so inferior to that of england. 'i have been two times
 in england,' he remarked, but i nevčre find the bif so supérieur
 to ours. i find it vary conveenient that they bring it you on
 leetle pieces of stick, for one penny: but i do not find the bif
 supérieur.' on hearing this, the englishman, red with
 astonishment, exclaimed, 'good heavens, sir! you have been
 eating cat's meat.'" no, m. curmer, we are ready to acknowledge
 the superiority of your cookery, but we have long since made up
 our minds as to the inferiority of your raw material.
. ingredients.— lbs. of rump-steak,  egg,  tablespoonful of
minced savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste,  pint of stock, no.
,  or  slices of bacon,  tablespoonfuls of any store sauce, a
slight thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—have the steaks cut rather thin, slightly beat them to make
them level, cut them into  or  pieces, brush over with egg, and
sprinkle with herbs, which should be very finely minced; season with
pepper and salt, and roll up the pieces tightly, and fasten with a small
skewer. put the stock in a stewpan that will exactly hold them, for by
being pressed together, they will keep their shape better; lay in the
rolls of meat, cover them with the bacon, cut in thin slices, and over
that put a piece of paper. stew them very gently for full  hours; for
the slower they are done the better. take them out, remove the skewers,
thicken the gravy with butter and flour, and flavour with any store
sauce that may be preferred. give one boil, pour over the meat, and
serve.
time.— hours. average cost, s. per pound.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
(economical.)
. ingredients.—the remains of underdone cold roast beef, bread
crumbs,  shalot finely minced, pepper and salt to taste, gravy made
from the beef bones, thickening of butter and flour,  tablespoonful of
mushroom ketchup.
mode.—cut some slices of underdone roast beef about half an inch
thick; sprinkle over them some bread crumbs, minced shalot, and a little
of the fat and seasoning; roll them, and fasten with a small skewer.
have ready some gravy made from the beef bones; put in the pieces of
meat, and stew them till tender, which will be in about -/ hour, or
rather longer. arrange the meat in a dish, thicken and flavour the
gravy, and pour it over the meat, when it is ready to serve.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the beef, d.
seasonable at any time.
broiled ox-tail (an entree).
. ingredients.— tails, -/ pint of stock, no. , salt and
cayenne to taste, bread crumbs,  egg.
mode.—joint and cut up the tails into convenient-sized pieces, and
put them into a stewpan, with the stock, cayenne, and salt, and, if
liked very savoury, a bunch of sweet herbs. let them simmer gently for
about -/ hours; then take them out, drain them, and let them cool.
beat an egg upon a plate; dip in each piece of tail, and, afterwards,
throw them into a dish of bread crumbs; broil them over a clear fire,
until of a brownish colour on both sides, and serve with a good gravy,
or any sauce that may be preferred.
time.—about -/ hours. average cost, from d. to s. d.,
according to the season.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—these may be more easily prepared by putting the tails in a
brisk oven, after they have been dipped in egg and bread-crumb; and,
when brown, they are done. they must be boiled the same time as for
broiling.
 strange tails.—naturalists cannot explain the uses of some of
 the strange tails borne by animals. in the egyptian and syrian
 sheep, for instance, the tail grows so large, that it is not
 infrequently supported upon a sort of little cart, in order to
 prevent inconvenience to the animal. thin monstrous appendage
 sometimes attains a weight of seventy, eighty, or even a hundred
 pounds.
to dress beef palates (an entree).
. ingredients.— palates, sufficient gravy to cover them (no. ),
cayenne to taste,  tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup,  tablespoonful
of pickled-onion liquor, thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—wash the palates, and put them into a stewpan, with sufficient
water to cover them, and let them boil until perfectly tender, or until
the upper skin may be easily peeled off. have ready sufficient gravy
(no. ) to cover them; add a good seasoning of cayenne, and thicken
with roux, no. , or a little butter kneaded with flour; let it boil
up, and skim. cut the palates into square pieces, put them in the gravy,
and let them simmer gently for / hour; add ketchup and onion-liquor,
give one boil, and serve.
time.—from  to  hours to boil the palates.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—palates may be dressed in various ways with sauce tournée, good
onion sauce, tomato sauce, and also served in a vol-au-vent; but the
above will be found a more simple method of dressing them.
beef pickle, which may also be used for any kind of meat, tongues, or
hams.
. ingredients.— lbs. of salt,  lbs. of fine sugar,  oz. of
powdered saltpetre,  gallons of spring water.
mode.—boil all the ingredients gently together, so long as any scum
or impurity arises, which carefully remove; when quite cold, pour it
over the meat, every part of which must be covered with the brine. this
may be used for pickling any kind of meat, and may be kept for some
time, if boiled up occasionally with an addition of the ingredients.
time.—a ham should be kept in the pickle for a fortnight; a piece of
beef weighing  lbs.,  or  days; a tongue,  days or a fortnight.
note.—for salting and pickling meat, it is a good plan to rub in only
half the quantity of salt directed, and to let it remain for a day or
two to disgorge and effectually to get rid of the blood and slime; then
rub in the remainder of the salt and other ingredients, and proceed as
above. this rule may be applied to all the recipes we have given for
salting and pickling meat.
. ingredients.—for  lbs. of a round of beef allow -/ lb. of
salt, / oz. of powdered saltpetre; or,  lb. of salt, / lb. of
sugar,  oz. of powdered saltpetre.
mode.—rub in, and sprinkle either of the above mixtures on  lbs. of
meat. keep it in an earthenware pan, or a deep wooden tray, and turn
twice a week during  weeks; then bind up the beef tightly with coarse
linen tape, and hang it in a kitchen in which a fire is constantly kept,
for  weeks. pork, hams, and bacon may be cured in a similar way, but
will require double the quantity of the salting mixture; and, if not
smoke-dried, they should be taken down from hanging after  or  weeks,
and afterwards kept in boxes or tubs, amongst dry oat-husks.
time.— or  weeks to remain in the brine; to be hung  weeks.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the meat may be boiled fresh from this pickle, instead of
smoking it.
beep ragout (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of cold roast beef,  onions, pepper,
salt, and mixed spices to taste; / pint of boiling water, 
tablespoonfuls of gravy.
mode.—cut the beef into rather large pieces, and put them into a
stewpan with the onions, which must be sliced. season well with pepper,
salt, and mixed spices, and pour over about / pint of boiling water,
and gravy in the above proportion (gravy saved from the meat answers the
purpose); let the whole stew very gently for about  hours, and serve
with pickled walnuts, gherkins, or capers, just warmed in the gravy.
time.— hours. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—beef, a little salt.
mode.—-the fore-rib is considered the primest roasting piece, but the
middle-rib is considered the most economical. let the meat be well hung
(should the weather permit), and cut off the thin ends of the bones,
which should be salted for a few days, and then boiled. put the meat
down to a nice clear fire, put some clean dripping into the pan, dredge
the joint with a little flour, and keep continually basting the whole
time. sprinkle some fine salt over it (this must never be done until the
joint is dished, as it draws the juices from the meat); pour the
dripping from the pan, put in a little boiling: water slightly salted,
and strain the gravy over the meat. garnish with tufts of scraped
horseradish, and send horseradish sauce to table with it (see no.
). a yorkshire pudding (see puddings) sometimes accompanies this
dish, and, if lightly made and well cooked, will be found a very
agreeable addition.
time.— lbs. of beef, -/ hours;  to  lbs., from -/ to 
hours.
average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient.—a joint of  lbs. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 memoranda in roasting.—the management of the fire is a point of
 primary importance in roasting. a radiant fire throughout the
 operation is absolutely necessary to insure a good result. when
 the article to be dressed is thin and delicate, the fire may be
 small; but when the joint is large, the fire must fill the
 grate. meat must never be put down before a hollow or exhausted
 fire, which may soon want recruiting; on the other hand, if the
 heat of the fire becomes too fierce, the meat must be removed to
 a considerable distance till it is somewhat abated. some cooks
 always fail in their roasts, though they succeed in nearly
 everything else. a french writer on the culinary art says that
 anybody can learn how to cook, but one must be born a roaster.
 according to liebig, beef or mutton cannot be said to be
 sufficiently roasted until it has acquired, throughout the whole
 mass, a temperature of °; but poultry may be well cooked when
 the inner parts have attained a temperature of from ° to
 °. this depends on the greater amount of blood which beef and
 mutton contain, the colouring matter of blood not being
 coagulable under °.
roast ribs of beef, boned and rolled (a very convenient joint for a
small family).
. ingredients.— or  ribs of beef.
mode.—choose a fine rib of beef, and have it cut according to the
weight you require, either wide or narrow. bone and roll the meat round,
secure it with wooden skewers, and, if necessary, bind it round with a
piece of tape. spit the beef firmly, or, if a bottle-jack is used, put
the joint on the hook, and place it near a nice clear fire. let it
remain so till the outside of the meat is set, when draw it to a
distance, and keep continually basting until the meat is done, which can
be ascertained by the steam from it drawing towards the fire. as this
joint is solid, rather more than / hour must be allowed for each lb.
remove the skewers, put in a plated or silver one, and send the joint to
table with gravy in the dish, and garnish with tufts of horseradish.
horseradish sauce, no. , is a great improvement to roast beef.
time.—for  lbs. of the rolled ribs,  hours (as the joint is very
solid, we have allowed an extra / hour); for  lbs., -/ hour.
average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient.—a joint of  lbs. for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year.
note.—when the weight exceeds  lbs., we would not advise the above
method of boning and rolling; only in the case of  or  ribs, when the
joint cannot stand upright in the dish, and would look awkward. the
bones should be put in with a few vegetables and herbs, and made into
stock.
 roast beef has long been a national dish in england. in most of
 our patriotic songs it is contrasted with the fricasseed frogs,
 popularly supposed to be the exclusive diet of frenchmen.
"o the roast beef of old england,
and o the old english roast beef."
 this national chorus is appealed to whenever a song-writer
 wishes to account for the valour displayed by englishmen at sea
 or on land.
. ingredients.—beef, a little salt.
mode.—as a joint cannot be well roasted without a good fire, see that
it is well made up about / hour before it is required, so that when
the joint is put down, it is clear and bright. choose a nice sirloin,
the weight of which should not exceed  lbs., as the outside would be
too much done, whilst the inside would not be done enough. spit it or
hook it on to the jack firmly, dredge it slightly with flour, and place
it near the fire at first, as directed in the preceding recipe. then
draw it to a distance, and keep continually basting until the meat is
done. sprinkle a small quantity of salt over it, empty the dripping-pan
of all the dripping, pour in some boiling water slightly salted, stir it
about, and strain over the meat. garnish with tufts of horseradish,
and send horseradish sauce and yorkshire pudding to table with it. for
carving, see p. .
time.—a sirloin of  lbs., -/ hours;  to  lbs., about  or
-/ hours.
average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient.—a joint of  lbs. for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
the rump, round, and other pieces of beef are roasted in the same
manner, allowing for solid joints; / hour to every lb.
note.—-the above is the usual method of roasting moat; but to have it
in perfection and the juices kept in, the meat should at first be laid
close to the fire, and when the outside is set and firm, drawn away to a
good distance, and then left to roast very slowly; where economy is
studied, this plan would not answer, as the meat requires to be at the
fire double the time of the ordinary way of cooking; consequently,
double the quantity of fuel would be consumed.
 origin of the word "sirloin."—the loin of beef is said to have
 been knighted by king charles ii., at friday hall, chingford.
 the "merry monarch" returned to this hospitable mansion for
 epping forest literally "as hungry as a hunter," and beheld,
 with delight, a huge loin of beef steaming upon the table. "a
 noble joint!" exclaimed the king. "by st. george, it shall have
 a title!" then drawing his sword, he raised it above the meat,
 and cried, with mock dignity, "loin, we dub thee knight;
 henceforward be sir loin!" this anecdote is doubtless
 apocryphal, although the oak table upon which the joint was
 supposed to have received its knighthood, might have been seen
 by any one who visited friday-hill house, a few years ago. it
 is, perhaps, a pity to spoil so noble a story; but the interests
 of truth demand that we declare that sirloin is probably a
 corruption of surloin, which signifies the upper part of a
 loin, the prefix sur being equivalent to over or above. in
 french we find this joint called surlonge, which so closely
 resembles our sirloin, that we may safely refer the two words
 to a common origin.
. ingredients.—/ round of beef,  oz. of sugar,  oz. of powdered
saltpetre,  oz. of black pepper, / lb. of bay-salt, / lb. of common
salt. mode.—rub the meat well with salt, and let it remain for a day,
to disgorge and clear it from slime. the next day, rub it well with the
above ingredients on every side, and let it remain in the pickle for
about a fortnight, turning it every day. it may be boiled fresh from the
pickle, or smoked.
time.—/ round of beef to remain in pickle about a fortnight.
average cost, d. per lb. seasonable at any time.
note.—the aitch-bone, flank, or brisket may be salted and pickled by
any of the recipes we have given for salting beef, allowing less time
for small joints to remain in the pickle; for instance, a joint of  or
 lbs. will be sufficiently salt in about a week.
. ingredients.— lbs. of lean beef,  lb. of treacle,  oz. of
saltpetre,  lb. of common salt.
mode.—rub the beef well with the treacle, and let it remain for 
days, turning and rubbing it often; then wipe it, pound the salt and
saltpetre very fine, rub these well in, and turn it every day for 
days. roll it up tightly in a coarse cloth, and press it under a large
weight; have it smoked, and turn it upside down every day. boil it, and,
on taking it out of the pot, put a heavy weight on it to press it.
time.— days.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of suet allow  lbs. of lean beef;
seasoning to taste of salt, pepper, and mixed spices.
mode.—clear the suet from skin, and chop that and the beef as finely
as possible; season with pepper, salt, and spices, and mix the whole
well together. make it into flat cakes, and fry of a nice brown. many
persons pound the meat in a mortar after it is chopped ( but this is not
necessary when the meat is minced finely.)
time.— minutes. average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
beef-steak, rolled, roasted, and stuffed.
. ingredients.— lbs. of rump-steak, forcemeat no. , pepper and
salt to taste, clarified butter.
mode.—have the steaks cut rather thick from a well-hung rump of beef,
and sprinkle over them a seasoning of pepper and salt. make a forcemeat
by recipe no. ; spread it over half of the steak; roll it up, bind
and skewer it firmly, that the forcemeat may not escape, and roast it
before a nice clear fire for about -/ hour, or rather longer, should
the roll be very large and thick. keep it constantly basted with butter,
and serve with brown gravy, some of which must be poured round the
steak, and the remainder sent to table in a tureen.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year, but best in winter.
sliced and broiled beef—a pretty dish (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few slices of cold roast beef,  or  potatoes, a
thin batter, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—pare the potatoes as you would peel an apple; fry the parings
in a thin batter seasoned with salt and pepper, until they are of a
light brown colour, and place them on a dish over some slices of beef,
which should be nicely seasoned and broiled.
time.— minutes to broil the meat.
seasonable at any time.
spiced beef (to serve cold).
. ingredients.— lbs. of the thick flank or rump of beef, / lb.
of coarse sugar,  oz. of saltpetre, / lb. of pounded allspice,  lb.
of common salt.
mode.—rub the sugar well into the beef, and let it lay for  hours;
then rub the saltpetre and allspice, both of which should be pounded,
over the meat, and let it remain for another  hours; then rub in the
salt. turn daily in the liquor for a fortnight, soak it for a few hours
in water, dry with a cloth, cover with a coarse paste, put a little
water at the bottom of the pan, and bake in a moderate oven for  hours.
if it is not covered with a paste, be careful to put the beef into a
deep vessel, and cover with a plate, or it will be too crisp. during the
time the meat is in the oven it should be turned once or twice.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable at any time.
 baking meat.—baking exerts some unexplained influence on meat,
 rendering it less savoury and less agreeable than meat which has
 been roasted. "those who have travelled in germany and france,"
 writes mr. lewis, one of our most popular scientific authors,
 "must have repeatedly marvelled at the singular uniformity in
 the flavour, or want of flavour, of the various 'roasts' served
 up at the table-d'hôte." the general explanation is, that the
 german and french meat is greatly inferior in quality to that of
 england and holland, owing to the inferiority of pasturage; and
 doubtless this is one cause, but it is not the chief cause. the
 meat is inferior, but the cooking is mainly at fault. the meat
 is scarcely ever roasted, because there is no coal, and
 firewood is expensive. the meat is therefore baked; and the
 consequence of this baking is, that no meat is eatable or eaten,
 with its own gravy, but is always accompanied by some sauce more
 or less piquant. the germans generally believe that in england
 we eat our beef and mutton almost raw; they shudder at our
 gravy, as if it were so much blood.
stewed beef or rump steak (an entree).
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of beef or rump steak,  onions, 
turnips,  carrots,  or  oz. of butter, / pint of water, 
teaspoonful of salt, / do. of pepper,  tablespoonful of ketchup, 
tablespoonful of flour.
mode.—have the steaks cut tolerably thick and rather lean; divide
them into convenient-sized pieces, and fry them in the butter a nice
brown on both sides. cleanse and pare the vegetables, cut the onions and
carrots into thin slices, and the turnips into dice, and fry these in
the same fat that the steaks were done in. put all into a saucepan, add
/ pint of water, or rather more should it be necessary, and simmer
very gently for -/ or  hours; when nearly done, skim well, add salt,
pepper, and ketchup in the above proportions, and thicken with a
tablespoonful of flour mixed with  of cold water. let it boil up for a
minute or two after the thickening is added, and serve. when a
vegetable-scoop is at hand, use it to cut the vegetables in fanciful
shapes, and tomato, harvey's sauce, or walnut-liquor may be used to
flavour the gravy. it is less rich if stewed the previous day, so that
the fat may be taken off when cold; when wanted for table, it will
merely require warming through.
time.— hours. average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
stewed beef and celery sauce (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.— roots of celery,  pint of gravy, no. ,  onions
sliced,  lbs. of cold roast or boiled beef.
mode.—cut the celery into -inch pieces, put them in a stew-pan, with
the gravy and onions, simmer gently until the celery is tender, when add
the beef cut into rather thick pieces; stew gently for  minutes, and
serve with fried potatoes.
time.—from  to  minutes to stew the celery.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable from september to january.
stewed beef with oysters (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few thick steaks of cold ribs or sirloin of beef, 
oz. of butter,  onion sliced, pepper and salt to taste, / glass of
port wine, a little flour to thicken,  or  dozen oysters, rather more
than / pint of water.
mode.—cut the steaks rather thick, from cold sirloin or ribs of beef;
brown them lightly in a stewpan, with the butter and a little water; add
/ pint of water, the onion, pepper, and salt, and cover the stewpan
closely, and let it simmer very gently for / hour; then mix about a
teaspoonful of flour smoothly with a little of the liquor; add the port
wine and oysters, their liquor having been previously strained and put
into the stewpan; stir till the oysters plump, and serve. it should not
boil after the oysters are added, or they will harden.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, s. d.
seasonable from september to april.
. ingredients.— lbs. of a brisket of beef, vinegar and salt, 
carrots,  turnips,  small onions,  blade of pounded mace,  whole
allspice pounded, thickening of butter and flour,  tablespoonfuls of
ketchup; stock, or water.
mode.—about an hour before dressing it, rub the meat over with
vinegar and salt; put it into a stewpan, with sufficient stock to cover
it (when this is not at hand, water may be substituted for it), and be
particular that the stewpan is not much larger than the meat. skim well,
and when it has simmered very gently for  hour, put in the vegetables,
and continue simmering till the meat is perfectly tender. draw out the
bones, dish the meat, and garnish either with tufts of cauliflower or
braised cabbage cut in quarters. thicken as much gravy as required, with
a little butter and flour; add spices and ketchup in the above
proportion, give one boil, pour some of it over the meat, and the
remainder send in a tureen.
time.—rather more than  hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the remainder of the liquor in which the beef was boiled may be
served as a soup, or it may be sent to table with the meat in a tureen.
. ingredients.—/ rump of beef, sufficient stock to cover it (no.
),  tablespoonfuls of vinegar,  tablespoonfuls of ketchup,  large
bunch of savoury herbs,  onions,  cloves, pepper and salt to taste,
thickening of butter and flour,  glass of port wine.
mode.—cut out the bone, sprinkle the meat with a little cayenne (this
must be sparingly used), and bind and tie it firmly up with tape; put it
into a stewpan with sufficient stock to cover it, and add vinegar,
ketchup, herbs, onions, cloves, and seasoning in the above proportion,
and simmer very gently for  or  hours, or until the meat is perfectly
tender, which may be ascertained by piercing it with a thin skewer. when
done, remove the tape, lay it into a deep dish, which keep hot; strain
and skim the gravy, thicken it with butter and flour, add a glass of
port wine and any flavouring to make the gravy rich and palatable; let
it boil up, pour over the meat, and serve. this dish may be very much
enriched by garnishing with forcemeat balls, or filling up the space
whence the bone is taken with a good forcemeat; sliced carrots, turnips,
and onions boiled with the meat, are also a great improvement, and,
where expense is not objected to, it may be glazed. this, however, is
not necessary where a good gravy is poured round and over the meat.
time.—/ rump stewed gently from  to  hours.
average cost, d. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—a stock or gravy in which to boil the meat, may be made of the
bone and trimmings, by boiling them with water, and adding carrots,
onions, turnips, and a bunch of sweet herbs. to make this dish richer
and more savoury, half-roast the rump, and afterwards stew it in strong
stock and a little madeira. this is an expensive method, and is not,
after all, much better than a plainer-dressed joint.
 the baron of beef.—this noble joint, which consisted of two
 sirloins not cut asunder, was a favourite dish of our ancestors.
 it is rarely seen nowadays; indeed, it seems out of place on a
 modern table, as it requires the grim boar's head and christmas
 pie as supporters. sir walter scott has described a feast at
 which the baron of beef would have appeared to great advantage.
 we will quote a few lines to remind us of those days when
 "england was merry england," and when hospitality was thought to
 be the highest virtue.
"the fire, with well-dried logs supplied,
went roaring up the chimney wide;
the huge hall-table's oaken face,
scrubb'd till it shone, the day to grace,
bore then, upon its massive board,
no mark to part the squire and lord.
then was brought in the lusty brawn,
by old blue-coated serving-man;
then the grim boar's head frown'd on high,
crested with bays and rosemary.
well can the green-garb'd ranger tell
how, when, and where the monster fell;
what dogs before his death he tore,
and all the baiting of the boar;
while round the merry wassel bowl,
garnish'd with ribbons, blithe did trowl.
there the huge sirloin reek'd; hard by
plum-porridge stood, and christmas pie;
nor fail'd old scotland to produce,
at such high tide, her savoury goose."
 when a lord's son came of age, in the olden time, the baron of
 beef was too small a joint, by many degrees, to satisfy the
 retainers who would flock to the hall; a whole ox was therefore
 generally roasted over a fire built up of huge logs. we may here
 mention, that an ox was roasted entire on the frozen thames, in
 the early part of the present century.
. ingredients.—a shin of beef,  head of celery,  onion, a faggot
of savoury herbs, / teaspoonful of allspice, / teaspoonful of whole
black pepper,  carrots,  button onions,  turnips, thickening of
butter and flour,  tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup,  tablespoonfuls
of port wine; pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—have the bone sawn into  or  pieces, cover with hot water,
bring it to a boil, and remove any scum that may rise to the surface.
put in the celery, onion, herbs, spice, and seasoning, and simmer very
gently until the meat is tender. peel the vegetables, cut them into any
shape fancy may dictate, and boil them with the onions until tender;
lift out the beef, put it on a dish, which keep hot, and thicken with
butter and flour as much of the liquor as will be wanted for gravy; keep
stirring till it boils, then strain and skim. put the gravy back in the
stewpan, add the seasoning, port wine, and ketchup, give one boil, and
pour it over the beef; garnish with the boiled carrots, turnips, and
onions.
time.—the meat to be stewed about  hours. average cost, d. per
lb. with bone.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
toad-in-the-hole (a homely but savoury dish).
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of rump-steak,  sheep's kidney, pepper and
salt to taste. for the batter,  eggs,  pint of milk,  tablespoonfuls
of flour, / saltspoonful of salt.
mode.—cut up the steak and kidney into convenient-sized pieces, and
put them into a pie-dish, with a good seasoning of salt and pepper; mix
the flour with a small quantity of milk at first, to prevent its being
lumpy; add the remainder, and the  eggs, which should be well beaten;
put in the salt, stir the batter for about  minutes, and pour it over
the steak. place it in a tolerably brisk oven immediately, and bake for
-/ hour.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the remains of cold beef, rather underdone, may be substituted
for the steak, and, when liked, the smallest possible quantity of minced
onion or shalot may be added.
. ingredients.— tongue, a bunch of savoury herbs, water.
mode.—in choosing a tongue, ascertain how long it has been dried or
pickled, and select one with a smooth skin, which denotes its being
young and tender. if a dried one, and rather hard, soak it at least for
 hours previous to cooking it; if, however, it is fresh from the
pickle,  or  hours will be sufficient for it to remain in sock. put
the tongue in a stewpan with plenty of cold water and a bunch of savoury
herbs; let it gradually come to a boil, skim well and simmer very gently
until tender. peel off the skin, garnish with tufts of cauliflowers or
brussels sprouts, and serve. boiled tongue is frequently sent to table
with boiled poultry, instead of ham, and is, by many persons, preferred.
if to serve cold, peel it, fasten it down to a piece of board by
sticking a fork through the root, and another through the top, to
straighten it. when cold, glaze it, and put a paper ruche round the
root, and garnish with tufts of parsley.
time.—a large smoked tongue,  to -/ hours; a small one, -/ to
 hours. a large unsmoked tongue,  to -/ hours; a small one,  to
-/ hours.
average cost, for a moderate sized tongue, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—for a tongue of  lbs.,  oz. of saltpetre, / oz.
of black pepper,  oz. of sugar,  oz. of juniper berries,  oz. of
salt.
mode.—rub the above ingredients well into the tongue, and let it
remain in the pickle for  days or a fortnight; then drain it, tie it
up in brown paper, and have it smoked for about  days over a wood
fire; or it may be boiled out of this pickle.
time.—from  to  days to remain in the pickle; to be smoked 
days.
average cost, for a medium-sized uncured tongue, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
note.—if not wanted immediately, the tongue will keep  or  weeks
without being too salt; then it must not be rubbed, but only turned in
the pickle.
. ingredients.— lbs. of salt,  oz. of sugar,  oz. of powdered
saltpetre.
mode.—rub the above ingredients well into the tongues, and keep them
in this curing mixture for  months, turning them every day. drain them
from the pickle, cover with brown paper, and have them smoked for about
 weeks.
time.—the tongues to remain in pickle  months; to be smoked  weeks.
sufficient.—the above quantity of brine sufficient for  tongues, of
 lbs. each.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: beef tongue.]
 the tongues of animals.—the tongue, whether in the ox or in
 man, is the seat of the sense of taste. this sense warns the
 animal against swallowing deleterious substances. dr. carpenter
 says, that, among the lower animals, the instinctive perceptions
 connected with this sense, are much more remarkable than our
 own; thus, an omnivorous monkey will seldom touch fruits of a
 poisonous character, although their taste may be agreeable.
 however this may be, man's instinct has decided that ox-tongue
 is better than horse-tongue; nevertheless, the latter is
 frequently substituted by dishonest dealers for the former. the
 horse's tongue may be readily distinguished by a spoon-like
 expansion at its end.
. ingredients.— oz. of salt,  oz. of bay-salt,  oz. of saltpetre,
 oz. of coarse sugar; cloves, mace, and allspice to taste; butter,
common crust of flour and water.
mode.—lay the tongue for a fortnight in the above pickle, turn it
every day, and be particular that the spices are well pounded; put it
into a small pan just large enough to hold it, place some pieces of
butter on it, and cover with a common crust. bake in a slow oven until
so tender that a straw would penetrate it; take off the skin, fasten it
down to a piece of board by running a fork through the root and another
through the tip, at the same time straightening it and putting it into
shape. when cold, glaze it, put a paper ruche round the root, which is
generally very unsightly, and garnish with tufts of parsley.
time.—from  or  hours in a slow oven, according to size.
average cost, for a medium-sized uncured tongue, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—tripe, onion sauce, no. , milk and water.
mode.—ascertain that the tripe is quite fresh, and have it cleaned
and dressed. cut away the coarsest fat, and boil it in equal proportions
of milk and water for / hour. should the tripe be entirely undressed,
more than double that time should be allowed for it. have ready some
onion sauce made by recipe no. s, dish the tripe, smother it with the
sauce, and the remainder send to table in a tureen.
time.— hour: for undressed tripe, from -/ to  hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable at any time.
note.—tripe may be dressed in a variety of ways: it may be cut in
pieces and fried in batter, stewed in gravy with mushrooms, or cut into
collops, sprinkled with minced onion and savoury herbs, and fried a nice
brown in clarified butter.
a boiled aitch-bone of beef is not a difficult joint to carve, as will
be seen on reference to the accompanying engraving. by following with
the knife the direction of the line from  to , nice slices will be
easily cut. it may be necessary, as in a round of beef, to cut a thick
slice off the outside before commencing to serve.
[illustration]
there is but little description necessary to add, to show the carving of
a boiled brisket of beef, beyond the engraving here inserted. the only
point to be observed is, that the joint should be cut evenly and firmly
quite across the bones, so that, on its reappearance at table, it should
not have a jagged and untidy look.
[illustration]
this dish resembles the sirloin, except that it has no fillet or
undercut. as explained in the recipes, the end piece is often cut off,
salted and boiled. the mode of carving is similar to that of the
sirloin, viz., in the direction of the dotted line from  to . this
joint will be the more easily cut if the plan be pursued which is
suggested in carving the sirloin; namely, the inserting of the knife
immediately between the bone and the moat, before commencing to cut it
into slices. all joints of roast beef should be cut in even and thin
slices. horseradish, finely scraped, may be served as a garnish; but
horseradish sauce is preferable for eating with the beef.
[illustration]
this dish is served differently at various tables, some preferring it to
come to table with the fillet, or, as it is usually called, the
undercut, uppermost. the reverse way, as shown in the cut, is that most
usually adopted. still the undercut is best eaten when hot;
consequently, the carver himself may raise the joint, and cut some
slices from the under side, in the direction of from  to , as the
fillet is very much preferred by some eaters. the upper part of the
sirloin should be cut in the direction of the line from  to , and care
should be taken to carve it evenly and in thin slices. it will be found
a great assistance, in carving this joint well, if the knife be first
inserted just above the bone at the bottom, and run sharply along
between the bone and meat, and also to divide the meat from the bone in
the same way at the side of the joint. the slices will then come away
more readily.
[illustration]
some carvers cut the upper side of the sirloin across, as shown by the
line from  to ; but this is a wasteful plan, and one not to be
recommended. with the sirloin, very finely-scraped horseradish is
usually served, and a little given, when liked, to each guest.
horseradish sauce is preferable, however, for serving on the plate,
although the scraped horseradish may still be used as a garnish.
[illustration]
a round of beef is not so easily carved as many other joints of beef,
and to manage it properly, a thin-bladed and very sharp knife is
necessary. off the outside of the joint, at its top, a thick slice
should first be cut, so as to leave the surface smooth; then thin and
even slices should be cleverly carved in the direction of the line  to
; and with each slice of the lean a delicate morsel of the fat should
be served.
[illustration]
passing the knife down in the direction of from  to , a not too thin
slice should be helped; and the carving of a tongue may be continued in
this way until the best portions of the upper side are served. the fat
which lies about the root of the tongue can be served by turning the
tongue, and cutting in the direction of from  to .
[illustration]
[illustration]
. of all wild or domesticated animals, the sheep is, without
exception, the most useful to man as a food, and the most necessary to
his health and comfort; for it not only supplies him with the lightest
and most nutritious of meats, but, in the absence of the cow, its udder
yields him milk, cream, and a sound though inferior cheese; while from
its fat he obtains light, and from its fleece broadcloth, kerseymere,
blankets, gloves, and hose. its bones when burnt make an animal
charcoal—ivory black—to polish his boots, and when powdered, a manure
for the cultivation of his wheat; the skin, either split or whole, is
made into a mat for his carriage, a housing for his horse, or a lining
for his hat, and many other useful purposes besides, being extensively
employed in the manufacture of parchment; and finally, when oppressed by
care and sorrow, the harmonious strains that carry such soothing
contentment to the heart, are elicited from the musical strings,
prepared almost exclusively from the intestines of the sheep.
. this valuable animal, of which england is estimated to maintain an
average stock of ,,, belongs to the class already indicated
under the ox,—the mammalia; to the order of rumenantia, or
cud-chewing animal; to the tribe of capridae, or horned quadrupeds;
and the genus ovis, or the "sheep." the sheep may be either with or
without horns; when present, however, they have always this peculiarity,
that they spring from a triangular base, are spiral in form, and
lateral, at the side of the head, in situation. the fleece of the sheep
is of two sorts, either short and harsh, or soft and woolly; the wool
always preponderating in an exact ratio to the care, attention, and
amount of domestication bestowed on the animal. the generic
peculiarities of the sheep are the triangular and spiral form of the
horns, always larger in the male when present, but absent in the most
cultivated species; having sinuses at the base of all the toes of the
four feet, with two rudimentary hoofs on the fore legs, two inguinal
teats to the udder, with a short tail in the wild breed, but of varying
length in the domesticated; have no incisor teeth in the upper jaw, but
in their place a hard elastic cushion along the margin of the gum, on
which the animal nips and breaks the herbage on which it feeds; in the
lower jaw there are eight incisor teeth and six molars on each side of
both jaws, making in all  teeth. the fleece consists of two coats, one
to keep the animal warm, the other to carry off the water without
wetting the skin. the first is of wool, the weight and fineness of which
depend on the quality of the pasture and the care bestowed on the flock;
the other of hair, that pierces the wool and overlaps it, and is in
excess in exact proportion to the badness of the keep and inattention
with which the animal is treated.
. the great object of the grazier is to procure an animal that will
yield the greatest pecuniary return in the shortest time; or, in other
words, soonest convert grass and turnips into good mutton and fine
fleece. all sheep will not do this alike; some, like men, are so
restless and irritable, that no system of feeding, however good, will
develop their frames or make them fat. the system adopted by the breeder
to obtain a valuable animal for the butcher, is to enlarge the capacity
and functions of the digestive organs, and reduce those of the head and
chest, or the mental and respiratory organs. in the first place, the
mind should be tranquillized, and those spaces that can never produce
animal fibre curtailed, and greater room afforded, as in the abdomen,
for those that can. and as nothing militates against the fattening
process so much as restlessness, the chief wish of the grazier is to
find a dull, indolent sheep, one who, instead of frisking himself,
leaping his wattles, or even condescending to notice the butting gambols
of his silly companions, silently fills his paunch with pasture, and
then seeking a shady nook, indolently and luxuriously chows his cud with
closed eyes and blissful satisfaction, only rising when his delicious
repast is ended, to proceed silently and without emotion to repeat the
pleasing process of laying in more provender, and then returning to his
dreamy siesta to renew the delightful task of rumination. such animals
are said to have a lymphatic temperament, and are of so kindly a
nature, that on good pasturage they may be said to grow daily. the
leicestershire breed is the best example of this lymphatic and contented
animal, and the active orkney, who is half goat in his habits, of the
restless and unprofitable. the rich pasture of our midland counties
would take years in making the wiry orkney fat and profitable, while one
day's fatigue in climbing rocks after a coarse and scanty herbage would
probably cause the actual death of the pampered and short-winded
leicester.
. the more removed from the nature of the animal is the food on which
it lives, the more difficult is the process of assimilation, and the
more complex the chain of digestive organs; for it must be evident to
all, that the same apparatus that converts flesh into flesh, is
hardly calculated to transmute grass into flesh. as the process of
digestion in carnivorous animals is extremely simple, these organs are
found to be remarkably short, seldom exceeding the length of the
animal's body; while, where digestion is more difficult, from the
unassimilating nature of the aliment, as in the ruminant order, the
alimentary canal, as is the case with the sheep, is twenty-seven times
the length of the body. the digestive organ in all ruminant animals
consists of four stomachs, or, rather, a capacious pouch, divided by
doorways and valves into four compartments, called, in their order of
position, the paunch, the reticulum, the omasum, and the abomasum. when
the sheep nibbles the grass, and is ignorantly supposed to be eating, he
is, in fact, only preparing the raw material of his meal, in reality
only mowing the pasture, which, as he collects, is swallowed instantly,
passing into the first receptacle, the paunch, where it is surrounded
by a quantity of warm saliva, in which the herbage undergoes a process
of maceration or softening, till the animal having filled this
compartment, the contents pass through a valve into the second or
smaller bag,—the reticulum, where, having again filled the paunch
with a reserve, the sheep lies down and commences that singular process
of chewing the cud, or, in other words, masticating the food he has
collected. by the operation of a certain set of muscles, a small
quantity of this softened food from the reticulum, or second bag, is
passed into the mouth, which it now becomes the pleasure of the sheep to
grind under his molar teeth into a soft smooth pulp, the operation being
further assisted by a flow of saliva, answering the double purpose of
increasing the flavour of the aliment and promoting the solvency of the
mass. having completely comminuted and blended this mouthful, it is
swallowed a second time; but instead of returning to the paunch or
reticulum, it passes through another valve into a side cavity,—the
omasum, where, after a maceration in more saliva for some hours, it
glides by the same contrivance into the fourth pouch,—the abomasum,
an apartment in all respects analogous to the ordinary stomach of
animals, and where the process of digestion, begun and carried on in the
previous three, is here consummated, and the nutrient principle, by
means of the bile, eliminated from the digested aliment. such is the
process of digestion in sheep and oxen.
. no other animal, even of the same order, possesses in so remarkable
a degree the power of converting pasture into flesh as the
leicestershire sheep; the south down and cheviot, the two next breeds in
quality, are, in consequence of the greater vivacity of the animal's
nature, not equal to it in that respect, though in both the brain and
chest are kept subservient to the greater capacity of the organs of
digestion. besides the advantage of increased bulk and finer fleeces,
the breeder seeks to obtain an augmented deposit of tissue in those
parts of the carcase most esteemed as food, or, what are called in the
trade "prime joints;" and so far has this been effected, that the
comparative weight of the hind quarters over the fore has become a test
of quality in the breed, the butchers in some markets charging twopence
a pound more for that portion of the sheep. indeed, so superior are the
hind quarters of mutton now regarded, that very many of the west-end
butchers never deal in any other part of the sheep.
. the difference in the quality of the flesh in various breeds is a
well-established fact, not alone in flavour, but also in tenderness; and
that the nature of the pasture on which the sheep is fed influences the
flavour of the meat, is equally certain, and shown in the estimation in
which those flocks are held which have grazed on the thymy heath of
bamstead in sussex. it is also a well-established truth, that the
larger the frame of the animal, the coarser is the meat, and that
small bones are both guarantees for the fineness of the breed and the
delicacy of the flesh. the sex too has much to do in determining the
quality of the meat; in the males, the lean is closer in fibre, deeper
in colour, harder in texture, less juicy, and freer from fat, than in
the female, and is consequently tougher and more difficult of digestion;
but probably age, and the character of the pasturage on which they are
reared, has, more than any other cause, an influence on the quality and
tenderness of the meat.
. the numerous varieties of sheep inhabiting the different regions of
the earth have been reduced by cuvier to three, or at most four,
species: the ovis amman, or the argali, the presumed parent stock of
all the rest; the ovis tragelaphus, the bearded sheep of africa; the
ovis musmon, the musmon of southern europe; and the ovis montana,
the mouflon of america; though it is believed by many naturalists that
this last is so nearly identical with the indian argali as to be
undeserving a separate place. it is still a controversy to which of
these three we are indebted for the many breeds of modern domestication;
the argali, however, by general belief, has been considered as the most
probable progenitor of the present varieties.
. the effects produced by change of climate, accident, and other
causes, must have been great to accomplish so complete a physical
alteration as the primitive argali must have undergone before the
musmon, or mouflon of corsica, the immediate progenitor of all our
european breeds, assumed his present appearance. the argali is about a
fifth larger in size than the ordinary english sheep, and being a native
of a tropical clime, his fleece is of hair instead of wool, and of a
warm reddish brown, approaching to yellow; a thick mane of darker hair,
about seven inches long, commences from two long tufts at the angle of
the jaws, and, running under the throat and neck, descends down the
chest, dividing, at the fore fork, into two parts, one running down the
front of each leg, as low as the shank. the horns, unlike the character
of the order generally, have a quadrangular base, and, sweeping inwards,
terminate in a sharp point. the tail, about seven inches long, ends in a
tuft of stiff hairs. from this remarkable muffler-looking beard, the
french have given the species the name of mouflon ŕ manchettes. from
the primitive stock eleven varieties have been reared in this country,
of the domesticated sheep, each supposed by their advocates to possess
some one or more special qualities. these eleven, embracing the shetland
or orkney; the dun-woolled; black-faced, or heath-bred; the moorland, or
devonshire; the cheviot; the horned, of norfolk the ryeland; south-down;
the merino; the old leicester, and the teeswater, or new leicester, have
of late years been epitomized; and, for all useful and practical
purposes, reduced to the following four orders:—
. the south-down, the leicester, the black-faced, and the cheviot.
[illustration: south-down ram.]
[illustration: south-down ewe.]
. south-downs.—it appears, as far as our investigation can trace the
fact, that from the very earliest epoch of agricultural history in
england, the breezy range of light chalky hills running through the
south-west and south of sussex and hampshire, and known as the
south-downs, has been famous for a superior race of sheep; and we find
the romans early established mills and a cloth-factory at winchester,
where they may be said to terminate, which rose to such estimation, from
the fineness of the wool and texture of the cloth, that the produce was
kept as only worthy to clothe emperors. from this, it may be inferred
that sheep have always been indigenous to this hilly tract. though
boasting so remote a reputation, it is comparatively within late years
that the improvement and present state of perfection of this breed has
been effected, the south-down new ranking, for symmetry of shape,
constitution, and early maturity, with any stock in the kingdom. the
south-down has no horns, is covered with a fine wool from two to three
inches long, has a small head, and legs and face of a grey colour. it
is, however, considered deficient in depth and breadth of chest. a
marked peculiarity of this breed is that its hind quarters stand higher
than the fore, the quarters weighing from fifteen to eighteen pounds.
[illustration: leicester ram.]
[illustration: leicester ewe.]
. the leicester.—it was not till the year  that mr. robert
bakewell directed his attention to the improvement of his stock of
sheep, and ultimately effected that change in the character of his flock
which has brought the breed to hold so prominent a place. the leicester
is regarded as the largest example of the improved breeds, very
productive, and yielding a good fleece. he has a small head, covered
with short white hairs, a clean muzzle, an open countenance, full eye,
long thin ear, tapering neck, well-arched ribs, and straight back. the
meat is indifferent, its flavour not being so good as that of the
south-down, and there is a very large proportion of fat. average weight
of carcase from  to  lbs.
[illustration: heath ram.]
[illustration: heath ewe.]
. black-faced, on heath-bred sheep.—this is the most hardy of all
our native breeds, and originally came from ettrick forest. the face and
legs are black, or sometimes mottled, the horns spiral, and on the top
of the forehead it has a small round tuft of lighter-coloured wool than
on the face; has the muzzle and lips of the same light hue, and what
shepherds call a mealy mouth; the eye is full of vivacity and fire, and
well open; the body long, round, and firm, and the limbs robust. the
wool is thin, coarse, and light. weight of the quarter, from  to 
lbs.
. the cheviot.—from the earliest traditions, these hills in the
north, like the chalk-ridges in the south, have possessed a race of
large-carcased sheep, producing a valuable fleece. to these physical
advantages, they added a sound constitution, remarkable vigour, and
capability to endure great privation. both sexes are destitute of horns,
face white, legs long and clean, carries the head erect, has the throat
and neck well covered, the cars long and open, and the face animated.
the cheviot is a small-boned sheep, and well covered with wool to the
hough; the only defect in this breed, is in a want of depth in the
chest. weight of the quarter, from  to  lbs.
[illustration: romney-marsh ram.]
[illustration: romney-marsh ewe.]
. though the romney marshes, that wide tract of morass and lowland
moor extending from the weald (or ancient forest) of kent into sussex,
has rather been regarded as a general feeding-ground for any kind of
sheep to be pastured on, it has yet, from the earliest date, been famous
for a breed of animals almost peculiar to the locality, and especially
for size, length, thickness, and quantity of wool, and what is called
thickness of stocking; and on this account for ages held pre-eminence
over every other breed in the kingdom. so satisfied were the kentish men
with the superiority of their sheep, that they long resisted any
crossing in the breed. at length, however, this was effected, and from
the old romney and new leicester a stock was produced that proved, in an
eminent degree, the advantage of the cross; and though the breed was
actually smaller than the original, it was found that the new stock did
not consume so much food, the stocking was increased, they were ready
for the market a year sooner; that the fat formed more on the exterior
of the carcase, where it was of most advantage to the grazier, rather
than as formerly in the interior, where it went to the butcher as offal;
and though the wool was shorter and lighter, it was of a better colour,
finer, and possessed of superior felting properties.
. the romney marsh breed is a large animal, deep, close, and compact,
with white face and legs, and yields a heavy fleece of a good staple
quality. the general structure is, however, considered defective, the
chest being narrow and the extremities coarse; nevertheless its tendency
to fatten, and its early maturity, are universally admitted. the romney
marsh, therefore, though not ranking as a first class in respect of
perfection and symmetry of breed, is a highly useful, profitable, and
generally advantageous variety of the english domestic sheep.
. different names have been given to sheep by their breeders,
according to their age and sex. the male is called a ram, or tup; after
weaning, he is said to be a hog, or hogget, or a lamb-hog, tup-hog, or
teg; later he is a wether, or wether-hog; after the first shearing, a
shearing, or dinmont; and after each succeeding shearing, a two, three,
or four-shear ram, tup, or wether, according to circumstances. the
female is called a ewe, or gimmer-lamb, till weaned, when she becomes,
according to the shepherd's nomenclature, a gimmer-ewe, hog, or teg;
after shearing, a gimmer or shearing-ewe, or theave; and in future a
two, three, or four-shear ewe, or theave.
. the mode of slaughtering sheep is perhaps as humane and expeditious
a process as could be adopted to attain the objects sought: the animal
being laid on its side in a sort of concave stool, the butcher, while
pressing the body with his knee, transfixes the throat near the angle of
the jaw, passing his knife between the windpipe and bones of the neck;
thus dividing the jugulars, carotids, and large vessels, the death being
very rapid from such a hemorrhage.
[illustration: side of mutton, showing the several joints.]
. almost every large city has a particular manner of cutting up, or,
as it is called, dressing the carcase. in london this process is very
simple, and as our butchers have found that much skewering back,
doubling one part over another, or scoring the inner cuticle or fell,
tends to spoil the meat and shorten the time it would otherwise keep,
they avoid all such treatment entirely. the carcase when flayed (which
operation is performed while yet warm), the sheep when hung up and the
head removed, presents the profile shown in our cut; the small numerals
indicating the parts or joints into which one half of the animal is cut.
after separating the hind from the fore quarters, with eleven ribs to
the latter, the quarters are usually subdivided in the manner shown in
the sketch, in which the several joins are defined by the intervening
lines and figures. hind quarter: no. , the leg; , the loin—the two,
when cut in one piece, being called the saddle. fore quarter: no. ,
the shoulder;  and  the neck; no.  being called, for distinction, the
scrag, which is generally afterwards separated from , the lower and
better joint; no. , the breast. the haunch of mutton, so often served
at public dinners and special entertainments, comprises all the leg and
so much of the loin, short of the ribs or lap, as is indicated on the
upper part of the carcase by a dotted line.
. the gentle and timid disposition of the sheep, and its defenceless
condition, must very early have attached it to man for motives less
selfish than either its fleece or its flesh; for it has been proved
beyond a doubt that, obtuse as we generally regard it, it is susceptible
of a high degree of domesticity, obedience, and affection. in many parts
of europe, where the flocks are guided by the shepherd's voice alone, it
is no unusual thing for a sheep to quit the herd when called by its
name, and follow the keeper like a dog. in the mountains of scotland,
when a flock is invaded by a savage dog, the rams have been known to
form the herd into a circle, and placing themselves on the outside line,
keep the enemy at bay, or charging on him in a troop, have despatched
him with their horns.
. the value of the sheep seems to have been early understood by adam
in his fallen state; his skin not only affording him protection for his
body, but a covering for his tent; and accordingly, we find abel
intrusted with this portion of his father's stock; for the bible tells
us that "abel was a keeper of sheep." what other animals were
domesticated at that time we can only conjecture, or at what exact
period the flesh of the sheep was first eaten for food by man, is
equally, if not uncertain, open to controversy. for though some
authorities maintain the contrary, it is but natural to suppose that
when abel brought firstlings of his flock, "and the fat thereof," as a
sacrifice, the less dainty portions, not being oblations, were hardly
likely to have been flung away as refuse. indeed, without supposing adam
and his descendants to have eaten animal food, we cannot reconcile the
fact of jubal cain, cain's son, and his family, living in tents, as they
are reported to have done, knowing that both their own garments and the
coverings of the tents, were made from the hides and skins of the
animals they bred; for the number of sheep and oxen slain for oblations
only, would not have supplied sufficient material for two such necessary
purposes. the opposite opinion is, that animal food was not eaten till
after the flood, when the lord renewed his covenant with noah. from
scriptural authority we learn many interesting facts as regards the
sheep: the first, that mutton fat was considered the most delicious
portion of any meat, and the tail and adjacent part the most exquisite
morsel in the whole body; consequently, such were regarded as especially
fit for the offer of sacrifice. from this fact we may reasonably infer
that the animal still so often met with in palestine and syria, and
known as the fat-tailed sheep, was in use in the days of the patriarchs,
though probably not then of the size and weight it now attains to; a
supposition that gains greater strength, when it is remembered that the
ram abraham found in the bush, when he went to offer up isaac, was a
horned animal, being entangled in the brake by his curved horns; so far
proving that it belonged to the tribe of the capridae, the fat-tailed
sheep appertaining to the same family.
. though the lambing season in this country usually commences in
march, under the artificial system, so much pursued now to please the
appetite of luxury, lambs can be procured at all seasons. when, however,
the sheep lambs in mid-winter, or the inclemency of the weather would
endanger the lives of mother and young, if exposed to its influence, it
is customary to rear the lambs within-doors, and under the shelter of
stables or barns, where, foddered on soft hay, and part fed on cow's
milk, the little creatures thrive rapidly: to such it is customary to
give the name of house lamb, to distinguish it from that reared in the
open air, or grass-fed. the ewe goes five months with her young, about
 days, or close on  weeks. the weaning season commences on poor
lands, about the end of the third month, but on rich pasture not till
the close of the fourth—sometimes longer.
. from the large proportion of moisture or fluids contained in the
tissues of all young animals, the flesh of lamb and veal is much more
prone, in close, damp weather, to become tainted and spoil than the
flesh of the more mature, drier, and closer-textured beef and mutton.
among epicures, the most delicious sorts of lamb are those of the
south-down breed, known by their black feet; and of these, those which
have been exclusively suckled on the milk of the parent ewe, are
considered the finest. next to these in estimation are those fed on the
milk of several dams, and last of all, though the fattest, the grass-fed
lamb; this, however, implies an age much greater than either of the
others.
[illustration: side of lamb.]
. lamb, in the early part of the season, however reared, is in
london, and indeed generally, sold in quarters, divided with eleven ribs
to the forequarter; but, as the season advances, these are subdivided
into two, and the hind-quarter in the same manner; the first consisting
of the shoulder, and the neck and breast; the latter, of the leg and the
loin,—as shown in the cut illustrative of mutton. as lamb, from the
juicy nature of its flesh, is especially liable to spoil in unfavourable
weather, it should be frequently wiped, so as to remove any moisture
that may form on it.
. in the purchasing of lamb for the table, there are certain signs by
which the experienced judgment is able to form an accurate opinion
whether the animal has been lately slaughtered, and whether the joints
possess that condition of fibre indicative of good and wholesome meat.
the first of these doubts may be solved satisfactorily by the bright and
dilated appearance of the eye; the quality of the fore-quarter can
always be guaranteed by the blue or healthy ruddiness of the jugular, or
vein of the neck; while the rigidity of the knuckle, and the firm,
compact feel of the kidney, will answer in an equally positive manner
for the integrity of the hind-quarter.
. mode of cutting up a side of lamb in london.—, . ribs; .
breast; . shoulder; . loin; . leg; ,,. fore quarter.
baked minced mutton (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of any joint of cold roast mutton,  or 
onions,  bunch of savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste,  blades of
pounded mace or nutmeg,  tablespoonfuls of gravy, mashed potatoes.
mode.—mince an onion rather fine, and fry it a light-brown colour;
add the herbs and mutton, both of which should be also finely minced and
well mixed; season with pepper and salt, and a little pounded mace or
nutmeg, and moisten with the above proportion of gravy. put a layer of
mashed potatoes at the bottom of a dish, then the mutton, and then
another layer of potatoes, and bake for about / hour.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
note.—if there should be a large quantity of meat, use  onions
instead of .
. ingredients.—breast of mutton, bread crumbs,  tablespoonfuls of
minced savoury herbs (put a large proportion of parsley), pepper and
salt to taste.
mode.—cut off the superfluous fat; bone it; sprinkle over a layer of
bread crumbs, minced herbs, and seasoning; roll, and bind it up firmly.
boil gently for  hours, remove the tape, and serve with caper sauce,
no. , a little of which should be poured over the meat.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year.
. ingredients.—mutton, water, salt.
mode.—a. leg of mutton for boiling should not hang too long, as it
will not look a good colour when dressed. cut off the shank-bone, trim
the knuckle, and wash and wipe it very clean; plunge it into sufficient
boiling water to cover it; let it boil up, then draw the saucepan to the
side of the fire, where it should remain till the finger can be borne in
the water. then place it sufficiently near the fire, that the water may
gently simmer, and be very careful that it does not boil fast, or the
meat will be hard. skim well, add a little salt, and in about -/
hours after the water begins to simmer, a moderate-sized leg of mutton
will be done. serve with carrots and mashed turnips, which may be boiled
with the meat, and send caper sauce (no. ) to table with it in a
tureen.
time.—a moderate-sized leg of mutton of  lbs., -/ hours after the
water boils; one of  lbs.,  hours.
average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient.—a moderate-sized leg of mutton for  or  persons.
seasonable nearly all the year, but not so good in june, july, and
august.
note.—when meat is liked very thoroughly cooked, allow more time
than stated above. the liquor this joint was boiled in should be
converted into soup.
 the good shepherd.—the sheep's complete dependence upon the
 shepherd for protection from its numerous enemies is frequently
 referred to in the bible; thus the psalmist likens himself to a
 lost sheep, and prays the almighty to seek his servant; and our
 saviour, when despatching his twelve chosen disciples to preach
 the gospel amongst their unbelieving brethren, compares them to
 lambs going amongst wolves. the shepherd of the east, by kind
 treatment, calls forth from his sheep unmistakable signs of
 affection. the sheep obey his voice and recognize the names by
 which he calls them, and they follow him in and out of the fold.
 the beautiful figure of the "good shepherd," which so often
 occurs in the new testament, expresses the tenderness of the
 saviour for mankind. "the good shepherd giveth his life for the
 sheep."—john, x. . "i am the good shepherd, and know my
 sheep, and am known by mine."—john, x. . "and other sheep i
 have which are not of this fold: them also i must bring, and
 they shall hear my voice: and there shall be one fold and one
 shepherd."—john, x. .
. ingredients.—a small leg of mutton, weighing  or  lbs.,
forcemeat, no. ,  shalots finely minced.
mode.—make a forcemeat by recipe no. , to which add 
finely-minced shalots. bone the leg of mutton, without spoiling the
skin, and cut off a great deal of the fat. fill the hole up whence the
bone was taken, with the forcemeat, and sew it up underneath, to prevent
its falling out. bind and tie it up compactly, and roast it before a
nice clear fire for about -/ hours or rather longer; remove the tape
and send it to table with a good gravy. it may be glazed or not, as
preferred.
time.—-/ hours, or rather longer. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
braised fillet of mutton, with french beans.
. ingredients.—the chump end of a loin of mutton, buttered paper,
french beans, a little glaze,  pint of gravy.
mode.—roll up the mutton in a piece of buttered paper, roast it for 
hours, and do not allow it to acquire the least colour. have ready some
french beans, boiled, and drained on a sieve; remove the paper from the
mutton, glaze it; just heat up the beans in the gravy, and lay them on
the dish with the meat over them. the remainder of the gravy may be
strained, and sent to table in a tureen.
time.— hours. average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 various qualities of mutton—mutton is, undoubtedly, the meat
 most generally used in families; and, both by connoisseurs and
 medical men, it stands first in favour, whether its the favour,
 digestible qualifications, or general wholesomeness, be
 considered. of all mutton, that furnished by south-down sheep is
 the most highly esteemed; it is also the dearest, on account of
 its scarcity, and the great demand of it. therefore, if the
 housekeeper is told by the butcher that he has not any in his
 shop, it should not occasion disappointment to the purchaser.
 the london and other markets are chiefly supplied with sheep
 called half-breeds, which are a cross between the down and
 lincoln or leicester. these half-breeds make a greater weight of
 mutton than the true south-downs, and, for this very desirable
 qualification, they are preferred by the great sheep-masters.
 the legs of this mutton range from  to  lbs. in weight; the
 shoulders, necks, or loins, about  to  lbs.; and if care is
 taken not to purchase it; the shoulders, necks, or loins, about
  to  lbs.; and it cure is taken not to purchase it too fat, it
 will be found the most satisfactory and economical mutton that
 can be bought.
. ingredients.— small leg of mutton,  carrots,  onions,  faggot
of savoury herbs, a bunch of parsley, seasoning to taste of pepper and
salt, a few slices of bacon, a few veal trimmings, / pint of gravy or
water.
mode.—line the bottom of a braising-pan with a few slices of bacon,
put in the carrots, onions, herbs, parsley, and seasoning, and over
these place the mutton. cover the whole with a few more slices of bacon
and the veal trimmings, pour in the gravy or water, and stew very gently
for  hours. strain the gravy, reduce it to a glaze over a sharp fire,
glaze the mutton with it, and send it to table, placed on a dish of
white haricot beans boiled tender, or garnished with glazed onions.
time.— hours. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 the order of the golden fleece.—this order of knighthood was
 founded by philip the good, duke of burgundy, in , on the
 day of his marriage with the princess isabella of portugal. the
 number of the members was originally fixed at thirty-one,
 including the sovereign, as the head and chief of the
 institution. in , pope leo x. consented to increase the
 number to fifty-two, including the head. in  the german
 emperor charles vi. and king philip of spain both laid claim to
 the order. the former, however, on leaving spain, which he could
 not maintain by force of arms, took with him, to vienna, the
 archives of the order, the inauguration of which he solemnized
 there in , with great magnificence; but philip v. of spain
 declared himself grand master, and formally protested, at the
 congress of cambrai (), against the pretensions of the
 emperor. the dispute, though subsequently settled by the
 intercession of france, england, and holland, was frequently
 renewed, until the order was tacitly introduced into both
 countries, and it now passes by the respective names of the
 spanish or austrian "order of the golden fleece," according to
 the country where it is issued.
. ingredients.—breast of mutton,  onions, salt and pepper to taste,
flour, a bunch of savoury herbs, green peas.
mode.—cut the mutton into pieces about  inches square, and let it be
tolerably lean; put it into a stewpan, with a little fat or butter, and
fry it of a nice brown; then dredge in a little flour, slice the onions,
and put it with the herbs in the stewpan; pour in sufficient water
just to cover the meat, and simmer the whole gently until the mutton
is tender. take out the meat, strain, and skim off all the fat from the
gravy, and put both the meat and gravy back into the stewpan; add about
a quart of young green peas, and let them boil gently until done.  or 
slices of bacon added and stewed with the mutton give additional
flavour; and, to insure the peas being a beautiful green colour, they
may be boiled in water separately, and added to the stew at the moment
of serving.
time.—-/ hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from june to august.
 names of animals saxon, and of their flesh norman.—the names of
 all our domestic animals are of saxon origin; but it is curious
 to observe that norman names have been given to the different
 sorts of flesh which these animals yield. how beautifully this
 illustrates the relative position of saxon and norman after the
 conquest. the saxon hind had the charge of tending and feeding
 the domestic animals, but only that they might appear on the
 table of his norman lord. thus 'ox,' 'steer,' 'cow,' are saxon,
 but 'beef' is norman; 'calf' is saxon, but 'veal' norman;
 'sheep' is saxon, but 'mutton' norman; so it is severally with
 'deer' and 'venison,' 'swine' and 'pork,' 'fowl' and 'pullet.'
 'bacon,' the only flesh which, perhaps, ever came within his
 reach, is the single exception.
broiled mutton and tomato sauce (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few slices of cold mutton, tomato sauce, no. .
mode.—cut some nice slices from a cold leg or shoulder of mutton;
season them with pepper and salt, and broil over a clear fire. make some
tomato sauce by recipe no. , pour it over the mutton, and serve. this
makes an excellent dish, and must be served very hot.
time.—about  minutes to broil the mutton.
seasonable in september and october, when tomatoes are plentiful and
seasonable.
 shepherds and their flocks.—the shepherd's crook is older than
 either the husbandman's plough or the warrior's sword. we are
 told that abel was a keeper of sheep. many passages in holy writ
 enable us to appreciate the pastoral riches of the first eastern
 nations; and we can form an idea of the number of their flocks,
 when we read that jacob gave the children of hamor a hundred
 sheep for the price of a field, and that the king of israel
 received a hundred thousand every year from the king of moab,
 his tributary, and a like number of rams covered with their
 fleece. the tendency which most sheep have to ramble, renders it
 necessary for them to be attended by a shepherd. to keep a flock
 within bounds, is no easy task; but the watchful shepherd
 manages to accomplish it without harassing the sheep. in the
 highlands of scotland, where the herbage is scanty, the
 sheep-farm requires to be very large, and to be watched over by
 many shepherds. the farms of some of the great scottish
 landowners are of enormous extent. "how many sheep have you on
 your estate?" asked prince esterhazy of the duke of argyll. "i
 have not the most remote idea," replied the duke; "but i know
 the shepherds number several thousands."
. ingredients.—loin of mutton, pepper and salt, a small piece of
butter.
mode.—cut the chops from a well-hung tender loin of mutton, remove a
portion of the fat, and trim them into a nice shape; slightly beat and
level them; place the gridiron over a bright clear fire, rub the bars
with a little fat, and lay on the chops. whilst broiling, frequently
turn them, and in about  minutes they will be done. season with pepper
and salt, dish them on a very hot dish, rub a small piece of butter on
each chop, and serve very hot and expeditiously.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient.—allow  chop to each person.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of leg, loin, or neck of mutton,  onions,
 lettuces,  pint of green peas,  teaspoonful of salt,  teaspoonful
of pepper, / pint of water, / lb. of clarified butter; when liked, a
little cayenne.
mode.—mince the above quantity of undressed leg, loin, or neck of
mutton, adding a little of the fat, also minced; put it into a stewpan
with the remaining ingredients, previously shredding the lettuce and
onion rather fine; closely cover the stewpan, after the ingredients have
been well stirred, and simmer gently for rather more than  hours. serve
in a dish, with a border of rice round, the same as for curry.
time.—rather more than  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from june to august.
curried mutton (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of any joint of cold mutton,  onions,
/ lb. of butter,  dessertspoonful of curry powder,  dessertspoonful
of flour, salt to taste, / pint of stock or water.
mode.—slice the onions in thin rings, and put them into a stewpan
with the butter, and fry of a light brown; stir in the curry powder,
flour, and salt, and mix all well together. cut the meat into nice thin
slices (if there is not sufficient to do this, it may be minced), and
add it to the other ingredients; when well browned, add the stock or
gravy, and stew gently for about / hour. serve in a dish with a border
of boiled rice, the same as for other curries.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable in winter.
cutlets of cold mutton (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold loin or neck of mutton,  egg,
bread crumbs, brown gravy (no. ), or tomato sauce (no. ).
mode.—cut the remains of cold loin or neck of mutton into cutlets,
trim them, and take away a portion of the fat, should there be too much;
dip them in beaten egg, and sprinkle with bread crumbs, and fry them a
nice brown in hot dripping. arrange them on a dish, and pour round them
either a good gravy or hot tomato sauce.
time.—about  minutes.
seasonable.—tomatoes to be had most reasonably in september and
october.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of cold mutton,  oz. of beef suet, pepper
and salt to taste,  oz. of boiled rice,  egg, bread crumbs, made
gravy.
mode.—chop the meat, suet, and rice finely; mix well together, and
add a high seasoning of pepper and salt, and roll into sausages; cover
them with egg and bread crumbs, and fry in hot dripping of a nice brown.
serve in a dish with made gravy poured round them, and a little in a
tureen.
time.—/ hour to fry the sausages.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
 the golden fleece.—the ancient fable of the golden fleece may
 be thus briefly told:—phryxus, a son of athamus, king of
 thebes, to escape the persecutions of his stepmother ino, paid a
 visit to his friend aeetes, king of colchis. a ram, whose fleece
 was of pure gold, carried the youth through the air in a most
 obliging manner to the court of his friend. when safe at
 colchis, phryxus offered the ram on the altars of mars, and
 pocketed the fleece. the king received him with great kindness,
 and gave him his daughter chalciope in marriage; but, some time
 after, he murdered him in order to obtain possession of the
 precious fleece. the murder of phryxus was amply revenged by the
 greeks. it gave rise to the famous argonautic expedition,
 undertaken by jason and fifty of the most celebrated heroes of
 greece. the argonauts recovered the fleece by the help of the
 celebrated sorceress medea, daughter of aeetes, who fell
 desperately in love with the gallant but faithless jason. in the
 story of the voyage of the argo, a substratum of truth probably
 exists, though overlaid by a mass of fiction. the ram which
 carried phryxus to colchis is by some supposed to have been the
 name of the ship in which he embarked. the fleece of gold is
 thought to represent the immense treasures he bore away from
 thebes. the alchemists of the fifteenth century were firmly
 convinced that the golden fleece was a treatise on the
 transmutation of metals, written on sheepskin.
. ingredients.— lbs. of the middle or best end of the neck of
mutton,  carrots,  turnips,  onions, popper and salt to taste, 
tablespoonful of ketchup or harvey's sauce.
mode.—trim off some of the fat, cut the mutton into rather thin
chops, and put them into a frying-pan with the fat trimmings. fry of a
pale brown, but do not cook them enough for eating. cut the carrots and
turnips into dice, and the onions into slices, and slightly fry them in
the same fat that the mutton was browned in, but do not allow them to
take any colour. now lay the mutton at the bottom of a stewpan, then the
vegetables, and pour over them just sufficient boiling water to cover
the whole. give one boil, skim well, and then set the pan on the side of
the fire to simmer gently until the meat is tender. skim off every
particle of fat, add a seasoning of pepper and salt, and a little
ketchup, and serve. this dish is very much better if made the day before
it is wanted for table, as the fat can be so much more easily removed
when the gravy is cold. this should be particularly attended to, as it
is apt to be rather rich and greasy if eaten the same day it is made. it
should be served in rather a deep dish.
time.—-/ hours to simmer gently.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—breast or scrag of mutton, flour, pepper and salt to
taste,  large onion,  cloves, a bunch of savoury herbs,  blade of
mace, carrots and turnips, sugar.
mode.—cut the mutton into square pieces, and fry them a nice colour;
then dredge over them a little flour and a seasoning of pepper and salt.
put all into a stewpan, and moisten with boiling water, adding the
onion, stuck with  cloves, the mace, and herbs. simmer gently till the
meat is nearly done, skim off all the fat, and then add the carrots and
turnips, which should previously be cut in dice and fried in a little
sugar to colour them. let the whole simmer again for  minutes; take
out the onion and bunch of herbs, and serve.
time.—about  hours to simmer.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
haricot mutton (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold neck or loin of mutton,  oz. of
butter,  onions,  dessertspoonful of flour, / pint of good gravy,
pepper and salt to taste,  tablespoonfuls of port wine,  tablespoonful
of mushroom ketchup,  carrots,  turnips,  head of celery.
mode.—cut the cold mutton into moderate-sized chops, and take off the
fat; slice the onions, and fry them with the chops, in a little butter,
of a nice brown colour; stir in the flour, add the gravy, and let it
stew gently nearly an hour. in the mean time boil the vegetables until
nearly tender, slice them, and add them to the mutton about / hour
before it is to be served. season with pepper and salt, add the ketchup
and port wine, give one boil, and serve.
time.— hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast shoulder or leg of mutton,
 whole peppers,  whole allspice, a faggot of savoury herbs, / head
of celery,  onion,  oz. of butter, flour.
mode.—cut the meat in nice even slices from the bones, trimming off
all superfluous fat and gristle; chop the bones and fragments of the
joint, put them into a stewpan with the pepper, spice, herbs, and
celery; cover with water, and simmer for  hour. slice and fry the onion
of a nice pale-brown colour, dredge in a little flour to make it thick,
and add this to the bones, &c. stew for / hour, strain the gravy, and
let it cool; then skim off every particle of fat, and put it, with the
meat, into a stewpan. flavour with ketchup, harvey's sauce; tomato
sauce, or any flavouring that may be preferred, and let the meat
gradually warm through, but not boil, or it will harden. to hash meat
properly, it should be laid in cold gravy, and only left on the fire
just long enough to warm through.
time.—-/ hour to simmer the gravy.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
 hashed mutton.—many persons express a decided aversion to
 hashed mutton; and, doubtless, this dislike has arisen from the
 fact that they have unfortunately never been properly served
 with this dish. if properly done, however, the meat tender (it
 ought to be as tender as when first roasted), the gravy abundant
 and well flavoured, and the sippets nicely toasted, and the
 whole served neatly; then, hashed mutton is by no means to be
 despised, and is infinitely more wholesome and appetizing than
 the cold leg or shoulder, of which fathers and husbands, and
 their bachelor friends, stand in such natural awe.
hodge-podge (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—about  lb. of underdone cold mutton,  lettuces, 
pint of green peas,  or  green onions,  oz. of butter, pepper and
salt to taste, / teacupful of water.
mode.—mince the mutton, and cut up the lettuces and onions in slices.
put these in a stewpan, with all the ingredients except the peas, and
let these simmer very gently for / hour, keeping them well stirred.
boil the peas separately, mix these with the mutton, and serve very hot.
time.—/ hour.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from the end of may to august.
. ingredients.— lbs. of the loin or neck of mutton,  lbs. of
potatoes,  large onions, pepper and salt to taste, rather more than 
pint of water.
mode.—trim off some of the fat of the above quantity of loin or neck
of mutton, and cut it into chops of a moderate thickness. pare and halve
the potatoes, and cut the onions into thick slices. put a layer of
potatoes at the bottom of a stewpan, then a layer of mutton and onions,
and season with pepper and salt; proceed in this manner until the
stewpan is full, taking care to have plenty of vegetables at the top.
pour in the water, and let it stew very gently for -/ hours, keeping
the lid of the stewpan closely shut the whole time, and occasionally
shaking it to prevent its burning.
time.—-/ hours.
average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—more suitable for a winter dish.
. ingredients.— or  lbs. of the breast of mutton, -/ pint of
water, salt and pepper to taste,  lbs. of potatoes,  large onions.
mode.—put the mutton into a stewpan with the water and a little salt,
and let it stew gently for an hour; cut the meat into small pieces, skim
the fat from the gravy, and pare and slice the potatoes and onions. put
all the ingredients into the stewpan in layers, first a layer of
vegetables, then one of meat, and sprinkle seasoning of pepper and salt
between each layer; cover closely, and let the whole stew very gently
for  hour of rather more, shaking it frequently to prevent its burning.
time.—rather more than  hours. average cost, s, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—suitable for a winter dish.
note.—irish stew may be prepared in the same manner as above, but
baked in a jar instead of boiled. about  hours or rather more in a
moderate oven will be sufficient time to bake it.
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the neck of mutton, clarified butter,
the yolk of  egg,  tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs,  tablespoonful of
minced savoury herbs,  tablespoonful of minced parsley,  teaspoonful
of minced shalot,  saltspoonful of finely-chopped lemon-peel; pepper,
salt, and pounded mace to taste; flour, / pint of hot broth or water,
 teaspoonfuls of harvey's sauce,  teaspoonful of soy,  teaspoonfuls
of tarragon vinegar,  tablespoonful of port wine.
mode.—cut the mutton into nicely-shaped cutlets, flatten them, and
trim off some of the fat, dip them in clarified butter, and then, into
the beaten yolk of an egg. mix well together bread crumbs, herbs,
parsley, shalot, lemon-peel, and seasoning in the above proportion, and
cover the cutlets with these ingredients. melt some butter in a
frying-pan, lay in the cutlets, and fry them a nice brown; take them,
out, and keep them hot before the fire. dredge some flour into the pan,
and if there is not sufficient butter, add a little more; stir till it
looks brown, then pour in the hot broth or water, and the remaining
ingredients; give one boil, and pour round the cutlets. if the gravy
should not be thick enough, add a little more flour. mushrooms, when
obtainable, are a great improvement to this dish, and when not in
season, mushroom-powder may be substituted for them.
time.— minutes;—rather longer, should the cutlets be very thick.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 the downs.—the well-known substance chalk, which the chemist
 regards as a nearly pure carbonate of lime, and the microscopist
 as an aggregation of inconceivably minute shells and corals,
 forms the sub-soil of the hilly districts of the south-east of
 england. the chalk-hills known as the south downs start from the
 bold promontory of beachy head, traverse the county of sussex
 from east to west, and pass through hampshire into surrey. the
 north downs extend from godalming, by godstone, into kent, and
 terminate in the line of cliffs which stretches from dover to
 ramsgate. the downs are clothed with short verdant turf; but the
 layer of soil which rests upon the chalk is too thin to support
 trees and shrubs. the hills have rounded summits, and their
 smooth, undulated outlines are unbroken save by the sepulchral
 monuments of the early inhabitants of the country. the coombes
 and furrows, which ramify and extend into deep valleys, appear
 like dried-up channels of streams and rivulets. from time
 immemorial, immense flocks of sheep have been reared on these
 downs. the herbage of these hills is remarkably nutritious; and
 whilst the natural healthiness of the climate, consequent on the
 dryness of the air and the moderate elevation of the land, is
 eminently favourable to rearing a superior race of sheep, the
 arable land in the immediate neighbourhood of the downs affords
 the means of a supply of other food, when the natural produce of
 the hills fails. the mutton of the south-down breed of sheep is
 highly valued for its delicate flavour, and the wool for its
 fineness; but the best specimens of this breed, when imported
 from england into the west indies, become miserably lean in the
 course of a year or two, and their woolly fleece gives place to
 a covering of short, crisp, brownish hair.
broiled kidneys (a breakfast or supper dish).
. ingredients.—sheep kidneys, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—ascertain that the kidneys are fresh, and cut them open very
evenly, lengthwise, down to the root, for should one half be thicker
than the other, one would be underdone whilst the other would be dried,
but do not separate them; skin them, and pass a skewer under the white
part of each half to keep them flat, and broil over a nice clear fire,
placing the inside downwards; turn them when done enough on one side,
and cook them on the other. remove the skewers, place the kidneys on a
very hot dish, season with pepper and salt, and put a tiny piece of
butter in the middle of each; serve very hot and quickly, and send very
hot plates to table.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, -/d. each.
sufficient.—allow  for each person.
seasonable at any time.
note.—a prettier dish than the above may be made by serving the
kidneys each on a piece of buttered toast out in any fanciful shape. in
this case a little lemon-juice will be found an improvement.
[illustration: kidneys.]
. ingredients.—kidneys, butter, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—cut the kidneys open without quite dividing them, remove the
skin, and put a small piece of butter in the frying-pan. when the butter
is melted, lay in the kidneys the flat side downwards, and fry them for
 or  minutes, turning them when they are half-done. serve on a piece
of dry toast, season with pepper and salt, and put a small piece of
butter in each kidney; pour the gravy from the pan over them, and serve
very hot.
time.— or  minutes.
average cost, -/d. each.
sufficient.—allow  kidney to each person.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: haunch of mutton.]
. ingredients.—haunch of mutton, a little salt, flour.
mode.—let this joint hang as long as possible without becoming
tainted, and while hanging dust flour over it, which keeps off the
flies, and prevents the air from getting to it. if not well hung, the
joint, when it comes to table, will neither do credit to the butcher or
the cook, as it will not be tender. wash the outside well, lest it
should have a bad flavour from keeping; then flour it and put it down to
a nice brisk fire, at some distance, so that it may gradually warm
through. keep continually basting, and about / hour before it is
served, draw it nearer to the fire to get nicely brown. sprinkle a
little fine salt over the meat, pour off the dripping, add a little
boiling water slightly salted, and strain this over the joint. place a
paper ruche on the bone, and send red-currant jelly and gravy in a
tureen to table with it.
time.—about  hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  to  persons.
seasonable.—in best season from september to march.
 how to buy meat economically.—if the housekeeper is not very
 particular as to the precise joints to cook for dinner, there is
 oftentimes an opportunity for her to save as much money in her
 purchases of meat as will pay for the bread to eat with it. it
 often occurs, for instance, that the butcher may have a
 superfluity of certain joints, and these he would be glad to get
 rid of at a reduction of sometimes as much as d. or -/d. per
 lb., and thus, in a joint of  or  lbs., will be saved enough
 to buy  quartern loaves. it frequently happens with many
 butchers, that, in consequence of a demand for legs and loins of
 mutton, they have only shoulders left, and these they will be
 glad to sell at a reduction.
[illustration: leg of mutton.]
. ingredients.—leg of mutton, a little salt.
mode.—as mutton, when freshly killed, is never tender, hang it almost
as long as it will keep; flour it, and put it in a cool airy place for a
few days, if the weather will permit. wash off the flour, wipe it very
dry, and cut off the shank-bone; put it down to a brisk clear fire,
dredge with flour, and keep continually basting the whole time it is
cooking. about  minutes before serving, draw it near the fire to get
nicely brown; sprinkle over it a little salt, dish the meat, pour off
the dripping, add some boiling water slightly salted, strain it over the
joint, and serve.
time.—a leg of mutton weighing  lbs., about -/ or -/ hours;
one of  lbs., about  hours, or rather less.
average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient.—a moderate-sized leg of mutton sufficient for  or 
persons.
seasonable at any time, but not so good in june, july, and august.
. ingredients.—loin of mutton, a little salt.
mode.—cut and trim off the superfluous fat, and see that the butcher
joints the meat properly, as thereby much annoyance is saved to the
carver, when it comes to table. have ready a nice clear fire (it need
not be a very wide large one), put down the meat, dredge with flour, and
baste well until it is done. make the gravy as for roast leg of mutton,
and serve very hot.
[illustration: loin of mutton.]
time.—a loin of mutton weighing  lbs., -/ hour, or rather longer.
average cost, -/d. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
rolled loin of mutton (very excellent).
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of a loin of mutton, / teaspoonful of
pepper, / teaspoonful of pounded allspice, / teaspoonful of mace,
/ teaspoonful of nutmeg,  cloves, forcemeat no. ,  glass of port
wine,  tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup.
mode.—hang the mutton till tender, bone it, and sprinkle over it
pepper, mace, cloves, allspice, and nutmeg in the above proportion, all
of which must be pounded very fine. let it remain for a day, then make a
forcemeat by recipe no. , cover the meat with it, and roll and bind
it up firmly. half bake it in a slow oven, let it grow cold, take off
the fat, and put the gravy into a stewpan; flour the meat, put it in the
gravy, and stew it till perfectly tender. now take out the meat, unbind
it, add to the gravy wine and ketchup as above, give one boil, and pour
over the meat. serve with red-currant jelly; and, if obtainable, a few
mushrooms stewed for a few minutes in the gravy, will be found a great
improvement.
time.—-/ hour to bake the meat, -/ hour to stew gently.
average cost, s. d. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—this joint will be found very nice if rolled and stuffed, as
here directed, and plainly roasted. it should be well basted, and served
with a good gravy and currant jelly.
. ingredients.— lbs. of the middle, or best end of the neck of
mutton; a little salt.
mode.—trim off a portion of the fat, should there be too much, and if
it is to look particularly nice, the chine-bone should be sawn down, the
ribs stripped halfway down, and the ends of the bones chopped off; this
is, however, not necessary. put the meat into sufficient boiling water
to cover it; when it boils, add a little salt and remove all the scum.
draw the saucepan to the side of the fire, and let the water get so cool
that the finger may be borne in it; then simmer very slowly and gently
until the meat is done, which will be in about -/ hour, or rather
more, reckoning from the time that it begins to simmer.
serve with turnips and caper sauce, no. , and pour a little of it
over the meat. the turnips should be boiled with the mutton; and, when
at hand, a few carrots will also be found an improvement. these,
however, if very large and thick, must be cut into long thinnish pieces,
or they will not be sufficiently done by the time the mutton is ready.
garnish the dish with carrots and turnips placed alternately round the
mutton.
time.— lbs. of the neck of mutton, about -/ hour.
average cost, -/ d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 the poets on sheep.—the keeping of flocks seems to have been
 the first employment of mankind; and the most ancient sort of
 poetry was probably pastoral. the poem known as the pastoral
 gives a picture of the life of the simple shepherds of the
 golden age, who are supposed to have beguiled their time in
 singing. in all pastorals, repeated allusions are made to the
 "fleecy flocks," the "milk-white lambs," and "the tender ewes;"
 indeed, the sheep occupy a position in these poems inferior only
 to that of the shepherds who tend them. the "nibbling sheep" has
 ever been a favourite of the poets, and has supplied them with
 figures and similes without end. shakspere frequently compares
 men to sheep. when gloster rudely drives the lieutenant from the
 side of henry vi., the poor king thus touchingly speaks of his
 helplessness;—
"so flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf:
so first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece,
and next his throat, unto the butcher's knife."
in the "two gentlemen of verona," we meet with the following
humorous comparison:—
 "proteus. the sheep for fodder follow the shepherd, the
 shepherd for food follows not the sheep: thou for wages
 followest thy master, thy master for wages follows not thee;
 therefore, thou art a sheep.
 "speed. such another proof will make me cry baa."
the descriptive poets give us some charming pictures of sheep.
every one is familiar with the sheep-shearing scene in thomson's
"seasons:"—
"heavy and dripping, to the breezy brow
slow move the harmless race; where, as they spread
their dwelling treasures to the sunny ray,
inly disturb'd, and wond'ring what this wild
outrageous tumult means, their loud complaints
the country fill; and, toss'd from rock to rock,
incessant bleatings run around the hills."
what an exquisite idea of stillness is conveyed in the
oft-quoted line from gray's "elegy:"—
 "and drowsy tinklings lull the distant fold."
 from dyer's quaint poem of "the fleece" we could cull a hundred
 passages relating to sheep; but we have already exceeded our
 space. we cannot, however, close this brief notice of the
 allusions that have been made to sheep by our poets, without
 quoting a couple of verses from robert burns's "elegy on poor
 mailie," his only "pet yowe:"—
"thro' a' the town she troll'd by him;
a lang half-mile she could descry him;
wi' kindly bleat, when she did spy him.
she ran wi' speed;
a friend mair faithfu' ne'er cam' nigh him
than mailie dead.
"i wat she was a sheep o' sense.
an' could behave hersel' wi' mense;
i'll say't, she never brak a fence,
thro' thievish greed.
our bardie, lanely, keeps the spence,
sin' mailie's dead."
mutton collops (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few slices of a cold leg or loin of mutton, salt
and pepper to taste,  blade of pounded mace,  small bunch of savoury
herbs minced very fine,  or  shalots,  or  oz. of butter, 
dessertspoonful of flour, / pint of gravy,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice.
mode.—cut some very thin slices from a leg or the chump end of a loin
of mutton; sprinkle them with pepper, salt, pounded mace, minced savoury
herbs, and minced shalot; fry them in butter, stir in a dessertspoonful
of flour, add the gravy and lemon-juice, simmer very gently about  or 
minutes, and serve immediately.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: mutton cutlets.]
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the best end of the neck of mutton,
salt and pepper to taste, mashed potatoes.
mode.—procure a well-hung neck of mutton, saw off about  inches of
the top of the bones, and cut the cutlets of a moderate thickness. shape
them by chopping off the thick part of the chine-bone; beat them flat
with a cutlet-chopper, and scrape quite clean, a portion of the top of
the bone. broil them over a nice clear fire for about  or  minutes,
and turn them frequently. have ready some smoothly-mashed white
potatoes; place these in the middle of the dish; when the cutlets are
done, season with pepper and salt; arrange them round the potatoes, with
the thick end of the cutlets downwards, and serve very hot and quickly.
(see coloured plate.)
time.— or  minutes. average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—cutlets may be served in various ways; with peas, tomatoes,
onions, sauce piquante, &c.
mutton pie (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of a cold leg, loin, or neck of mutton,
pepper and salt to taste,  blades of pounded mace,  dessertspoonful of
chopped parsley,  teaspoonful of minced savoury herbs; when liked, a
little minced onion or shalot;  or  potatoes,  teacupful of gravy;
crust.
mode.—cold mutton may be made into very good pies if well seasoned
and mixed with a few herbs; if the leg is used, cut it into very thin
slices; if the loin or neck, into thin cutlets. place some at the bottom
of the dish; season well with pepper, salt, mace, parsley, and herbs;
then put a layer of potatoes sliced, then more mutton, and so on till
the dish is full; add the gravy, cover with a crust, and bake for 
hour.
time.— hour.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the remains of an underdone leg of mutton may be converted into
a very good family pudding, by cutting the meat into slices, and putting
them into a basin lined with a suet crust. it should be seasoned well
with pepper, salt, and minced shalot, covered with a crust, and boiled
for about  hours.
. ingredients.— lbs. of the neck or loin of mutton, weighed after
being boned;  kidneys, pepper and salt to taste,  teacupfuls of gravy
or water,  tablespoonfuls of minced parsley; when liked, a little
minced onion or shalot; puff crust.
mode.—bone the mutton, and cut the meat into steaks all of the same
thickness, and leave but very little fat. cut up the kidneys, and
arrange these with the meat neatly in a pie-dish; sprinkle over them the
minced parsley and a seasoning of pepper and salt; pour in the gravy,
and cover with a tolerably good puff crust. bake for -/ hour, or
rather longer, should the pie be very large, and let the oven be rather
brisk. a well-made suet crust may be used instead of puff crust, and
will be found exceedingly good.
time.—-/ hour, or rather longer. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the chump end of the loin of mutton,
weighed after being boned; pepper and salt to taste, suet crust made
with milk (see pastry), in the proportion of  oz. of suet to each pound
of flour; a very small quantity of minced onion (this may be omitted
when the flavour is not liked).
mode.—cut the meat into rather thin slices, and season them with
pepper and salt; line the pudding-dish with crust; lay in the meat, and
nearly, but do not quite, fill it up with water; when the flavour is
liked, add a small quantity of minced onion; cover with crust, and
proceed in the same manner as directed in recipe no. , using the same
kind of pudding-dish as there mentioned.
time.—about  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year, but more suitable in winter.
ragout of cold neck of mutton (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of a cold neck or loin of mutton,  oz.
of butter, a little flour,  onions sliced, / pint of water,  small
carrots,  turnips, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—cut the mutton into small chops, and trim off the greater
portion of the fat; put the butter into a stewpan, dredge in a little
flour, add the sliced onions, and keep stirring till brown; then put in
the meat. when this is quite brown, add the water, and the carrots and
turnips, which should be cut into very thin slices; season with pepper
and salt, and stew till quite tender, which will be in about / hour.
when in season, green peas may be substituted for the carrots and
turnips: they should be piled in the centre of the dish, and the chops
laid round.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable, with peas, from june to august.
[illustration: neck of mutton -. best end. -. scrag.]
. ingredients.—neck of mutton; a little salt.
mode.—for roasting, choose the middle, or the best end, of the neck
of mutton, and if there is a very large proportion of fat, trim off some
of it, and save it for making into suet puddings, which will be found
exceedingly good. let the bones be cut short and see that it is properly
jointed before it is laid down to the fire, as they will be more easily
separated when they come to table. place the joint at a nice brisk
fire, dredge it with flour, and keep continually basting until done. a
few minutes before serving, draw it nearer the the fire to acquire a
nice colour, sprinkle over it a little salt, pour off the dripping, add
a little boiling water slightly salted, strain this over the meat and
serve. red-currant jelly may be sent to table with it.
time.— lbs. of the neck of mutton, rather more than  hour.
average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 woollen manufactures.—the distinction between hair and wool is
 rather arbitrary than natural, consisting in the greater or less
 degrees of fineness, softness and pliability of the fibres.
 when the fibres possess these properties so far as to admit of
 their being spun and woven into a texture sufficiently pliable
 to be used as an article of dress, they are called wool. the
 sheep, llama, angora goat, and the goat of thibet, are the
 animals from which most of the wool used in manufactures is
 obtained. the finest of all wools is that from the goat of
 thibet, of which the cashmere shawls are made. of european
 wools, the finest is that yielded by the merino sheep, the
 spanish and saxon breeds taking the precedence. the merino
 sheep, as now naturalized in australia, furnishes an excellent
 fleece; but all varieties of sheep-wool, reared either in europe
 or australia are inferior in softness of feel to that grown in
 india, and to that of the llama of the andes. the best of our
 british wools are inferior in fineness to any of the
 above-mentioned, being nearly twelve times the thickness of the
 finest spanish merino; but for the ordinary purposes of the
 manufacturer, they are unrivalled.
[illustration: saddle of mutton.]
. ingredients.—saddle of mutton; a little salt.
mode.—to insure this joint being tender, let it hang for ten days or
a fortnight, if the weather permits. cut off the tail and flaps and trim
away every part that has not indisputable pretensions to be eaten, and
have the skin taken off and skewered on again. put it down to a bright,
clear fire, and, when the joint has been cooking for an hour, remove the
skin and dredge it with flour. it should not be placed too near the
fire, as the fat should not be in the slightest degree burnt. keep
constantly basting, both before and after the skin is removed; sprinkle
some salt over the joint. make a little gravy in the dripping-pan; pour
it over the meat, which send to table with a tureen of made gravy and
red-currant jelly.
time.—a saddle of mutton weighing  lbs., -/ hours;  lbs.,
-/ hours. when liked underdone, allow rather less time.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient.—a moderate-sized saddle of  lbs. for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year; not so good when lamb is in full season.
. ingredients.—shoulder of mutton; a little salt.
mode.—put the joint down to a bright, clear fire; flour it well, and
keep continually basting. about / hour before serving, draw it near
the fire, that the outside may acquire a nice brown colour, but not
sufficiently near to blacken the fat. sprinkle a little fine salt over
the meat, empty the dripping-pan of its contents, pour in a little
boiling water slightly salted, and strain this over the joint. onion
sauce, or stewed spanish onions, are usually sent to table with this
dish, and sometimes baked potatoes.
time.—a shoulder of mutton weighing  or  lbs., -/ hour.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
note.—shoulder of mutton may be dressed in a variety of ways; boiled,
and served with onion sauce; boned, and stuffed with a good veal
forcemeat; or baked, with sliced potatoes in the dripping-pan.
 the ettrick shepherd.—james hogg was perhaps the most
 remarkable man that ever wore the maud of a shepherd. under
 the garb, aspect, and bearing of a rude peasant (and rude enough
 he was in most of these things, even after no inconsiderable
 experience of society), the world soon discovered a true poet.
 he taught himself to write, by copying the letters of a printed
 book as he lay watching his flock on the hillside, and believed
 that he had reached the utmost pitch of his ambition when he
 first found that his artless rhymes could touch the heart of the
 ewe-milker who partook the shelter of his mantle during the
 passing storm. if "the shepherd" of professor wilson's "noctes
 ambrosianae" may be taken as a true portrait of james hogg, we
 must admit that, for quaintness of humour, the poet of ettrick
 forest had few rivals. sir walter scott said that hogg's
 thousand little touches of absurdity afforded him more
 entertainment than the best comedy that ever set the pit in a
 roar. among the written productions of the shepherd-poet, is an
 account of his own experiences in sheep-tending, called "the
 shepherd's calender." this work contains a vast amount of useful
 information upon sheep, their diseases, habits, and management.
 the ettrick shepherd died in .
sheep's brains, en matelote (an entree).
. ingredients.— sheep's brains, vinegar, salt, a few slices of
bacon,  small onion,  cloves, a small bunch of parsley, sufficient
stock or weak broth to cover the brains,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice,
matelote sauce, no. .
mode.—detach the brains from the heads without breaking them, and put
them into a pan of warm water; remove the skin, and let them remain for
two hours. have ready a saucepan of boiling water, add a little vinegar
and salt, and put in the brains. when they are quite firm, take them out
and put them into very cold water. place  or  slices of bacon in a
stewpan, put in the brains, the onion stuck with  cloves, the parsley,
and a good seasoning of pepper and salt; cover with stock, or weak
broth, and boil them gently for about  minutes. have ready some
croűtons; arrange these in the dish alternately with the brains, and
cover with a matelote sauce, no. , to which has been added the above
proportion of lemon-juice.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
sheep's feet or trotters (soyer's recipe).
. ingredients.— feet, / lb. of beef or mutton suet,  onions, 
carrot,  bay-leaves,  sprigs of thyme,  oz. of salt, / oz. of
pepper,  tablespoonfuls of flour, -/ quarts of water, / lb. of
fresh butter,  teaspoonful of salt,  teaspoonful of flour, /
teaspoonful of pepper, a little grated nutmeg, the juice of  lemon, 
gill of milk, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—have the feet cleaned, and the long bone extracted from them.
put the suet into a stewpan, with the onions and carrot sliced, the
bay-leaves, thyme, salt, and pepper, and let these simmer for  minutes.
add  tablespoonfuls of flour and the water, and keep stirring till it
boils; then put in the feet. let these simmer for  hours, or until
perfectly tender, and take them and lay them on a sieve. mix together,
on a plate, with the back of a spoon, butter, salt, flour (
teaspoonful), pepper, nutmeg, and lemon-juice as above, and put the
feet, with a gill of milk, into a stewpan. when very hot, add the
butter, &c., and stir continually till melted. now mix the yolks of 
eggs with  tablespoonfuls of milk; stir this to the other ingredients,
keep moving the pan over the fire continually for a minute or two, but
do not allow it to boil after the eggs are added. serve in a very hot
dish, and garnish with croűtons, or sippets of toasted bread.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— sheep's head, sufficient water to cover it, 
carrots,  turnips,  or  parsnips,  onions, a small bunch of parsley,
 teaspoonful of pepper,  teaspoonfuls of salt, / lb. of scotch
oatmeal.
mode.—clean the head well, and let it soak in warm water for  hours,
to get rid of the blood; put it into a saucepan, with sufficient cold
water to cover it, and when it boils, add the vegetables, peeled and
sliced, and the remaining ingredients; before adding the oatmeal, mix it
to a smooth batter with a little of the liquor. keep stirring till it
boils up; then shut the saucepan closely, and let it stew gently for
-/ or  hours. it may be thickened with rice or barley, but oatmeal
is preferable.
time.—-/ or  hours. average cost, d. each.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 singed sheep's head.—the village of dudingston, which stands
 "within a mile of edinburgh town," was formerly celebrated for
 this ancient and homely scottish dish. in the summer months,
 many opulent citizens used to resort to this place to solace
 themselves over singed sheep's heads, boiled or baked. the sheep
 fed upon the neighbouring hills were slaughtered at this
 village, and the carcases were sent to town; but the heads were
 left to be consumed in the place. we are not aware whether the
 custom of eating sheep's heads at dudingston is still kept up by
 the good folks of edinburgh.
toad-in-the-hole (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.— oz. of flour,  pint of milk,  eggs, butter, a few
slices of cold mutton, pepper and salt to taste,  kidneys.
mode.—make a smooth batter of flour, milk, and eggs in the above
proportion; butter a baking-dish, and pour in the batter. into this
place a few slices of cold mutton, previously well seasoned, and the
kidneys, which should be cut into rather small pieces; bake about 
hour, or rather longer, and send it to table in the dish it was baked
in. oysters or mushrooms may be substituted for the kidneys, and will be
found exceedingly good.
time.—rather more than  hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— breast of lamb, a few slices of bacon, / pint of
stock no. ,  lemon,  onion,  bunch of savoury herbs, green peas.
mode.—remove the skin from a breast of lamb, put it into a saucepan
of boiling water, and let it simmer for  minutes. take it out and lay
it in cold water. line the bottom of a stewpan with a few thin slices of
bacon; lay the lamb on these; peel the lemon, cut it into slices, and
put these on the meat, to keep it white and make it tender; cover with 
or  more slices of bacon; add the stock, onion, and herbs, and set it
on a slow fire to simmer very gently until tender. have ready some green
peas, put these on a dish, and place the lamb on the top of these. the
appearance of this dish may be much improved by glazing the lamb, and
spinach may be substituted for the peas when variety is desired.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable,—grass lamb, from easter to michaelmas.
 the lamb as a sacrifice.—the number of lambs consumed in
 sacrifices by the hebrews must have been very considerable. two
 lambs "of the first year" were appointed to be sacrificed daily
 for the morning and evening sacrifice; and a lamb served as a
 substitute for the first-born of unclean animals, such as the
 ass, which could not be accepted as an offering to the lord.
 every year, also, on the anniversary of the deliverance of the
 children of israel from the bondage of egypt, every family was
 ordered to sacrifice a lamb or kid, and to sprinkle some of its
 blood upon the door-posts, in commemoration of the judgment of
 god upon the egyptians. it was to be eaten roasted, with
 unleavened bread and bitter herbs, in haste, with the loins
 girded, the shoes on the feet, and the staff in the hand; and
 whatever remained until the morning was to be burnt. the sheep
 was also used in the numerous special, individual, and national
 sacrifices ordered by the jewish law. on extraordinary
 occasions, vast quantities of sheep were sacrificed at once;
 thus solomon, on the completion of the temple, offered "sheep
 and oxen that could not be told nor numbered for multitude."
. ingredients.— breast of lamb, pepper and salt to taste,
sufficient stock, no. , to cover it,  glass of sherry, thickening of
butter and flour.
mode.—skin the lamb, cut it into pieces, and season them with pepper
and salt; lay these in a stewpan, pour in sufficient stock or gravy to
cover them, and stew very gently until tender, which will be in about
-/ hour. just before serving, thicken the sauce with a little butter
and flour; add the sherry, give one boil, and pour it over the meat.
green peas, or stewed mushrooms, may be strewed over the meat, and will
be found a very great improvement.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable,—grass lamb, from easter to michaelmas.
. ingredients.—loin of lamb, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—trim off the flap from a fine loin of lamb, aid cut it into
chops about / inch in thickness. have ready a bright clear fire; lay
the chops on a gridiron, and broil them of a nice pale brown, turning
them when required. season them with pepper and salt; serve very hot and
quickly, and garnish with crisped parsley, or place them on mashed
potatoes. asparagus, spinach, or peas are the favourite accompaniments
to lamb chops.
time.—about  or  minutes. average cost, s. per lb.
sufficient.—allow  chops to each person.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
lamb cutlets and spinach (an entree).
. ingredients.— cutlets, egg and bread crumbs, salt and pepper to
taste, a little clarified butter.
mode.—cut the cutlets from a neck of lamb, and shape them by cutting
off the thick part of the chine-bone. trim off most of the fat and all
the skin, and scrape the top part of the bones quite clean. brush the
cutlets over with egg, sprinkle them with bread crumbs, and season with
pepper and salt. now dip them into clarified butter, sprinkle over a few
more bread crumbs, and fry them over a sharp fire, turning them when
required. lay them before the fire to drain, and arrange them on a dish
with spinach in the centre, which should be previously well boiled,
drained, chopped, and seasoned.
time.—about  or  minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
note.—peas, asparagus, or french beans, may be substituted for the
spinach; or lamb cutlets may be served with stewed cucumbers, soubise
sauce, &c. &c.
. ingredients.— lb. of lamb's fry,  pints of water, egg and bread
crumbs,  teaspoonful of chopped parsley, salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—boil the fry for / hour in the above proportion of water,
take it out and dry it in a cloth; grate some bread down finely, mix
with it a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and a high seasoning of pepper
and salt. brush the fry lightly over with the yolk of an egg, sprinkle
over the bread crumbs, and fry for  minutes. serve very hot on a napkin
in a dish, and garnish with plenty of crisped parsley.
time.- hour to simmer the fry,  minutes to fry it.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
. ingredients.—the remains of a cold shoulder of lamb, pepper and
salt to taste,  oz. of butter, about / pint of stock or gravy, 
tablespoonful of shalot vinegar,  or  pickled gherkins.
mode.—take the blade-bone from the shoulder, and cut the meat into
collops as neatly as possible. season the bone with pepper and salt,
pour a little oiled butter over it, and place it in the oven to warm
through. put the stock into a stewpan, add the ketchup and shalot
vinegar, and lay in the pieces of lamb. let these heat gradually
through, but do not allow them to boil. take the blade-bone out of the
oven, and place it on a gridiron over a sharp fire to brown. slice the
gherkins, put them into the hash, and dish it with the blade-bone in the
centre. it may be garnished with croutons or sippets of toasted bread.
time.—altogether / hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable,—house lamb, from christmas to march; grass lamb, from
easter to michaelmas.
[illustration: fore-quarter of lamb.]
. ingredients.—lamb, a little salt.
mode.—to obtain the flavour of lamb in perfection, it should not be
long kept; time to cool is all that it requires; and though the meat may
be somewhat thready, the juices and flavour will be infinitely superior
to that of lamb that has been killed  or  days. make up the fire in
good time, that it may be clear and brisk when the joint is put down.
place it at a sufficient distance to prevent the fat from burning, and
baste it constantly till the moment of serving. lamb should be very
thoroughly done without being dried up, and not the slightest
appearance of red gravy should be visible, as in roast mutton: this rule
is applicable to all young white meats. serve with a little gravy made
in the dripping-pan, the same as for other roasts, and send to table
with it a tureen of mint sauce, no. , and a fresh salad. a cut lemon,
a small piece of fresh butter, and a little cayenne, should also be
placed on the table, so that when the carver separates the shoulder from
the ribs, they may be ready for his use; if, however, he should not be
very expert, we would recommend that the cook should divide these joints
nicely before coming to table.
time.—fore-quarter of lamb weighing  lbs., -/ to  hours.
average cost, d. to s. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable,—grass lamb, from easter to michaelmas.
. ingredients.—leg of lamb, béchamel sauce, no. .
mode.—do not choose a very large joint, but one weighing about  lbs.
have ready a saucepan of boiling water, into which plunge the lamb, and
when it boils up again, draw it to the side of the fire, and let the
water cool a little. then stew very gently for about -/ hour,
reckoning from the time that the water begins to simmer. make some
béchamel by recipe no. , dish the lamb, pour the sauce over it, and
garnish with tufts of boiled cauliflower or carrots. when liked, melted
butter may be substituted for the béchamel: this is a more simple
method, but not nearly so nice. send to table with it some of the sauce
in a tureen, and boiled cauliflowers or spinach, with whichever
vegetable the dish is garnished.
time.—-/ hour after the water simmers.
average cost, d. to s. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
. ingredients.—lamb, a little salt.
[illustration: leg of lamb.]
mode.—place the joint at a good distance from the fire at first, and
baste well the whole time it is cooking. when nearly done, draw it
nearer the fire to acquire a nice brown colour. sprinkle a little fine
salt over the meat, empty the dripping-pan of its contents; pour in a
little boiling water, and strain this over the meat. serve with mint
sauce and a fresh salad, and for vegetables send peas, spinach, or
cauliflowers to table with it.
time.—a leg of lamb weighing  lbs., -/ hour.
average cost, d. to s. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
[illustration: loin of lamb.]
. ingredients.— loin of lamb, a few slices of bacon,  bunch of
green onions,  or  young carrots, a bunch of savoury herbs,  blades
of pounded mace,  pint of stock, salt to taste.
mode.—bone a loin of lamb, and line the bottom of a stewpan just
capable of holding it, with a few thin slices of fat bacon; add the
remaining ingredients, cover the meat with a few more slices of bacon,
pour in the stock, and simmer very gently for  hours; take it up, dry
it, strain and reduce the gravy to a glaze, with which glaze the meat,
and serve it either on stewed peas, spinach, or stewed cucumbers.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
[illustration: saddle of lamb. ribs of lamb.]
. ingredients.—lamb; a little salt.
mode.—this joint is now very much in vogue, and is generally
considered a nice one for a small party. have ready a clear brisk fire;
put down the joint at a little distance, to prevent the fat from
scorching, and keep it well basted all the time it is cooking. serve
with mint sauce and a fresh salad, and send to table with it, either
peas, cauliflowers, or spinach.
time.—a small saddle, -/ hour; a large one,  hours.
average cost, d. to s. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
note.—loin and ribs of lamb are roasted in the same manner, and
served with the same sauces as the above. a loin will take about -/
hour; ribs, from  to -/ hour.
. ingredients.—lamb; a little salt.
mode.—have ready a clear brisk fire, and put down the joint at a
sufficient distance from it, that the fat may not burn. keep constantly
basting until done, and serve with a little gravy made in the
dripping-pan, and send mint sauce to table with it. peas, spinach, or
cauliflowers are the usual vegetables served with lamb, and also a fresh
salad.
time.—a shoulder of lamb rather more than  hour.
average cost, s. to s. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
. ingredients.—shoulder of lamb, forcemeat no. , trimmings of
veal or beef,  onions, / head of celery,  faggot of savoury herbs, a
few slices of fat bacon,  quart of stock no. .
mode.—take the blade-bone out of a shoulder of lamb, fill up its
place with forcemeat, and sew it up with coarse thread. put it into a
stewpan with a few slices of bacon under and over the lamb, and add the
remaining ingredients. stew very gently for rather more than  hours.
reduce the gravy, with which glaze the meat, and serve with peas, stewed
cucumbers, or sorrel sauce.
time.—rather more than  hours. average cost, d. to s. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
lamb's sweetbreads, larded, and asparagus (an entree).
. ingredients.— or  sweetbreads, / pint of veal stock, white
pepper and salt to taste, a small bunch of green onions,  blade of
pounded mace, thickening of butter and flour,  eggs, nearly / pint of
cream,  teaspoonful of minced parsley, a very little grated nutmeg.
mode.—soak the sweetbreads in lukewarm water, and put them into a
saucepan with sufficient boiling water to cover them, and let them
simmer for  minutes; then take them out and put them into cold water.
now lard them, lay them in a stewpan, add the stock, seasoning, onions,
mace, and a thickening of butter and flour, and stew gently for / hour
or  minutes. beat up the egg with the cream, to which add the minced
parsley and a very little grated nutmeg. put this to the other
ingredients; stir it well till quite hot, but do not let it boil after
the cream is added, or it will curdle. have ready some asparagus-tops,
boiled; add these to the sweetbreads, and serve.
time.—altogether / hour. average cost, s. d. to s. d. each.
sufficient— sweetbreads for  entrée.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
another way to dress sweetbreads (an entree).
. ingredients.—sweetbreads, egg and bread crumbs, / pint of gravy,
no. , / glass of sherry.
mode.—soak the sweetbreads in water for an hour, and throw them into
boiling water to render them firm. let them stew gently for about /
hour, take them out and put them into a cloth to drain all the water
from them. brush them over with egg, sprinkle them with bread crumbs,
and either brown them in the oven or before the fire. have ready the
above quantity of gravy, to which add / glass of sherry; dish the
sweetbreads, pour the gravy under them, and garnish with water-cresses.
time.—rather more than / hour. average cost, s. d. to s. d.
each.
sufficient— sweetbreads for  entrée.
seasonable from easter to michaelmas.
[illustration: haunch of mutton.]
. a deep cut should, in the first place, be made quite down to the
bone, across the knuckle-end of the joint, along the line  to . this
will let the gravy escape; and then it should be carved, in not too
thick slices, along the whole length of the haunch, in the direction of
the line from  to .
[illustration: leg of mutton.]
. this homely, but capital english joint, is almost invariably served
at table as shown in the engraving. the carving of it is not very
difficult: the knife should be carried sharply down in the direction of
the line from  to , and slices taken from either side, as the guests
may desire, some liking the knuckle-end, as well done, and others
preferring the more underdone part. the fat should be sought near the
line  to . some connoisseurs are fond of having this joint dished with
the under-side uppermost, so as to get at the finely-grained meat lying
under that part of the meat, known as the pope's eye; but this is an
extravagant fashion, and one that will hardly find favour in the eyes of
many economical british housewives and housekeepers.
[illustration: loin of mutton.]
. there is one point in connection with carving a loin of mutton
which includes every other; that is, that the joint should be thoroughly
well jointed by the butcher before it is cooked. this knack of jointing
requires practice and the proper tools; and no one but the butcher is
supposed to have these. if the bones be not well jointed, the carving of
a loin of mutton is not a gracious business; whereas, if that has been
attended to, it is an easy and untroublesome task. the knife should be
inserted at fig. , and after feeling your way between the bones, it
should be carried sharply in the direction of the line  to . as there
are some people who prefer the outside cut, while others do not like it,
the question as to their choice of this should be asked.
[illustration: saddle of mutton.]
. although we have heard, at various intervals, growlings expressed
at the inevitable "saddle of mutton" at the dinner-parties of our middle
classes, yet we doubt whether any other joint is better liked, when it
has been well hung and artistically cooked. there is a diversity of
opinion respecting the mode of sending this joint to table; but it has
only reference to whether or no there shall be any portion of the tail,
or, if so, how many joints of the tail. we ourselves prefer the mode as
shown in our coloured illustration "o;" but others may, upon equally
good grounds, like the way shown in the engraving on this page. some
trim the tail with a paper frill. the carving is not difficult: it is
usually cut in the direction of the line from  to , quite down to the
bones, in evenly-sliced pieces. a fashion, however, patronized by some,
is to carve it obliquely, in the direction of the line from  to ; in
which case the joint would be turned round the other way, having the
tail end on the right of the carver.
[illustration: shoulder of mutton.]
. this is a joint not difficult to carve. the knife should be drawn
from the outer edge of the shoulder in the direction of the line from 
to , until the bone of the shoulder is reached. as many slices as can
be carved in this manner should be taken, and afterwards the meat lying
on either side of the blade-bone should be served, by carving in the
direction of  to  and  to . the uppermost side of the shoulder being
now finished, the joint should be turned, and slices taken off along its
whole length. there are some who prefer this under-side of the shoulder
for its juicy flesh, although the grain of the meat is not so fine as
that on the other side.
[illustration: fore-quarter of lamb.]
. we always think that a good and practised carver delights in the
manipulation of this joint, for there is a little field for his judgment
and dexterity which does not always occur. the separation of the
shoulder from the breast is the first point to be attended to; this is
done by passing the knife lightly round the dotted line, as shown by the
figures , , , , and , so as to cut through the skin, and then, by
raising with a little force the shoulder, into which the fork should be
firmly fixed, it will come away with just a little more exercise of the
knife. in dividing the shoulder and breast, the carver should take care
not to cut away too much of the meat from the latter, as that would
rather spoil its appearance when the shoulder is removed. the breast and
shoulder being separated, it is usual to lay a small piece of butter,
and sprinkle a little cayenne, lemon-juice, and salt between them; and
when this is melted and incorporated with the meat and gravy, the
shoulder may, as more convenient, be removed into another dish. the,
next operation is to separate the ribs from the brisket, by cutting
through the meat on the line  to . the joint is then ready to be
served to the guests; the ribs being carved in the direction of the
lines from  to , and the brisket from  to . the carver should ask
those at the table what parts they prefer-ribs, brisket, or a piece of
the shoulder.
are carved in the same manner as the corresponding joints of mutton.
(see nos. , , , .)
[illustration]
. the hog belongs to the order mammalia, the genus sus scrofa,
and the species pachydermata, or thick-skinned; and its generic
characters are, a small head, with long flexible snout truncated; 
teeth, divided into  upper incisors, converging,  lower incisors,
projecting,  upper and  lower canine, or tusks,—the former short, the
latter projecting, formidable, and sharp, and  molars in each jaw;
cloven feet furnished with  toes, and tail, small, short, and twisted;
while, in some varieties, this appendage is altogether wanting.
. from the number and position of the teeth, physiologists are
enabled to define the nature and functions of the animal; and from those
of the sus, or hog, it is evident that he is as much a grinder as a
biter, or can live as well on vegetable as on animal food; though a
mixture of both is plainly indicated as the character of food most
conducive to the integrity and health of its physical system.
. thus the pig tribe, though not a ruminating mammal, as might be
inferred from the number of its molar teeth, is yet a link between the
herbivorous and the carnivorous tribes, and is consequently what is
known as an omnivorous quadruped; or, in other words, capable of
converting any kind of aliment into nutriment.
. though the hoof in the hog is, as a general rule, cloven, there are
several remarkable exceptions, as in the species native to norway,
illyria, sardinia, and formerly to the berkshire variety of the
british domesticated pig, in which the hoof is entire and _un_cleft.
. whatever difference in its physical nature, climate and soil may
produce in this animal, his functional characteristics are the same in
whatever part of the world he may be found; and whether in the trackless
forests of south america, the coral isles of polynesia, the jungles of
india, or the spicy brakes of sumatra, he is everywhere known for his
gluttony, laziness, and indifference to the character and quality of his
food. and though he occasionally shows an epicure's relish for a
succulent plant or a luscious carrot, which he will discuss with all his
salivary organs keenly excited, he will, the next moment, turn with
equal gusto to some carrion offal that might excite the forbearance of
the unscrupulous cormorant. it is this coarse and repulsive mode of
feeding that has, in every country and language, obtained for him the
opprobrium of being "an unclean animal."
. in the mosaical law, the pig is condemned as an unclean beast, and
consequently interdicted to the israelites, as unfit for human food.
"and the swine, though he divideth the hoof and be cloven-footed, yet he
cheweth not the cud. he is unclean to you."—lev. xi. . strict,
however, as the law was respecting the cud-chewing and hoof-divided
animals, the jews, with their usual perversity and violation of the
divine commands, seem afterwards to have ignored the prohibition; for,
unless they ate pork, it is difficult to conceive for what purpose they
kept troves of swine, as from the circumstance recorded in matthew
xviii. , when jesus was in galilee, and the devils, cast out of the
two men, were permitted to enter the herd of swine that were feeding on
the hills in the neighbourhood of the sea of tiberias, it is very
evident they did. there is only one interpretation by which we can
account for a prohibition that debarred the jews from so many foods
which we regard as nutritious luxuries, that, being fat and the texture
more hard of digestion than other meats, they were likely, in a hot dry
climate, where vigorous exercise could seldom be taken, to produce
disease, and especially cutaneous affections; indeed, in this light, as
a code of sanitary ethics, the book of leviticus is the most admirable
system of moral government ever conceived for man's benefit.
there is no domestic animal so profitable or so useful to man as the
much-maligned pig, or any that yields him a more varied or more
luxurious repast. the prolific powers of the pig are extraordinary, even
under the restraint of domestication; but when left to run wild in
favourable situations, as in the islands of the south pacific, the
result, in a few years, from two animals put on shore and left
undisturbed, is truly surprising; for they breed so fast, and have such
numerous litters, that unless killed off in vast numbers both for the
use of the inhabitants and as fresh provisions for ships' crews, they
would degenerate into vermin. in this country the pig has usually two
litters, or farrows, in a year, the breeding seasons being april and
october; and the period the female goes with her young is about four
months,— weeks or  days. the number produced at each litter
depends upon the character of the breed;  being the average number in
the small variety, and  in the large; in the mixed breeds, however,
the average is between  and , and in some instances has reached as
many as . but however few, or however many, young pigs there may be to
the farrow, there is always one who is the dwarf of the family circle, a
poor, little, shrivelled, half-starved anatomy, with a small melancholy
voice, a staggering gait, a woe-begone countenance, and a thread of a
tail, whose existence the complacent mother ignores, his plethoric
brothers and sisters repudiate, and for whose emaciated jaws there is
never a spare or supplemental teat, till one of the favoured
gormandizers, overtaken by momentary oblivion, drops the lacteal
fountain, and gives the little squeaking straggler the chance of a
momentary mouthful. this miserable little object, which may be seen
bringing up the rear of every litter, is called the tony pig, or the
anthony; so named, it is presumed, from being the one always assigned
to the church, when tithe was taken in kind; and as st. anthony was the
patron of husbandry, his name was given in a sort of bitter derision to
the starveling that constituted his dues; for whether there are ten or
fifteen farrows to the litter, the anthony is always the last of the
family to come into the world.
. from the grossness of his feeding, the large amount of aliment he
consumes, his gluttonous way of eating it, from his slothful habits,
laziness, and indulgence in sleep, the pig is particularly liable to
disease, and especially indigestion, heartburn, and affections of the
skin.
a powerful monitor in the brain of the pig teaches him to seek for
relief and medicine. to open the pores of his skin, blocked up with mud,
and excite perspiration, he resorts to a tree, a stump, or his
trough—anything rough and angular, and using it as a curry-comb to his
body, obtains the luxury of a scratch and the benefit of cuticular
evaporation; he next proceeds with his long supple snout to grub up
antiscorbutic roots, cooling salads of mallow and dandelion, and,
greatest treat of all, he stumbles on a piece of chalk or a mouthful of
delicious cinder, which, he knows by instinct, is the most sovereign
remedy in the world for that hot, unpleasant sensation he has had all
the morning at his stomach.
. it is a remarkable fact that, though every one who keeps a pig
knows how prone he is to disease, how that disease injures the quality
of the meat, and how eagerly he pounces on a bit of coal or cinder, or
any coarse dry substance that will adulterate the rich food on which he
lives, and by affording soda to his system, correct the vitiated fluids
of his body,—yet very few have the judgment to act on what they see,
and by supplying the pig with a few shovelfuls of cinders in his sty,
save the necessity of his rooting for what is so needful to his health.
instead of this, however, and without supplying the animal with what its
instinct craves for, his nostril is bored with a red-hot iron, and a
ring clinched in his nose to prevent rooting for what he feels to be
absolutely necessary for his health; and ignoring the fact that, in a
domestic state at least, the pig lives on the richest of all
food,—scraps of cooked animal substances, boiled vegetables, bread, and
other items, given in that concentrated essence of aliment for a
quadruped called wash, and that he eats to repletion, takes no exercise,
and finally sleeps all the twenty-four hours he is not eating, and then,
when the animal at last seeks for those medicinal aids which would
obviate the evil of such a forcing diet, his keeper, instead of meeting
his animal instinct by human reason, and giving him what he seeks, has
the inhumanity to torture him by a ring, that, keeping up a perpetual
"raw" in the pig's snout, prevents his digging for those corrective
drugs which would remove the evils of his artificial existence.
. though subject to so many diseases, no domestic animal is more
easily kept in health, cleanliness, and comfort, and this without the
necessity of "ringing," or any excessive desire of the hog to roam,
break through his sty, or plough up his pound. whatever the kind of
food may be on which the pig is being fed or fattened, a teaspoonful or
more of salt should always be given in his mess of food, and a little
heap of well-burnt cinders, with occasional bits of chalk, should always
be kept by the side of his trough, as well as a vessel of clean water:
his pound, or the front part of his sty, should be totally free from
straw, the brick flooring being every day swept out and sprinkled with a
layer of sand. his lair, or sleeping apartment, should be well sheltered
by roof and sides from cold, wet, and all changes of weather, and the
bed made up of a good supply of clean straw, sufficiently deep to enable
the pig to burrow his unprotected body beneath it. all the refuse of the
garden, in the shape of roots, leaves, and stalks, should be placed in a
corner of his pound or feeding-chamber, for the delectation of his
leisure moments; and once a week, on the family washing-day, a pail of
warm soap-suds should be taken into his sty, and, by means of a
scrubbing-brush and soap, his back, shoulders, and flanks should be well
cleaned, a pail of clean warm water being thrown over his body at the
conclusion, before he is allowed to retreat to his clean straw to dry
himself. by this means, the excessive nutrition of his aliment will be
corrected, a more perfect digestion insured, and, by opening the pores
of the skin, a more vigorous state of health acquired than could have
been obtained under any other system.
. we have already said that no other animal yields man so many
kinds and varieties of luxurious food as is supplied to him by the flesh
of the hog differently prepared; for almost every part of the animal,
either fresh, salted, or dried, is used for food; and even those viscera
not so employed are of the utmost utility in a domestic point of view.
. though destitute of the hide, horns, and hoofs, constituting the
offal of most domestic animals, the pig is not behind the other mammalia
in its usefulness to man. its skin, especially that of the boar, from
its extreme closeness of texture, when tanned, is employed for the seats
of saddles, to cover powder, shot, and drinking-flasks; and the hair,
according to its colour, flexibility, and stubbornness, is manufactured
into tooth, nail, and hairbrushes,—others into hat, clothes, and
shoe-brushes; while the longer and finer qualities are made into long
and short brooms and painters' brushes; and a still more rigid
description, under the name of "bristles," are used by the shoemaker as
needles for the passage of his wax-end. besides so many benefits and
useful services conferred on man by this valuable animal, his fat, in a
commercial sense, is quite as important as his flesh, and brings a price
equal to the best joints in the carcase. this fat is rendered, or melted
out of the caul, or membrane in which it is contained, by boiling water,
and, while liquid, run into prepared bladders, when, under the name of
lard, it becomes an article of extensive trade and value.
. of the numerous varieties of the domesticated hog, the following
list of breeds may be accepted as the best, presenting severally all
those qualities aimed at in the rearing of domestic stock, as affecting
both the breeder and the consumer. native—berkshire, essex, york, and
cumberland; foreign—the chinese. before, however, proceeding with the
consideration of the different orders, in the series we have placed
them, it will be necessary to make a few remarks relative to the pig
generally. in the first place, the black pig is regarded by breeders
as the best and most eligible animal, not only from the fineness and
delicacy of the skin, but because it is less affected by the heat in
summer, and far less subject to cuticular disease than either the white
or brindled hog, but more particularly from its kindlier nature and
greater aptitude to fatten.
. the great quality first sought for in a hog is a capacious stomach,
and next, a healthy power of digestion; for the greater the quantity he
can eat, and the more rapidly he can digest what he has eaten, the more
quickly will he fatten; and the faster he can be made to increase in
flesh, without a material increase of bone, the better is the breed
considered, and the more valuable the animal. in the usual order of
nature, the development of flesh and enlargement of bone proceed
together; but here the object is to outstrip the growth of the bones by
the quicker development of their fleshy covering.
. the chief points sought for in the choice of a hog are breadth of
chest, depth of carcase, width of loin, chine, and ribs, compactness of
form, docility, cheerfulness, and general beauty of appearance. the head
in a well-bred hog must not be too long, the forehead narrow and convex,
cheeks full, snout fine, mouth small, eyes small and quick, ears short,
thin, and sharp, pendulous, and pointing forwards; neck full and broad,
particularly on the top, where it should join very broad shoulders; the
ribs, loin, and haunch should be in a uniform line, and the tail well
set, neither too high nor too low; at the same time the back is to be
straight or slightly curved, the chest deep, broad, and prominent, the
legs short and thick; the belly, when well fattened, should nearly touch
the ground, the hair be long, thin, fine, and having few bristles, and
whatever the colour, uniform, either white, black, or blue; but not
spotted, speckled, brindled, or sandy. such are the features and
requisites that, among breeders and judges, constitute the beau idéal
of a perfect pig.
[illustration: berkshire sow.]
. the berkshire pig is the best known and most esteemed of all our
english domestic breeds, and so highly is it regarded, that even the
varieties of the stock are in as great estimation as the parent breed
itself. the characteristics of the berkshire hog are that it has a tawny
colour, spotted with black, large ears hanging over the eyes, a thick,
close, and well-made body, legs short and small in the bone; feeds up to
a great weight, fattens quickly, and is good either for pork or bacon.
the new or improved berkshire possesses all the above qualities, but is
infinitely more prone to fatten, while the objectionable colour has been
entirely done away with, being now either all white or completely black.
[illustration: essex sow.]
. next to the former, the essex takes place in public estimation,
always competing, and often successfully, with the berkshire. the
peculiar characters of the essex breed are that it is tip-eared, has a
long sharp head, is roach-backed, with a long flat body, standing high
on the legs; is rather bare of hair, is a quick feeder, has an enormous
capacity of stomach and belly, and an appetite to match its receiving
capability. its colour is white, or else black and white, and it has a
restless habit and an unquiet disposition. the present valuable stock
has sprung from a cross between the common native animal and either the
white chinese or black neapolitan breeds.
[illustration: yorkshire sow.]
. the yorkshire, called also the old lincolnshire, was at one time
the largest stock of the pig family in england, and perhaps, at that
time, the worst. it was long-legged, weak in the loins, with coarse
white curly hair, and flabby flesh. now, however, it has undergone as
great a change as any breed in the kingdom, and by judicious crossing
has become the most valuable we possess, being a very well-formed pig
throughout, with a good head, a pleasant docile countenance, with
moderate-sized drooping ears, a broad back, slightly curved, large chine
and loins, with deep sides, full chest, and well covered with long
thickly-set white hairs. besides these qualities of form, he is a quick
grower, feeds fast, and will easily make from  to  stone before
completing his first year. the quality of the meat is also uncommonly
good, the fat and lean being laid on in almost equal proportions. so
capable is this species of development, both in flesh and stature, that
examples of the yorkshire breed have been exhibited weighing as much as
a scotch ox.
[illustration: cumberland sow.]
. though almost every country in england can boast some local variety
or other of this useful animal, obtained from the native stock by
crossing with some of the foreign kinds, cumberland and the north-west
parts of the kingdom have been celebrated for a small breed of white
pigs, with a thick, compact, and well-made body, short in the legs, the
head and back well formed, ears slouching and a little downwards, and on
the whole, a hardy, profitable animal, and one well disposed to fatten.
. there is no variety of this useful animal that presents such
peculiar features as the species known to us as the chinese pig; and as
it is the general belief that to this animal and the neapolitan hog we
are indebted for that remarkable improvement which has taken place in
the breeds of the english pig, it is necessary to be minute in the
description of this, in all respects, singular animal. the chinese, in
the first place, consists of many varieties, and presents as many forms
of body as differences of colour; the best kind, however, has a
beautiful white skin of singular thinness and delicacy; the hair too is
perfectly white, and thinly set over the body, with here and there a few
bristles. he has a broad snout, short head, eyes bright and fiery, very
small fine pink ears, wide cheeks, high chine, with a neck of such
immense thickness, that when the animal is fat it looks like an
elongated carcase,—a mass of fat, without shape or form, like a feather
pillow. the belly is dependent, and almost trailing on the ground, the
legs very short, and the tail so small as to be little more than a
rudiment. it has a ravenous appetite, and will eat anything that the
wonderful assimilating powers of its stomach can digest; and to that
capability, there seems no limit in the whole range of animal or
vegetable nature. the consequence of this perfect and singularly rapid
digestion is an unprecedented proneness to obesity, a process of
fattening that, once commenced, goes on with such rapid development,
that, in a short time, it loses all form, depositing such an amount of
fat, that it in fact ceases to have any refuse part or offal, and,
beyond the hair on its back and the callous extremity of the snout, the
whole carcase is eatable.
[illustration: chinese sow.]
. when judiciously fed on vegetable diet, and this obese tendency
checked, the flesh of the chinese pig is extremely delicate and
delicious; but when left to gorge almost exclusively on animal food, it
becomes oily, coarse, and unpleasant. perhaps there is no other instance
in nature where the effect of rapid and perfect digestion is so well
shown as in this animal, which thrives on everything, and turns to the
benefit of its physical economy, food of the most opposite nature, and
of the most unwholesome and offensive character. when fully fattened,
the thin cuticle, that is one of its characteristics, cracks, from the
adipose distension beneath, exposing the fatty mass, which discharges a
liquid oil from the adjacent tissues. the great fault in this breed is
the remarkably small quantity of lean laid down, to the immense
proportion of fat. some idea of the growth of this species may be
inferred from the fact of their attaining to  stone before two years,
and when further advanced, as much as  stone. in its pure state,
except for roasters, the chinese pig is too disproportionate for the
english market; but when crossed with some of our lean stock, the breed
becomes almost invaluable.
[illustration: westphalian boar.]
. the wild boar is a much more cleanly and sagacious animal than the
domesticated hog; he is longer in the snout, has his ears shorter and
his tusks considerably longer, very frequently measuring as much as 
inches. they are extremely sharp, and are bent in an upward circle.
unlike his domestic brother, who roots up here and there, or wherever
his fancy takes, the wild boar ploughs the ground in continuous lines or
furrows. the boar, when selected as the parent of a stock, should have a
small head, be deep and broad in the chest; the chine should be arched,
the ribs and barrel well rounded, with the haunches falling full down
nearly to the hock; and he should always be more compact and smaller
than the female. the colour of the wild boar is always of a uniform hue,
and generally of an iron grey; shading off into a black. the hair of the
boar is of considerable length, especially about the head and mane; he
stands, in general, from  to  inches in height at the shoulders,
though instances have occurred where he has reached  inches. the young
are of a pale yellowish tint, irregularly brindled with light brown. the
boar of germany is a large and formidable animal, and the hunting of
him, with a small species of mastiff, is still a national sport. from
living almost exclusively on acorns and nuts, his flesh is held in great
esteem, and in westphalia his legs are made into hams by a process
which, it is said, enhances the flavour and quality of the meat in a
remarkable degree.
. there are two points to be taken into consideration by all breeders
of pigs—to what ultimate use is the flesh to be put; for, if meant to
be eaten fresh, or simply salted, the small breed of pigs is host
suited for the purpose; if for hams or bacon, the large variety of the
animal is necessary. pigs are usually weaned between six and eight weeks
after birth, after which they are fed on soft food, such as mashed
potatoes in skimmed or butter-milk. the general period at which the
small hogs are killed for the market is from  to  weeks; from  to 
mouths, they are called store pigs, and are turned out to graze till the
animal has acquired its full stature. as soon as this point has been
reached, the pig should be forced to maturity as quickly as possible; he
should therefore be taken from the fields and farm-yard, and shut up on
boiled potatoes, buttermilk, and peas-meal, after a time to be followed
by grains, oil-cake, wash, barley, and indian meal; supplying his sty at
the same time with plenty of water, cinders, and a quantity of salt in
every mess of food presented to him.
. the estimated number of pigs in great britain is supposed to exceed
 millions; and, considering the third of the number as worth ł
apiece, and the remaining two-thirds as of the relative value of s.
each, would give a marketable estimate of over ł,, for this
animal alone.
. the best and most humane mode of killing all large hogs is to
strike them down like a bullock, with the pointed end of a poleaxe, on
the forehead, which has the effect of killing the animal at once; all
the butcher has then to do, is to open the aorta and great arteries, and
laying the animal's neck over a trough, let out the blood as quickly as
possible. the carcase is then to be scalded, either on a board or by
immersion in a tub of very hot water, and all the hair and dirt rapidly
scraped off, till the skin is made perfectly white, when it is hung up,
opened, and dressed, as it is called, in the usual way. it is then
allowed to cool, a sheet being thrown around the carcase, to prevent the
air from discolouring the newly-cleaned skin. when meant for bacon, the
hair is singed instead of being scalded off.
. in the country, where for ordinary consumption the pork killed for
sale is usually both larger and fatter than that supplied to the london
consumer, it is customary to remove the skin and fat down to the lean,
and, salting that, roast what remains of the joint. pork goes further,
and is consequently a more economical food than other meats, simply
because the texture is closer, and there is less waste in the cooking,
either in roasting or boiling.
. in fresh pork, the leg is the most economical family joint, and the
loin the richest.
. comparatively speaking, very little difference exists between the
weight of the live and dead pig, and this, simply because there is
neither the head nor the hide to be removed. it has been proved that
pork loses in cooking -/, per cent. of its weight. a salted hand
weighing  lbs.  oz. lost in the cooking  oz.; after cooking, the
meat weighing only  lbs.  oz., and the bone  oz. the original cost
was -/d. a pound; but by this deduction, the cost rose to d. per
pound with the bone, and -/d. without it.
. pork, to be preserved, is cured in several ways,—either by
covering it with salt, or immersing it in ready-made brine, where it is
kept till required; or it is only partially salted, and then hung up to
dry, when the meat is called white bacon; or, after salting, it is hung
in wood smoke till the flesh is impregnated with the aroma from the
wood. the wiltshire bacon, which is regarded as the finest in the
kingdom, is prepared by laying the sides of a hog in large wooden
troughs, and then rubbing into the flesh quantities of powdered
bay-salt, made hot in a frying-pan. this process is repeated for four
days; they are then left for three weeks, merely turning the flitches
every other day. after that time they are hung up to dry. the hogs
usually killed for purposes of bacon in england average from  to 
stone; on the other hand, the hogs killed in the country for farm-house
purposes, seldom weigh less than  stone. the legs of boars, hogs, and,
in germany, those of bears, are prepared differently, and called hams.
. the practice in vogue formerly in this country was to cut out the
hams and cure them separately; then to remove the ribs, which were
roasted as "spare-ribs," and, curing the remainder of the side, call it
a "gammon of bacon."
small pork to cut for table in joints, is cut up, in most places
throughout the kingdom, as represented in the engraving. the sale is
divided with nine ribs to the fore quarter; and the following is an
enumeration of the joints in the two respective quarters:—
. the leg.
hind quarter . the loin.
. the spring, or belly.
. the hand.
fore quarter . the fore-loin.
. the cheek.
[illustration: side of a pig, showing the several joints.]
the weight of the several joints of a good pork pig of four stone may be
as follows; viz.:—
the leg  lbs.
the loin and spring  lbs.
the hand  lbs.
the chine  lbs.
the cheek from  to  lbs.
of a bacon pig, the legs are reserved for curing, and when cured are
called hams: when the meat is separated from the shoulder-blade and
bones and cured, it is called bacon. the bones, with part of the meat
left on them, are divided into spare-ribs, griskins, and chines.
pork cutlets (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast loin of pork,  oz. of
butter,  onions,  dessertspoonful of flour, / pint of gravy, pepper
and salt to taste,  teaspoonful of vinegar and mustard.
mode.—cut the pork into nice-sized cutlets, trim off most of the fat,
and chop the onions. put the butter into a stewpan, lay in the cutlets
and chopped onions, and fry a light brown; then add the remaining
ingredients, simmer gently for  or  minutes, and serve.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable from october to march.
 austrian method of herding pigs.—in the austrian empire there
 are great numbers of wild swine, while, among the wandering
 tribes peopling the interior of hungary, and spreading over the
 vast steppes of that country, droves of swine form a great
 portion of the wealth of the people, who chiefly live on a
 coarse bread and wind-dried bacon.
 in german switzerland, the tyrol, and other mountainous
 districts of continental europe, though the inhabitants, almost
 everywhere, as in england, keep one or more pigs, they are at
 little or no trouble in feeding them, one or more men being
 employed by one or several villages as swine-herds; who, at a
 certain hour, every morning, call for the pig or pigs, and
 driving them to their feeding-grounds on the mountain-side and
 in the wood, take custody of the herd till, on the approach of
 night, they are collected into a compact body and driven home
 for a night's repose in their several sties.
 the amount of intelligence and docility displayed by the pigs in
 these mountain regions, is much more considerable than that
 usually allowed to this animal, and the manner in which these
 immense herds of swine are collected, and again distributed,
 without an accident or mistake, is a sight both curious and
 interesting; for it is all done without the assistance of a dog,
 or the aid even of the human voice, and solely by the crack of
 the long-lashed and heavily-loaded whip, which the swine-herd
 carries, and cracks much after the fashion of the french
 postilion; and which, though he frequently cracks, waking a
 hundred sharp echoes from the woods and rocks, he seldom has to
 use correctionally; the animal soon acquiring a thorough
 knowledge of the meaning of each crack; and once having felt its
 leaded thong, a lasting remembrance of its power. at early dawn,
 the swine-herd takes his stand at the outskirts of the first
 village, and begins flourishing through the misty air his
 immensely long lash, keeping a sort of rude time with the crack,
 crack, crack, crack, crack, crack of his whip. the nearest pigs,
 hearing the well-remembered sound, rouse from their straw, and
 rush from their sties into the road, followed by all their
 litters. as soon as a sufficient number are collected, the drove
 is set in motion, receiving, right and left, as they advance,
 fresh numbers; whole communities, or solitary individuals,
 streaming in from all quarters, and taking their place, without
 distinction, in the general herd; and, as if conscious where
 their breakfast lay, without wasting a moment on idle
 investigation, all eagerly push on to the mountains. in this
 manner village after village is collected, till the drove not
 unfrequently consists of several thousands. the feeding-ground
 has, of course, often to be changed, and the drove have
 sometimes to be driven many miles, and to a considerable height
 up the mountain, before the whip gives the signal for the
 dispersion of the body and the order to feed, when the herdsman
 proceeds to form himself a shelter, and look after his own
 comfort for the rest of the day. as soon as twilight sets in,
 the whip is again heard echoing the signal for muster; and in
 the same order in which they were collected, the swine are
 driven back, each group tailing off to its respective sty, as
 the herd approaches the villages, till the last grunter, having
 found his home, the drover seeks his cottage and repose.
. ingredients.—loin of pork, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—cut the cutlets from a delicate loin of pork, bone and trim
them neatly, and cut away the greater portion of the fat. season them
with pepper; place the gridiron on the fire; when quite hot, lay on the
chops and broil them for about / hour, turning them  or  times; and
be particular that they are thoroughly done, but not dry. dish them,
sprinkle over a little fine salt, and serve plain, or with tomato sauce,
sauce piquante, or pickled gherkins, a few of which should be laid round
the dish as a garnish.
time.—about / hour. average cost, d. per lb. for chops.
sufficient.—allow  for  persons.
seasonable from october to march.
(another way.)
. ingredients.—loin or fore-loin, of pork, egg and bread crumbs,
salt and pepper to taste; to every tablespoonful of bread crumbs allow
/ teaspoonful of minced sage; clarified butter.
mode.—cut the cutlets from a loin, or fore-loin, of pork; trim them
the same as mutton cutlets, and scrape the top part of the bone. brush
them over with egg, sprinkle with bread crumbs, with which have been
mixed minced sage and a seasoning of pepper and salt; drop a little
clarified butter on them, and press the crumbs well down. put the
frying-pan on the fire, put in some lard; when this is hot, lay in the
cutlets, and fry them a light brown on both sides. take them out, put
them before the fire to dry the greasy moisture from them, and dish them
on mashed potatoes. serve with them any sauce that may be preferred;
such as tomato sauce, sauce piquante, sauce robert, or pickled gherkins.
time.—from  to  minutes. average cost, d. per lb. for chops.
sufficient.—allow  cutlets for  persons.
seasonable from october to march.
note.—the remains of roast loin of pork may be dressed in the same
manner.
pork cheese (an excellent breakfast dish).
. ingredients.— lbs. of cold roast pork, pepper and salt to taste,
 dessertspoonful of minced parsley,  leaves of sage, a very small
bunch of savoury herbs,  blades of pounded mace, a little nutmeg, /
teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel; good strong gravy, sufficient to fill
the mould.
mode.—cut, but do not chop, the pork into fine pieces, and allow /
lb. of fat to each pound of lean. season with pepper and salt; pound
well the spices, and chop finely the parsley, sage, herbs, and
lemon-peel, and mix the whole nicely together. put it into a mould, fill
up with good strong well-flavoured gravy, and bake rather more than one
hour. when cold, turn it out of the mould.
time.—rather more than  hour.
seasonable from october to march.
[illustration: roast leg of pork.]
. ingredients.—leg of pork, a little oil for stuffing. (see recipe
no. .)
mode.—choose a small leg of pork, and score the skin across in narrow
strips, about / inch apart. cut a slit in the knuckle, loosen the
skin, and fill it with a sage-and-onion stuffing, made by recipe no.
. brush the joint over with a little salad-oil (this makes the
crackling crisper, and a better colour), and put it down to a bright,
clear fire, not too near, as that would cause the skin to blister. baste
it well, and serve with a little gravy made in the dripping-pan, and do
not omit to send to table with it a tureen of well-made apple-sauce.
(sec no. .)
time.—a leg of pork weighing  lbs., about  hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
 english mode of hunting, and indian pig-sticking.—the hunting
 of the wild boar has been in all times, and in all countries, a
 pastime of the highest interest and excitement, and from the age
 of nimrod, has only been considered second to the more dangerous
 sport of lion-hunting. the buried treasures of nineveh, restored
 to us by mr. layard, show us, on their sculptured annals, the
 kings of assyria in their royal pastime of boar-hunting. that
 the greeks were passionately attached to this sport, we know
 both from history and the romantic fables of the poets. marc
 antony, at one of his breakfasts with cleopatra, had eight wild
 boars roasted whole; and though the romans do not appear to
 have been addicted to hunting, wild-boar fights formed part of
 their gladiatorial shows in the amphitheatre. in france,
 germany, and britain, from the earliest time, the boar-hunt
 formed one of the most exciting of sports; but it was only in
 this country that the sport was conducted without dogs,—a real
 hand-to-hand contest of man and beast; the hunter, armed only
 with a boar-spear, a weapon about four feet long, the ash staff,
 guarded by plates of steel, and terminating in a long, narrow,
 and very sharp blade: this, with a hunting-knife, or hanger,
 completed his offensive arms. thus equipped, the hunter would
 either encounter his enemy face to face, confront his desperate
 charge, as with erect tail, depressed head, and flaming eyes, he
 rushed with his foamy tusks full against him, who either sought
 to pierce his vitals through his counter, or driving his spear
 through his chine, transfix his heart; or failing those more
 difficult aims, plunge it into his flank, and, without
 withdrawing the weapon, strike his ready hanger into his throat.
 but expert as the hunter might be, it was not often the
 formidable brute was so quickly dispatched; for he would
 sometimes seize the spear in his powerful teeth, and nip it off
 like a reed, or, coming full tilt on his enemy, by his momentum
 and weight bear him to the earth, ripping up, with a horrid
 gash, his leg or side, and before the writhing hunter could draw
 his knife, the infuriated beast would plunge his snout in the
 wound, and rip, with savage teeth, the bowels of his victim. at
 other times, he would suddenly swerve from his charge, and
 doubling on his opponent, attack the hunter in the rear. from
 his speed, great weight, and savage disposition, the wild boar
 is always a dangerous antagonist, and requires great courage,
 coolness, and agility on the part of the hunter. the continental
 sportsman rides to the chase in a cavalcade, with music and
 dogs,—a kind of small hound or mastiff, and leaving all the
 honorary part of the contest to them, when the boar is becoming
 weary, and while beset by the dogs, rides up, and drives his
 lance home in the beast's back or side. boar-hunting has been
 for some centuries obsolete in england, the animal no longer
 existing in a wild state among us; but in our indian empire, and
 especially in bengal, the pastime is pursued by our countrymen
 with all the daring of the national character; and as the animal
 which inhabits the cane-brakes and jungles is a formidable foe,
 the sport is attended with great excitement. the hunters,
 mounted on small, active horses, and armed only with long
 lances, ride, at early daylight, to the skirts of the jungle,
 and having sent in their attendants to beat the cover, wait till
 the tusked monster comes crashing from among the canes, when
 chase is immediately given, till he is come up with, and
 transfixed by the first weapon. instead of flight, however, he
 often turns to bay, and by more than one dead horse and wounded
 hunter, shows how formidable he is, and what those polished
 tusks, sharp as pitch-forks, can effect, when the enraged animal
 defends his life.
to glaze ham.—(see recipe no. .)
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast pork,  onions, 
teaspoonful of flour,  blades of pounded mace,  cloves, 
tablespoonful of vinegar, / pint of gravy, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—chop the onions and fry them of a nice brown, cut the pork into
thin slices, season them with pepper and salt, and add these to the
remaining ingredients. stew gently for about / hour, and serve
garnished with sippets of toasted bread.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable from october to march.
. ingredients.—bacon; eggs.
mode.—cut the bacon into thin slices, trim away the rusty parts, and
cut off the rind. put it into a cold frying-pan, that is to say, do not
place the pan on the fire before the bacon is in it. turn it  or 
times, and dish it on a very hot dish. poach the eggs and slip them on
to the bacon, without breaking the yolks, and serve quickly.
time.— or  minutes. average cost, d. to s. per lb. for the
primest parts.
sufficient.—allow  eggs for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—fried rashers of bacon, curled, serve as a pretty garnish to
many dishes; and, for small families, answer very well as a substitute
for boiled bacon, to serve with a small dish of poultry, &c.
broiled rashers of bacon (a breakfast dish).
. before purchasing bacon, ascertain that it is perfectly free from
rust, which may easily be detected by its yellow colour; and for
broiling, the streaked part of the thick flank, is generally the most
esteemed. cut it into thin slices, take off the rind, and broil over a
nice clear fire; turn it  or  times, and serve very hot. should there
be any cold bacon left from the previous day, it answers very well for
breakfast, cut into slices, and broiled or fried.
time.— or  minutes.
average cost, d. to s. per lb. for the primest parts.
seasonable at any time.
note.—when the bacon is cut very thin, the slices may be curled round
and fastened by means of small skewers, and fried or toasted before the
fire.
. ingredients.—bacon; water.
[illustration: boiled bacon.]
mode.—as bacon is frequently excessively salt, let it be soaked in
warm water for an hour or two previous to dressing it; then pare off the
rusty parts, and scrape the under-side and rind as clean as possible.
put it into a saucepan of cold water, let it come gradually to a boil,
and as fast as the scum rises to the surface of the water, remove it.
let it simmer very gently until it is thoroughly done; then take it
up, strip off the skin, and sprinkle over the bacon a few bread
raspings, and garnish with tufts of cauliflower or brussels sprouts.
when served alone, young and tender broad beans or green peas are the
usual accompaniments.
time.— lb. of bacon, / hour;  lbs., -/ hour.
average cost, d. to s. per lb. for the primest parts.
sufficient.— lbs., when served with poultry or veal, sufficient for
 persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of coarse sugar, -/ lb. of bay-salt, 
oz. of saltpetre,  lb. of common salt.
mode.—sprinkle each flitch with salt, and let the blood drain off for
 hours; then pound and mix the above ingredients well together and rub
it well into the meat, which should be turned every day for a month;
then hang it to dry, and afterwards smoke it for  days.
time.—to remain in the pickle  month, to be smoked  days.
sufficient.—the above quantity of salt for  pig.
 how pigs were formerly pastured and fed.—though unquestionably
 far greater numbers of swine are now kept in england than
 formerly, every peasant having one or more of that useful
 animal, in feudal times immense droves of pigs were kept by the
 franklings and barons; in those days the swine-herds being a
 regular part of the domestic service of every feudal household,
 their duty consisted in daily driving the herd of swine from the
 castle-yard, or outlying farm, to the nearest woods, chase, or
 forest, where the frankling or vavasour had, either by right or
 grant, what was called free warren, or the liberty to feed his
 hogs off the acorns, beech, and chestnuts that lay in such
 abundance on the earth, and far exceeded the power of the royal
 or privileged game to consume. indeed, it was the license
 granted the nobles of free warren, especially for their swine,
 that kept up the iniquitous forest laws to so late a date, and
 covered so large a portion of the land with such immense tracts
 of wood and brake, to the injury of agriculture and the misery
 of the people. some idea of the extent to which swine were
 grazed in the feudal times, may be formed by observing the
 number of pigs still fed in epping forest, the forest of dean,
 and the new forest, in hampshire, where, for several months of
 the year, the beech-nuts and acorns yield them so plentiful a
 diet. in germany, where the chestnut is so largely cultivated,
 the amount of food shed every autumn is enormous; and
 consequently the pig, both wild and domestic, has, for a
 considerable portion of the year, an unfailing supply of
 admirable nourishment. impressed with the value of this fruit
 for the food of pigs, the prince consort has, with great
 judgment, of late encouraged the collection of chestnuts in
 windsor park, and by giving a small reward to old people and
 children for every bushel collected, has not only found an
 occupation for many of the unemployed poor, but, by providing a
 gratuitous food for their pig, encouraged a feeling of
 providence and economy.
for curing bacon, and keeping it free from rust (cobbett's recipe).
. the two sides that remain, and which are called flitches, are to be
cured for bacon. they are first rubbed with salt on their insides, or
flesh sides, then placed one on the other, the flesh sides uppermost, in
a salting-trough which has a gutter round its edges to drain away the
brine; for, to have sweet and fine bacon, the flitches must not be
sopping in brine, which gives it the sort of vile taste that barrel and
sea pork have. every one knows how different is the taste of fresh dry
salt from that of salt in a dissolved state; therefore change the salt
often,—once in  or  days; let it melt and sink in, but not lie too
long; twice change the flitches, put that at bottom which was first on
the top: this mode will cost you a great deal more in salt than the
sopping mode, but without it your bacon will not be so sweet and fine,
nor keep so well. as for the time required in making your flitches
sufficiently salt, it depends on circumstances. it takes a longer time
for a thick than a thin flitch, and longer in dry than in damp weather,
or in a dry than in a damp place; but for the flitches of a hog of five
score, in weather not very dry or damp, about  weeks may do; and as
yours is to be fat, which receives little injury from over-salting, give
time enough, for you are to have bacon until christmas comes again.
. the place for salting should, like a dairy, always be cool, but
well ventilated; confined air, though cool, will taint meat sooner than
the midday day sun accompanied by a breeze. with regard to smoking the
bacon, two precautions are necessary: first, to hang the flitches where
no rain comes down upon them; and next, that the smoke must proceed from
wood, not peat, turf, or coal. as to the time required to smoke a
flitch, it depends a good deal upon whether there be a constant fire
beneath; and whether the fire be large or small: a month will do, if the
fire be pretty constant and rich, as a farmhouse fire usually is; but
over-smoking, or rather too long hanging in the air, makes the bacon
rust; great attention should therefore be paid to this matter. the
flitch ought not to be dried up to the hardness of a board, and yet it
ought to be perfectly dry. before you hang it up, lay it on the floor,
scatter the flesh side pretty thickly over with bran, or with some fine
sawdust, not of deal or fir; rub it on the flesh, or pat it well down
upon it: this keeps the smoke from getting into the little openings, and
makes a sort of crust to be dried on.
. to keep the bacon sweet and good, and free from hoppers, sift fine
some clean and dry wood ashes. put some at the bottom of a box or chest
long enough to hold a flitch of bacon; lay in one flitch, and then put
in more ashes, then another flitch, and cover this with six or eight
inches of the ashes. the place where the box or chest is kept ought to
be dry, and should the ashes become damp, they should be put in the
fireplace to dry, and when cold, put back again. with these precautions,
the bacon will be as good at the end of the year as on the first day.
. for simple general rules; these may be safely taken as a guide; and
those who implicitly follow the directions given, will possess at the
expiration of from  weeks to  months well-flavoured and well-cured
bacon.
 hog not bacon. anecdote of lord bacon.—as lord bacon, on one
 occasion, was about to pass sentence of death upon a man of the
 name of hogg, who had just been tried for a long career of
 crime, the prisoner suddenly claimed to be heard in arrest of
 judgment, saying, with an expression of arch confidence as he
 addressed the bench, "i claim indulgence, my lord, on the plea
 of relationship; for i am convinced your lordship will never be
 unnatural enough to hang one of your own family."
 "indeed, replied the judge, with some amazement," i was not
 aware that i had the honour of your alliance; perhaps you will
 be good enough to name the degree of our mutual affinity."
 "i am sorry, my lord," returned the impudent thief, "i cannot
 trace the links of consanguinity; but the moral evidence is
 sufficiently pertinent. my name, my lord, is hogg, your
 lordship's is bacon; and all the world will allow that bacon and
 hog are very closely allied."
 "i am sorry," replied his lordship, "i cannot admit the truth of
 your instance: hog cannot be bacon till it is hanged; and so,
 before i can admit your plea, or acknowledge the family compact,
 hogg must be hanged to-morrow morning."
. ingredients.—ham; a common crust.
mode.—as a ham for baking should be well soaked, let it remain in water
for at least  hours. wipe it dry, trim away any rusty places
underneath, and cover it with a common crust, taking care that this is
of sufficient thickness all over to keep the gravy in. place it in a
moderately-heated oven, and bake for nearly  hours. take off the crust,
and skin, and cover with raspings, the same as for boiled ham, and
garnish the knuckle with a paper frill. this method of cooking a ham is,
by many persons, considered far superior to boiling it, as it cuts
fuller of gravy and has a finer flavour, besides keeping a much longer
time good.
time.—a medium-sized ham,  hours.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. by the whole ham.
seasonable all the year.
[illustration: boiled ham.]
. ingredients.—ham, water, glaze or raspings.
mode.—in choosing a ham, ascertain that it is perfectly sweet, by
running a sharp knife into it, close to the bone; and if, when the knife
is withdrawn, it has an agreeable smell, the ham is good; if, on the
contrary, the blade has a greasy appearance and offensive smell, the ham
is bad. if it has been long hung, and is very dry and salt, let it
remain in soak for  hours, changing the water frequently. this length
of time is only necessary in the case of its being very hard; from  to
 hours would be sufficient for a yorkshire or westmoreland ham. wash
it thoroughly clean, and trim away from the under-side, all the rusty
and smoked parts, which would spoil the appearance. put it into a
boiling-pot, with sufficient cold water to cover it; bring it gradually
to boil, and as the scum rises, carefully remove it. keep it simmering
very gently until tender, and be careful that it does not stop boiling,
nor boil too quickly. when done, take it out of the pot, strip off the
skin, and sprinkle over it a few fine bread-raspings, put a frill of cut
paper round the knuckle, and serve. if to be eaten cold, let the ham
remain in the water until nearly cold: by this method the juices are
kept in, and it will be found infinitely superior to one taken out of
the water hot; it should, however, be borne in mind that the ham must
not remain in the saucepan all night. when the skin is removed,
sprinkle over bread-raspings, or, if wanted particularly nice, glaze it.
place a paper frill round the knuckle, and garnish with parsley or cut
vegetable flowers. (see coloured plate p.)
time.—a ham weighing  lbs.,  hours to simmer gently;  lbs., 
hours; a very large one, about  hours.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. by the whole ham.
seasonable all the year.
. ingredients.—vinegar and water,  heads of celery,  turnips, 
onions, a large bunch of savoury herbs.
mode.—prepare the ham as in the preceding recipe, and let it soak for
a few hours in vinegar and water. put it on in cold water, and when it
boils, add the vegetables and herbs. simmer very gently until tender,
take it out, strip off the skin, cover with bread-raspings, and put a
paper ruche or frill round the knuckle.
time.—a ham weighing  lbs.,  hours.
average cost, d. to d. per lb. by the whole ham.
seasonable at any time.
 how to silence a pig. anecdote of charles v.—when the emperor
 charles v. was one day walking in the neighbourhood of vienna,
 full of pious considerations, engendered by the thoughts of the
 dominican cloister he was about to visit, he was much annoyed by
 the noise of a pig, which a country youth was carrying a little
 way before him. at length, irritated by the unmitigated noise,
 "have you not learned how to quiet a pig" demanded the imperial
 traveller, tartly. "noa," replied the ingenuous peasant,
 ignorant of the quality of his interrogator;—"noa; and i should
 very much like to know how to do it," changing the position of
 his burthen, and giving his load a surreptitious pinch of the
 ear, which immediately altered the tone and volume of his
 complaining.
 "why, take the pig by the tail," said the emperor, "and you will
 see how quiet he will become."
 struck by the novelty of the suggestion, the countryman at once
 dangled his noisy companion by the tail, and soon discovered
 that, under the partial congestion caused by its inverted
 position, the pig had indeed become silent; when, looking with
 admiration on his august adviser, he exclaimed,—
 "ah, you must have learned the trade much longer than i, for you
 understand it a great deal better."
fried ham and eggs (a breakfast dish).
. ingredients.—ham; eggs.
mode.—cut the ham into slices, and take care that they are of the
same thickness in every part. cut off the rind, and if the ham should be
particularly hard and salt, it will be found an improvement to soak it
for about  minutes in hot water, and then dry it in a cloth. put it
into a cold frying-pan, set it over the fire, and turn the slices  or 
times whilst they are cooking. when done, place them on a dish, which
should be kept hot in front of the fire during the time the eggs are
being poached. poach the eggs, slip them on to the slices of ham, and
serve quickly.
time.— or  minutes to broil the ham.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. by the whole ham.
seasonable at any time.
note.—ham may also be toasted or broiled; but, with the latter
method, to insure its being well cooked, the fire must be beautifully
clear, or it will have a smoky flavour far from agreeable.
potted ham, that will keep good for some time.
. ingredients.—to  lbs. of lean ham allow  lb. of fat, 
teaspoonfuls of pounded mace, / nutmeg grated, rather more than /
teaspoonful of cayenne, clarified lard.
mode.—mince the ham, fat and lean together in the above proportion,
and pound it well in a mortar, seasoning it with cayenne pepper, pounded
mace, and nutmeg; put the mixture into a deep baking-dish, and bake for
/ hour; then press it well into a stone jar, fill up the jar with
clarified lard, cover it closely, and paste over it a piece of thick
paper. if well seasoned, it will keep a long time in winter, and will be
found very convenient for sandwiches, &c.
time.—/ hour.
seasonable at any time.
(a nice addition to the breakfast or luncheon table.)
. ingredients.—to  lbs. of lean ham allow / lb. of fat, 
teaspoonful of pounded mace, / teaspoonful of pounded allspice, /
nutmeg, pepper to taste, clarified butter.
mode.—cut some slices from the remains of a cold ham, mince them
small, and to every  lbs. of lean, allow the above proportion of fat.
pound the ham in a mortar to a fine paste, with the fat, gradually add
the seasoning and spices, and be very particular that all the
ingredients are well mixed and the spices well pounded. press the
mixture into potting-pots, pour over clarified butter, and keep it in a
cool place.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
 importance of the boar's head, scottish feuds, &c.—the boar's
 head, in ancient times, formed the most important dish on the
 table, and was invariably the first placed on the board upon
 christmas-day, being preceded by a body of servitors, a flourish
 of trumpets, and other marks of distinction and reverence, and
 carried into the hall by the individual of next rank to the lord
 of the feast. at some of our colleges and inns of court, the
 serving of the boar's head on a silver platter on christmas-day
 is a custom still followed; and till very lately, a bore's head
 was competed for at christmas time by the young men of a rural
 parish in essex. indeed, so highly was the grizzly boar's head
 regarded in former times, that it passed into a cognizance of
 some of the noblest families in the realm: thus it was not only
 the crest of the nevills and warwicks, with their collateral
 houses, but it was the cognizance of richard iii., that—
"wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
that spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines,
swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
in your embowell'd bosoms,"—
 and whose nature it was supposed to typify; and was universally
 used as a sign to taverns. the boar's head in eastcheap,
 which, till within the last twenty-five years still stood in all
 its primitive quaintness, though removed to make way for the
 london-bridge approaches, will live vividly in the mind of every
 reader of shakspeare, as the resort of the prince of wales,
 poins, and his companions, and the residence of falstaff and his
 coney-catching knaves, bardolph, pistol, and nym; and whose sign
 was a boar's head, carved in stone over the door, and a smaller
 one in wood on each side of the doorway.
 the traditions and deeds of savage vengeance recorded in
 connection with this grim trophy of the chase are numerous in
 all parts of europe. but the most remarkable connected with the
 subject in this country, were two events that occurred in
 scotland, about the th and th centuries.
 a border family having been dispossessed of their castle and
 lands by a more powerful chief, were reduced for many years to
 great indigence, the expelled owner only living in the hope of
 wreaking a terrible vengeance, which, agreeably to the motto of
 his house, he was content to "bide his time" for. the usurper
 having invited a large number of his kindred to a grand hunt in
 his new domains, and a feast after in the great hall, returned
 from the chase, and discovering the feast not spread, vented his
 wrath in no measured terms on the heads of the tardy servitors.
 at length a menial approached, followed by a line of servants,
 and placing the boar's head on the table, the guests rushed
 forward to begin the meal; when, to their horror, they
 discovered, not a boar's but a bull's head,—a sign of death.
 the doors were immediately closed, and the false servants, who
 were the adherents of the dispossessed chief, threw off their
 disguise, and falling on the usurper and his friends, butchered
 them and every soul in the castle belonging to the rival
 faction.
 a tribe of caterans, or mountain robbers, in the western
 highlands, having been greatly persecuted by a powerful chief of
 the district, waylaid him and his retinue, put them all to the
 sword, and cutting off the chief's head, repaired to his castle,
 where they ordered the terrified wife to supply them with food
 and drink. to appease their savage humour, the lady gave order
 for their entertainment, and on returning to the hall to see her
 orders were complied with, discovered, in place of the boar's
 head that should have graced the board, her husband's bleeding
 head; the savage caterans, in rude derision, as a substitute for
 the apple or lemon usually placed between the jaws, having
 thrust a slice of bread in the dead man's mouth.
for curing hams (mons. ude's recipe).
. ingredients.—for  hams weighing about  or  lbs. each, allow 
lb. of moist sugar,  lb. of common salt,  oz. of saltpetre,  quart of
good vinegar.
mode.—as soon as the pig is cold enough to be cut up, take the  hams
and rub them well with common salt, and leave them in a large pan for 
days. when the salt has drawn out all the blood, drain the hams, and
throw the brine away. mix sugar, salt, and saltpetre together in the
above proportion, rub the hams well with these, and put them into a
vessel large enough to hold them, always keeping the salt over them. let
them remain for  days, then pour over them a quart of good vinegar.
turn them in the brine every day for a month, then drain them well, and
rub them with bran. have them smoked over a wood fire, and be particular
that the hams are hung as high up as possible from the fire; otherwise
the fat will melt, and they will become dry and hard.
time.—to be pickled  month; to be smoked  month.
sufficient for  hams of  lbs. each.
seasonable from october to march.
 the price of a sow in africa.—in one of the native states of
 africa, a pig one day stole a piece of food from a child as it
 was in the act of conveying the morsel to its mouth; upon which
 the robbed child cried so loud that the mother rushed out of her
 hovel to ascertain the cause; and seeing the purloining pig make
 off munching his booty, the woman in her heat struck the grunter
 so smart a blow, that the surly rascal took it into his head to
 go home very much indisposed, and after a certain time resolved
 to die,—a resolution that he accordingly put into practice;
 upon which the owner instituted judicial proceedings before the
 star chamber court of his tribe, against the husband and family
 of the woman whose rash act had led to such results; and as the
 pig happened to be a sow, in the very flower of her age, the
 prospective loss to the owner in unnumbered teems of pigs, with
 the expenses attending so high a tribunal, swelled the damages
 and costs to such a sum, that it was found impossible to pay
 them. and as, in the barbarous justice existing among these rude
 people, every member of a family is equally liable as the
 individual who committed the wrong, the father, mother,
 children, relatives,—an entire community, to the number of
 thirty-two souls, were sold as slaves, and a fearful sum of
 human misery perpetrated, to pay the value of a thieving old
 sow.
to salt two hams, about  or  lbs. each.
. ingredients.— lbs. of treacle, / lb. of saltpetre,  lb. of
bay-salt,  pounds of common salt.
mode.—two days before they are put into pickle, rub the hams well
with salt, to draw away all slime and blood. throw what comes from them
away, and then rub them with treacle, saltpetre, and salt. lay them in a
deep pan, and let them remain one day; boil the above proportion of
treacle, saltpetre, bay-salt, and common salt for / hour, and pour
this pickle boiling hot over the hams: there should be sufficient of it
to cover them. for a day or two rub them well with it; afterwards they
will only require turning. they ought to remain in this pickle for 
weeks or a month, and then be sent to be smoked, which will take nearly
or quite a month to do. an ox-tongue pickled in this way is most
excellent, to be eaten either green or smoked.
time.—to remain in the pickle  weeks or a month; to be smoked about
a month.
seasonable from october to march.
. ingredients.— lbs. of common salt,  lbs. of coarse sugar,  lb.
of bay-salt,  quarts of strong beer.
mode.—before the hams are put into pickle, rub them the preceding day
well with salt, and drain the brine well from them. put the above
ingredients into a saucepan, and boil for / hour; pour over the hams,
and let them remain a month in the pickle. rub and turn them every day,
but do not take them out of the pickling-pan; and have them smoked for a
month.
time.—to be pickled  month; to be smoked  month.
seasonable from october to march.
to pickle hams (suffolk recipe).
. ingredients.—to a ham from  to  lbs., allow  lb. of coarse
sugar, / lb. of salt,  oz. of saltpetre, / a teacupful of vinegar.
mode.—rub the hams well with common salt, and leave them for a day or
two to drain; then rub well in, the above proportion of sugar, salt,
saltpetre, and vinegar, and turn them every other day. keep them in the
pickle  month, drain them, and send them to be smoked over a wood fire
for  weeks or a month.
time.—to remain in the pickle  month. to be smoked  weeks or 
month.
sufficient.—the above proportion of pickle sufficient for  ham.
seasonable.—hams should be pickled from october to march.
 novel way of recovering a stolen pig.—it is a well-known fact,
 that in ireland the pig is, in every respect, a domesticated
 animal, sharing often both the bed and board of the family, and
 making an outer ring to the domestic circle, as, seated round
 the pot of potatoes, they partake of the midday meal called
 dinner. an irishman upon one occasion having lost an interesting
 member of his household, in the form of a promising young
 porker, consulted his priest on the occasion, and having hinted
 at the person he suspected of purloining the "illegant slip of a
 pig" he was advised to take no further notice of the matter, but
 leave the issue to his spiritual adviser. next sunday his
 reverence, after mass, came to the front of the altar-rails, and
 looking very hard at the supposed culprit, exclaimed, "who stole
 pat doolan's pig?" to this inquiry there was of course no
 answer;—the priest did not expect there would be any. the
 following sunday the same query was propounded a little
 stronger—"who of you was it, i say, who stole poor pat doolan's
 pig?" it now became evident that the culprit was a hardened
 sinner; so on the third sunday, instead of repeating the
 unsatisfactory inquiry, the priest, after, as usual, eyeing the
 obdurate offender, said, in a tone of pious sorrow, "mike regan,
 mike regan, you treat me with contempt!" that night, when the
 family was all asleep, the latch of the door was noiselessly
 lifted, and the "illegant slip of a pig" cautiously slipped into
 the cabin.
. take an old hogshead, stop up all the crevices, and fix a place to
put a cross-stick near the bottom, to hang the articles to be smoked on.
next, in the side, cut a hole near the top, to introduce an iron pan
filled with sawdust and small pieces of green wood. having turned the
tub upside down, hang the articles upon the cross-stick, introduce the
iron pan in the opening, and place a piece of red-hot iron in the pan,
cover it with sawdust, and all will be complete. let a large ham remain
 hours, and keep up a good smoke.
. ingredients.—to every  lbs. of meat, allow  oz. of saltpetre, 
oz. of salt prunella,  lb. of common salt. for the pickle,  gallons of
water,  lbs. of common salt,  lbs. of coarse sugar,  lbs. of
bay-salt.
mode.—weigh the sides, hams, and cheeks, and to every  lbs. allow
the above proportion of saltpetre, salt prunella, and common salt. pound
and mix these together, and rub well into the meat; lay it in a stone
trough or tub, rubbing it thoroughly, and turning it daily for 
successive days. at the end of the second day, pour on it a pickle made
as follows:—put the above ingredients into a saucepan, set it on the
fire, and stir frequently; remove all the scum, allow it to boil for /
hour, and pour it hot over the meat. let the hams, &c., be well rubbed
and turned daily; if the meat is small, a fortnight will be sufficient
for the sides and shoulders to remain in the pickle, and the hams 
weeks; if from  lbs. and upwards,  weeks will be required for the
sides, &c., and from  to  weeks for the hams. on taking the pieces
out, let them drain for an hour, cover with dry sawdust, and smoke from
a fortnight to  weeks. boil and carefully skim the pickle after using,
and it will keep good, closely corked, for  years. when boiling it for
use, add about  lbs. of common salt, and the same of treacle, to allow
for waste. tongues are excellent put into this pickle cold, having been
first rubbed well with saltpetre and salt, and allowed to remain 
hours, not forgetting to make a deep incision under the thick part of
the tongue, so as to allow the pickle to penetrate more readily. a
fortnight or  weeks, according to the size of the tongue, will be
sufficient.
time—small meat to remain in the pickle a fortnight, hams  weeks; to
be smoked from a fortnight to  weeks.
the following is from morton's "cyclopaedia of agriculture," and will be
found fully worthy of the high character of that publication.
. the carcass of the hog, after hanging over-night to cool, is laid
on a strong bench or stool, and the head is separated from the body at
the neck, close behind the ears; the feet and also the internal fat are
removed. the carcass is next divided into two sides in the following
manner:—the ribs are divided about an inch from the spine on each side,
and the spine, with the ends of the ribs attached, together with the
internal flesh between it and the kidneys, and also the flesh above it,
throughout the whole length of the sides, are removed. the portion of
the carcass thus cut out is in the form of a wedge—the breadth of the
interior consisting of the breadth of the spine, and about an inch of
the ribs on each side, being diminished to about half an inch at the
exterior or skin along the back. the breast-bone, and also the first
anterior rib, are also dissected from the side. sometimes the whole of
the ribs are removed; but this, for reasons afterwards to be noticed, is
a very bad practice. when the hams are cured separately from the sides,
which is generally the case, they are cut out so as to include the
hock-bone, in a similar manner to the london mode of cutting a haunch of
mutton. the carcass of the hog thus cut up is ready for being salted,
which process, in large caring establishments, is generally as follows.
the skin side of the pork is rubbed over with a mixture of fifty parts
by weight of salt, and one part of saltpetre in powder, and the incised
parts of the ham or flitch, and the inside of the flitch covered with
the same. the salted bacon, in pairs of flitches with the insides to
each other, is piled one pair of flitches above another on benches
slightly inclined, and furnished with spouts or troughs to convey the
brine to receivers in the floor of the salting-house, to be afterwards
used for pickling pork for navy purposes. in this state the bacon
remains a fortnight, which is sufficient for flitches cut from nogs of a
carcass weight less than  stone ( lbs. to the stone). flitches of a
larger size, at the expiration of that time, are wiped dry and reversed
in their place in the pile, having, at the same time, about half the
first quantity of fresh, dry, common salt sprinkled over the inside and
incised parts; after which they remain on the benches for another week.
hams being thicker than flitches, will require, when less than  lbs.
weight,  weeks; and when above that weight,  weeks to remain under the
above-described process. the next and last process in the preparation of
bacon and hams, previous to being sent to market, is drying. this is
effected by hanging the flitches and hams for  or  weeks in a room
heated by stoves, or in a smoke-house, in which they are exposed for the
same length of time to the smoke arising from the slow combustion of the
sawdust of oak or other hard wood. the latter mode of completing the
curing process has some advantages over the other, as by it the meat is
subject to the action of creosote, a volatile oil produced by the
combustion of the sawdust, which is powerfully antiseptic. the process
also furnishing a thin covering of a resinous varnish, excludes the air
not only from the muscle but also from the fat; thus effectually
preventing the meat from becoming rusted; and the principal reasons for
condemning the practice of removing the ribs from the flitches of pork
are, that by so doing the meat becomes unpleasantly hard and pungent in
the process of salting, and by being more opposed to the action of the
air, becomes sooner and more extensively rusted. notwithstanding its
superior efficacy in completing the process of curing, the flavour which
smoke-drying imparts to meat is disliked by many persons, and it is
therefore by no means the most general mode of drying adopted by
mercantile curers. a very impure variety of pyroligneous acid, or
vinegar made from the destructive distillation of wood, is sometimes
used, on account of the highly preservative power of the creosote which
it contains, and also to impart the smoke-flavour; in which latter
object, however, the coarse flavour of tar is given, rather than that
derived from the smoke from combustion of wood. a considerable portion
of the bacon and hams salted in ireland is exported from that country
packed amongst salt, in bales, immediately from the salting process,
without having been in any degree dried. in the process of salting above
described, pork loses from eight to ten per cent. of its weight,
according to the size and quality of the meat; and a further diminution
of weight, to the extent of five to six per cent., takes place in drying
during the first fortnight after being taken out of salt; so that the
total loss in weight occasioned by the preparation of bacon and hams in
a proper state for market, is not less on an average than fifteen per
cent. on the weight of the fresh pork.
collared pig's face (a breakfast or luncheon dish).
. ingredients.— pig's face; salt. for brine,  gallon of spring
water,  lb. of common salt, / handful of chopped juniper-berries, 
bruised cloves,  bay-leaves, a few sprigs of thyme, basil, sage, /
oz. of saltpetre. for forcemeat, / lb. of ham, / lb. bacon, 
teaspoonful of mixed spices, pepper to taste, / lb. of lard, 
tablespoonful of minced parsley,  young onions.
[illustration: pig's face.]
mode.—singe the head carefully, bone it without breaking the skin,
and rub it well with salt. make the brine by boiling the above
ingredients for / hour, and letting it stand to cool. when cold, pour
it over the head, and let it steep in this for  days, turning and
rubbing it often. then wipe, drain, and dry it. for the forcemeat, pound
the ham and bacon very finely, and mix with these the remaining
ingredients, taking care that the whole is thoroughly incorporated.
spread this equally over the head, roll it tightly in a cloth, and bind
it securely with broad tape. put it into a saucepan with a few meat
trimmings, and cover it with stock; let it simmer gently for  hours,
and be particular that it does not stop boiling the whole time. when
quite tender, take it up, put it between  dishes with a heavy weight on
the top, and when cold, remove the cloth and tape. it should be sent to
table on a napkin, or garnished with a piece of deep white paper with a
ruche at the top.
time.— hours. average cost, from s. to s. d.
seasonable from october to march.
 the wild and domestic hog.—the domestic hog is the descendant
 of a race long since banished from this island; and it is
 remarkable, that while the tamed animal has been and is kept
 under surveillance, the wild type whence this race sprung, has
 maintained itself in its ancient freedom, the fierce denizen of
 the forest, and one of the renowned beasts of the chase.
 whatever doubt may exist as to the true origin of the dog, the
 horse, the ox, and others, or as to whether their original race
 is yet extant or not, these doubts do not apply to the domestic
 hog. its wild source still exists, and is universally
 recognized: like the wolf, however, it has been expelled from
 our island; but, like that animal, it still roams through the
 vast wooded tracts of europe and asia.
to dress pig's fry (a savoury dish).
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of pig's fry,  onions, a few sage-leaves,
 lbs. of potatoes, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—put the lean fry at the bottom of a pie-dish, sprinkle over it
some minced sage and onion, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; slice
the potatoes; put a layer of these on the seasoning, then the fat fry,
then more seasoning, and a layer of potatoes at the top. fill the dish
with boiling water, and bake for  hours, or rather longer.
time.—rather more than  hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from october to march.
. melt the inner fat of the pig, by putting it in a stone jar, and
placing this in a saucepan of boiling water, previously stripping off
the skin. let it simmer gently over a bright fire, and as it melts, pour
it carefully from the sediment. put it into small jars or bladders for
use, and keep it in a cool place. the flead or inside fat of the pig,
before it is melted, makes exceedingly light crust, and is particularly
wholesome. it may be preserved a length of time by salting it well, and
occasionally changing the brine. when wanted for use, wash and wipe it,
and it will answer for making into paste as well as fresh lard.
average cost, d. per lb.
. ingredients.—leg of pork; salt.
mode.—for boiling, choose a small, compact, well-filled leg, and rub
it well with salt; let it remain in pickle for a week or ten days,
turning and rubbing it every day. an hour before dressing it, put it
into cold water for an hour, which improves the colour. if the pork is
purchased ready salted, ascertain how long the meat has been in pickle,
and soak it accordingly. put it into a boiling-pot, with sufficient cold
water to cover it; let it gradually come to a boil, and remove the scum
as it rises. simmer it very gently until tender, and do not allow it to
boil fast, or the knuckle will fall to pieces before the middle of the
leg is done. carrots, turnips, or parsnips may be boiled with the pork,
some of which should be laid round the dish as a garnish, and a
well-made pease-pudding is an indispensable accompaniment.
time.—a leg of pork weighing  lbs.,  hours after the water boils,
and to be simmered very gently.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
note.—the liquor in which a leg of pork has been boiled, makes
excellent pea-soup.
 antiquity of the hog.—the hog has survived changes which have
 swept multitudes of pachydermatous animals from the surface of
 our earth. it still presents the same characteristics, both
 physical and moral, which the earliest writers, whether sacred
 or profane, have faithfully delineated. although the domestic
 has been more or less modified by long culture, yet the wild
 species remains unaltered, insomuch that the fossil relics may
 be identified with the bones of their existing descendants.
. ingredients.—pork; a little powdered sage.
[illustration: spare-rib of pork.]
[illustration: griskin of pork.]
mode.—as this joint frequently comes to table hard and dry,
particular care should be taken that it is well basted. put it down to a
bright fire, and flour it. about  minutes before taking it up,
sprinkle over some powdered sage; make a little gravy in the
dripping-pan, strain it over the meat, and serve with a tureen of apple
sauce. this joint will be done in far less time than when the skin is
left on, consequently, should have the greatest attention that it be not
dried up.
time.—griskin of pork weighing  lbs., -/ hour.
average cost, d. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
note.—a spare-rib of pork is roasted in the same manner as above, and
would take -/ hour for one weighing about  lbs.
[illustration: bacon for larding, and larding-needle.]
. ingredients.—bacon and larding-needle.
mode.—bacon for larding should be firm and fat, and ought to be cured
without any saltpetre, as this reddens white meats. lay it on a table,
the rinds downwards; trim off any rusty part, and cut it into slices of
an equal thickness. place the slices one on the top of another, and cut
them evenly into narrow strips, so arranging it that every piece of
bacon is of the same size. bacon for fricandeau, poultry, and game,
should be about  inches in length, and rather more than one-eighth of
an inch in width. if for larding fillets of beef or loin of veal, the
pieces of bacon must be thicker. the following recipe of soyer is, we
think, very explicit; and any cook, by following the directions here
given, may be able to lard, if not well, sufficiently for general use.
"have the fricandeau trimmed, lay it, lengthwise, upon a clean napkin
across your hand, forming a kind of bridge with your thumb at the part
you are about to commence at; then with the point of the larding-needle
make three distinct lines across, / inch apart; run the needle into
the third line, at the further side of the fricandeau, and bring it out
at the first, placing one of the lardoons in it; draw the needle
through, leaving out / inch of the bacon at each line; proceed thus to
the end of the row; then make another line, / inch distant, stick in
another row of lardoons, bringing them out at the second line, leaving
the ends of the bacon out all the same length; make the next row again
at the same distance, bringing the ends out between the lardoons of the
first row, proceeding in this manner until the whole surface is larded
in chequered rows. everything else is larded in a similar way; and, in
the case of poultry, hold the breast over a charcoal fire for one
minute, or dip it into boiling water, in order to make the flesh firm."
. ingredients.—pork; a little salt.
[illustration: fore loin of pork.]
[illustration: hind loin of pork.]
mode.—score the skin in strips rather more than / inch apart, and
place the joint at a good distance from the fire, on account of the
crackling, which would harden before the meat would be heated through,
were it placed too near. if very lean, it should be rubbed over with a
little salad oil, and kept well basted all the time it is at the fire.
pork should be very thoroughly cooked, but not dry; and be careful never
to send it to table the least underdone, as nothing is more unwholesome
and disagreeable than underdressed white meats. serve with apple sauce,
no. , and a little gravy made in the dripping-pan. a stuffing of sage
and onion may be made separately, and baked in a flat dish: this method
is better than putting it in the meat, as many persons have so great an
objection to the flavour.
time.—a loin of pork weighing  lbs., about  hours: allow more time
should it be very fat.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
 fossil remains of the hog.—in british strata, the oldest fossil
 remains of the hog which professor owen states that he has
 examined, were from fissures in the red crag (probably miocene)
 of newbourne, near woodbridge, suffolk. "they were associated
 with teeth of an extinct felis about the size of a leopard,
 with those of a bear, and with remains of a large cervus. these
 mammalian remains were found with the ordinary fossils of the
 red crag: they had undergone the same process of trituration,
 and were impregnated with the same colouring matter as the
 associated bones and teeth of fishes acknowledged to be derived
 from the regular strata of the red crag. these mammaliferous
 beds have been proved by mr. lyell to be older than the
 fluvio-marine, or norwich crag, in which remains of the
 mastodon, rhinoceros, and horse have been discovered; and still
 older than the fresh-water pleistocene deposits, from which the
 remains of the mammoth, rhinoceros, &c. are obtained in such
 abundance. i have met," says the professor, in addition, "with
 some satisfactory instances of the association of fossil remains
 of a species of hog with those of the mammoth, in the newer
 pliocene freshwater formations of england."
. ingredients.—salt,  oz. of saltpetre,  oz. of bay-salt,  oz. of
coarse sugar.
mode.—cut out the snout, remove the brains, and split the head,
taking off the upper bone to make the jowl a good shape; rub it well
with salt; next day take away the brine, and salt it again the following
day; cover the head with saltpetre, bay-salt, and coarse sugar, in the
above proportion, adding a little common salt. let the head be often
turned, and when it has been in the pickle for  days, smoke it for a
week or rather longer.
time.—to remain in the pickle  days; to be smoked  week.
seasonable.—should be made from september to march.
note.—a pig's check, or bath chap, will take about  hours after the
water boils.
pig's liver (a savoury and economical dish).
. ingredients.—the liver and lights of a pig,  or  slices of
bacon, potatoes,  large bunch of parsley,  onions,  sage-leaves,
pepper and salt to taste, a little broth or water.
mode.—slice the liver and lights, and wash these perfectly clean, and
parboil the potatoes; mince the parsley and sage, and chop the onion
rather small. put the meat, potatoes, and bacon into a deep tin dish, in
alternate layers, with a sprinkling of the herbs, and a seasoning of
pepper and salt between each; pour on a little water or broth, and bake
in a moderately-heated oven for  hours.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
. ingredients.—a thin slice of bacon,  onion,  blade of mace, 
peppercorns,  or  sprigs of thyme,  pint of gravy, pepper and salt to
taste, thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—put the liver, heart, and pettitoes into a stewpan with the
bacon, mace, peppercorns, thyme, onion, and gravy, and simmer these
gently for / hour; then take out the heart and liver, and mince them
very fine. keep stewing the feet until quite tender, which will be in
from  minutes to / hour, reckoning from the time that they boiled up
first; then put back the minced liver, thicken the gravy with a little
butter and flour, season with pepper and salt, and simmer over a gentle
fire for  minutes, occasionally stirring the contents. dish the mince,
split the feet, and arrange them round alternately with sippets of
toasted bread, and pour the gravy in the middle.
time.—altogether  minutes.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of saltpetre; salt.
mode.—as pork does not keep long without being salted, cut it into
pieces of a suitable size as soon as the pig is cold. rub the pieces of
pork well with salt, and put them into a pan with a sprinkling of it
between each piece: as it melts on the top, strew on more. lay a coarse
cloth over the pan, a board over that, and a weight on the board, to
keep the pork down in the brine. if excluded from the air, it will
continue good for nearly  years.
average cost, d. per lb. for the prime parts.
seasonable.—the best time for pickling meat is late in the autumn.
 the universality of the hog.—a singular circumstance in the
 domestic history of the hog, is the extent of its distribution
 over the surface of the earth; being found even in insulated
 places, where the inhabitants are semi-barbarous, and where the
 wild species is entirely unknown. the south-sea islands, for
 example, were found on their discovery to be well stocked with a
 small black hog; and the traditionary belief of the people was
 that these animals were coeval with the origin of themselves.
 yet they possessed no knowledge of the wild boar, or any other
 animal of the hog kind, from which the domestic breed might be
 supposed to be derived. in these islands the hog is the
 principal quadruped, and the fruit of the bread-tree is its
 principal food, although it is also fed with yams, eddoes, and
 other vegetables. this nutritious diet, which it has in great
 abundance, is, according to foster, the reason of its flesh
 being so delicious, so full of juice, and so rich in fat, which
 is not less delicate to the taste than the finest butter.
. ingredients.—pork; water.
mode.—should the pork be very salt, let it remain in water about 
hours before it is dressed; put it into a saucepan with sufficient cold
water to cover it, let it gradually come to a boil, then gently simmer
until quite tender. allow ample time for it to cook, as nothing is more
disagreeable than underdone pork, and when boiled fast, the meat becomes
hard. this is sometimes served with boiled poultry and roast veal,
instead of bacon: when tender, and not over salt, it will be found
equally good.
time.—a piece of pickled pork weighing  lbs., -/ hour;  lbs.,
rather more than  hours.
average cost, d. per lb. for the primest parts.
seasonable at any time.
 the antiquity of the hog.—by what nation and in what period the
 hog was reclaimed, is involved in the deepest obscurity. so far
 back as we have any records of history, we find notices of this
 animal, and of its flesh being used as the food of man. by some
 nations, however, its flesh was denounced as unclean, and
 therefore prohibited to be used, whilst by others it was
 esteemed as a great delicacy. by the mosaic law it was forbidden
 to be eaten by the jews, and the mahometans hold it in utter
 abhorrence. dr. kitto, however, says that there does not appear
 to be any reason in the law of moses why the hog should be held
 in such peculiar abomination. there seems nothing to have
 prevented the jews, if they had been so inclined, to rear pigs
 for sale, or for the use of the land. in the talmud there are
 some indications that this was actually done; and it was,
 probably, for such purposes that the herds of swine mentioned in
 the new testament were kept, although it is usual to consider
 that they were kept by the foreign settlers in the land. indeed,
 the story which accounts for the peculiar aversion of the
 hebrews to the hog, assumes that it did not originate until
 about  years before christ, and that, previously, some jews
 were in the habit of rearing hogs for the purposes indicated.
pork pies (warwickshire recipe).
. ingredients.—for the crust,  lbs. of lard to  lbs. of flour,
milk, and water. for filling the pies, to every  lbs. of meat allow 
oz. of salt, -/ oz. of pepper, a small quantity of cayenne,  pint of
water.
mode.—rub into the flour a portion of the lard; the remainder put
with sufficient milk and water to mix the crust, and boil this gently
for / hour. pour it boiling on the flour, and knead and beat it till
perfectly smooth. now raise the crust in either a round or oval form,
cut up the pork into pieces the size of a nut, season it in the above
proportion, and press it compactly into the pie, in alternate layers of
fat and lean, and pour in a small quantity of water; lay on the lid, cut
the edges smoothly round, and pinch them together. bake in a brick oven,
which should be slow, as the meat is very solid. very frequently, the
inexperienced cook finds much difficulty in raising the crust. she
should bear in mind that it must not be allowed to get cold, or it will
fall immediately: to prevent this, the operation should be performed as
near the fire as possible. as considerable dexterity and expertness are
necessary to raise the crust with the hand only, a glass bottle or small
jar may be placed in the middle of the paste, and the crust moulded on
this; but be particular that it is kept warm the whole time.
sufficient.—the proportions for  pie are  lb. of flour and  lbs.
of meat.
seasonable from september to march.
 the flesh of swine in hot climates.—it is observed by m.
 sonini, that the flesh of swine, in hot climates, is considered
 unwholesome, and therefore may account for its proscription by
 the legislators and priests of the east. in egypt, syria, and
 even the southern parts of greece, although both white and
 delicate, it is so flabby and surcharged with fat, that it
 disagrees with the strongest stomachs. abstinence from it in
 general was, therefore, indispensable to health under the
 burning suns of egypt and arabia. the egyptians were permitted
 to eat it only once a year,—on the feast of the moon; and then
 they sacrificed a number of these animals to that planet. at
 other seasons, should any one even touch a hog, he was obliged
 immediately to plunge into the river nile, as he stood, with his
 clothes on, in order to purify himself from the supposed
 contamination he had contracted by the touch.
. ingredients.— lbs. of flour, / lb. of butter, / lb. of mutton
suet, salt and white pepper to taste,  lbs. of the neck of pork, 
dessertspoonful of powdered sage.
mode.—well dry the flour, mince the suet, and put these with the
butter into a saucepan, to be made hot, and add a little salt. when
melted, mix it up into a stiff paste, and put it before the fire with a
cloth over it until ready to make up; chop the pork into small pieces,
season it with white pepper, salt, and powdered sage; divide the paste
into rather small pieces, raise it in a round or oval form, fill with
the meat, and bake in a brick oven. these pies will require a fiercer
oven than those in the preceding recipe, as they are made so much
smaller, and consequently do not require so soaking a heat.
time.—if made small, about -/ hour.
seasonable from september to march.
 swineherds of antiquity.—from the prejudice against the hog
 among the ancients, those who tended them formed an isolated
 class, and were esteemed as the outcasts of society. however
 much the flesh of the animal was esteemed by the greeks and
 romans, yet the swineherd is not mentioned by either the classic
 writers or the poets who, in ancient greece and rome, painted
 rural life. we have no descriptions of gods or heroes descending
 to the occupation of keeping swine. the swineherd is never
 introduced into the idyls of theocritus, nor has virgil admitted
 him into his eclogues. the eumaeus of homer is the only
 exception that we have of a swineherd meeting with favour in the
 eyes of a poet of antiquity. this may be accounted for, on the
 supposition that the prejudices of the egyptians relative to
 this class of men, extended to both greece and italy, and
 imparted a bias to popular opinion.
(author's oxford recipe.)
. ingredients.— lb. of pork, fat and lean, without skin or gristle;
 lb. of lean veal,  lb. of beef suet, / lb. of bread crumbs, the
rind of / lemon,  small nutmeg,  sage-leaves,  teaspoonful of
pepper,  teaspoonfuls of salt, / teaspoonful of savory, /
teaspoonful of marjoram.
mode.—chop the pork, veal, and suet finely together, add the bread
crumbs, lemon-peel (which should be well minced), and a small nutmeg
grated. wash and chop the sage-leaves very finely; add these with the
remaining ingredients to the sausage-meat, and when thoroughly mixed,
either put the meat into skins, or, when wanted for table, form it into
little cakes, which should be floured and fried.
average cost, for this quantity, s. d.
sufficient for about  moderate-sized sausages.
seasonable from october to march.
 the hog in england.—from time immemorial, in england, this
 animal has been esteemed as of the highest importance. in the
 anglo-saxon period, vast herds of swine were tended by men, who
 watched over their safety, and who collected them under shelter
 at night. at that time, the flesh of the animal was the staple
 article of consumption in every family, and a large portion of
 the wealth of the rich freemen of the country consisted of these
 animals. hence it was common to make bequests of swine, with
 lands for their support; and to these were attached rights and
 privileges in connection with their feeding, and the extent of
 woodland to be occupied by a given number was granted in
 accordance with established rules. this is proved by an ancient
 saxon grant, quoted by sharon turner, in his "history of the
 anglo-saxons," where the right of pasturage is conveyed in a
 deed by the following words:—"i give food for seventy swine in
 that woody allotment which the countrymen call wolferdinlegh."
[illustration: fried sausages.]
. ingredients.—sausages; a small piece of butter.
mode.—prick the sausages with a fork (this prevents them from
bursting), and put them into a frying-pan with a small piece of butter.
keep moving the pan about, and turn the sausages  or  times. in from
 to  minutes they will be sufficiently cooked, unless they are very
large, when a little more time should be allowed for them. dish them
with or without a piece of toast under them, and serve very hot. in some
counties, sausages are boiled and served on toast. they should be
plunged into boiling water, and simmered for about  or  minutes.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable.—good from september to march.
note.—sometimes, in close warm weather, sausages very soon turn sour;
to prevent this, put them in the oven for a few minutes with a small
piece of butter to keep them moist. when wanted for table, they will not
require so long frying as uncooked sausages.
 the saxon swineherd.—the men employed in herding swine during
 the anglo-saxon period of our history were, in general, thralls
 or born slaves of the soil, who were assisted by powerful dogs,
 capable even of singly contending with the wolf until his master
 came with his spear to the rescue. in the "ivanhoe" of sir
 walter scott, we have an admirable picture, in the character of
 gurth, an anglo-saxon swineherd, as we also have of his master,
 a large landed proprietor, a great portion of whose wealth
 consisted of swine, and whose rude but plentiful board was
 liberally supplied with the flesh.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of lean pork, add / lb. of fat bacon,
/ oz. of salt,  saltspoonful of pepper, / teaspoonful of grated
nutmeg,  teaspoonful of minced parsley.
mode.—remove from the pork all skin, gristle, and bone, and chop it
finely with the bacon; add the remaining ingredients, and carefully mix
altogether. pound it well in a mortar, make it into convenient-sized
cakes, flour these, and fry them a nice brown for about  minutes. this
is a very simple method of making sausage-meat, and on trial will prove
very good, its great recommendation being, that it is so easily made.
time.— minutes.
seasonable from september to march.
. put the pig into cold water directly it is killed; let it remain
for a few minutes, then immerse it in a large pan of boiling water for 
minutes. take it out, lay it on a table, and pull off the hair as
quickly as possible. when the skin looks clean, make a slit down the
belly, take out the entrails, well clean the nostrils and ears, wash the
pig in cold water, and wipe it thoroughly dry. take off the feet at the
first joint, and loosen and leave sufficient skin to turn neatly over.
if not to be dressed immediately, fold it in a wet cloth to keep it from
the air.
 the learned pig.—that the pig is capable of education, is a
 fact long known to the world; and though, like the ass,
 naturally stubborn and obstinate, that he is equally amenable
 with other animals to caresses and kindness, has been shown from
 very remote time; the best modern evidence of his docility,
 however, is the instance of the learned pig, first exhibited
 about a century since, but which has been continued down to our
 own time by repeated instances of an animal who will put
 together all the letters or figures that compose the day, month,
 hour, and date of the exhibition, besides many other
 unquestioned evidences of memory. the instance already given of
 breaking a sow into a pointer, till she became more stanch even
 than the dog itself, though surprising, is far less wonderful
 than that evidence of education where so generally obtuse an
 animal may be taught not only to spell, but couple figures and
 give dates correctly.
. ingredients.—pig,  oz. of bread crumbs,  sage-leaves, pepper
and salt to taste, a piece of butter the size of an egg, salad oil or
butter to baste with, about / pint of gravy,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice.
[illustration: roast sucking-pig.]
mode.—a sucking-pig, to be eaten in perfection, should not be more
than three weeks old, and should be dressed the same day that it is
killed. after preparing the pig for cooking, as in the preceding recipe,
stuff it with finely-grated bread crumbs, minced sage, pepper, salt, and
a piece of butter the size of an egg, all of which should be well mixed
together, and put into the body of the pig. sew up the slit neatly, and
truss the legs back, to allow the inside to be roasted, and the under
part to be crisp. put the pig down to a bright clear fire, not too near,
and let it lay till thoroughly dry; then have ready some butter tied up
in a piece of thin cloth, and rub the pig with this in every part. keep
it well rubbed with the butter the whole of the time it is roasting, and
do not allow the crackling to become blistered or burnt. when half-done,
hang a pig-iron before the middle part (if this is not obtainable, use a
flat iron), to prevent its being scorched and dried up before the ends
are done. before it is taken from the fire, cut off the head, and part
that and the body down the middle. chop the brains and mix them with the
stuffing; add / pint of good gravy, a tablespoonful of lemon-juice,
and the gravy that flowed from the pig; put a little of this on the dish
with the pig, and the remainder send to table in a tureen. place the pig
back to back in the dish, with one half of the head on each side, and
one of the ears at each end, and send it to table as hot as possible.
instead of butter, many cooks take salad oil for basting, which makes
the crackling crisp; and as this is one of the principal things to be
considered, perhaps it is desirable to use it; but be particular that it
is very pure, or it will impart an unpleasant flavour to the meat. the
brains and stuffing may be stirred into a tureen of melted butter
instead of gravy, when the latter is not liked. apple sauce and the
old-fashioned currant sauce are not yet quite obsolete as an
accompaniment to roast pig.
time.—-/ to  hours for a small pig.
average cost, s. to s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
 how roast pig was discovered.—charles lamb, who, in the early
 part of this century, delighted the reading public by his quaint
 prose sketches, written under the title of "essays of elia,"
 has, in his own quiet humorous way, devoted one paper to the
 subject of roast pig, and more especially to that luxurious
 and toothsome dainty known as "crackling;" and shows, in a
 manner peculiarly his own, how crackling first came into the
 world.
 according to this erudite authority, man in the golden age, or
 at all events the primitive age, eat his pork and bacon raw, as,
 indeed, he did his beef and mutton; unless, as hudibras tells
 us, he was an epicure, when he used to make a saddle of his
 saddle of mutton, and after spreading it on his horse's back,
 and riding on it for a few hours till thoroughly warmed, he sat
 down to the luxury of a dish cooked to a turn. at the epoch of
 the story, however, a citizen of some scythian community had the
 misfortune to have his hut, or that portion of it containing his
 live stock of pigs, burnt down. in going over the débris on
 the following day, and picking out all the available salvage,
 the proprietor touched something unusually or unexpectedly hot,
 which caused him to shake his hand with great energy, and clap
 the tips of his suffering fingers to his mouth. the act was
 simple and natural, but the result was wonderful. he rolled his
 eyes in ecstatic pleasure, his frame distended, and, conscious
 of a celestial odour, his nostrils widened, and, while drawing
 in deep inspirations of the ravishing perfume, he sucked his
 fingers with a gusto he had never, in his most hungry moments,
 conceived. clearing away the rubbish from beneath him, he at
 last brought to view the carcase of one of his pigs, roasted to
 death. stooping down to examine this curious object, and
 touching its body, a fragment of the burnt skin was detached,
 which, with a sort of superstitious dread, he at length, and in
 a spirit of philosophical inquiry, put into his mouth. ye gods!
 the felicity he then enjoyed, no pen can chronicle! then it was
 that he—the world—first tasted crackling. like a miser with
 his gold, the scythian hid his treasure from the prying eyes of
 the world, and feasted, in secret, more sumptuously than the
 gods. when he had eaten up all his pig, the poor man fell into a
 melancholy; he refused the most tempting steak, though cooked on
 the horse's back, and turned every half-hour after his own
 favourite recipe; he fell, in fact, from his appetite, and was
 reduced to a shadow, till, unable longer to endure the torments
 of memory he hourly suffered, he rose one night and secretly set
 fire to his hut, and once more was restored to flesh and
 manhood. finding it impossible to live in future without
 roast-pig, he set fire to his house every time his larder became
 empty; till at last his neighbours, scandalized by the frequency
 of these incendiary acts, brought his conduct before the supreme
 council of the nation. to avert the penalty that awaited him, he
 brought his judges to the smouldering ruins, and discovering the
 secret, invited them to eat; which having done, with tears of
 gratitude, the august synod embraced him, and, with an
 overflowing feeling of ecstasy, dedicated a statue to the memory
 of the man who first instituted roast pork.
[illustration: sucking-pig.]
. a sucking-pig seems, at first sight, rather an elaborate dish, or
rather animal, to carve; but by carefully mastering the details of the
business, every difficulty will vanish; and if a partial failure be at
first made, yet all embarrassment will quickly disappear on a second
trial. a sucking-pig is usually sent to table in the manner shown in the
engraving (and also in coloured plate s), and the first point to be
attended to is to separate the shoulder from the carcase, by carrying
the knife quickly and neatly round the circular line, as shown by the
figures , , ;—the shoulder will then easily come away. the next step
is to take off the leg; and this is done in the same way, by cutting
round this joint in the direction shown by the figures , , , in the
same way as the shoulder. the ribs then stand fairly open to the knife,
which should be carried down in the direction of the line  to ; and
two or three helpings will dispose of these. the other half of the pig
is served, of course, in the same manner. different parts of the pig are
variously esteemed; some preferring the flesh of the neck; others, the
ribs; and others, again, the shoulders. the truth is, the whole of a
sucking-pig is delicious, delicate eating; but, in carving it, the host
should consult the various tastes and fancies of his guests, keeping the
larger joints, generally, for the gentlemen of the party.
[illustration: ham.]
. in cutting a ham, the carver must be guided according as he desires
to practise economy, or have, at once, fine slices out of the prime
part. under the first supposition, he will commence at the knuckle end,
and cut off thin slices towards the thick part of the ham. to reach the
choicer portion, the knife, which must be very sharp and thin, should be
carried quite down to the bone, in the direction of the line  to . the
slices should be thin and even, and always cut down to the bone. there
are some who like to carve a ham by cutting a hole at the top, and then
slicing pieces off inside the hole, gradually enlarging the circle; but
we think this a plan not to be recommended. a ham, when hot, is usually
sent to table with a paper ruffle round the knuckle; when cold, it is
served in the manner shown by coloured plate p.
[illustration: leg of pork.]
. this joint, which is such a favourite one with many people, is easy
to carve. the knife should be carried sharply down to the bone, clean
through the crackling, in the direction of the line  to . sago and
onion and apple sauce are usually sent to table with this
dish,—sometimes the leg of pork is stuffed,—and the guests should be
asked if they will have either or both. a frequent plan, and we think a
good one, is now pursued, of sending sage and onion to table separately
from the joint, as it is not everybody to whom the flavour of this
stuffing is agreeable.
note.—the other dishes of pork do not call for any special remarks as
to their carving or helping.
. any remarks made on the calf or the lamb must naturally be in a
measure supplementary to the more copious observations made on the
parent stock of either. as the calf, at least as far as it is identified
with veal, is destined to die young,—to be, indeed, cut off in its
comparative infancy,—it may, at first sight, appear of little or no
consequence to inquire to what particular variety, or breed of the
general stock, his sire or dam may belong. the great art, however, in
the modern science of husbandry has been to obtain an animal that shall
not only have the utmost beauty of form of which the species is capable,
but, at the same time, a constitution free from all taint, a frame that
shall rapidly attain bulk and stature, and a disposition so kindly that
every quantum of food it takes shall, without drawback or
procrastination, be eliminated into fat and muscle. the breed, then, is
of very considerable consequence in determining, not only the quality of
the meat to the consumer, but its commercial value to the breeder and
butcher.
. under the artificial system adopted in the rearing of domestic
cattle, and stock in general, to gratify the arbitrary mandates of
luxury and fashion, we can have veal, like lamb, at all seasons in the
market, though the usual time in the metropolis for veal to make its
appearance is about the beginning of february.
. the cow goes with young for nine months, and the affection and
solicitude she evinces for her offspring is more human in its tenderness
mid intensity than is displayed by any other animal; and her distress
when she hears its bleating, and is not allowed to reach it with her
distended udders, is often painful to witness, and when the calf has
died, or been accidentally killed, her grief frequently makes her refuse
to give down her milk. at such times, the breeder has adopted the
expedient of flaying the dead carcase, and, distending the skin with
hay, lays the effigy before her, and then taking advantage of her
solicitude, milks her while she is caressing the skin with her tongue.
. in a state of nature, the cow, like the deer, hides her young in
the tall ferns and brakes, and the most secret places; and only at
stated times, twice or thrice a day, quits the herd, and, hastening to
the secret cover, gives suck to her calf, and with the same,
circumspection returns to the community.
. in some countries, to please the epicurean taste of vitiated
appetites, it is the custom to kill the calf for food almost immediately
after birth, and any accident that forestalls that event, is considered
to enhance its value. we are happy to say, however, that in this
country, as far as england and scotland are concerned, the taste for
very young veal has entirely gone out, and "staggering bob," as the poor
little animal was called in the language of the shambles, is no longer
to be met with in such a place.
. the weaning of calves is a process that requires a great amount of
care and judgment; for though they are in reality not weaned till
between the eighth and the twelfth week, the process of rearing them by
hand commences in fact from the birth, the calf never being allowed to
suck its dam. as the rearing of calves for the market is a very
important and lucrative business, the breeder generally arranges his
stock so that ten or a dozen of his cows shall calve about the same
time; and then, by setting aside one or two, to find food for the entire
family, gets the remaining eight or ten with their full fountains of
milk, to carry on the operations of his dairy. some people have an idea
that skimmed milk, if given in sufficient quantity, is good enough for
the weaning period of calf-feeding; but this is a very serious mistake,
for the cream, of which it has been deprived, contained nearly all the
oleaginous principles, and the azote or nitrogen, on which the vivifying
properties of that fluid depends. indeed, so remarkably correct has this
fact proved to be, that a calf reared on one part of new milk mixed with
five of water, will thrive and look well; while another, treated with
unlimited skimmed milk, will be poor, thin, and miserable.
. it is sometimes a matter of considerable trouble to induce the
blundering calf—whose instinct only teaches him to suck, and that he
will do at anything and with anything—acquire the knowledge of
imbibition, that for the first few days it is often necessary to fill a
bottle with milk, and, opening his mouth, pour the contents down his
throat. the manner, however, by which he is finally educated into the
mystery of suction, is by putting his allowance of milk into a large
wooden bowl; the nurse then puts her hand into the milk, and, by bending
her fingers upwards, makes a rude teat for the calf to grasp in his
lips, when the vacuum caused by his suction of the fingers, causes the
milk to rise along them into his mouth. in this manner one by one the
whole family are to be fed three times a day; care being taken, that
new-born calves are not, at first, fed on milk from a cow who has some
days calved.
. as the calf progresses towards his tenth week, his diet requires to
be increased in quantity and quality; for these objects, his milk can be
thickened with flour or meal, and small pieces of softened oil-cake are
to be slipped into his mouth after sucking, that they may dissolve
there, till he grows familiar with, and to like the taste, when it may
be softened and scraped down into his milk-and-water. after a time,
sliced turnips softened by steam are to be given to him in tolerable
quantities; then succulent grasses; and finally, hay may be added to the
others. some farmers, desirous of rendering their calves fat for the
butcher in as short a time as possible, forget both the natural weakness
of the digestive powers, and the contracted volume of the stomach, and
allow the animals either to suck ad libitum, or give them, if brought
up at the pail or by hand, a larger quantity of milk than they can
digest. the idea of overloading the stomach never suggests itself to
their minds. they suppose that the more food the young creature
consumes, the sooner it will be fat, and they allow it no exercise
whatever, for fear it should denude its very bones of their flesh. under
such circumstances, the stomach soon becomes deranged; its functions are
no longer capable of acting; the milk, subjected to the acid of the
stomach, coagulates, and forms a hardened mass of curd, when the muscles
become affected with spasms, and death frequently ensues.
. there was no species of slaughtering practised in this country so
inhuman and disgraceful as that, till very lately, employed in killing
this poor animal; when, under the plea of making the flesh white, the
calf was bled day by day, till, when the final hour came, the animal was
unable to stand. this inhumanity is, we believe, now everywhere
abolished, and the calf is at once killed, and with the least amount of
pain; a sharp-pointed knife is run through the neck, severing all the
large veins and arteries up to the vertebrae. the skin is then taken off
to the knee, which is disjointed, and to the head, which is removed; it
is then reflected backwards, and the carcase having been opened and
dressed, is kept apart by stretchers, and the thin membrane, the caul,
extended over the organs left in the carcase, as the kidneys and
sweet-bread; some melted fat is then scattered suddenly over the whole
interior, giving that white and frosted appearance to the meat, that is
thought to add to its beauty; the whole is then hung up to cool and
harden.
. the manner of cutting up veal for the english market is to divide
the carcase into four quarters, with eleven ribs to each fore quarter;
which are again subdivided into joints as exemplified on the cut.
[illustration: side of a calf, showing the several joints.]
 hind quarter:—
. the loin.
. the chump, consisting of the rump
and hock-bone.
. the fillet.
. the hock, or hind knuckle.
 fore quarter:—
 . the shoulder.
 . the neck.
 . the breast.
 . the fore knuckle.
. the several parts of a moderately-sized well-fed calf, about eight
weeks old, are nearly of the following weights:—loin and chump  lbs.,
fillet -/ lbs., hind knuckle -/ lbs., shoulder  lbs, neck 
lbs., breast  lbs., and fore knuckle  lbs.; making a total of  lbs.
weight. the london mode of cutting the carcase is considered better than
that pursued in edinburgh, as giving three roasting joints, and one
boiling, in each quarter; besides the pieces being more equally divided,
as regards flesh, and from the handsomer appearance they make on the
table.
baked veal (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—/ lb. of cold roast veal, a few slices of bacon, 
pint of bread crumbs, / pint of good veal gravy, / teaspoonful of
minced lemon-peel,  blade of pounded mace, cayenne and salt to taste, 
eggs.
mode.—mince finely the veal and bacon; add the bread crumbs, gravy,
and seasoning, and stir these ingredients well together. beat up the
eggs thoroughly; add these, mix the whole well together, put into a
dish, and bake from / to  hour. when liked, a little good gravy may
be served in a tureen as an accompaniment.
time.—from / to  hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
[illustration: breast of veal.]
. ingredients.—veal; a little flour.
mode.—wash the veal, well wipe it, and dredge it with flour; put it
down to a bright fire, not too near, as it should not be scorched. baste
it plentifully until done; dish it, pour over the meat some good melted
butter, and send to table with it a piece of boiled bacon and a cut
lemon.
time.—from -/ to  hours.
average cost, -/d. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.—breast of veal,  oz. of butter, a bunch of savoury
herbs, including parsley;  blades of pounded mace,  cloves,  or 
young onions,  strip of lemon-peel,  allspice, / teaspoonful of
pepper,  teaspoonful of salt, thickening of butter and flour, 
tablespoonfuls of sherry,  tablespoonfuls of tomato sauce, 
tablespoonful of lemon-juice,  tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup,
green peas.
mode.—cut the breast in half, after removing the bone underneath, and
divide the meat into convenient-sized pieces. put the butter into a
frying-pan, lay in the pieces of veal, and fry until of a nice brown
colour. now place these in a stewpan with the herbs, mace, cloves,
onions, lemon-peel, allspice, and seasoning; pour over them just
sufficient boiling water to cover the meat; well close the lid, and let
the whole simmer very gently for about  hours. strain off as much gravy
as is required, thicken it with butter and flour, add the remaining
ingredients, skim well, let it simmer for about  minutes, then pour it
over the meat. have ready some green peas, boiled separately; sprinkle
these over the veal, and serve. it may be garnished with forcemeat
balls, or rashers of bacon curled and fried. instead of cutting up the
meat, many persons prefer it dressed whole;—in that case it should be
half-roasted before the water, &c. are put to it.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
 breeding of calves.—the forwarding of calves to maturity,
 whether intended to be reared for stock, or brought to an early
 market as veal, is always a subject of great importance, and
 requires a considerable amount of intelligence in the selection
 of the best course, to adopt for either end. when meant to be
 reared as stock, the breeding should be so arranged that the cow
 shall calve about the middle of may. as our subject, however,
 has more immediate reference to the calf as meat than as
 stock, we shall confine our remarks to the mode of procedure
 adopted in the former case; and here, the first process adopted
 is that of weaning; which consists in separating the calf
 entirely from the cow, but, at the same time, rearing it on
 the mother's milk. as the business of the dairy would be
 suspended if every cow were allowed to rear its young, and
 butter, cheese, and cream become desiderata,—things to be
 desired, but not possessed, a system of economical husbandry
 becomes necessary, so as to retain our dairy produce, and yet,
 for some weeks at least, nourish the calf on its mother's milk,
 but without allowing the animal to draw that supply for itself:
 this, with the proper substituted food on which to rear the
 young animal, is called weaning.
veal cake (a convenient dish for a picnic).
. ingredients.—a few slices of cold roast veal, a few slices of cold
ham,  hard-boiled eggs,  tablespoonfuls of minced parsley, a little
pepper, good gravy.
mode.—cut off all the brown outside from the veal, and cut the eggs
into slices. procure a pretty mould; lay veal, ham, eggs, and parsley in
layers, with a little pepper between each, and when the mould is full,
get some strong stock, and fill up the shape. bake for / hour, and
when cold, turn it out.
time.—/ hour.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— calf's feet,  slices of bacon,  oz. of butter, 
tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice, salt and whole pepper to taste,  onion,
a bunch of savoury herbs,  cloves,  blade of mace, water, parsley and
butter no. .
mode.—procure  white calf's feet; bone them as far as the first
joint, and put them into warm water to soak for  hours. then put the
bacon, butter, lemon-juice, onion, herbs, spices, and seasoning into a
stewpan; lay in the feet, and pour in just sufficient water to cover the
whole. stew gently for about  hours; take out the feet, dish them, and
cover with parsley and butter, made by recipe no. . the liquor they
were boiled in should be strained and put by in a clean basin for use:
it will be found very good as an addition to gravies, &c. &c.
time.—rather more than  hours.
average cost, in full season, d. each. sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
 when a calf should be killed.—the age at which a calf ought to
 be killed should not be under four weeks: before that time the
 flesh is certainly not wholesome, wanting firmness, due
 development of muscular fibre, and those animal juices on which
 the flavour and nutritive properties of the flesh depend,
 whatever the unhealthy palate of epicures may deem to the
 contrary. in france, a law exists to prevent the slaughtering of
 calves under six weeks of age. the calf is considered in prime
 condition at ten weeks, when he will weigh from sixteen to
 eighteen stone, and sometimes even twenty.
. ingredients.—a set of calf's feet; for the batter allow for each
egg  tablespoonful of flour,  tablespoonful of bread crumbs, hot lard
or clarified dripping, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—if the feet are purchased uncleaned, dip them into warm water
repeatedly, and scrape off the hair, first one foot and then the other,
until the skin looks perfectly clean, a saucepan of water being kept by
the fire until they are finished. after washing and soaking in cold
water, boil them in just sufficient water to cover them, until the bones
come easily away. then pick them out, and after straining the liquor
into a clean vessel, put the meat into a pie-dish until the next day.
now cut it down in slices about / inch thick, lay on them a stiff
batter made of egg, flour, and bread crumbs in the above proportion;
season with pepper and salt, and plunge them into a pan of boiling lard.
fry the slices a nice brown, dry them before the fire for a minute or
two, dish them on a napkin, and garnish with tufts of parsley. this
should be eaten with melted butter, mustard, and vinegar. be careful to
have the lard boiling to set the batter, or the pieces of feet will run
about the pan. the liquor they were boiled in should be saved, and will
be found useful for enriching gravies, making jellies, &e. &e.
time.—about  hours to stew the feet,  or  minutes to fry them.
average cost, in full season, d. each.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—this dish can be highly recommended to delicate persons.
 colour of veal.—as whiteness of flesh is considered a great
 advantage in veal, butchers, in the selection of their calves,
 are in the habit of examining the inside of its mouth, and
 noting the colour of the calf's eyes; alleging that, from the
 signs they there see, they can prognosticate whether the veal
 will be white or florid.
. ingredients.—a calf's head,  tablespoonfuls of minced parsley, 
blades of pounded mace, / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, white pepper
to taste, a few thick slices of ham, the yolks of  eggs boiled hard.
mode.—scald the head for a few minutes; take it out of the water, and
with a blunt knife scrape off all the hair. clean it nicely, divide the
head and remove the brains. boil it tender enough to take out the bones,
which will be in about  hours. when the head is boned, flatten it on
the table, sprinkle over it a thick layer of parsley, then a layer of
ham, and then the yolks of the eggs cut into thin rings and put a
seasoning of pounded mace, nutmeg, and white pepper between each layer;
roll the head up in a cloth, and tie it up as tightly as possible. boil
it for  hours, and when it is taken out of the pot, place a heavy
weight on the top, the same as for other collars. let it remain till
cold; then remove the cloth and binding, and it will be ready to serve.
time.—altogether  hours. average cost, s. to s. each.
seasonable from march to october.
 feeding a calf.—the amount of milk necessary for a calf for
 some time, will be about four quarts a day, though, after the
 first fortnight, that quantity should be gradually increased,
 according to its development of body, when, if fed exclusively
 on milk, as much as three gallons a day will be requisite for
 the due health and requirements of the animal. if the weather
 is fine and genial, it should be turned into an orchard or small
 paddock for a few hours each day, to give it an opportunity to
 acquire a relish for the fresh pasture, which, by the tenth or
 twelfth week, it will begin to nibble and enjoy. after a certain
 time, the quantity of milk may be diminished, and its place
 supplied by water thickened with meal. hay-tea and linseed-jelly
 are also highly nutritious substances, and may be used either as
 adjuncts or substitutes.
fricasseed calf's head (an entree).
. ingredients.—the remains of a boiled calf's head, -/ pint of
the liquor in which the head was boiled,  blade of pounded mace, 
onion minced, a bunch of savoury herbs, salt and white pepper to taste,
thickening of butter and flour, the yolks of  eggs,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice, forcemeat balls.
mode.—remove all the bones from the head, and cut the meat into nice
square pieces. put -/ pint of the liquor it was boiled in into a
saucepan, with mace, onion, herbs, and seasoning in the above
proportion; let this simmer gently for / hour, then strain it and put
in the meat. when quite hot through, thicken the gravy with a little
butter rolled in flour, and, just before dishing the fricassee, put in
the beaten yolks of eggs and lemon-juice; but be particular, after these
two latter ingredients are added, that the sauce does not boil, or it
will curdle. garnish with forcemeat balls and curled slices of broiled
bacon. to insure the sauce being smooth, it is a good plan to dish the
meat first, and then to add the eggs to the gravy: when these are set,
the sauce may be poured over the meat.
time.—altogether, -/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
calf's head a la maitre d'hotel.
. ingredients.—the remains of a cold calf's head, rather more than
/ pint of maitre d'hôtel sauce no. .
mode.—make the sauce by recipe no. , and have it sufficiently
thick that it may nicely cover the meat; remove the bones from the head,
and cut the meat into neat slices. when the sauce is ready, lay in the
meat; let it gradually warm through, and, after it boils up, let it
simmer very gently for  minutes, and serve.
time.—rather more than -/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the meat, s. d.
seasonable from march to october.
 the calf in america.—in america, the calf is left with the
 mother for three or four days, when it is removed, and at once
 fed on barley and oats ground together and made into a gruel, 
 quart of the meal being boiled for half an hour in  quarts of
 water. one quart of this certainly nutritious gruel, is to be
 given, lukewarm, morning and evening. in ten days, a bundle of
 soft hay is put beside the calf, which he soon begins to eat,
 and, at the same time, some of the dry meal is placed in his
 manger for him to lick. this process, gradually increasing the
 quantity of gruel twice a day, is continued for two months, till
 the calf is fit to go to grass, and, as it is said, with the
 best possible success. but, in this country, the mode pointed
 out in no.  has received the sanction of the best experience.
curried veal (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast veal,  onions,  apples
sliced,  tablespoonful of curry-powder,  dessertspoonful of flour, /
pint of broth or water,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice.
mode.—slice the onions and apples, and fry them in a little butter;
then take them out, cut the meat into neat cutlets, and fry these of a
pale brown; add the curry-powder and flour, put in the onion, apples,
and a little broth or water, and stew gently till quite tender; add the
lemon-juice, and serve with an edging of boiled rice. the curry may be
ornamented with pickles, capsicums, and gherkins arranged prettily on
the top.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable from march to october.
veal cutlets (an entree).
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the prime part of the leg of veal,
egg and bread crumbs,  tablespoonfuls of minced savoury herbs, salt and
popper to taste, a small piece of butter.
[illustration: veal cutlets.]
mode.—have the veal cut into slices about / of an inch in
thickness, and, if not cut perfectly even, level the meat with a
cutlet-bat or rolling-pin. shape and trim the cutlets, and brush them
over with egg. sprinkle with bread crumbs, with which have been mixed
minced herbs and a seasoning of pepper and salt, and press the crumbs
down. fry them of a delicate brown in fresh lard or butter, and be
careful not to burn them. they should be very thoroughly done, but not
dry. if the cutlets be thick, keep the pan covered for a few minutes at
a good distance from the fire, after they have acquired a good colour:
by this means, the meat will be done through. lay the cutlets in a dish,
keep them hot, and make a gravy in the pan as follows: dredge in a
little flour, add a piece of butter the size of a walnut, brown it, then
pour as much boiling water as is required over it, season with pepper
and salt, add a little lemon-juice, give one boil, and pour it over the
cutlets. they should be garnished with slices of broiled bacon, and a
few forcemeat balls will be found a very excellent addition to this
dish.
time.—for cutlets of a moderate thickness, about  minutes; if very
thick, allow more time.
average cost, d. per lb. sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—veal cutlets may be merely floured and fried of a nice brown;
the gravy and garnishing should be the same as in the preceding recipe.
they may also be cut from the loin or neck, as shown in the engraving.
broiled veal cutlets a l'italienne (an entree).
. ingredients.—neck of veal, salt and pepper to taste, the yolk of 
egg, bread crumbs, / pint of italian sauce no. .
mode.—cut the veal into cutlets, flatten and trim them nicely; powder
over them a little salt and pepper; brush them over with the yolk of an
egg, dip them into bread crumbs, then into clarified butter, and,
afterwards, in the bread crumbs again; broil or fry them over a clear
fire, that they may acquire a good brown colour. arrange them in the
dish alternately with rashers of broiled ham, and pour the sauce, made
by recipe no. , in the middle.
time.— to  minutes, according to the thickness of the cutlets.
average cost, d. per lb.
seasonable from march to october.
 the calf's-head club.—when the restoration of charles ii. took
 the strait waistcoat off the minds and morose religion of the
 commonwealth period, and gave a loose rein to the
 long-compressed spirits of the people, there still remained a
 large section of society wedded to the former state of things.
 the elders of this party retired from public sight, where,
 unoffended by the reigning saturnalia, they might dream in
 seclusion over their departed utopia. the young bloods of this
 school, however, who were compelled to mingle in the world, yet
 detesting the politics which had become the fashion, adopted a
 novel expedient to keep alive their republican sentiments, and
 mark their contempt of the reigning family. they accordingly
 met, in considerable numbers, at some convenient inn, on the
 th of january in each year,—the anniversary of charles's
 death, and dined together off a feast prepared from calves'
 heads, dressed in every possible variety of way, and with an
 abundance of wine drank toasts of defiance and hatred to the
 house of stuart, and glory to the memory of old holl cromwell;
 and having lighted a large bonfire in the yard, the club of fast
 young puritans, with their white handkerchiefs stained red in
 wine, and one of the party in a mask, bearing an axe, followed
 by the chairman, carrying a calf's head pinned up in a napkin,
 marched in mock procession to the bonfire, into which, with
 great shouts and uproar, they flung the enveloped head. this odd
 custom was continued for some time, and even down to the early
 part of this century it was customary for men of republican
 politics always to dine off calf's head on the th of january.
veal cutlets a la maintenon (an entree).
. ingredients.— or  lbs. of veal cutlets, egg and bread crumbs, 
tablespoonfuls of minced savoury herbs, salt and pepper to taste, a
little grated nutmeg.
mode.—cut the cutlets about / inch in thickness, flatten them, and
brush them over with the yolk of an egg; dip them into bread crumbs and
minced herbs, season with pepper and salt and grated nutmeg, and fold
each cutlet in a piece of buttered paper. broil them, and send them to
table with melted butter or a good gravy.
time.—from  to  minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
(excellent.)
. ingredients.— to  lbs. of the loin or neck of veal,  or 
young carrots, a bunch of green onions,  slices of lean bacon,  blades
of pounded mace,  bunch of savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste, a
few new potatoes,  pint of green peas.
mode.—cut the veal into cutlets, trim them, and put the trimmings
into a stewpan with a little butter; lay in the cutlets and fry them a
nice brown colour on both sides. add the bacon, carrots, onions, spice,
herbs, and seasoning; pour in about a pint of boiling water, and stew
gently for  hours on a very slow fire. when done, skim off the fat,
take out the herbs, and flavour the gravy with a little tomato sauce and
ketchup. have ready the peas and potatoes, boiled separately; put them
with the veal, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from june to august with peas;—rather earlier when these
are omitted.
scotch collops (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast veal, a little butter,
flour, / pint of water,  onion,  blade of pounded mace, 
tablespoonful of lemon-juice, / teaspoonful of finely-minced
lemon-peel,  tablespoonfuls of sherry,  tablespoonful of mushroom
ketchup.
mode.—cut the veal the same thickness as for cutlets, rather larger
than a crown-piece; flour the meat well, and fry a light brown in
butter; dredge again with flour, and add / pint of water, pouring it
in by degrees; set it on the fire, and when it boils, add the onion and
mace, and let it simmer very gently about / hour; flavour the gravy
with lemon-juice, peel, wine, and ketchup, in the above proportion; give
one boil, and serve.
time.—/ hour.
seasonable from march to october.
scotch collops, white (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast veal, / teaspoonful of
grated nutmeg,  blades of pounded mace, cayenne and salt to taste, a
little butter,  dessertspoonful of flour, / pint of water, 
teaspoonful of anchovy sauce,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 
teaspoonful of lemon-peel,  tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup, 
tablespoonfuls of cream,  tablespoonful of sherry.
mode.—cut the veal into thin slices about  inches in width; hack
them with a knife, and grate on them the nutmeg, mace, cayenne, and
salt, and fry them in a little butter. dish them, and make a gravy in
the pan by putting in the remaining ingredients. give one boil, and pour
it over the collops; garnish with lemon and slices of toasted bacon,
rolled. forcemeat balls may be added to this dish. if cream is not at
hand, substitute the yolk of an egg beaten up well with a little milk.
time.—about  or  minutes.
seasonable from may to october.
 cooking collops.—dean ramsay, who tells us, in his
 "reminiscences of scottish life and character," a number of
 famous stories of the strong-headed, warm-hearted, and
 plain-spoken old dames of the north, gives, amongst them, the
 following:—a strong-minded lady of this class was inquiring the
 character of a cook she was about to hire. the lady who was
 giving the character entered a little upon the cook's moral
 qualifications, and described her as a very decent woman; to
 which the astounding reply—this was  years ago, and a dean
 tells the story—"oh, d—n her decency; can she make good
 collops?"
. ingredients.—veal, forcemeat no. , melted butter.
mode.—have the fillet cut according to the size required; take out
the bone, and after raising the skin from the meat, put under the flap a
nice forcemeat, made by recipe no. . prepare sufficient of this, as
there should be some left to eat cold, and to season and flavour a mince
if required. skewer and bind the veal up in a round form; dredge well
with flour, put it down at some distance from the fire at first, and
baste continually. about / hour before serving, draw it nearer the
fire, that it may acquire more colour, as the outside should be of a
rich brown, but not burnt. dish it, remove the skewers, which replace by
a silver one; pour over the joint some good melted butter, and serve
with either boiled ham, bacon, or pickled pork. never omit to send a cut
lemon to table with roast veal.
[illustration: fillet of veal.]
time.—a fillet of veal weighing  lbs., about  hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.—a small fillet of veal, forcemeat no. , thickening
of butter and flour, a few mushrooms, white pepper to taste, 
tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice,  blades of pounded mace, / glass of
sherry.
mode.—if the whole of the leg is purchased, take off the knuckle to
stew, and also the square end, which will serve for cutlets or pies.
remove the bone, and fill the space with a forcemeat no. . roll and
skewer it up firmly; place a few skewers at the bottom of a stewpan to
prevent the meat from sticking, and cover the veal with a little weak
stock. let it simmer very gently until tender, as the more slowly veal
is stewed, the better. strain and thicken the sauce, flavour it with
lemon-juice, mace, sherry, and white pepper; give one boil, and pour it
over the meat. the skewers should be removed, and replaced by a silver
one, and the dish garnished with slices of cut lemon.
time.—a. fillet of veal weighing  lbs.,  hours' very gentle
stewing.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
the golden calf.—we are told in the book of genesis, that aaron, in the
lengthened absence of moses, was constrained by the impatient people to
make them an image to worship; and that aaron, instead of using his
delegated power to curb this sinful expression of the tribes, and
appease the discontented jews, at once complied with their demand, and,
telling them to bring to him their rings and trinkets, fashioned out of
their willing contributions a calf of gold, before which the multitude
fell down and worshipped. whether this image was a solid figure of gold,
or a wooden effigy merely, coated with metal, is uncertain. to suppose
the former,—knowing the size of the image made from such trifling
articles as rings, we must presuppose the israelites to have spoiled the
egyptians most unmercifully: the figure, however, is of more consequence
than the weight or size of the idol. that the israelite brought away
more from goshen than the plunder of the egyptians, and that they were
deeply imbued with egyptian superstition, the golden calf is only one,
out of many instances of proof; for a gilded ox, covered with a pall,
was in that country an emblem of osiris, one of the gods of the egyptian
trinity. besides having a sacred cow, and many varieties of the holy
bull, this priest-ridden people worshipped the ox as a symbol of the
sun, and offered to it divine honours, as the emblem of frugality,
industry, and husbandry. it is therefore probable that, in borrowing so
familiar a type, the israelites, in their calf-worship, meant, under a
well-understood cherubic symbol, to acknowledge the full force of those
virtues, under an emblem of divine power and goodness. the prophet hosea
is full of denunciations against calf-worship in israel, and alludes to
the custom of kissing these idols, hosea, viii, -.
fricandeau of veal (an entree).
. ingredients.—a piece of the fat side of a leg of veal (about 
lbs.), lardoons,  carrots,  large onions, a faggot of savoury herbs, 
blades of pounded mace,  whole allspice,  bay-leaves, pepper to taste,
a few slices of fat bacon,  pint of stock no. .
[illustration: fricandeau of veal.]
mode.—the veal for a fricandeau should be of the best quality, or it
will not be good. it may be known by the meat being white and not
thready. take off the skin, flatten the veal on the table, then at one
stroke of the knife, cut off as much as is required, for a fricandeau
with an uneven surface never looks well. trim it, and with a sharp knife
make two or three slits in the middle, that it may taste more of the
seasoning. now lard it thickly with fat bacon, as lean gives a red
colour to the fricandeau. slice the vegetables, and put these, with the
herbs and spices, in the middle of a stewpan, with a few slices of
bacon at the top: these should form a sort of mound in the centre for
the veal to rest upon. lay the fricandeau over the bacon, sprinkle over
it a little salt, and pour in just sufficient stock to cover the bacon,
&c., without touching the veal. let it gradually come to a boil; then
put it over a slow and equal fire, and let it simmer very gently for
about -/ hours, or longer should it be very large. baste it
frequently with the liquor, and a short time before serving, put it into
a brisk oven, to make the bacon firm, which otherwise would break when
it was glazed. dish the fricandeau, keep it hot, skim off the fat from
the liquor, and reduce it quickly to a glaze, with which glaze the
fricandeau, and serve with a purée of whatever vegetable happens to be
in season—spinach, sorrel, asparagus, cucumbers, peas, &c.
time.—-/ hours. if very large, allow more time.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for an entrée.
seasonable from march to october.
fricandeau of veal (more economical.)
. ingredients.—the best end of a neck of veal (about -/ lbs.),
lardoons,  carrots,  onions, a faggot of savoury herbs,  blades of
mace,  bay-leaves, a little whole white pepper, a few slices of fat
bacon.
mode.—cut away the lean part of the best end of a neck of veal with a
sharp knife, scooping it from the bones. put the bones in with a little
water, which will serve to moisten the fricandeau: they should stew
about -/ hour. lard the veal, proceed in the same way as in the
preceding recipe, and be careful that the gravy does not touch the
fricandeau. stew very gently for  hours; glaze, and serve it on sorrel,
spinach, or with a little gravy in the dish.
time.— hours.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for an entrée.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—when the prime part of the leg is cut off, it spoils the whole;
consequently, to use this for a fricandeau is rather extravagant. the
best end of the neck answers the purpose nearly or quite as well.
boiled calf's head (with the skin on).
. ingredients.—calf's head, boiling water, bread crumbs,  large
bunch of parsley, butter, white pepper and salt to taste, 
tablespoonfuls of melted butter,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice,  or 
grains of cayenne.
mode.—put the head into boiling water, and let it remain by the side
of the fire for  or  minutes; take it out, hold it by the ear, and
with the back of a knife, scrape off the hair (should it not come off
easily, dip the head again into boiling water). when perfectly clean,
take the eyes out, cut off the ears, and remove the brain, which soak
for an hour in warm water. put the head into hot water to soak for a few
minutes, to make it look white, and then have ready a stewpan, into
which lay the head; cover it with cold water, and bring it gradually to
boil. remove the scum, and add a little salt, which assists to throw it
up. simmer it very gently from -/ to  hours, and when nearly done,
boil the brains for / hour; skin and chop them, not too finely, and
add a tablespoonful of minced parsley which has been previously scalded.
season with pepper and salt, and stir the brains, parsley, &c., into
about  tablespoonfuls of melted butter; add the lemon-juice and
cayenne, and keep these hot by the side of the fire. take up the head,
cut out the tongue, skin it, put it on a small dish with the brains
round it; sprinkle over the head a few bread crumbs mixed with a little
minced parsley; brown these before the fire, and serve with a tureen of
parsley and butter, and either boiled bacon, ham, or pickled pork as an
accompaniment.
time.—-/ to  hours.
average cost, according to the season, from s. to s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
boiled calf's head (without the skin).
. ingredients.—calf's head, water, a little salt,  tablespoonfuls
of melted butter,  tablespoonful of minced parsley, pepper and salt to
taste,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice.
[illustration: calf's head.]
[illustration: half a calf's head.]
mode.—after the head has been thoroughly cleaned, and the brains
removed, soak it in warm water to blanch it. lay the brains also into
warm water to soak, and let them remain for about an hour. put the head
into a stewpan, with sufficient cold water to cover it, and when it
boils, add a little salt; take off every particle of scum as it rises,
and boil the head until perfectly tender. boil the brains, chop them,
and mix with them melted butter, minced parsley, pepper, salt, and
lemon-juice in the above proportion. take up the head, skin the tongue,
and put it on a small dish with the brains round it. have ready some
parsley and butter, smother the head with it, and the remainder send to
table in a tureen. bacon, ham, pickled pork, or a pig's cheek, are
indispensable with calf's head. the brains are sometimes chopped with
hard-boiled eggs, and mixed with a little béchamel or white sauce.
time.—from -/ to -/ hours.
average cost, according to the season, from s. to s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—the liquor in which the head was boiled should be saved: it
makes excellent soup, and will be found a nice addition to gravies, &c.
half a calf's head is as frequently served as a whole one, it being a
more convenient-sized joint for a small family. it is cooked in the same
manner, and served with the same sauces, as in the preceding recipe.
hashed calf's head (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of a cold boiled calf's head,  quart of
the liquor in which it was boiled, a faggot of savoury herbs,  onion, 
carrot, a strip of lemon-peel,  blades of pounded mace, salt and white
pepper to taste, a very little cayenne, rather more than 
tablespoonfuls of sherry,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 
tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup, forcemeat balls.
mode.—cut the meat into neat slices, and put the bones and trimmings
into a stewpan with the above proportion of liquor that the head was
boiled in. add a bunch of savoury herbs,  onion,  carrot, a strip of
lemon-peel, and  blades of pounded mace, and let these boil for  hour,
or until the gravy is reduced nearly half. strain it into a clean
stewpan, thicken it with a little butter and flour, and add a flavouring
of sherry, lemon-juice, and ketchup, in the above proportion; season
with pepper, salt, and a little cayenne; put in the meat, let it
gradually warm through, but not boil more than two or three
minutes. garnish the dish with forcemeat balls and pieces of bacon
rolled and toasted, placed alternately, and send it to table very hot.
time.—altogether -/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the remains of the head, d.
seasonable from march to october.
veal collops (an entree).
. ingredients.—about  lbs. of the prime part of the leg of veal, a
few slices of bacon, forcemeat no. , cayenne to taste, egg and bread
crumbs, gravy.
mode.—cut the veal into long thin collops, flatten them, and lay on
each a piece of thin bacon of the same size; have ready some forcemeat,
made by recipe no. , which spread over the bacon, sprinkle over all a
little cayenne, roll them up tightly, and do not let them be more than 
inches long. skewer each one firmly, egg and bread crumb them, and fry
them a nice brown in a little butter, turning them occasionally, and
shaking the pan about. when done, place them on a dish before the fire;
put a small piece of butter in the pan, dredge in a little flour, add
/ pint of water,  tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice, a seasoning of salt,
pepper, and pounded mace; let the whole boil up, and pour it over the
collops.
time.—from  to  minutes.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.—a calf's liver, flour, a bunch of savoury herbs,
including parsley; when liked,  minced shalots;  teaspoonful of flour,
 tablespoonful of vinegar,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, pepper and
salt to taste, / pint water.
mode.—procure a calf's liver as white as possible, and cut it into
slices of a good and equal shape. dip them in flour, and fry them of a
good colour in a little butter. when they are done, put them on a dish,
which keep hot before the fire. mince the herbs very fine, put them in
the frying-pan with a little more butter; add the remaining ingredients,
simmer gently until the herbs are done, and pour over the liver.
time.—according to the thickness of the slices, from  to  minutes.
average cost, d. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.— or  lbs. of liver, bacon, pepper and salt to
taste, a small piece of butter, flour,  tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice,
/ pint of water.
mode.—cut the liver in thin slices, and cut as many slices of bacon
as there are of liver; fry the bacon first, and put that on a hot dish
before the fire. fry the liver in the fat which comes from the bacon,
after seasoning it with pepper and salt and dredging over it a very
little flour. turn the liver occasionally to prevent its burning, and
when done, lay it round the dish with a piece of bacon between each.
pour away the bacon fat, put in a small piece of butter, dredge in a
little flour, add the lemon-juice and water, give one boil, and pour it
in the middle of the dish. it may be garnished with slices of cut
lemon, or forcemeat balls.
time.—according to the thickness of the slices, from  to  minutes.
average cost, d. per lb. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
calf's liver larded and roasted (an entree).
. ingredients.—a calf's liver, vinegar,  onion,  or  sprigs of
parsley and thyme, salt and pepper to taste,  bay-leaf, lardoons, brown
gravy.
mode.—take a fine white liver, and lard it the same as a fricandeau;
put it into vinegar with an onion cut in slices, parsley, thyme,
bay-leaf, and seasoning in the above proportion. let it remain in this
pickle for  hours, then roast and baste it frequently with the
vinegar, &c.; glaze it, serve under it a good brown gravy, or sauce
piquante, and send it to table very hot.
time.—rather more than  hour. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—calf's liver stuffed with forcemeat no. , to which has been
added a little fat bacon, will be found a very savoury dish. it should
be larded or wrapped in buttered paper, and roasted before a clear fire.
brown gravy and currant jelly should be served with it.
fillet of veal au bechamel (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a small fillet of veal,  pint of béchamel sauce no.
, a few bread crumbs, clarified butter.
mode.—a fillet of real that has been roasted the preceding day will
answer very well for this dish. cut the middle out rather deep, leaving
a good margin round, from which to cut nice slices, and if there should
be any cracks in the veal, fill them up with forcemeat. mince finely the
meat that was taken out, mixing with it a little of the forcemeat to
flavour, and stir to it sufficient béchamel to make it of a proper
consistency. warm the veal in the oven for about an hour, taking care to
baste it well, that it may not be dry; put the mince in the place where
the meat was taken out, sprinkle a few bread crumbs over it, and drop a
little clarified butter on the bread crumbs; put it into the oven for
/ hour to brown, and pour béchamel round the sides of the dish.
time.—altogether -/ hour.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.—knuckle of veal, pepper and salt to taste, flour, 
onion,  head of celery, or a little celery-seed, a faggot of savoury
herbs,  blades of pounded mace, thickening of butter and flour, a few
young carrots,  tablespoonful of ketchup,  tablespoonful of tomato
sauce,  tablespoonfuls of sherry, the juice of / lemon.
mode.—cut the meat from a knuckle of veal into neat slices, season
with pepper and salt, and dredge them with flour. fry them in a little
butter of a pale brown, and put them into a stewpan with the bone (which
should be chopped in several places); add the celery, herbs, mace, and
carrots; pour over all about  pint of hot water, and let it simmer very
gently for  hours, over a slow but clear fire. take out the slices of
meat and carrots, strain and thicken the gravy with a little butter
rolled in flour; add the remaining ingredients, give one boil, put back
the meat and carrots, let these get hot through, and serve. when in
season, a few green peas, boiled separately, and added to this dish at
the moment of serving, would be found a very agreeable addition.
time.— hours. average cost, d. to d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—knuckle of veal,  onion,  blades of mace, 
teaspoonful of salt, / lb. of rice.
[illustration: knuckle of veal.]
mode.—have the knuckle cut small, or cut some cutlets from it, that
it may be just large enough to be eaten the same day it is dressed, as
cold boiled veal is not a particularly tempting dish. break the
shank-bone, wash it clean, and put the meat into a stewpan with
sufficient water to cover it. let it gradually come to a boil, put in
the salt, and remove the scum as fast as it rises. when it has simmered
gently for about / hour, add the remaining ingredients, and stew the
whole gently for -/ hours. put the meat into a deep dish, pour over
it the rice, &c., and send boiled bacon, and a tureen of parsley and
butter to table with it.
time.—a knuckle of veal weighing  lbs.,  hours' gentle stewing.
average cost, d. to d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—macaroni, instead of rice, boiled with the veal, will be found
good; or the rice and macaroni may be omitted, and the veal sent to
table smothered in parsley and butter.
[illustration: loin of veal.]
. ingredients.—veal; melted butter.
mode.—paper the kidney fat; roll in and skewer the flap, which makes
the joint a good shape; dredge it well with flour, and put it down to a
bright fire. should the loin be very large, skewer the kidney back for a
time to roast thoroughly. keep it well basted, and a short time before
serving, remove the paper from the kidney, and allow it to acquire a
nice brown colour, but it should not be burnt. have ready some melted
butter, put it into the dripping-pan after it is emptied of its
contents, pour it over the veal, and serve. garnish the dish with slices
of lemon and forcemeat balls, and send to table with it, boiled bacon,
ham, pickled pork, or pig's cheek.
time.—a large loin,  hours.
average cost, -/d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—a piece of toast should be placed under the kidney when the
veal is dished.
loin of veal au bechamel (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—loin of veal, / teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel,
rather more than / pint of béchamel or white sauce.
mode.—a loin of veal which has come from table with very little taken
off, answers very well for this dish. cut off the meat from the inside,
mince it, and mix with it some minced lemon-peel; put it into sufficient
béchamel to warm through. in the mean time, wrap the joint in buttered
paper, and place it in the oven to warm. when thoroughly hot, dish the
mince, place the loin above it, and pour over the remainder of the
béchamel.
time.—-/ hour to warm the meat in the oven.
seasonable from march to october.
loin of veal, a la daube.
. ingredients.—the chump end of a loin of veal, forcemeat no. , a
few slices of bacon, a bunch of savoury herbs,  blades of mace, /
teaspoonful of whole white pepper,  pint of veal stock or water,  or 
green onions.
mode.—cut off the chump from a loin of veal, and take out the bone;
fill the cavity with forcemeat no. , tie it up tightly, and lay it in
a stewpan with the bones and trimmings, and cover the veal with a few
slices of bacon. add the herbs, mace, pepper, and onions, and stock or
water; cover the pan with a closely-fitting lid, and simmer for  hours,
shaking the stewpan occasionally. take out the bacon, herbs, and onions;
reduce the gravy, if not already thick enough, to a glaze, with which
glaze the meat, and serve with tomato, mushroom, or sorrel sauce.
time.— hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
minced veal, with béchamel sauce (cold meat cookery).
(very good.)
. ingredients.—the remains of a fillet of veal,  pint of béchamel
sauce no. , / teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel, forcemeat balls.
mode.—cut—but do not chop—a few slices of cold roast veal as
finely as possible, sufficient to make rather more than  lb., weighed
after being minced. make the above proportion of béchamel, by recipe no.
; add the lemon-peel, put in the veal, and let the whole gradually
warm through. when it is at the point of simmering, dish it, and garnish
with forcemeat balls and fried sippets of bread.
time.—to simmer  minute.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
(more economical.)
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fillet or loin of veal,
rather more than  pint of water,  onion, / teaspoonful of minced
lemon-peel, salt and white pepper to taste,  blade of pounded mace, 
or  young carrots, a faggot of sweet herbs, thickening of butter and
flour,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice,  tablespoonfuls of cream or
milk.
mode.—take about  lb. of veal, and should there be any bones, dredge
them with flour, and put them into a stewpan with the brown outside, and
a few meat trimmings; add rather more than a pint of water, the onion
cut in slices, lemon-peel, seasoning, mace, carrots, and herbs; simmer
these well for rather more than  hour, and strain the liquor. rub a
little flour into some butter; add this to the gravy, set it on the
fire, and, when it boils, skim well. mince the veal finely by cutting,
and not chopping it; put it in the gravy; let it get warmed through
gradually; add the lemon-juice and cream, and, when it is on the point
of boiling, serve. garnish the dish with sippets of toasted bread and
slices of bacon rolled and toasted. forcemeat balls may also be added.
if more lemon-peel is liked than is stated above, put a little very
finely minced to the veal, after it is warmed in the gravy.
time.— hour to make the gravy.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable from march to october.
 the calf a symbol of divine power.—a singular symbolical
 ceremony existed among the hebrews, in which the calf performed
 a most important part. the calf being a type or symbol of divine
 power, or what was called the elohim,—the almighty
 intelligence that brought them out of egypt,—was looked upon
 much in the same light by the jews, as the cross subsequently
 was by the christians, a mystical emblem of the divine passion
 and goodness. consequently, an oath taken on either the calf or
 the cross was considered equally solemn and sacred by jew or
 nazarene, and the breaking of it a soul-staining perjury on
 themselves, and an insult and profanation directly offered to
 the almighty. to render the oath more impressive and solemn, it
 was customary to slaughter a dedicated calf in the temple, when,
 the priests having divided the carcase into a certain number of
 parts, and with intervening spaces, arranged the severed limbs
 on the marble pavement, the one, or all the party, if there were
 many individuals, to be bound by the oath, repeating the words
 of the compact, threaded their way in and out through the
 different spaces, till they had taken the circuit of each
 portion of the divided calf, when the ceremony was concluded. to
 avert the anger of the lord, when jerusalem was threatened by
 nebuchadnezzar and his babylonian host, the jews had made a
 solemn to god, ratified by the ceremony of the calf, if he
 released them from their dreaded foe, to cancel the servitude of
 their hebrew brethren. after investing the city for some time,
 and reducing the inhabitants to dreadful suffering and
 privation, the babylonians, hearing that pharaoh, whom the jews
 had solicited for aid, was rapidly approaching with a powerful
 army, hastily raised the siege, and, removing to a distance,
 took up a position where they could intercept the egyptians, and
 still cover the city. no sooner did the jews behold the retreat
 of the enemy, than they believed all danger was past, and, with
 their usual turpitude, they repudiated their oath, and refused
 to liberate their oppressed countrymen. for this violation of
 their covenant with the lord, they were given over to all the
 horrors of the sword, pestilence, and famine—jeremiah, xxxiv.
(a pretty side or corner dish.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of minced cold roast veal,  oz. of ham, 
tablespoonful of gravy, pepper and salt to taste,  teaspoonful of
grated nutmeg, / lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of macaroni,  or  eggs
to bind, a small piece of butter.
mode.—cut some nice slices from a cold fillet of veal, trim off the
brown outside, and mince the meat finely with the above proportion of
ham: should the meat be very dry, add a spoonful of good gravy. season
highly with pepper and salt, add the grated nutmeg and bread crumbs, and
mix these ingredients with  or  eggs well beaten, which should bind
the mixture and make it like forcemeat. in the mean time, boil the
macaroni in salt and water, and drain it; butter a mould, put some of
the macaroni at the bottom and sides of it, in whatever form is liked;
mix the remainder with the forcemeat, fill the mould up to the top, put
a plate or small dish on it, and steam for / hour. turn it out
carefully, and serve with good gravy poured round, but not over, the
meat.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—to make a variety, boil some carrots and turnips separately in
a little salt and water; when done, cut them into pieces about / inch
in thickness; butter an oval mould, and place these in it, in white and
red stripes alternately, at the bottom and sides. proceed as in the
foregoing recipe, and be very careful in turning it out of the mould.
moulded minced veal (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—/ lb. of cold roast veal, a small slice of bacon,
/ teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel, / onion chopped fine, salt,
pepper, and pounded mace to taste, a slice of toast soaked in milk, 
egg.
mode.—mince the meat very fine, after removing from it all skin and
outside pieces, and chop the bacon; mix these well together, adding the
lemon-peel, onion, seasoning, mace, and toast. when all the ingredients
are thoroughly incorporated, heat up an egg, with which bind the
mixture. butter a shape, put in the meat, and hake for / hour; turn it
out of the mould carefully, and pour round it a good brown gravy. a
sheep's head dressed in this manner is an economical and savoury dish.
time.—/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the meat, d.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.—the best end of the neck of veal (from  to  lbs.),
bacon,  tablespoonful of minced parsley, salt, pepper, and grated
nutmeg to taste;  onion,  carrots, a little celery (when this is not
obtainable, use the seed), / glass of sherry, thickening of butter and
flour, lemon-juice,  blade of pounded mace.
mode.—prepare the bacon for larding, and roll it in minced parsley,
salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg; lard the veal, put it into a stewpan
with a few slices of lean bacon or ham, an onion, carrots, and celery;
and do not quite cover it with water. stew it gently for  hours, or
until it is quite tender; strain off the liquor; stir together over the
fire, in a stewpan, a little flour and butter until brown; lay the veal
in this, the upper side to the bottom of the pan, and let it remain till
of a nice brown colour. place it in the dish; pour into the stewpan as
much gravy as is required, boil it up, skim well, add the wine, pounded
mace, and lemon-juice; simmer for  minutes, pour it over the meat, and
serve.
time.—rather more than  hours.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
 birth of calves.—the cow seldom produces more than a single
 calf; sometimes, twins, and, very rarely, three. a french
 newspaper, however,—the "nouveau bulletin des sciences,"—gave
 a trustworthy but extraordinary account of a cow which produced
 nine calves in all, at three successive births, in three
 successive years. the first year, four cow calves; the second
 year, three calves, two of them females; the third year, two
 calves, both females. with the exception of two belonging to the
 first birth, all were suckled by the mother.
. ingredients.—veal, melted butter, forcemeat balls.
mode.—have the veal cut from the best end of the neck; dredge it with
flour, and put it down to a bright clear fire; keep it well basted; dish
it, pour over it some melted butter, and garnish the dish with fried
forcemeat balls; send to table with a cut lemon. the scrag may be boiled
or stewed in various ways, with rice, onion-sauce, or parsley and
butter.
time.—about  hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient.— or  lbs. for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
veal olive pie (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few thin slices of cold fillet of veal, a few thin
slices of bacon, forcemeat no. , a cupful of gravy,  tablespoonfuls
of cream, puff-crust.
mode.—cut thin slices from a fillet of veal, place on them thin
slices of bacon, and over them a layer of forcemeat, made by recipe no.
, with an additional seasoning of shalot and cayenne; roll them
tightly, and fill up a pie-dish with them; add the gravy and cream,
cover with a puff-crust, and bake for  to -/ hour: should the pie be
very large, allow  hours. the pieces of rolled veal should be about 
inches in length, and about  inches round.
time.—moderate-sized pie,  to -/ hour.
seasonable from march to october.
fried patties (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—cold roast veal, a few slices of cold ham,  egg
boiled hard, pounded mace, pepper and salt to taste, gravy, cream, 
teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel, good puff-paste.
mode.—mince a little cold veal and ham, allowing one-third ham to
two-thirds veal; add an egg boiled hard and chopped, and a seasoning of
pounded mace, salt, pepper, and lemon-peel; moisten with a little gravy
and cream. make a good puff-paste; roll rather thin, and cut it into
round or square pieces; put the mince between two of them, pinch the
edges to keep in the gravy, and fry a light brown. they may be also
baked in patty-pans: in that case, they should be brushed over with the
yolk of an egg before they are put in the oven. to make a variety,
oysters may be substituted for the ham.
time.— minutes to fry the patties.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.— lbs. of veal cutlets,  or  slices of lean bacon
or ham, pepper and salt to taste,  tablespoonfuls of minced savoury
herbs,  blades of pounded mace, crust,  teacupful of gravy.
mode.—cut the cutlets into square pieces, and season them with
pepper, salt, and pounded mace; put them in a pie-dish with the savoury
herbs sprinkled over, and  or  slices of lean bacon or ham placed at
the top: if possible, this should be previously cooked, as undressed
bacon makes the veal red, and spoils its appearance. pour in a little
water, cover with crust, ornament it in any way that is approved; brush
it over with the yolk of an egg, and bake in a well-heated oven for
about -/ hour. pour in a good gravy after baking, which is done by
removing the top ornament, and replacing it after the gravy is added.
time.—about -/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to october.
 a very veal dinner.—at a dinner given by lord polkemmet, a
 scotch nobleman and judge, his guests saw, when the covers were
 removed, that the fare consisted of veal broth, a roasted fillet
 of veal, veal cutlets, a veal pie, a calf's head, and
 calf's-foot jelly. the judge, observing the surprise of his
 guests, volunteered an explanation.—"oh, ay, it's a' cauf;
 when we kill a beast, we just eat up ae side, and doun the
 tither."
. ingredients.— lbs. of veal cutlets, / lb. of boiled ham, 
tablespoonfuls of minced savoury herbs, / teaspoonful of grated
nutmeg,  blades of pounded mace, pepper and salt to taste, a strip of
lemon-peel finely minced, the yolks of  hard-boiled eggs, / pint of
water, nearly / pint of good strong gravy, puff-crust.
mode.—cut the veal into nice square pieces, and put a layer of them
at the bottom of a pie-dish; sprinkle over these a portion of the herbs,
spices, seasoning, lemon-peel, and the yolks of the eggs cut in slices;
cut the ham very thin, and put a layer of this in. proceed in this
manner until the dish is full, so arranging it that the ham comes at the
top. lay a puff-paste on the edge of the dish, and pour in about /
pint of water; cover with crust, ornament it with leaves, brush it over
with the yolk of an egg, and bake in a well-heated oven for  to -/
hour, or longer, should the pie be very large. when it is taken out of
the oven, pour in at the top, through a funnel, nearly / pint of
strong gravy: this should be made sufficiently good that, when cold, it
may cut in a firm jelly. this pie may be very much enriched by adding a
few mushrooms, oysters, or sweetbreads; but it will be found very good
without any of the last-named additions.
time.—-/ hour, or longer, should the pie be very large. average
cost, s. sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from march to
october.
potted veal (for breakfast).
. ingredients.—to every lb. of veal allow / lb. of ham, cayenne
and pounded mace to taste,  oz. of fresh butter; clarified butter.
mode.—mince the veal and ham together as finely as possible, and
pound well in a mortar, with cayenne, pounded mace, and fresh butter in
the above proportion. when reduced to a perfectly smooth paste, press it
into potting-pots, and cover with clarified butter. if kept in a cool
place, it will remain good some days.
seasonable from march to october.
 names of calves, &c.—during the time the young male calf is
 suckled by his mother, he is called a bull-or ox-calf; when
 turned a year old, he is called a stirk, stot, or yearling; on
 the completion of his second year, he is called a two-year-old
 bull or steer (and in some counties a twinter); then, a
 three-year-old steer; and at four, an ox or a bullock, which
 latter names are retained till death. it may be here remarked,
 that the term ox is used as a general or common appellation for
 neat cattle, in a specific sense, and irrespective of sex; as
 the british ox, the indian ox. the female is termed cow, but
 while sucking the mother, a cow-calf; at the age of a year, she
 is called a yearling quey; in another year, a heifer, or
 twinter; then, a three-year-old quey or twinter; and, at four
 years old, a cow. other names, to be regarded as provincialisms,
 may exist in different districts.
ragout of cold veal (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold veal,  oz. of butter, / pint
of gravy, thickening of butter and flour, pepper and salt to taste, 
blade of pounded mace,  tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup, 
tablespoonful of sherry,  dessertspoonful of lemon-juice, forcemeat
balls.
mode.—any part of veal will make this dish. cut the meat into
nice-looking pieces, put them in a stewpan with  oz. of butter, and fry
a light brown; add the gravy (hot water may be substituted for this),
thicken with a little butter and flour, and stew gently about / hour;
season with pepper, salt, and pounded mace; add the ketchup, sherry, and
lemon-juice; give one boil, and serve. garnish the dish with forcemeat
balls and fried rashers of bacon.
time.—altogether / hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold meat, d.
seasonable from march to october.
note.—the above recipe may be varied, by adding vegetables, such as
peas, cucumbers, lettuces, green onions cut in slices, a dozen or two of
green gooseberries (not seedy), all of which should be fried a little
with the meat, and then stewed in the gravy.
veal rissoles (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—a few slices of cold roast veal, a few slices of ham
or bacon,  tablespoonful of minced parsley,  tablespoonful of minced
savoury herbs,  blade of pounded mace, a very little grated nutmeg,
cayenne and salt to taste,  eggs well beaten, bread crumbs.
mode.—mince the veal very finely with a little ham or bacon; add the
parsley, herbs, spices, and seasoning; mix into a paste with an egg;
form into balls or cones; brush these over with egg, sprinkle with bread
crumbs, and fry a rich brown. serve with brown gravy, and garnish the
dish with fried parsley.
time.—about  minutes to fry the rissoles.
seasonable from march to october.
veal rolls (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of a cold fillet of veal, egg and bread
crumbs, a few slices of fat bacon, forcemeat no. .
mode.—cut a few slices from a cold fillet of veal / inch thick; rub
them over with egg; lay a thin slice of fat bacon over each piece of
veal; brush these with the egg, and over this spread the forcemeat
thinly; roll up each piece tightly, egg and bread crumb them, and fry
them a rich brown. serve with mushroom sauce or brown gravy.
time.— to  minutes to fry the rolls.
seasonable from march to october.
shoulder of veal, stuffed and stewed.
. ingredients.—a shoulder of veal, a few slices of ham or bacon,
forcemeat no. ,  carrots,  onions, salt and pepper to taste, a
faggot of savoury herbs,  blades of pounded mace, water, thickening of
butter and flour.
mode.—bone the joint by carefully detaching the meat from the
blade-bone on one side, and then on the other, being particular not to
pierce the skin; then cut the bone from the knuckle, and take it out.
fill the cavity whence the bone was taken with a forcemeat made by
recipe no. . roll and bind the veal up tightly; put it into a
stew-pan with the carrots, onions, seasoning, herbs, and mace; pour in
just sufficient water to cover it, and let it stew very gently for
about  hours. before taking it up, try if it is properly done by
thrusting a larding-needle in it: if it penetrates easily, it is
sufficiently cooked. strain and skim the gravy, thicken with butter and
flour, give one boil, and pour it round the meat. a few young carrots
may be boiled and placed round the dish as a garnish, and, when in
season, green peas should always be served with this dish.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from march to october.
 the fattening of calves.—the fattening of calves for the market
 is an important business in lanarkshire or clydesdale, and
 numbers of newly-dropped calves are regularly carried there from
 the farmers of the adjacent districts, in order to be prepared
 for the butcher. the mode of feeding them is very simple; milk
 is the chief article of their diet, and of this the calves
 require a sufficient supply from first to last. added to this,
 they must be kept in a well-aired place, neither too hot nor too
 cold, and freely supplied with dry litter. it is usual to
 exclude the light,—at all events to a great degree, and to put
 within their reach a lump of chalk, which they are very fond of
 licking. thus fed, calves, at the end of  or  weeks, often
 attain a very large size; viz.,  to  stone, exclusive of the
 offal. far heavier weights have occurred, and without any
 deterioration in the delicacy and richness of the flesh. this
 mode of feeding upon milk alone at first appears to be very
 expensive, but it is not so, when all things are taken into
 consideration; for at the age of  or  weeks a calf,
 originally purchased for  shillings, will realize nearly the
 same number of pounds. for , or even  weeks, the milk of one
 cow is sufficient,—indeed half that quantity is enough for the
 first fortnight; but after the th or th week it will consume
 the greater portion of the milk of two moderate cows; but then
 it requires neither oil-cake nor linseed, nor any other food.
 usually, however, the calves are not kept beyond the age of 
 weeks, and will then sell for  or  pounds each: the milk of
 the cow is then ready for a successor. in this manner a relay of
 calves may be prepared for the markets from early spring to the
 end of summer, a plan more advantageous than that of overfeeding
 one to a useless degree of corpulency.
. ingredients.—equal quantities of fat bacon and lean veal; to every
lb. of meat, allow  teaspoonful of minced sage, salt and pepper to
taste.
mode.—chop the meat and bacon finely, and to every lb. allow the
above proportion of very finely-minced sage; add a seasoning of pepper
and salt, mix the whole well together, make it into flat cakes, and fry
a nice brown.
seasonable from march to october.
stewed veal, with peas, young carrots, and new potatoes.
. ingredients.— or  lbs. of the loin or neck of veal,  young
carrots, a few green onions,  pint of green peas,  new potatoes, a
bunch of savoury herbs, pepper and salt to taste,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice,  tablespoonfuls of tomato sauce,  tablespoonfuls of
mushroom ketchup.
mode.—dredge the meat with flour, and roast or bake it for about /
hour: it should acquire a nice brown colour. put the meat into a stewpan
with the carrots, onions, potatoes, herbs, pepper, and salt; pour over
it sufficient boiling water to cover it, and stew gently for  hours.
take out the meat and herbs, put it in a deep dish, skim off all the fat
from the gravy, and flavour it with lemon-juice, tomato sauce, and
mushroom ketchup in the above proportion. have ready a pint of green
peas boiled; put these with the meat, pour over it the gravy, and
serve. the dish may be garnished with a few forcemeat balls. the meat,
when preferred, may be cut into chops, and floured and fried instead of
being roasted; and any part of veal dressed in this way will be found
extremely savoury and good.
time.— hours. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable, with peas, from june to august.
baked sweetbreads (an entree).
. ingredients.— sweetbreads, egg and bread crumbs, oiled butter, 
slices of toast, brown gravy.
[illustration: sweetbreads.]
mode.—choose large white sweetbreads; put them into warm water to
draw out the blood, and to improve their colour; let them remain for
rather more than  hour; then put them into boiling water, and allow
them to simmer for about  minutes, which renders them firm. take them
up, drain them, brush over with egg, sprinkle with bread crumbs; dip
them in egg again, and then into more bread crumbs. drop on them a
little oiled butter, and put the sweetbreads into a moderately-heated
oven, and let them bake for nearly / hour. make  pieces of toast;
place the sweetbreads on the toast, and pour round, but not over them, a
good brown gravy.
time.—to soak  hour, to be boiled  minutes, baked  minutes.
average cost, s. to s. sufficient for an entrée.
seasonable.—in full season from may to august.
fried sweetbreads a la maitre d'hotel (an entree).
. ingredients.— sweetbreads, egg and bread crumbs, / lb. of
butter, salt and pepper to taste, rather more than / pint of maître
d'hôtel sauce no. .
mode.—soak the sweetbreads in warm water for an hour; then boil them
for  minutes; cut them in slices, egg and bread crumb them, season
with pepper and salt, and put them into a frying-pan, with the above
proportion of butter. keep turning them until done, which will be in
about  minutes; dish them, and pour over them a maître d'hôtel sauce,
made by recipe no. . the dish may be garnished with slices of cut
lemon.
time.—to soak  hour, to be broiled  minutes, to be fried about 
minutes.
average cost, s. to s., according to the season.
sufficient for an entrée.
seasonable.—in full season from may to august.
note.—the egg and bread crumb may be omitted, and the slices of
sweetbread dredged with a little flour instead, and a good gravy may be
substituted for the maitre d'hôtel sauce. this is a very simple method
of dressing them.
stewed sweetbreads (an entree).
. ingredients.— sweetbreads,  pint of white stock no. ,
thickening of butter and flour,  tablespoonfuls of cream, 
tablespoonful of lemon-juice,  blade of pounded mace, white pepper and
salt to taste.
mode.—soak the sweetbreads in warm water for  hour, and boil them
for  minutes; take them out, put them into cold water for a few
minutes; lay them in a stewpan with the stock, and simmer them gently
for rather more than / hour. dish them; thicken the gravy with a
little butter and flour; let it boil up, add the remaining ingredients,
allow the sauce to get quite hot, but not boil, and pour it over the
sweetbreads.
time.—to soak  hour, to be boiled  minutes, stewed rather more
than / hour.
average cost, from s. to s., according to the season.
sufficient for an entrée.
seasonable.—in full season from may to august.
note.—a few mushrooms added to this dish, and stewed with the
sweetbreads, will be found an improvement.
 season and choice of veal.—veal, like all other meats, has its
 season of plenty. the best veal, and the largest supply, are to
 be had from march to the end of july. it comes principally from
 the western counties, and is generally of the alderney breed. in
 purchasing veal, its whiteness and fineness of grain should be
 considered, the colour being especially of the utmost
 consequence. veal may be bought at all times of the year and of
 excellent quality, but is generally very dear, except in the
 months of plenty.
stewed tendrons de veau (an entree).
. ingredients.—the gristles from  breasts of veal, stock no. , 
faggot of savoury herbs,  blades of pounded mace,  cloves,  carrots,
 onions, a strip of lemon-peel.
mode.—the tendrons or gristles, which are found round the front of
a breast of veal, are now very frequently served as an entrée, and when
well dressed, make a nice and favourite dish. detach the gristles from
the bone, and cut them neatly out, so as not to spoil the joint for
roasting or stewing. put them into a stewpan, with sufficient stock, no.
, to cover them; add the herbs, mace, cloves, carrots, onions, and
lemon, and simmer these for nearly, or quite,  hours. they should be
stewed until a fork will enter the meat easily. take them up, drain
them, strain the gravy, boil it down to a glaze, with which glaze the
meat. dish the tendrons in a circle, with croűtons fried of a nice
colour placed between each; and put mushroom sauce, or a purée of green
peas or tomatoes, in the middle.
time.— hours. sufficient for one entrée.
seasonable.—with peas, from june to august.
 cow-pox, or variola.—it is to dr. jenner, of berkeley,
 gloucestershire, who died in , that we owe the practice of
 vaccination, as a preservative from the attack of that
 destructive scourge of the human race, the small-pox. the
 experiments of this philosophic man were begun in , and
 published the next year. he had observed that cows were subject
 to a certain infectious eruption of the teats, and that those
 persons who became affected by it, while milking the cattle,
 escaped the small-pox raging around them. this fact, known to
 farmers from time immemorial, led him to a course of
 experiments, the result of which all are acquainted with.
tendrons de veau (an entree).
. ingredients.—the gristles from  breasts of veal, stock no. , 
faggot of savoury herbs,  blade of pounded mace,  cloves,  carrots, 
onions, a strip of lemon-peel, egg and bread crumbs,  tablespoonfuls of
chopped mushrooms, salt and pepper to taste,  tablespoonfuls of sherry,
the yolk of  egg,  tablespoonfuls of cream.
mode.—after removing the gristles from a breast of veal, stew them
for  hours, as in the preceding recipe, with stock, herbs, mace,
cloves, carrots, onions, and lemon-peel. when perfectly tender, lift
them out and remove any bones or hard parts remaining. put them between
two dishes, with a weight on the top, and when cold, cut them into
slices. brush these over with egg, sprinkle with bread crumbs, and fry a
pale brown. take / pint of the gravy they were boiled in, add 
tablespoonfuls of chopped mushrooms, a seasoning of salt and pepper, the
sherry, and the yolk of an egg beaten with  tablespoonfuls of cream.
stir the sauce over the fire until it thickens; when it is on the point
of boiling, dish the tendrons in a circle, and pour the sauce in the
middle. tendrons are dressed in a variety of ways,—with sauce ŕ
l'espagnole, vegetables of all kinds: when they are served with a purée,
they should always be glazed.
time.—-/ hours. average cost.—usually bought with breast of
veal.
sufficient for an entrée.
seasonable from march to october.
tete de veau en tortue (an entree).
. ingredients.—half a calf's head, or the remains of a cold boiled
one; rather more than  pint of good white stock, no. ,  glass of
sherry or madeira, cayenne and salt to taste, about  mushroom-buttons
(when obtainable),  hard-boiled eggs,  gherkins,  quenelles or
forcemeat balls, no.  or ,  crayfish,  croűtons.
mode.—half a calf's head is sufficient to make a good entrée, and if
there are any remains of a cold one left from the preceding day, it will
answer very well for this dish. after boiling the head until tender,
remove the bones, and cut the meat into neat pieces; put the stock into
a stewpan, add the wine, and a seasoning of salt and cayenne; fry the
mushrooms in butter for  or  minutes, and add these to the gravy. boil
this quickly until somewhat reduced; then put in the yolks of the
hard-boiled eggs whole, the whites cut in small pieces, and the
gherkins chopped. have ready a few veal quenelles, made by recipe no.
 or ; add these, with the slices of head, to the other
ingredients, and let the whole get thoroughly hot, without boiling.
arrange the pieces of head as high in the centre of the dish as
possible; pour over them the ragout, and garnish with the crayfish and
croűtons placed alternately. a little of the gravy should also be served
in a tureen.
time.—about / hour to reduce the stock.
sufficient for  or  persons.
average cost, exclusive of the calf's head, s. d.
seasonable from march to october.
 a frenchman's opinion of veal.—a great authority in his native
 paris tells us, that veal, as a meat, is but little nourishing,
 is relaxing, and sufficiently difficult of digestion. lending
 itself, as it does, he says, in all the flowery imagery of the
 french tongue and manner, "to so many metamorphoses, it may be
 called, without exaggeration, the chameleon of the kitchen. who
 has not eaten calf's head au naturel, simply boiled with the
 skin on, its flavour heightened by sauce just a little sharp? it
 is a dish as wholesome as it is agreeable, and one that the most
 inexperienced cook may serve with success. calf's feet ŕ la
 poulette, au gratin, fried, &c.; les cervelles, served in
 the same manner, and under the same names; sweetbreads en
 fricandeau, piqués en fin,—all these offer most satisfactory
 entrées, which the art of the cook, more or less, varies for the
 gratification of his glory and the well-being of our appetites.
 we have not spoken, in the above catalogue, either of the liver,
 or of the fraise, or of the ears, which also share the honour
 of appearing at our tables. where is the man not acquainted with
 calf's liver ŕ la bourgeoise, the most frequent and convenient
 dish at unpretentious tables? the fraise, cooked in water, and
 eaten with vinegar, is a wholesome and agreeable dish, and
 contains a mucilage well adapted for delicate persons. calf's
 ears have, in common with the feet and cervelles, the
 advantage of being able to be eaten either fried or ŕ la
 poulette; and besides, can be made into a farce, with the
 addition of peas, onions, cheese, &c. neither is it confined to
 the calf's tongue, or even the eyes, that these shall dispute
 alone the glory of awakening the taste of man; thus, the
 fressure (which, as is known, comprises the heart, the mou,
 and the rate), although not a very recherché dish, lends
 itself to all the caprices of an expert artist, and may, under
 various marvellous disguises, deceive, and please, and even
 awaken our appetite."—verily, we might say, after this rhapsody
 of our neighbour, that his country's weal will not suffer in him
 as an able and eloquent exponent and admirer.
[illustration: breast of veal.]
. the carving of a breast of veal is not dissimilar to that of a
fore-quarter of lamb, when the shoulder has been taken off. the breast
of veal consists of two parts,—the rib-bones and the gristly brisket.
these two parts should first be separated by sharply passing the knife
in the direction of the lines , ; when they are entirely divided, the
rib-bones should be carved in the direction of the lines  to ; and the
brisket can be helped by cutting pieces in the direction  to . the
carver should ask the guests whether they have a preference for the
brisket or ribs; and if there be a sweetbread served with the dish, as
it often is with roast breast of veal, each person should receive a
piece.
[illustration: calf's head.]
. this is not altogether the most easy-looking dish to cut when it is
put before a carver for the first time; there is not much real
difficulty in the operation, however, when the head has been attentively
examined, and, after the manner of a phrenologist, you get to know its
bumps, good and bad. in the first place, inserting the knife quite down
to the bone, cut slices in the direction of the line  to ; with each
of these should be helped a piece of what is called the throat
sweetbread, cut in the direction of from  to . the eye, and the flesh
round, are favourite morsels with many, and should be given to those at
the table who are known to be the greatest connoisseurs. the jawbone
being removed, there will then be found some nice lean; and the palate,
which is reckoned by some a tit-bit, lies under the head. on a separate
dish there is always served the tongue and brains, and each guest should
be asked to take some of these.
[illustration: fillet of veal.]
. the carving of this joint is similar to that of a round of beef.
slices, not too thick, in the direction of the line  to  are cut; and
the only point to be careful about is, that the veal be evenly carved.
between the flap and the meat the stuffing is inserted, and a small
portion of this should be served to every guest. the persons whom the
host wishes most to honour should be asked if they like the delicious
brown outside slice, as this, by many, is exceedingly relished.
[illustration: knuckle of veal.]
. the engraving, showing the dotted line from  to , sufficiently
indicates the direction which should be given to the knife in carving
this dish. the best slices are those from the thickest part of the
knuckle, that is, outside the line  to .
[illustration: loin of veal.]
. as is the case with a loin of mutton, the careful jointing of a
loin of veal is more than half the battle in carving it. if the butcher
be negligent in this matter, he should be admonished; for there is
nothing more annoying or irritating to an inexperienced carver than to
be obliged to turn his knife in all directions to find the exact place
where it should be inserted in order to divide the bones. when the
jointing is properly performed, there is little difficulty in carrying
the knife down in the direction of the line  to . to each guest should
be given a piece of the kidney and kidney fat, which lie underneath, and
are considered great delicacies.
[illustration]
[illustration]
"birds, the free tenants of land, air, and ocean,
their forms all symmetry, their motions grace;
in plumage delicate and beautiful;
thick without burthen, close as fishes' scales,
or loose as full-blown poppies to the breeze."
the pelican island.
. the divisions of birds are founded principally on their habits of
life, and the natural resemblance which their external parts, especially
their bills, bear to each other. according to mr. vigors, there are five
orders, each of which occupies its peculiar place on the surface of the
globe; so that the air, the forest, the land, the marsh, and the water,
has each its appropriate kind of inhabitants. these are respectively
designated as birds of prey, perchers, walkers, waders, and swimmers;
and, in contemplating their variety, lightness, beauty, and wonderful
adaptation to the regions they severally inhabit, and the functions they
are destined to perform in the grand scheme of creation, our hearts are
lifted with admiration at the exhaustless ingenuity, power, and wisdom
of him who has, in producing them, so strikingly "manifested his
handiwork." not only these, however, but all classes of animals, have
their peculiar ends to fulfil; and, in order that this may be
effectually performed, they are constructed in such a manner as will
enable them to carry out their conditions. thus the quadrupeds, that are
formed to tread the earth in common with man, are muscular and vigorous;
and, whether they have passed into the servitude of man, or are
permitted to range the forest or the field, they still retain, in a high
degree, the energies with which they were originally endowed. birds, on
the contrary, are generally feeble, and, therefore, timid. accordingly,
wings have been given them to enable them to fly through the air, and
thus elude the force which, by nature, they are unable to resist.
notwithstanding the natural tendency of all bodies towards the centre of
the earth, birds, when raised in the atmosphere, glide through it with
the greatest ease, rapidity, and vigour. there, they are in their
natural element, and can vary their course with the greatest
promptitude—can mount or descend with the utmost facility, and can
light on any spot with the most perfect exactness, and without the
slightest injury to themselves.
. the mechanism which enables birds to wing their course through the
air, is both singular and instructive. their bodies are covered with
feathers, which are much lighter than coverings of hair, with which
quadrupeds are usually clothed. the feathers are so placed as to overlap
each other, like the slates or the tiles on the roof of a house. they
are also arranged from the fore-part backwards; by which the animals are
enabled the more conveniently to cut their way through the air. their
bones are tubular or hollow, and extremely light compared with those of
terrestrial animals. this greatly facilitates their rising from the
earth, whilst their heads, being comparatively small, their bills shaped
like a wedge, their bodies slender, sharp below, and round above,—all
these present a union of conditions, favourable, in the last degree, to
cutting their way through the aërial element to which they are
considered as more peculiarly to belong. with all these conditions,
however, birds could not fly without wings. these, therefore, are the
instruments by which they have the power of rapid locomotion, and are
constructed in such a manner as to be capable of great expansion when
struck in a downward direction. if we except, in this action, the slight
hollow which takes place on the under-side, they become almost two
planes. in order that the downward action may be accomplished to the
necessary extent, the muscles which move the wings have been made
exceedingly large; so large, indeed, that, in some instances, they have
been estimated at not less than a sixth of the weight of the whole body.
therefore, when a bird is on the ground and intends to fly, it takes a
leap, and immediately stretching its wings, strikes them out with great
force. by this act these are brought into an oblique direction, being
turned partly upwards and partly horizontally forwards. that part of the
force which has the upward tendency is neutralized by the weight of the
bird, whilst the horizontal force serves to carry it forward. the stroke
being completed, it moves upon its wings, which, being contracted and
having their edges turned upwards, obviate, in a great measure, the
resistance of the air. when it is sufficiently elevated, it makes a
second stroke downwards, and the impulse of the air again moves it
forward. these successive strokes may be regarded as so many leaps taken
in the air. when the bird desires to direct its course to the right or
the left, it strikes strongly with the opposite wing, which impels it to
the proper side. in the motions of the animal, too, the tail takes a
prominent part, and acts like the rudder of a ship, except that, instead
of sideways, it moves upwards and downwards. if the bird wishes to rise,
it raises its tail; and if to fall, it depresses it; and, whilst in a
horizontal position, it keeps it steady. there are few who have not
observed a pigeon or a crow preserve, for some time, a horizontal flight
without any apparent motion of the wings. this is accomplished by the
bird having already acquired sufficient velocity, and its wings being
parallel to the horizon, meeting with but small resistance from the
atmosphere. if it begins to fall, it can easily steer itself upward by
means of its tail, till the motion it had acquired is nearly spent, when
it must be renewed by a few more strokes of the wings. on alighting, a
bird expands its wings and tail fully against the air, as a ship, in
tacking round, backs her sails, in order that they may meet with all the
resistance possible.
. in the construction of the eyes of birds, there is a peculiarity
necessary to their condition. as they pass a great portion of their
lives among thickets and hedges, they are provided for the defence of
their eyes from external injuries, as well as from the effects of the
light, when flying in opposition to the rays of the sun, with a
nictating or winking membrane, which can, at pleasure, be drawn over the
whole eye like a curtain. this covering is neither opaque nor wholly
pellucid, but is somewhat transparent; and it is by its means that the
eagle is said to be able to gaze at the sun. "in birds," says a writer
on this subject, "we find that the sight is much more piercing,
extensive, and exact, than in the other orders of animals. the eye is
much larger in proportion to the bulk of the head, than in any of these.
this is a superiority conferred upon them not without a corresponding
utility: it seems even indispensable to their safety and subsistence.
were this organ in birds dull, or in the least degree opaque, they would
be in danger, from the rapidity of their motion, of striking against
various objects in their flight. in this case their celerity, instead of
being an advantage, would become an evil, and their flight be restrained
by the danger resulting from it. indeed we may consider the velocity
with which an animal moves, as a sure indication of the perfection of
its vision. among the quadrupeds, the sloth has its sight greatly
limited; whilst the hawk, as it hovers in the air, can espy a lark
sitting on a clod, perhaps at twenty times the distance at which a man
or a dog could perceive it."
. amongst the many peculiarities in the construction of birds, not
the least is the mode by which their respiration is accomplished. this
is effected by means of air-vessels, which extend throughout the body,
and adhere to the under-surface of the bones. these, by their motion,
force the air through the true lungs, which are very small, and placed
in the uppermost part of the chest, and closely braced down to the back
and ribs. the lungs, which are never expanded by air, are destined to
the sole purpose of oxidizing the blood. in the experiments made by mr.
john hunter, to discover the use of this general diffusion of air
through the bodies of birds, he found that it prevents their respiration
from being stopped or interrupted by the rapidity of their motion
through a resisting medium. it is well known that, in proportion to
celerity of motion, the air becomes resistive; and were it possible for
a man to move with the swiftness of a swallow, as he is not provided
with an internal construction similar to that of birds, the resistance
of the air would soon suffocate him.
. birds are distributed over every part of the globe, being found in
the coldest as well as the hottest regions, although some species are
restricted to particular countries, whilst others are widely dispersed.
at certain seasons of the year, many of them change their abodes, and
migrate to climates better adapted to their temperaments or modes of
life, for a time, than those which they leave. many of the birds of
britain, directed by an unerring instinct, take their departure from the
island before the commencement of winter, and proceed to the more
congenial warmth of africa, to return with the next spring. the causes
assigned by naturalists for this peculiarity are, either a deficiency of
food, or the want of a secure asylum for the incubation and nourishment
of their young. their migrations are generally performed in large
companies, and, in the day, they follow a leader, which is occasionally
changed. during the night, many of the tribes send forth a continual
cry, to keep themselves together; although one would think that the
noise which must accompany their flight would be sufficient for that
purpose. the flight of birds across the mediterranean was noticed three
thousand years ago, as we find it said in the book of numbers, in the
scriptures, that "there went forth a wind from the lord, and brought
quails from the sea, and let them fall upon the camp, and a day's
journey round about it, to the height of two cubits above the earth."
. if the beauty of birds were not a recommendation to their being
universally admired, their general liveliness, gaiety, and song would
endear them to mankind. it appears, however, from accurate observations
founded upon experiment, that the notes peculiar to different kinds of
birds are altogether acquired, and that they are not innate, any more
than language is to man. the attempt of a nestling bird to sing has been
compared to the endeavour of a child to talk. the first attempts do not
seem to possess the slightest rudiments of the future song; but, as the
bird grows older and becomes stronger, it is easily perceived to be
aiming at acquiring the art of giving utterance to song. whilst the
scholar is thus endeavouring to form his notes, when he is once sure of
a passage, he usually raises his tone, but drops it again when he finds
himself unequal to the voluntary task he has undertaken. "many
well-authenticated facts," says an ingenious writer, "seem decisively to
prove that birds have no innate notes, but that, like mankind, the
language of those to whose care they have been committed at their birth,
will be their language in after-life." it would appear, however,
somewhat unaccountable why, in a wild state, they adhere so steadily to
the song of their own species only, when the notes of so many others are
to be heard around them. this is said to arise from the attention paid
by the nestling bird to the instructions of its own parent only,
generally disregarding the notes of all the rest. persons; however, who
have an accurate ear, and who have given their attention to the songs of
birds, can frequently distinguish some which have their notes mixed with
those of another species; but this is in general so trifling, that it
can hardly be considered as more than the mere varieties of provincial
dialects.
. in reference to the food of birds, we find that it varies, as it
does in quadrupeds, according to the species. some are altogether
carnivorous; others, as so many of the web-footed tribes, subsist on
fish; others, again, on insects and worms; and others on grain and
fruit. the extraordinary powers of the gizzard of the granivorous
tribes, in comminuting their food so as to prepare it for digestion,
would, were they not supported by incontrovertible facts founded on
experiment, appear to exceed all credibility. tin tubes, full of grain,
have been forced into the stomachs of turkeys, and in twenty-four hours
have been found broken, compressed, and distorted into every shape.
twelve small lancets, very sharp both at the point and edges, have been
fixed in a ball of lead, covered with a case of paper, and given to a
turkey-cock, and left in its stomach for eight hours. after that time
the stomach was opened, when nothing appeared except the naked ball. the
twelve lancets were broken to pieces, whilst the stomach remained
perfectly sound and entire. from these facts, it is concluded that the
stones, so frequently found in the stomachs of the feathered tribes, are
highly useful in assisting the gastric juices to grind down the grain
and other hard substances which constitute their food. the stones,
themselves, being also ground down and separated by the powerful action
of the gizzard, are mixed with the food, and, no doubt, contribute very
greatly to the health, as well as to the nourishment of the animals.
. all birds being oviparous, the eggs which they produce after the
process of incubation, or sitting for a certain length of time, are, in
the various species, different both in figure and colour, as well as in
point of number. they contain the elements of the future young, for the
perfecting of which in the incubation a bubble of air is always placed
at the large end, between the shell and the inside skin. it is supposed
that from the heat communicated by the sitting bird to this confined
air, its spring is increased beyond its natural tenor, and, at the same
time, its parts are put into motion by the gentle rarefaction. by this
means, pressure and motion are communicated to the parts of the egg,
which, in some inscrutable way, gradually promote the formation and
growth of the young, till the time comes for its escaping from the
shell. to preserve an egg perfectly fresh, and even fit for incubation,
for  or  months after it has been laid, réaumur, the french
naturalist, has shown that it is only necessary to stop up its pores
with a slight coating of varnish or mutton-suet.
. birds however, do not lay eggs before they have some place to put
them; accordingly, they construct nests for themselves with astonishing
art. as builders, they exhibit a degree of architectural skill,
niceness, and propriety, that would seem even to mock the imitative
talents of man, however greatly these are marked by his own high
intelligence and ingenuity.
"each circumstance
most artfully contrived to favour warmth.
here read the reason of the vaulted roof;
how providence compensates, ever kind,
the enormous disproportion that subsists
between the mother and the numerous brood
which her small bulk must quicken into life."
in building their nests, the male and female generally assist each
other, and they contrive to make the outside of their tenement bear as
great a resemblance as possible to the surrounding foliage or branches;
so that it cannot very easily be discovered even by those who are in
search of it. this art of nidification is one of the most wonderful
contrivances which the wide field of nature can show, and which, of
itself, ought to be sufficient to compel mankind to the belief, that
they and every other part of the creation, are constantly under the
protecting power of a superintending being, whose benign dispensations
seem as exhaustless as they are unlimited.
[illustration]
chicken cutlets (an entree).
. ingredients.— chickens; seasoning to taste of salt, white pepper,
and cayenne;  blades of pounded mace, egg and bread crumbs, clarified
butter,  strip of lemon-rind,  carrots,  onion,  tablespoonfuls of
mushroom ketchup, thickening of butter and flour,  egg.
mode.—remove the breast and leg bones of the chickens; cut the meat
into neat pieces after having skinned it, and season the cutlets with
pepper, salt, pounded mace, and cayenne. put the bones, trimmings, &c.,
into a stewpan with  pint of water, adding carrots, onions, and
lemon-peel in the above proportion; stew gently for -/ hour, and
strain the gravy. thicken it with butter and flour, add the ketchup and
 egg well beaten; stir it over the fire, and bring it to the
simmering-point, but do not allow it to boil. in the mean time, egg and
bread-crumb the cutlets, and give them a few drops of clarified butter;
fry them a delicate brown, occasionally turning them; arrange them
pyramidically on the dish, and pour over them the sauce.
time.— minutes to fry the cutlets. average cost, s. each.
sufficient for an entrée.
seasonable from april to july.
 fowls as food.—brillat savarin, pre-eminent in gastronomic
 taste, says that he believes the whole gallinaceous family was
 made to enrich our larders and furnish our tables; for, from the
 quail to the turkey, he avers their flesh is a light aliment,
 full of flavour, and fitted equally well for the invalid as for
 the man of robust health. the fine flavour, however, which
 nature has given to all birds coming under the definition of
 poultry, man has not been satisfied with, and has used many
 means—such as keeping them in solitude and darkness, and
 forcing them to eat—to give them an unnatural state of fatness
 or fat. this fat, thus artificially produced, is doubtless
 delicious, and the taste and succulence of the boiled and
 roasted bird draw forth the praise of the guests around the
 table. well-fattened and tender, a fowl is to the cook what the
 canvas is to the painter; for do we not see it served boiled,
 roasted, fried, fricasseed, hashed, hot, cold, whole,
 dismembered, boned, broiled, stuffed, on dishes, and in
 pies,—always handy and ever acceptable?
 the common or domestic fowl.—from time immemorial, the common
 or domestic fowl has been domesticated in england, and is
 supposed to be originally the offspring of some wild species
 which abound in the forests of india. it is divided into a
 variety of breeds, but the most esteemed are, the poland or
 black, the dorking, the bantam, the game fowl, and the malay or
 chittagong. the common, or barn-door fowl, is one of the most
 delicate of the varieties; and at dorking, in surrey, the breed
 is brought to great perfection. till they are four months old,
 the term chicken is applied to the young female; after that age
 they are called pullets, till they begin to lay, when they are
 called hens. the english counties most productive in poultry are
 surrey, sussex, norfolk, herts, devon, and somerset.
french chicken cutlets (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast or boiled fowl, fried
bread, clarified butter, the yolk of  egg, bread crumbs, /
teaspoonful of finely-minced lemon-peel; salt, cayenne, and mace to
taste. for sauce,— oz. of butter,  minced shalots, a few slices of
carrot, a small bunch of savoury herbs, including parsley,  blade of
pounded mace,  peppercorns, / pint of gravy.
mode.—cut the fowls into as many nice cutlets as possible; take a
corresponding number of sippets about the same size, all cut one shape;
fry them a pale brown, put them before the fire, then dip the cutlets
into clarified butter mixed with the yolk of an egg, cover with bread
crumbs seasoned in the above proportion, with lemon-peel, mace, salt,
and cayenne; fry them for about  minutes, put each piece on one of the
sippets, pile them high in the dish, and serve with the following sauce,
which should be made ready for the cutlets. put the butter into a
stewpan, add the shalots, carrot, herbs, mace, and peppercorns; fry for
 minutes or rather longer; pour in / pint of good gravy, made of the
chicken bones, stew gently for  minutes, strain it, and serve.
time.— minutes to fry the cutlets;  minutes to make the gravy.
average cost, exclusive of the chicken, d.
seasonable from april to july.
 eggs for hatching.—eggs intended for hatching should be removed
 as soon as laid, and placed in bran in a dry, cool place. choose
 those that are near of a size; and, as a rule, avoid those that
 are equally thick at both ends,—such, probably, contain a
 double yolk, and will come to no good. eggs intended for
 hatching should never be stored longer than a month, as much
 less the better. nine eggs may be placed under a bantam hen, and
 as many as fifteen under a dorking. the odd number is considered
 preferable, as more easily packed. it will be as well to mark
 the eggs you give the hen to sit on, so that you may know if she
 lays any more: if she does, you must remove them; for, if
 hatched at all, they would be too late for the brood. if during
 incubation an egg should be broken, remove it, and take out the
 remainder, and cleanse them in luke-warm water, or it is
 probable the sticky nature of the contents of the broken egg
 will make the others cling to the hen's feathers; and they, too,
 may be fractured.
 hens sitting.—some hens are very capricious as regards sitting;
 they will make a great fuss, and keep pining for the nest, and,
 when they are permitted to take to it, they will sit just long
 enough to addle the eggs, and then they're off again. the safest
 way to guard against such annoyance, is to supply the hen with
 some hard-boiled eggs; if she sits on them a reasonable time,
 and seems steadily inclined, like a good matron, you may then
 give her proper eggs, and let her set about the business in
 earnest.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast chicken or fowl; to every
/ lb. of meat allow  oz. of ham,  tablespoonfuls of cream, 
tablespoonfuls of veal gravy, / teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel;
cayenne, salt, and pepper to taste;  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 
oz. of butter rolled in flour; puff paste.
mode.—mince very small the white meat from a cold roast fowl, after
removing all the skin; weigh it, and to every / lb. of meat allow the
above proportion of minced ham. put these into a stewpan with the
remaining ingredients, stir over the fire for  minutes or / hour,
taking care that the mixture does not burn. roll out some puff paste
about / inch in thickness; line the patty-pans with this, put upon
each a small piece of bread, and cover with another layer of paste;
brush over with the yolk of an egg, and bake in a brisk oven for about
/ hour. when done, cut a round piece out of the top, and, with a small
spoon, take out the bread (be particular in not breaking the outside
border of the crust), and fill the patties with the mixture.
time.—/ hour to prepare the meat; not quite / hour to bake the
crust.
seasonable at any time.
 hatching.—sometimes the chick within the shell is unable to
 break away from its prison; for the white of the egg will
 occasionally harden in the air to the consistence of joiners'
 clue, when the poor chick is in a terrible fix. an able writer
 says, "assistance in hatching must not be rendered prematurely,
 and thence unnecessarily, but only in the case of the chick
 being plainly unable to release itself; then, indeed, an
 addition may probably be made to the brood, as great numbers are
 always lost in this way. the chick makes a circular fracture at
 the big end of the egg, and a section of about one-third of the
 length of the shell being separated, delivers the prisoner,
 provided there is no obstruction from adhesion of the body to
 the membrane which lines the shell. between the body of the
 chick and the membrane of the shell there exists a viscous
 fluid, the white of the egg thickened with the intense heat of
 incubation, until it becomes a positive glue. when this happens,
 the feathers stick fast to the shell, and the chicks remain
 confined, and must perish, if not released."
 the method of assistance to be rendered to chicks which have a
 difficulty in releasing themselves from the shell, is to take
 the egg in the hand, and dipping the finger or a piece of linen
 rag in warm water, to apply it to the fastened parts until they
 are loosened by the gluey substance becoming dissolved and
 separated from the feathers. the chick, then, being returned to
 the nest, will extricate itself,—a mode generally to be
 observed, since, if violence were used, it would prove fatal.
 nevertheless, breaking the shell may sometimes be necessary; and
 separating with the fingers, as gently as may be, the membrane
 from the feathers, which are still to be moistened as mentioned
 above, to facilitate the operation. the points of small scissors
 may be useful, and when there is much resistance, as also
 apparent pain to the bird, the process must be conducted in the
 gentlest manner, and the shell separated into a number of small
 pieces. the signs of a need of assistance are the egg being
 partly pecked and chipped, and the cluck discontinuing its
 efforts for five of six hours. weakness from cold may disable
 the chicken from commencing the operation of pecking the shell,
 which must then be artificially performed with a circular
 fracture, such as is made by the bird itself.
. ingredients.— small fowls or  large one, white pepper and salt
to taste, / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, / teaspoonful of pounded
mace, forcemeat no. , a few slices of ham,  hard-boiled eggs, /
pint of water, puff crust.
mode.—skin and cut up the fowls into joints, and put the neck, leg,
and backbones in a stewpan, with a little water, an onion, a bunch of
savoury herbs, and a blade of mace; let these stew for about an hour,
and, when done, strain off the liquor: this is for gravy. put a layer of
fowl at the bottom of a pie-dish, then a layer of ham, then one of
forcemeat and hard-boiled eggs cut in rings; between the layers put a
seasoning of pounded mace, nutmeg, pepper, and salt. proceed in this
manner until the dish is full, and pour in about / pint of water;
border the edge of the dish with puff crust, put on the cover, ornament
the top, and glaze it by brushing over it the yolk of an egg. bake from
-/ to -/ hour, should the pie be very large, and, when done, pour
in, at the top, the gravy made from the bones. if to be eaten cold, and
wished particularly nice, the joints of the fowls should be boned, and
placed in the dish with alternate layers of forcemeat; sausage-meat may
also be substituted for the forcemeat, and is now very much used. when
the chickens are boned, and mixed with sausage-meat, the pie will take
about  hours to bake. it should be covered with a piece of paper when
about half-done, to prevent the paste from being dried up or scorched.
time.—for a pie with unboned meat, -/ to -/ hour; with boned
meat and sausage or forcemeat, -/ to  hours.
average cost, with  fowls, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 the young chicks.—the chicks that are hatched first should be
 taken from underneath the hen, lest she might think her task at
 an end, and leave the remaining eggs to spoil. as soon as the
 young birds are taken from the mother, they must be placed in a
 basket lined with soft wool, flannel, or hay, and stood in the
 sunlight if it be summer time, or by the fire if the weather be
 cold. it is a common practice to cram young chicks with food as
 soon as they are born. this is quite unnecessary. they will, so
 long as they are kept warm, come to no harm if they take no food
 for twenty-four hours following their birth. should the whole of
 the brood not be hatched by that time, those that are born may
 be fed with bread soaked in milk, and the yolk of a hard-boiled
 egg.
potted chicken or fowl (a luncheon or breakfast dish).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast chicken; to every lb. of
meat allow / lb. of fresh butter, salt and cayenne to taste, 
teaspoonful of pounded mace, / small nutmeg.
mode.—strip the meat from the bones of cold roast fowl; when it is
freed from gristle and skin, weigh it, and, to every lb. of meat, allow
the above proportion of butter, seasoning, and spices. cut the meat
into small pieces, pound it well with the fresh butter, sprinkle in the
spices gradually, and keep pounding until reduced to a perfectly smooth
paste. put it into potting-pots for use, and cover it with clarified
butter, about / inch in thickness, and, if to be kept for some time,
tie over a bladder:  or  slices of ham, minced and pounded with the
above ingredients, will be found an improvement. it should be kept in a
dry place.
seasonable at any time.
 feeding and cooping the chicks.—when all the chicks are
 hatched, they should be placed along with the mother under a
 coop in a warm dry spot. if two hens happen to have their broods
 at the same time, their respective chicks should be carefully
 kept separate; as, if they get mixed, and so go under the wrong
 coop, the hens will probably maim and destroy those who have
 mistaken their dwelling. after being kept snug beneath the coop
 for a week (the coop should be placed under cover at nightfall),
 the chicks may be turned loose for an hour or so in the warmest
 part of the day. they should be gradually weaned from the soaked
 bread and chopped egg, instead of which grits or boiled barley
 should be given; in  or  days their stomachs will be strong
 enough to receive bruised barley, and at the end of  weeks, if
 your chicks be healthy, they will be able to take care of
 themselves. it will be well, however, to keep your eye on them a
 week or so longer, as the elder chickens may drive them from
 their food. great care should be taken that the very young
 chicks do not run about the wet ground or on damp grass, as this
 is the most prominent and fatal cause of disease. while under
 the coop with their mother, a shallow pan or plate of water
 should be supplied to the chicks, as in a deeper vessel they are
 liable to drench themselves and take cold, or possibly to get
 drowned.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast or boiled chicken, 
lettuces, a little endive,  cucumber, a few slices of boiled beetroot,
salad-dressing no. .
mode.—trim neatly the remains of the chicken; wash, dry, and slice
the lettuces, and place in the middle of a dish; put the pieces of fowl
on the top, and pour the salad-dressing over them. garnish the edge of
the salad with hard-boiled eggs cut in rings, sliced cucumber, and
boiled beetroot cut in slices. instead of cutting the eggs in rings, the
yolks may be rubbed through a hair sieve, and the whites chopped very
finely, and arranged on the salad in small bunches, yellow and white
alternately. this should not be made long before it is wanted for table.
average cost, exclusive of the cold chicken, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 age and flavour of chickens.—it has been the opinion of the
 medical faculty of all ages and all countries, that the flesh of
 the young chicken is the must delicate and easy to digest of all
 animal food. it is less alkalescent than the flesh of any other
 animal, and its entire freedom from any irritating quality
 renders it a fit dish for the ailing, or those whose stomachs
 are naturally weak. in no animal, however, does age work such a
 change, in regard to the quality of its flesh, as it does in
 domestic fowls. in their infancy, cocks and hens are equally
 tender and toothsome; but as time overtakes them it is the cock
 whose flesh toughens first. a year-old cock, indeed, is fit for
 little else than to be converted into soup, while a hen at the
 same age, although sufficiently substantial, is not callous to
 the insinuations of a carving-knife. as regards capons, however,
 the rule respecting age does not hold good. there is scarcely to
 be found a more delicious animal than a well-fed, well-dressed
 capon. age does not dry up his juices; indeed, like wine, he
 seems but to mellow. at three years old, even, he is as tender
 as a chick, with the additional advantage of his proper chicken
 flavour being fully developed. the above remarks, however,
 concerning the capon, only apply to such as are naturally fed,
 and not crammed. the latter process may produce a
 handsome-looking bird, and it may weigh enough to satisfy the
 whim or avarice of its stuffer; but, when before the fire, it
 will reveal the cruel treatment to which it has been subjected,
 and will weep a drippingpan-ful of fat tears. you will never
 find heart enough to place such a grief-worn guest at the head
 of your table. it should be borne in mind as a rule, that
 small-boned and short-legged poultry are likely to excel the
 contrary sort in delicacy of colour, flavour, and fineness of
 flesh.
hashed duck (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast duck, rather more than 
pint of weak stock or water,  onion,  oz. of butter, thickening of
butter and flour, salt and cayenne to taste, / teaspoonful of minced
lemon-peel,  dessertspoonful of lemon-juice, / glass of port wine.
mode.—cut the duck into nice joints, and put the trimmings into a
stewpan; slice and fry the onion in a little butter; add these to the
trimmings, pour in the above proportion of weak stock or water, and stew
gently for  hour. strain the liquor, thicken it with butter and flour,
season with salt and cayenne, and add the remaining ingredients; boil it
up and skim well; lay in the pieces of duck, and let them get thoroughly
hot through by the side of the fire, but do not allow them to boil: they
should soak in the gravy for about / hour. garnish with sippets of
toasted bread. the hash may be made richer by using a stronger and more
highly-flavoured gravy; a little spice or pounded mace may also be
added, when their flavour is liked.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the cold duck, d.
seasonable from november to february; ducklings from may to august.
 the duck.—this bird belongs to the order of natatores, or
 swimmers; the most familiar tribes of which are ducks, swans,
 geese, auks, penguins, petrels, pelicans, guillemots, gulls, and
 terns. they mostly live in the water, feeding on fish, worms,
 and aquatic plants. they are generally polygamous, and make
 their nests among reeds, or in moist places. the flesh of many
 of the species is eatable, but that of some is extremely rank
 and oily. the duck is a native of britain, but is found on the
 margins of most of the european lakes. it is excessively greedy,
 and by no means a nice feeder. it requires a mixture of
 vegetable and animal food; but aquatic insects, corn, and
 vegetables, are its proper food. its flesh, however, is savoury,
 being not so gross as that of the goose, and of easier
 digestion. in the green-pea season it is usually found on an
 english table; but, according to ude, "november is its proper
 season, when it is plump and fat."
. ingredients.— large duck, pepper and salt to taste, good beef
gravy,  onions sliced,  sage-leaves, a few leaves of lemon thyme,
thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—after having emptied and singed the duck, season it inside with
pepper and salt, and truss it. roast it before a clear fire for about 
minutes, and let it acquire a nice brown colour. put it into a stewpan
with sufficient well-seasoned beef gravy to cover it; slice and fry the
onions, and add these, with the sage-leaves and lemon thyme, both of
which should be finely minced, to the stock. simmer gently until the
duck is tender; strain, skim, and thicken the gravy with a little butter
and flour; boil it up, pour over the duck, and serve. when in season,
about, -/ pint of young green peas, boiled separately, and put in the
ragoűt, very much improve this dish.
time.— minutes to roast the duck;  minutes to stew it.
average cost, from s. d. to s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to february; ducklings from april to august.
[illustration: buenos ayres ducks.]
 the buenos ayres duck.—the buenos ayres duck is of east-indian
 birth, and is chiefly valuable as an ornament; for we suppose
 one would as soon think of picking a chinese teal for luncheon,
 or a gold fish for breakfast, as to consign the handsome buenos
 ayres to the spit. the prevailing colour of this bird is black,
 with a metallic lustre, and a gleaming of blue steel about its
 breast and wings.
 varieties of ducks.—naturalists count nearly a hundred
 different species of ducks; and there is no doubt that the
 intending keeper of these harmless and profitable birds may
 easily take his choice from amongst twenty different sorts.
 there is, however, so little difference in the various members
 of the family, either as regards hardiness, laying, or hatching,
 that the most incompetent fancier or breeder may indulge his
 taste without danger of making a bad bargain. in connection with
 their value for table, light-coloured ducks are always of milder
 flavour than those that are dark-coloured, the white aylesbury's
 being general favourites. ducks reared exclusively on vegetable
 diet will have a whiter and more delicate flesh than those
 allowed to feed on animal offal; while the flesh of birds
 fattened on the latter food, will be firmer than that of those
 which have only partaken of food of a vegetable nature.
. ingredients.—a couple of ducks; sage-and-onion stuffing no. ; a
little flour.
choosing and trussing.—choose ducks with plump bellies, and with
thick and yellowish feet. they should be trussed with the feet on, which
should be scalded, and the skin peeled off, and then turned up close to
the legs. run a skewer through the middle of each leg, after having
drawn them as close as possible to the body, to plump up the breast,
passing the same quite through the body. cut off the heads and necks,
and the pinions at the first joint; bring these close to the sides,
twist the feet round, and truss them at the back of the bird. after the
duck is stuffed, both ends should be secured with string, so as to keep
in the seasoning.
[illustration: roast duck.]
mode.—to insure ducks being tender, never dress them the same day
they are killed; and if the weather permits, they should hang a day or
two. make a stuffing of sage and onion sufficient for one duck, and
leave the other unseasoned, as the flavour is not liked by everybody.
put them down to a brisk clear fire, and keep them well basted the whole
of the time they are cooking. a few minutes before serving, dredge them
lightly with flour, to make them froth and look plump; and when the
steam draws towards the fire, send them to table hot and quickly, with a
good brown gravy poured round, but not over the ducks, and a little
of the same in a tureen. when in season, green peas should invariably
accompany this dish.
time.—full-grown ducks from / to  hour; ducklings from  to 
minutes.
average cost, from s. d. to s. d. each.
sufficient.—a. couple of ducks for  or  persons.
seasonable.—ducklings from april to august; ducks from november to
february.
note.—ducklings are trussed and roasted in the same manner, and
served with the same sauces and accompaniments. when in season, serve
apple sauce.
[illustration: rouen ducks.]
 the rouen duck.—the rouen, or rhone duck, is a large and
 handsome variety, of french extraction. the plumage of the rouen
 duck is somewhat sombre; its flesh is also much darker, and,
 though of higher flavour, not near so delicate as that of our
 own aylesbury. it is with this latter breed that the rouen duck
 is generally mated; and the result is said to be increase of
 size and strength. in normandy and brittany these ducks, as well
 as other sorts, greatly abound; and the "duck-liver pâtés" are
 there almost as popular as the pâté de foie gras of strasburg.
 in order to bring the livers of the wretched duck to the
 fashionable and unnatural size, the same diabolical cruelty is
 resorted to as in the case of the strasburg goose. the poor
 birds are nailed by the feet to a board placed close to a
 fire, and, in that position, plentifully supplied with food and
 water. in a few days, the carcase is reduced to a mere shadow,
 while the liver has grown monstrously. we would rather abstain
 from the acquaintance of a man who ate pâté de foie gras,
 knowing its component parts.
 duck's eggs.—the ancient notion that ducks whose beaks have a
 tendency to curve upwards, are better layers than those whose
 beaks do not thus point, is, we need hardly say, simply absurd:
 all ducks are good layers, if they are carefully fed and tended.
 ducks generally lay at night, or early in the morning. while
 they are in perfect health, they will do this; and one of the
 surest signs of indisposition, among birds of this class, is
 irregularity in laying. the eggs laid will approach nearly the
 colour of the layer,—light-coloured ducks laying white eggs,
 and brown ducks greenish-blue eggs; dark-coloured birds laying
 the largest eggs. one time of day the notion was prevalent that
 a duck would hatch no other eggs than her own; and although this
 is not true, it will be, nevertheless, as well to match the
 duck's own eggs as closely as possible; for we have known
 instances wherein the duck has turned out of the nest and
 destroyed eggs differing from her own in size and colour.
 ducks.—the mallard, or wild duck, from which is derived the
 domestic species, is prevalent throughout europe, asia, and
 america. the mallard's most remarkable characteristic is one
 which sets at defiance the speculations of the most profound
 ornithologist. the female bird is extremely plain, but the
 male's plumage is a splendour of greens and browns, and browns
 and blues. in the spring, however, the plumage of the male
 begins to fade, and in two months, every vestige of his finery
 has departed, and he is not to be distinguished from his
 soberly-garbed wife. then the greens, and the blues, and the
 browns begin to bud out again, and by october he is once more a
 gorgeous drake. it is to be regretted that domestication has
 seriously deteriorated the moral character of the duck. in a
 wild state, he is a faithful husband, desiring but one wife, and
 devoting himself to her; but no sooner is he domesticated than
 he becomes polygamous, and makes nothing of owning ten or a
 dozen wives at a time. as regards the females, they are much
 more solicitous for the welfare of their progeny in a wild state
 than a tame. should a tame duck's duckling get into mortal
 trouble, its mother will just signify her sorrow by an extra
 "quack," or so, and a flapping of her wings; but touch a wild
 duck's little one if you dare! she will buffet you with her
 broad wings, and dash boldly at your face with her stout beak.
 if you search for her nest amongst the long grass, she will try
 no end of manoeuvres to lure you from it, her favourite ruse
 being to pretend lameness, to delude you into the notion that
 you have only to pursue her vigorously, and her capture is
 certain; so you persevere for half a mile or so, and then she is
 up and away, leaving you to find your way back to the nest if
 you can. among the ancients, opinion was at variance respecting
 the wholesomeness and digestibility of goose flesh, but
 concerning the excellence of the duck all parties were agreed;
 indeed, they not only assigned to duck-meat the palm for
 exquisite flavour and delicacy, they even attributed to it
 medicinal powers of the highest order. not only the roman
 medical writers of the time make mention of it, but likewise the
 philosophers of the period. plutarch assures us that cato
 preserved his whole household in health, in a season when plague
 and disease were rife, through dieting them on roast duck.
stewed duck and peas (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast duck,  oz. of butter,  or
 slices of lean ham or bacon,  tablespoonful of flour,  pints of thin
gravy, , or a small bunch of green onions,  sprigs of parsley, 
cloves,  pint of young green peas, cayenne and salt to taste, 
teaspoonful of pounded sugar.
mode.—put the butter into a stewpan; cut up the duck into joints, lay
them in with the slices of lean ham or bacon; make it brown, then dredge
in a tablespoonful of flour, and stir this well in before adding the
gravy. put in the onion, parsley, cloves, and gravy, and when it has
simmered for / hour, add a pint of young green peas, and stew gently
for about / hour. season with cayenne, salt, and sugar; take out the
duck, place it round the dish, and the peas in the middle.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold duck, s.
seasonable from june to august.
 ducks hatching.—concerning incubation by ducks, a practised
 writer says, "the duck requires a secret and safe place, rather
 than any attendance, and will, at nature's call, cover her eggs
 and seek her food. on hatching, there is not often a necessity
 for taking away any of the brood; and, having hatched, let the
 mother retain her young ones upon the nest her own time. on her
 moving with her brood, let a coop be prepared upon the short
 grass, if the weather be fine, and under shelter, if otherwise."
 cooping and feeding ducklings.—brood ducks should be cooped at
 some distance from any other. a wide and flat dish of water, to
 be often renewed, should stand just outside the coop, and
 barley, or any other meal, be the first food of the ducklings.
 it will be needful, if it be wet weather, to clip their tails,
 lest these draggle, and so weaken the bird. the period of the
 duck's confinement to the coop will depend on the weather, and
 on the strength of the ducklings. a fortnight is usually the
 extent of time necessary, and they may even be sometimes
 permitted to enjoy the luxury of a swim at the end of a week.
 they should not, however, be allowed to stay too long in the
 water at first; for they will then become ill, their feathers
 get rough, and looseness of the bowels ensue. in the latter
 case, let them be closely cooped for a few days, and bean-meal
 or oatmeal be mixed with their ordinary food.
[illustration: aylesbury ducks.]
 the aylesbury duck.—the white aylesbury duck is, and
 deservedly, a universal favourite. its snowy plumage and
 comfortable comportment make it a credit to the poultry-yard,
 while its broad and deep breast, and its ample back, convey the
 assurance that your satisfaction will not cease at its death. in
 parts of buckinghamshire, this member of the duck family is bred
 on an extensive scale; not on plains and commons, however, as
 might be naturally imagined, but in the abodes of the cottagers.
 round the walls of the living-rooms, and of the bedroom even,
 are fixed rows of wooden boxes, lined with hay; and it is the
 business of the wife and children to nurse and comfort the
 feathered lodgers, to feed the little ducklings, and to take the
 old ones out for an airing. sometimes the "stock" ducks are the
 cottager's own property, but it more frequently happens that
 they are intrusted to his care by a wholesale breeder, who pays
 him so much per score for all ducklings properly raised. to be
 perfect, the aylesbury duck should be plump, pure white, with
 yellow feet, and a flesh-coloured beak.
stewed duck and peas (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast duck, / pint of good
gravy, cayenne and salt to taste, / teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel,
 teaspoonful of pounded sugar,  oz, of butter rolled in flour, -/
pint of green peas.
mode.—cut up the duck into joints, lay it in the gravy, and add a
seasoning of cayenne, salt, and minced lemon-peel; let tins gradually
warm through, but not boil. throw the peas into boiling water slightly
salted, and boil them rapidly until tender. drain them, stir in the
pounded sugar, and the butter rolled in flour; shake them over the fire
for two or three minutes, and serve in the centre of the dish, with the
duck laid round.
time.— minutes to boil the peas, when they are full grown.
average cost, exclusive of the cold duck, d.
seasonable from june to august.
 fattening ducks.—many duck-keepers give their birds nothing in
 the shape of food, letting them wander about and pick up a
 living for themselves; and they will seem to get fat even upon
 this precarious feeding. unless, however, ducks are supplied
 with, besides chance food, a liberal feed of solid corn, or
 grain, morning and evening, their flesh will become flabby and
 insipid. the simple way to fatten ducks is to let them have as
 much, substantial food as they will eat, bruised oats and
 pea-meal being the standard fattening food for them. no cramming
 is required, as with the turkey and some other poultry: they
 will cram themselves to the very verge of suffocation. at the
 same time, plenty of exercise and clean water should be at their
 service.
 american mode of capturing ducks.—on the american rivers, the
 modes of capture are various. sometimes half a dozen artificial
 birds are fastened to a little raft, and which is so weighted
 that the sham birds squat naturally on the water. this is quite
 sufficient to attract the notice of a passing flock, who descend
 to cultivate the acquaintance of the isolated few when the
 concealed hunter, with his fowling-piece, scatters a deadly
 leaden shower amongst them. in the winter, when the water is
 covered with rubble ice, the fowler of the delaware paints his
 canoe entirely white, lies flat in the bottom of it, and floats
 with the broken ice; from which the aquatic inhabitants fail to
 distinguish it. so floats the canoe till he within it
 understands, by the quacking, and fluttering, and whirring of
 wings, that he is in the midst of a flock, when he is up in a
 moment with the murderous piece, and dying quacks and
 lamentations rend the still air.
[illustration: bow-bill ducks.]
 bow-bill ducks, &c.—every one knows how awkward are the
 anatidae, waddling along on their unelastic webbed toes, and
 their short legs, which, being placed considerably backward,
 make the fore part of the body preponderate. some, however, are
 formed more adapted to terrestrial habits than others, and
 notably amongst these may be named dendronessa sponsa, the
 summer duck of america. this beautiful bird rears her young in
 the holes of trees, generally overhanging the water. when strong
 enough, the young scramble to the mouth of the hole, launch into
 the air with their little wings and feet spread out, and drop
 into their favourite element. whenever their birthplace is at
 some distance from the water, the mother carries them to it, one
 by one, in her bill, holding them so as not to injure their yet
 tender frame. on several occasions, however, when the hole was
 , , or more yards from a piece of water, audubon observed
 that the mother suffered the young to fall on the grass and
 dried leaves beneath the tree, and afterwards led them directly
 to the nearest edge of the next pool or creek. there are some
 curious varieties of the domestic duck, which only appear
 interesting from their singularity, for there does not seem to
 be anything of use or value in the unusual characteristics which
 distinguish them; thus, the bow-bill duck, as shown in the
 engraving, called by some writers the hook-bill, is remarkable
 for the peculiarly strange distortion of its beak, and the tuft
 on the top of its head. the penguin duck, again, waddles in an
 upright position, like the penguin, on account of the unnatural
 situation of its legs. these odd peculiarities add nothing of
 value to the various breeds, and may be set down as only the
 result of accidental malformation, transmitted from generation
 to generation.
stewed duck and turnips (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast duck, / pint of good
gravy,  shalots, a few slices of carrot, a small bunch of savoury
herbs,  blade of pounded mace,  lb. of turnips, weighed after being
peeled,  oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—cut up the duck into joints, fry the shalots, carrots, and
herbs, and put them, with the duck, into the gravy; add the pounded
mace, and stew gently for  minutes or / hour. cut about  lb. of
turnips, weighed after being peeled, into /-inch squares, put the
butter into a stewpan, and stew them till quite tender, which will be in
about / hour, or rather more; season with pepper and salt, and serve
in the centre of the dish, with the duck, &c. laid round.
time.—rather more than / hour to stew the turnips.
average cost, exclusive of the cold duck, s.
seasonable from november to february.
 the wild duck.—in many parts of england the wild duck is to be
 found, especially in those desolate fenny parts where water
 abounds. in lincolnshire they are plentiful, and are annually
 taken in the decoys, which consist of ponds situate in the
 marshes, and surrounded with wood or reeds to prevent the birds
 which frequent them from, being disturbed. in these the birds
 sleep during the day; and as soon as evening sets in, the decoy
 rises, and the wild fowl feed during the night. now is the time
 for the decoy ducks to entrap the others. from the ponds
 diverge, in different directions, certain canals, at the end of
 which funnel nets are placed; along these the decoy ducks,
 trained for the purpose, lead the others in search of food.
 after they have got a certain length, a decoy-man appears, and
 drives them further on, until they are finally taken in the
 nets. it is from these decoys, in lincolnshire, that the london
 market is mostly supplied. the chinese have a singular mode of
 catching these ducks. a person wades in the water up to the
 chin, and, having his head covered with an empty calabash,
 approaches the place where the ducks are. as the birds have no
 suspicion of the nature of the object which is concealed under
 the calabash, they suffer its approach, and allow it to move at
 will among their flock. the man, accordingly, walks about in the
 midst of his game, and, whenever he pleases, pulls them by the
 legs under the water, and fixes them to his belt, until he has
 secured as many as he requires, and then moves off as he went
 amongst them, without exciting the slightest suspicion of the
 trick he has been playing them. this singular mode of
 duck-hunting is also practised on the ganges, the earthen
 vessels of the hindoos being used instead of calabashes. these
 vessels, being those in which the inhabitants boil their rice,
 are considered, after once being used, as defiled, and are
 accordingly thrown into the river. the duck-takers, finding them
 suitable for their purpose, put them on their heads; and as the
 ducks, from seeing them constantly floating down the stream, are
 familiar with their appearance, they regard them as objects from
 which no danger is to be expected.
[illustration: call-ducks.]
 duck-snares in the lincolnshire fens.—the following interesting
 account of how duck-snaring used to be managed in the
 lincolnshire fens, was published some years ago, in a work
 entitled the "feathered tribes."—"in the lakes to which they
 resorted, their favourite haunts were observed, and in the most
 sequestered part of a haunt, a pipe or ditch was cut across the
 entrance, decreasing gradually in width from the entrance to the
 further end, which was not more than two feet wide. the ditch
 was of a circular form, but did not bend much for the first ten
 yards. the banks of the lake on each side of the ditch were kept
 clear of weeds and close herbage, in order that the ducks might
 get on them to sit and dress themselves. along the ditch, poles
 were driven into the ground close to the edge on each side, and
 the tops were bent over across the ditch and tied together. the
 poles then bent forward at the entrance to the ditch, and formed
 an arch, the top of which was tea feet distant from the surface
 of the water; the arch was made to decrease in height as the
 ditch decreased in width, so that the remote end was not more
 than eighteen inches in height. the poles were placed about six
 feet from each other, and connected by poles laid lengthwise
 across the arch, and tied together. over the whole was thrown a
 net, which was made fast to a reed fence at the entrance and
 nine or ten yards up the ditch, and afterwards strongly pegged
 to the ground. at the end of the ditch furthest from the
 entrance, was fixed what was called a tunnel-net, of about four
 yards in length, of a round form, and kept open by a number of
 hoops about eighteen inches in diameter, placed at a small
 distance from each other to keep it distended. supposing the
 circular bend of the ditch to be to the right, when one stands
 with his back to the lake, then on the left-hand side, a number
 of reed fences were constructed, called shootings, for the
 purpose of screening the decoy-man from observation, and, in
 such a manner, that the fowl in the decoy would not be alarmed
 while he was driving those that were in the pipe. these
 shootings, which were ten in number, were about four yards in
 length and about six feet high. from the end of the last
 shooting a person could not see the lake, owing to the bend of
 the ditch; and there was then no further occasion for shelter.
 were it not for these shootings, the fowl that remained about
 the mouth of the ditch would have been alarmed, if the person
 driving the fowl already under the net should have been exposed,
 and would have become so shy as entirely to forsake the place."
 the decoy man, dog, and ducks.—"the first thing the decoy-man
 did, on approaching the ditch, was to take a piece of lighted
 peat or turf, and to hold it near his mouth, to prevent the
 birds from smelling him. he was attended by a dog trained to
 render him assistance. he walked very silently about halfway up
 the shootings, where a small piece of wood was thrust through
 the reed fence, which made an aperture just large enough to
 enable him to see if there were any fowl within; if not, he
 walked to see if any were about the entrance to the ditch. if
 there were, he stopped, made a motion to his dog, and gave him a
 piece of cheese to eat, when the dog went directly to a hole
 through the reed fence, and the birds immediately flew off the
 back into the water. the dog returned along the bank between the
 reed fences, and came out to his master at another hole. the man
 then gave the dog something more to encourage him, and the dog
 repeated his rounds, till the birds were attracted by his
 motions, and followed him into the mouth of the ditch—an
 operation which was called 'working them.' the man now retreated
 further back, working the dog at different holes, until the
 ducks were sufficiently under the net. he then commanded his dog
 to lie down under the fence, and going himself forward to the
 end of the ditch next the lake, he took off his hat, and gave it
 a wave between the shootings. all the birds that were under the
 net could then see him, but none that were in the lake could.
 the former flew forward, and the man then ran to the next
 shooting, and waved his hat, and so on, driving them along until
 they came into the tunnel-net, into which they crept. when they
 were all in, the man gave the net a twist, so as to prevent them
 getting back. he then took the net off from the end of the
 ditch, and taking out, one by one, the ducks that were in it,
 dislocated their necks."
[illustration: boiled fowl.]
. ingredients.—a pair of fowls; water.
choosing and trussing.—in choosing fowls for boiling, it should be
borne in mind that those that are not black-legged are generally much
whiter when dressed. pick, draw, singe, wash, and truss them in the
following manner, without the livers in the wings; and, in drawing, be
careful not to break the gall-bladder:—cut off the neck, leaving
sufficient skin to skewer back. cut the feet off to the first joint,
tuck the stumps into a slit made on each side of the belly, twist the
wings over the back of the fowl, and secure the top of the leg and the
bottom of the wing together by running a skewer through them and the
body. the other side must be done in the same manner. should the fowl be
very large and old, draw the sinews of the legs before tucking them in.
make a slit in the apron of the fowl, large enough to admit the parson's
nose, and tie a string on the tops of the legs to keep them in their
proper place.
mode.—when, they are firmly trussed, put them into a stewpan with
plenty of hot water; bring it to boil, and carefully remove all the scum
as it rises. simmer very gently until the fowl is tender, and bear in
mind that the slower it boils, the plumper and whiter will the fowl be.
many cooks wrap them in a floured cloth to preserve the colour, and to
prevent the scum from clinging to them; in this case, a few slices of
lemon should be placed on the breasts; over these a sheet of buttered
paper, and then the cloth; cooking them in this manner renders the flesh
very white. boiled ham, bacon, boiled tongue, or pickled pork, are the
usual accompaniments to boiled fowls, and they may be served with
béchamel, white sauce, parsley and butter, oyster, lemon, liver, celery,
or mushroom sauce. a little should be poured over the fowls, after the
skewers are removed, and the remainder sent in a tureen to table.
time.—large fowl,  hour; moderate-sized one, / hour; chicken, from
 minutes to / hour.
average cost, in full season, s. the pair.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year, but scarce in early spring.
[illustration: game-fowls.]
 the game fowl.—respecting the period at which this well-known
 member of the gallus family became domesticated, history is
 silent. there is little doubt, however, that, like the dog, it
 has been attached to mankind ever since mankind were attached to
 civilization. although the social position of this bird is, at
 the present time, highly respectable, it is nothing to what it
 was when rome was mistress of the world. writing at that period,
 pliny says, respecting the domestic cock, "the gait of the cock
 is proud and commanding; he walks with head erect and elevated
 crest; alone, of all birds, he habitually looks up to the sky,
 raising, at the same time, his curved and scythe-formed tail,
 and inspiring terror in the lion himself, that most intrepid of
 animals.——they regulate the conduct of our magistrates, and
 open or close to them their own houses. they prescribe rest or
 movement to the roman fasces: they command or prohibit battles.
 in a word, they lord it over the masters of the world." as well
 among the ancient greeks as the romans, was the cock regarded
 with respect, and even awe. the former people practised
 divinations by means of this bird. supposing there to be a doubt
 in the camp as to the fittest day to fight a battle, the letter
 of every day in the week would be placed face downwards, and a
 grain of corn placed on each; then the sacred cock would be let
 loose, and, according to the letters he pecked his corn from, so
 would the battle-time be regulated. on one momentous occasion,
 however, a person inimical to priestly interest officiously
 examined the grain, and found that those lying on the letters
 not wanted were made of wax, and the birds, preferring the true
 grain, left these untouched. it is needless to add that, after
 this, divination through the medium of cocks and grain fell out
 of fashion. whether or no the learned fowl above alluded to were
 of the "game" breed, is unknown; but that the birds were bred
 for the inhuman sport of fighting many hundred years before the
 christian era, there can be no doubt. themistocles, the athenian
 king, who flourished more than two thousand years ago, took
 advantage of the sight of a pitched battle between two cocks to
 harangue his soldiers on courage. "observe," said he, "with what
 intrepid valour they fight, inspired by no other motive than
 lore of victory; whereas you have to contend for your religion
 and your liberty, for your wives and children, and for the tombs
 of your ancestors." and to this day his courage has not
 degenerated. he still preserves his bold and elegant gait, his
 sparkling eye, while his wedge-shaped beak and cruel spurs are
 ever ready to support his defiant crow. it is no wonder that the
 breed is not plentiful—first, on account of the few eggs laid
 by the hen; and, secondly, from the incurable pugnacity of the
 chicks. half fledged broods may be found blind as bats from
 fighting, and only waiting for the least glimmer of sight to be
 at it again. without doubt, the flesh of game fowls is every way
 superior to that of every chicken of the family.
. ingredients.—a large fowl, seasoning, to taste, of pepper and
salt,  handfuls of button mushrooms,  slice of lean ham, / pint of
thickened gravy,  teaspoonful of lemon-juice, / teaspoonful of
pounded sugar.
mode.—cut the fowl into quarters, roast it until three-parts done,
and keep it well basted whilst at the fire. take the fowl up, broil it
for a few minutes over a clear fire, and season it with pepper and salt.
have ready some mushroom sauce made in the following manner. put the
mushrooms into a stewpan with a small piece of butter, the ham, a
seasoning of pepper and salt, and the gravy; simmer these gently for /
hour, add the lemon-juice and sugar, dish the fowl, and pour the sauce
round them.
time.—to roast the fowl,  minutes; to broil it,  to  minutes.
average cost, in full season, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—in full season from may to january.
[illustration: black bantams.]
 the bantam.—no one will dispute that for beauty, animation,
 plumage, and courage the bantam is entitled to rank next to the
 game fowl. as its name undoubtedly implies, the bird is of
 asiatic origin. the choicest sorts are the buff-coloured, and
 those that are entirely black. a year-old bantam cock of pure
 breed will not weigh more than sixteen ounces. despite its small
 size, however, it is marvellously bold, especially in defence of
 its progeny. a friend of the writer's, residing at kensington,
 possessed a pair of thorough-bred bantams, that were allowed the
 range of a yard where a fierce bull-terrier was kennelled. the
 hen had chicks; and, when about three weeks old, one of them
 strayed into the dog-kennel. the grim beast within took no
 notice of the tiny fledgling; but, when the anxious mother
 ventured in to fetch out the truant, with a growl the dog woke,
 and nearly snapped her asunder in his great jaws. the cock bird
 saw the tragic fate of its partner; but, nothing daunted, flew
 at the dog with a fierce cry, and pecked savagely at its face.
 the odds, however, were too great; and, when the terrier had
 sufficiently recovered from the astonishment caused by the
 sudden and unexpected attack, he seized the audacious bantam,
 and shook him to death; and, in five minutes, the devoted couple
 were entombed in pincher's capacious maw.
. ingredients.— fowl, mutton broth,  onions,  small blades of
pounded mace, pepper and salt to taste, / pint of rice, parsley and
butter.
mode.—truss the fowl as for boiling, and put it into a stewpan with
sufficient clear well-skimmed mutton broth to cover it; add the onion,
mace, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; stew very gently for about 
hour, should the fowl be large, and about / hour before it is ready
put in the rice, which should be well washed and soaked. when the latter
is tender, strain it from the liquor, and put it on a sieve reversed to
dry before the fire, and, in the mean time, keep the fowl hot. dish it,
put the rice round as a border, pour a little parsley and butter over
the fowl, and the remainder send to table in a tureen.
time.—a large fowl,  hour.
average cost, in full season, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year, but scarce in early spring.
[illustration: dorkings.]
 the dorking.—this bird takes its name from that of a town in
 surrey, where the breed is to be found in greater numbers, and
 certainly in greater perfection, than elsewhere. it is generally
 believed that this particular branch of poultry was found in the
 town above mentioned as long ago as the roman era. the dorking's
 chief characteristic is that he has five claws on each foot; the
 extra claw, however, is never of sufficient length to encumber
 the foot, or to cause it to "drag" its nest, or scratch out the
 eggs. the colour of the true dorking is pure white; long in the
 body, short in the legs, and a prolific layer. thirty years ago,
 there was much controversy respecting the origin of the dorking.
 the men of sussex declared that the bird belonged to them, and
 brought birds indigenous to their weald, and possessing all the
 dorking fine points and peculiarities, in proof of the
 declaration. others inclined to the belief that the poland bird
 was the father of the dorking, and not without at least a show
 of reason, as the former bird much resembles the latter in
 shape; and, despite its sombre hue, it is well known that the
 poland cock will occasionally beget thorough white stock from
 white english hens. the commotion has, however, long ago
 subsided, and dorking still retains its fair reputation for
 fowl.
. ingredients.— fowl,  oz. of butter,  onions sliced,  pint of
white veal gravy,  tablespoonful of curry-powder,  tablespoonful of
flour,  apple,  tablespoonfuls of cream,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice.
mode.—put the butter into a stewpan, with the onions sliced, the fowl
cut into small joints, and the apple peeled, cored, and minced. fry of a
pale brown, add the stock, and stew gently for  minutes; rub down the
curry-powder and flour with a little of the gravy, quite smoothly, and
stir this to the other ingredients; simmer for rather more than /
hour, and just before serving, add the above proportion of hot cream and
lemon-juice. serve with boiled rice, which may either be heaped lightly
on a dish by itself, or put round the curry as a border.
time.— minutes.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in the winter.
note.—this curry may be made of cold chicken, but undressed meat will
be found far superior.
 the poland.—this bird, a native of holland, is a great
 favourite with fowl-keepers, especially those who have on eye to
 profit rather than to amusement. those varieties known as the
 "silver spangled" and the "gold spangled" are handsome enough to
 please the most fastidious; but the common black breed, with the
 bushy crown of white feathers, is but a plain bird. the chief
 value of the common poland lies in the great number of eggs they
 produce; indeed, in many parts, they are as well known as
 "everlasting layers" as by their proper name. however, the
 experienced breeder would take good care to send the eggs of his
 everlasting layers to market, and not use them for home
 consumption, as, although they may be as large as those laid by
 other hens, the amount of nutriment contained in them is not
 nearly so great. mr. mowbray once kept an account of the number
 of eggs produced by this prolific bird, with the following
 result:—from the th of october to the th of the following
 september five hens laid  eggs; the average weight of each
 egg was one ounce five drachms, and the total weight of the
 whole, exclusive of the shells, -/ pounds. taking the weight
 of the birds at the fair average of five pounds each, we thus
 see them producing within a year double their weight of egg
 alone; and, supposing every egg to contain a chick, and allowing
 the chick to, grow, in less than eighteen months from the laying
 of the first egg, two thousand five hundred pounds of
 chicken-meat would be the result. the poland is easily fattened,
 and its flesh is generally considered juicier and of richer
 flavour than most others.
[illustration: spangled polands.]
curried fowl or chicken (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowls,  large onions, 
apple,  oz. of butter,  dessertspoonful of curry-powder,  teaspoonful
of flour, / pint of gravy,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice.
mode.—slice the onions, peel, core, and chop the apple, and cut the
fowl into neat joints; fry these in the butter of a nice brown; then add
the curry-powder, flour, and gravy, and stew for about  minutes. put
in the lemon-juice, and serve with boiled rice, either placed in a ridge
round the dish or separately. two or three shallots or a little garlic
may be added, if approved.
time.—altogether / hour. av. cost, exclusive of the cold fowl,
d.
seasonable in the winter.
[illustration: cochin-chinas.]
 the cochin-china.—about fifteen years ago, the arrival of this
 distinguished asiatic created in england as great a sensation as
 might be expected from the landing of an invading host. the
 first pair that ever made their appearance here were natives of
 shanghai, and were presented to the queen, who exhibited them at
 the dublin poultry-show of . then began the "cochin"
 furor. as soon as it was discovered, despite the most
 strenuous endeavours to keep the tremendous secret, that a
 certain dealer was possessed of a pair of these birds,
 straightway the avenues to that dealer's shop were blocked by
 broughams, and chariots, and hack cabs, until the shy poulterer
 had been tempted by a sufficiently high sum to part with his
 treasure. bank-notes were exchanged for cochin chicks, and
 cochin eggs were in as great demand as though they had been laid
 by the fabled golden goose. the reign of the cochin china was,
 however, of inconsiderable duration. the bird that, in ,
 would fetch thirty guineas, is now counted but ordinary
 chicken-meat, and its price is regulated according to its weight
 when ready for the spit. as for the precious buff eggs, against
 which, one time of day, guineas were weighed,—send for
 sixpenn'orth at the cheesemonger's, and you will get at least
 five; which is just as it should be. for elegance of shape or
 quality of flesh, the cochin cannot for a moment stand
 comparison with our handsome dunghill; neither can the
 indescribable mixture of growling and braying, peculiar to the
 former, vie with the musical trumpeting of our own morning
 herald: yet our poultry-breeders have been immense gainers by
 the introduction of the ungainly celestial, inasmuch as new
 blood has been infused into the english chicken family. of this
 incalculable advantage we may be sure; while, as to the cochin's
 defects, they are certain to be lost in the process of "cross
 and cross" breeding.
. ingredients.—a pair of fowls,  pint of béchamel, no, , a few
bunches of boiled brocoli or cauliflower.
mode.—truss and boil the fowls by recipe no. ; make a pint of
béchamel sauce by recipe no. ; pour some of this over the fowls, and
the remainder send to table in a tureen. garnish the dish with bunches
of boiled cauliflowers or brocoli, and serve very hot. the sauce should
be made sufficiently thick to adhere to the fowls; that for the tureen
should be thinned by adding a spoonful or two of stock.
time.—from / to  hour, according to size.
average cost, in full season, s. a pair.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year, but scarce in early spring.
 space for fowls.—we are no advocates for converting the
 domestic fowl into a cage-bird. we have known amateur
 fowl-keepers—worthy souls, who would butter the very barley
 they gave their pets, if they thought they would the more enjoy
 it—coop up a male bird and three or four hens in an ordinary
 egg-chest placed on its side, and with the front closely barred
 with iron hooping! this system will not do. every animal, from
 man himself to the guinea-pig, must have what is vulgarly, but
 truly, known as "elbow-room;" and it must be self-evident how
 emphatically this rule applies to winged animals. it may be
 urged, in the case of domestic fowls, that from constant disuse,
 and from clipping and plucking, and other sorts of maltreatment,
 their wings can hardly be regarded as instruments of flight; we
 maintain, however, that you may pluck a fowl's wing-joints as
 bare as a pumpkin, but you will not erase from his memory that
 he is a fowl, and that his proper sphere is the open air. if he
 likewise reflects that he is an ill-used fowl—a prison-bird—he
 will then come to the conclusion, that there is not the least
 use, under such circumstances, for his existence; and you must
 admit that the decision is only logical and natural.
boiled fowl, with oysters.
(excellent.)
. ingredients.— young fowl,  dozen oysters, the yolks of  eggs,
/ pint of cream.
mode.—truss a young fowl as for boiling; fill the inside with oysters
which have been bearded and washed in their own liquor; secure the ends
of the fowl, put it into a jar, and plunge the jar into a saucepan of
boiling water. keep it boiling for -/ hour, or rather longer; then
take the gravy that has flowed from the oysters and fowl, of which there
will be a good quantity; stir in the cream and yolks of eggs, add a few
oysters scalded in their liquor; let the sauce get quite hot, but do
not allow it to boil; pour some of it over the fowl, and the remainder
send to table in a tureen. a blade of pounded mace added to the sauce,
with the cream and eggs, will be found an improvement.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to april.
 the fowl-house.—in building a fowl-house, take care that it be,
 if possible, built against a wall or fence that faces the
 south, and thus insure its inmates against many cold winds,
 driving rains, and sleets they will otherwise suffer. let the
 floor of the house slope half an inch to the foot from back to
 front, so as to insure drainage; let it also be close, hard, and
 perfectly smooth; so that it may be cleanly swept out. a capital
 plan is to mix a few bushels of chalk and dry earth, spread it
 over the floor, and pay a paviour's labourer a trifle to hammer
 it level with his rammer. the fowl-house should be seven feet
 high, and furnished with perches at least two feet apart. the
 perches must be level, and not one above the other, or
 unpleasant consequences may ensue to the undermost row. the
 perches should be ledged (not fixed—just dropped into sockets,
 that they may be easily taken out and cleaned) not lower than
 five feet from the ground, convenient slips of wood being driven
 into the wall, to render the ascent as easy as possible. the
 front of the fowl-house should be latticed, taking care that the
 interstices be not wide enough even to tempt a chick to crawl
 through. nesting-boxes, containing soft hay, and fitted against
 the walls, so as to be easily reached by the perch-ladder,
 should be supplied. it will be as well to keep by you a few
 portable doors, so that you may hang one before the entrance to
 a nesting-box, when the hen goes in to sit. this will prevent
 other hens from intruding, a habit to which some are much
 addicted.
fricasseed fowl or chicken (an entree).
. ingredients.— small fowls or  large one,  oz. of butter, a
bunch of parsley and green onions,  clove,  blades of mace,  shalot,
 bay-leaf, salt and white pepper to taste, / pint of cream, the yolks
of  eggs.
mode.—choose a couple of fat plump chickens, and, after drawing,
singeing, and washing them, skin, and carve them into joints; blanch
these in boiling water for  or  minutes; take them out, and immerse
them in cold water to render them white. put the trimmings, with the
necks and legs, into a stewpan; add the parsley, onions, clove, mace,
shalot, bay-leaf, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; pour to these the
water that the chickens were blanched in, and simmer gently for rather
more than  hour. have ready another stewpan; put in the joints of fowl,
with the above proportion of butter; dredge them with flour, let them
get hot, but do not brown them much; then moisten the fricassee with the
gravy made from the trimmings, &c., and stew very gently for / hour.
lift the fowl into another stewpan, skim the sauce, reduce it quickly
over the fire, by letting it boil fast, and strain it over them. add the
cream, and a seasoning of pounded mace and cayenne; let it boil up, and
when ready to serve, stir to it the well-beaten yolks of  eggs: these
should not be put in till the last moment, and the sauce should be made
hot, but must not boil, or it will instantly curdle. a few
button-mushrooms stewed with the fowl are by many persons considered an
improvement.
time.— hour to make the gravy, / hour to simmer the fowl.
average cost, s. the pair.
sufficient.— large fowl for one entrée.
seasonable at any time.
 stocking the fowl-house.—take care that the birds with which
 you stock your house are young. the surest indications of old
 age are fading of the comb and gills from brilliant red to a
 dingy brick-colour, general paleness of plumage, brittleness of
 the feathers, length and size of the claws, and the scales of
 the legs and feet assuming a ragged and corny appearance. your
 cock and hens should be as near two years old as possible. hens
 will lay at a year old, but the eggs are always insignificant in
 size, and the layers giddy and unsteady sitters. the hen-bird is
 in her prime for breeding at three years old, and will continue
 so, under favourable circumstances, for two years longer; after
 which she will decline. crowing hens, and those that have large
 combs, are generally looked on with mistrust; but this is mere
 silliness and superstition—though it is possible that a spruce
 young cock would as much object to a spouse with such peculiar
 addictions, as a young fellow of our own species would to a
 damsel who whistled and who wore whiskers. fowls with yellow
 legs should be avoided; they are generally of a tender
 constitution, loose-fleshed, and of indifferent flavour.
fricasseed fowl (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl,  strip of
lemon-peel,  blade of pounded mace,  bunch of savoury herbs,  onion,
popper and salt to taste,  pint of water,  teaspoonful of flour, /
pint of cream, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—carve the fowls into nice joints; make gravy of the trimmings
and legs, by stewing them with the lemon-peel, mace, herbs, onion,
seasoning, and water, until reduced to / pint; then strain, and put in
the fowl. warm it through, and thicken with a teaspoonful of flour; stir
the yolks of the eggs into the cream; add these to the sauce, let it get
thoroughly hot, but do not allow it to boil, or it will curdle.
time.— hour to make the gravy, / hour to warm the fowl.
average cost, exclusive of the cold chicken, d.
seasonable at any time.
 characteristics of health and power.—the chief characteristics
 of health in a fowl are brightness and dryness of eye and
 nostrils, the comb and wattles firm and ruddy, the feathers
 elastic and glossy. the most useful cock is generally the
 greatest tyrant, who struts among his hens despotically, with
 his head erect and his eyes ever watchful. there is likely to be
 handsomer and stronger chicks in a house where a bold,
 active—even savage—bird reigns, than where the lord of the
 hen-house is a weak, meek creature, who bears the abuse and
 peckings of his wives without a remonstrance. i much prefer
 dark-coloured cock-birds to those of light plumage. a cock, to
 be handsome, should be of middling size; his bill should be
 short, comb bright-red, wattles large, breast broad, and wings
 strong. his head should be rather small than otherwise, his legs
 short and sturdy, and his spurs well-formed; his feathers should
 be short and close, and the more frequently and heartily he
 crows, the better father he is likely to become. the common
 error of choosing hens above the ordinary stature of their
 respective varieties should be avoided, as the best
 breeding-hens are those of medium size.
fried fowls (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowls, vinegar, salt and
cayenne to taste,  or  minced shalots. for the batter,—/ lb. of
flour, / pint of hot water,  oz. of butter, the whites of  eggs.
mode.—cut the fowl into nice joints; steep them for an hour in a
little vinegar, with salt, cayenne, and minced shalots. make the batter
by mixing the flour and water smoothly together; melt in it the butter,
and add the whites of egg beaten to a froth; take out the pieces of
fowl, dip them in the batter, and fry, in boiling lard, a nice brown.
pile them high in the dish, and garnish with fried parsley or rolled
bacon. when approved, a sauce or gravy may be served with them.
time.— minutes to fry the fowl.
average cost, exclusive of the cold fowl, d.
seasonable at any time.
 chanticleer and his companions.—on bringing the male and female
 birds together for the first time, it will be necessary to watch
 the former closely, as it is a very common occurrence with him
 to conceive a sudden and violent dislike for one or more of his
 wives, and not allow the obnoxious ones to approach within some
 distance of the others; indeed, i know many cases where the
 capricious tyrant has set upon the innocent cause of his
 resentment and killed her outright. in all such cases, the hen
 objected to should be removed and replaced by another. if the
 cock should, by any accident, get killed, considerable delicacy
 is required in introducing a new one. the hens may mope, and
 refuse to associate with their new husband, clustering in
 corners, and making odious comparisons between him and the
 departed; or the cock may have his own peculiar notions as to
 what a wife should be, and be by no means satisfied with those
 you have provided him. the plan is, to keep him by himself
 nearly the whole day, supplying him plentifully with
 exhilarating food, then to turn him loose among the hens, and to
 continue this practice, allowing him more of the society of his
 wives each day, until you suffer him to abide with them
 altogether.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl, vinegar, salt and
cayenne to taste,  minced shalots, yolk of egg; to every teacupful of
bread crumbs allow  blade of pounded mace,  teaspoonful of minced
lemon-peel,  saltspoonful of salt, a few grains of cayenne.
mode.—steep the pieces of fowl as in the preceding recipe, then dip
them into the yolk of an egg or clarified butter; sprinkle over bread
crumbs with which have been mixed salt, mace, cayenne, and lemon-peel in
the above proportion. fry a light brown, and serve with or without
gravy, as may be preferred.
time.— minutes to fry the fowl.
average cost, exclusive of the cold fowl, d.
seasonable at any time.
 various modes of fattening fowls.—it would, i think, be a
 difficult matter to find, among the entire fraternity of
 fowl-keepers, a dozen whose mode of fattening "stock" is the
 same. some say that the grand f secret is to give them abundance
 of saccharine food; others say nothing beats heavy corn steeped
 in milk; while another breeder, celebrated in his day, and the
 recipient of a gold medal from a learned society, says, "the
 best method is as follows:-the chickens are to be taken from the
 hen the night after they are hatched, and fed with eggs
 hard-boiled, chopped, and mixed with crumbs of bread, as larks
 and other small birds are fed, for the first fortnight; after
 which give them oatmeal and treacle mixed so as to crumble, of
 which the chickens are very fond, and thrive so fast that, at
 the end of two months, they will be as large as full-grown
 fowls." others there are who insist that nothing beats
 oleaginous diet, and cram their birds with ground oats and suet.
 but, whatever the course of diet favoured, on one point they
 seem agreed; and that is, that, while fattening, the fowls
 should be kept in the dark. supposing the reader to be a
 dealer—a breeder of gross chicken meat for the market (against
 which supposition the chances are , to ), and beset with
 as few scruples as generally trouble the huckster, the advice is
 valuable. "laugh and grow fat" is a good maxim enough; but
 "sleep and grow fat" is, as is well known to folks of porcine
 attributes, a better. the poor birds, immured in their dark
 dungeons, ignorant that there is life and sunshine abroad, tuck
 their heads under their wings and make a long night of it; while
 their digestive organs, having no harder work than to pile up
 fat, have an easy time enough. but, unless we are mistaken, he
 who breeds poultry for his own eating, bargains for a more
 substantial reward than the questionable pleasure of burying his
 carving-knife in chicken grease. tender, delicate, and
 nutritious flesh is the great aim; and these qualities, i can
 affirm without fear of contradiction, were never attained by a
 dungeon-fatted chicken: perpetual gloom and darkness is as
 incompatible with chicken life as it is with human. if you wish
 to be convinced of the absurdity of endeavouring to thwart
 nature's laws, plant a tuft of grass, or a cabbage-plant, in the
 darkest corner of your coal-cellar. the plant or the tuft may
 increase in length and breadth, but its colour will be as wan
 and pale, almost, as would be your own face under the
 circumstances.
. ingredients.— large fowl,  tablespoonfuls of salad oil, 
tablespoonful of flour,  pint of stock no. , or water, about 
mushroom-buttons, salt and pepper to taste,  teaspoonful of powdered
sugar, a very small piece of garlic.
mode.—cut the fowl into  or  pieces; put them with the oil into a
stewpan, and brown them over a moderate fire; dredge in the above
proportion of flour; when that is browned, pour in the stock or water;
let it simmer very slowly for rather more than / hour, and skim off
the fat as it rises to the top; add the mushrooms; season with salt,
pepper, garlic, and sugar; take out the fowl, which arrange
pyramidically on the dish, with the inferior joints at the bottom.
reduce the sauce by boiling it quickly over the fire, keeping it stirred
until sufficiently thick to adhere to the back of a spoon; pour over the
fowl, and serve.
time.—altogether  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 a fowl ŕ la marengo.—the following is the origin of the
 well-known dish poulet ŕ la marengo:—on the evening of the
 battle the first consul was very hungry after the agitation of
 the day, and a fowl was ordered with all expedition. the fowl
 was procured, but there was no butter at hand, and unluckily
 none could be found in the neighbourhood. there was oil in
 abundance, however; and the cook having poured a certain
 quantity into his skillet, put in the fowl, with a clove of
 garlic and other seasoning, with a little white wine, the best
 the country afforded; he then garnished it with mushrooms, and
 served it up hot. this dish proved the second conquest of the
 day, as the first consul found it most agreeable to his palate,
 and expressed his satisfaction. ever since, a fowl ŕ la marengo
 is a favourite dish with all lovers of good cheer.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl,  tablespoonfuls of
béchamel sauce no. ,  tablespoonfuls of white stock no. , the
white of  egg, bread crumbs, clarified butter.
mode.—take the remains of roast fowls, mince the white meat very
small, and put it into a stewpan with the béchamel and stock; stir it
well over the fire, and just let it boil up. pour the mince into a dish,
beat up the white of egg, spread it over, and strew on it a few grated
bread crumbs; pour a very little clarified butter on the whole, and
brown either before the fire or with a salamander. this should be served
in a silver dish, if at hand.
time.— or  minutes to simmer in the sauce.
seasonable at any time.
 the best way to fatten fowls.—the barn-door fowl is in itself a
 complete refutation of the cramming and dungeon policy of
 feeding practised by some. this fowl, which has the common run
 of the farm-yard, living on dairy-scraps and offal from the
 stable, begins to grow fat at threshing-time. he has his fill of
 the finest corn; he has his fill of fresh air and natural
 exercise, and at last he comes smoking to the table,—a dish
 for the gods. in the matter of unnaturally stuffing and
 confining fowls, mowbray is exactly of our opinion. he says:
 "the london chicken-butchers, as they are termed, are said to
 be, of all others, the most expeditious and dexterous feeders,
 putting up a coop of fowls, and making them thoroughly fat
 within the space of a fortnight, using much grease, and that
 perhaps not of the most delicate kind, in the food. in this way
 i have no boasts to make, having always found it necessary to
 allow a considerable number of weeks for the purpose of making
 fowls fat in coops. in the common way this business is often
 badly managed, fowls being huddled together in a small coop,
 tearing each other to pieces, instead of enjoying that repose
 which alone can insure, the wished-for object—irregularly fed
 and cleaned, until they become so stenched and poisoned in their
 own excrement, that their flesh actually smells and tastes when
 smoking upon the table." sussex produces the fattest and largest
 poultry of any county in england, and the fatting process there
 most common is to give them a gruel made of pot-liquor and
 bruised oats, with which are mixed hog's grease, sugar, and
 milk. the fowls are kept very warm, and crammed morning and
 night. they are put into the coop, and kept there two or three
 days before the cramming begins, and then it is continued for a
 fortnight, and the birds are sent to market.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowls,  shalots,  blades
of mace, a faggot of savoury herbs,  or three slices of lean ham, 
pint of stock or water, pepper and salt to taste,  onion, 
dessertspoonful of flour,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, /
teaspoonful of pounded sugar,  oz. of butter.
mode.—cut the fowls up into neat pieces, the same as for a fricassee;
put the trimmings into a stewpan with the shalots, mace, herbs, ham,
onion, and stock (water may be substituted for this). boil it slowly for
 hour, strain the liquor, and put a small piece of butter into a
stewpan; when melted, dredge in sufficient flour to dry up the butter,
and stir it over the fire. put in the strained liquor, boil for a few
minutes, and strain it again over the pieces of fowl. squeeze in the
lemon-juice, add the sugar and a seasoning of pepper and salt, make it
hot, but do not allow it to boil; lay the fowl neatly on the dish, and
garnish with croűtons.
time.—altogether -/ hour. average cost, exclusive of the cold
fowl, d.
seasonable at any time.
 the best fowls to fatten, &c.—the chicks most likely to fatten
 well are those first hatched in the brood, and those with the
 shortest legs. long-legged fowls, as a rule, are by far the most
 difficult to fatten. the most delicate sort are those which are
 put up to fatten as soon as the hen forsakes them; for, as says
 an old writer, "then they will be in fine condition, and full of
 flesh, which flesh is afterwards expended in the exercise of
 foraging for food, and in the increase of stature; and it may be
 a work of some weeks to recover it,—especially with young
 cocks." but whether you take them in hand as chicks, or not till
 they are older, the three prime rules to be observed are, sound
 and various food, warmth, and cleanliness. there is nothing that
 a fatting fowl grows so fastidious about as his water. if water
 any way foul be offered him, he will not drink it, but sulk with
 his food, and pine, and you all the while wondering the reason
 why. keep them separate, allowing to each bird as much space as
 you can spare. spread the ground with sharp sandy gravel; take
 care that they are not disturbed. in addition to their regular
 diet of good corn, make them a cake of ground oats or beans,
 brown sugar, milk, and mutton suet. let the cake lie till it is
 stale, then crumble it, and give each bird a gill-measureful
 morning and evening. no entire grain should be given to fowls
 during the time they are fattening; indeed, the secret of
 success lies in supplying them with the most nutritious food
 without stint, and in such a form that their digestive mills
 shall find no difficulty in grinding it.
[illustration: roast fowl.]
. ingredients.—a pair of fowls; a little flour.
mode.—fowls to be tender should be killed a couple of days before
they are dressed; when the feathers come out easily, then let them be
picked and cooked. in drawing them, be careful not to break the
gall-bag, as, wherever it touches, it would impart a very bitter taste;
the liver and gizzard should also be preserved. truss them in the
following manner:—after having carefully picked them, cut off the head,
and skewer the skin of the neck down over the back. cut off the claws;
dip the legs in boiling water, and scrape them; turn the pinions under,
run a skewer through them and the middle of the legs, which should be
passed through the body to the pinion and leg on the other side, one
skewer securing the limbs on both sides. the liver and gizzard should be
placed in the wings, the liver on one side and the gizzard on the other.
tie the legs together by passing a trussing-needle, threaded with twine,
through the backbone, and secure it on the other side. if trussed like a
capon, the legs are placed more apart. when firmly trussed, singe them
all over; put them down to a bright clear fire, paper the breasts with a
sheet of buttered paper, and keep the fowls well basted. roast them for
/ hour, more or less, according to the size, and  minutes before
serving, remove the paper, dredge the fowls with a little fine flour,
put a piece of butter into the basting-ladle, and as it melts, baste the
fowls with it; when nicely frothed and of a rich colour, serve with good
brown gravy, a little of which should be poured over the fowls, and a
tureen of well-made bread sauce, no. . mushroom, oyster, or egg sauce
are very suitable accompaniments to roast fowl.—chicken is roasted in
the same manner.
time.—a very large fowl, quite  hour, medium-sized one / hour,
chicken / hour, or rather longer.
average cost, in full season, s. a pair; when scarce, s. d. the
pair.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year, but scarce in early spring.
 the diseases of fowls, and how to cure them.—the diseases to
 which gallus domesticus is chiefly liable, are roup, pip,
 scouring, and chip. the first-mentioned is the most common of
 all, and results from cold. the ordinary symptoms,—swollen
 eyes, running at the nostrils, and the purple colour of the
 wattles. part birds so affected from the healthy ones, as, when
 the disease is at its height it is as contagious as glanders
 among horses. wash out the nostrils with warm water, give daily
 a peppercorn inclosed in dough; bathe the eyes and nostrils with
 warm milk and water. if the head is much swollen, bathe with
 warm brandy and water. when the bird is getting well, put half a
 spoonful of sulphur in his drinking-water. some fanciers
 prescribe for this disease half a spoonful of table salt,
 dissolved in half a gill of water, in which rue has been
 steeped; others, pills composed of ground rice and fresh butter:
 but the remedy first mentioned will be found far the best. as
 there is a doubt respecting the wholesomeness of the eggs laid
 by roupy hens, it will be as well to throw them away. the pip is
 a white horny skin growing on the tip of the bird's tongue. it
 should be removed with the point of a penknife, and the place
 rubbed with salt.
fowl and rice croquettes (an entree).
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice,  quart of stock or broth,  oz. of
butter, minced fowl, egg, and bread crumbs.
mode.—put the rice into the above proportion of cold stock or broth,
and let it boil very gently for / hour; then add the butter, and
simmer it till quite dry and soft when cold, make it into balls, hollow
out the inside, and fill with minced fowl made by recipe no. . the
mince should be rather thick. cover over with rice, dip the balls into
egg, sprinkle them with bread crumbs, and fry a nice brown. dish them,
and garnish with fried parsley. oysters, white sauce, or a little cream,
may be stirred into the rice before it cools.
time.—/ hour to boil the rice,  minutes to fry the croquettes.
average cost, exclusive of the fowl, d.
seasonable at any time.
 chip.—if the birds are allowed to puddle about on wet soil, or
 to be much out in the rain, they will get "chip." young chicks
 are especially liable to this complaint. they will sit shivering
 in out-of-the-way corners, perpetually uttering a dolorous
 "chip, chip;" seemingly frozen with cold, though, on handling
 them, they are found to be in high fever. a wholesale breeder
 would take no pains to attempt the cure of fowls so afflicted;
 but they who keep chickens for the pleasure, and not for the
 profit they yield, will be inclined to recover them if possible.
 give them none but warm food, half a peppercorn rolled in a
 morsel of dough every night, and a little nitre in their water.
 above all, keep them warm; a corner in the kitchen fender, for a
 day or two, will do more to effect a cure than the run of a
 druggist's warehouse.
croquettes of fowl (an entree).
. ingredients.— or  shalots,  oz. of butter,  teaspoonful of
flour, white sauce; pepper, salt, and pounded mace to taste; /
teaspoonful of pounded sugar, the remains of cold roast fowls, the yolks
of  eggs, egg, and bread crumbs.
mode.—mince the fowl, carefully removing all skin and bone, and fry
the shalots in the butter; add the minced fowl, dredge in the flour, put
in the pepper, salt, mace, pounded sugar, and sufficient white sauce to
moisten it; stir to it the yolks of  well-beaten eggs, and set it by to
cool. then make the mixture up into balls, egg and bread-crumb them, and
fry a nice brown. they may be served on a border of mashed potatoes,
with gravy or sauce in the centre.
time.— minutes to fry the balls.
seasonable at any time.
 the turn.—what is termed "turrling" with song-birds, is known,
 as regard fowls, as the "turn." its origin is the same in both
 cases,—over-feeing and want of exercise. without a moment's
 warning, a fowl so afflicted will totter and fall from its
 perch, and unless assistance be at hand, speedily give up the
 ghost. the veins of the palate should be opened, and a few drops
 of mixture composed of six parts of sweet nitre and one of
 ammonia, poured down its throat. i have seen ignorant keepers
 plunge a bird, stricken with the "turn," into cold water; but i
 never saw it taken out again alive; and for a good reason: the
 sudden chill has the effect of driving the blood to the
 head,—of aggravating the disease indeed, instead of relieving
 it.
hashed fowl—an entree (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl,  pint of water, 
onion,  or three small carrots,  blade of pounded mace, pepper and
salt to taste,  small bunch of savoury herbs, thickening of butter and
flour, -/ tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup.
mode.—cut off the best joints from the fowl, and the remainder make
into gravy, by adding to the bones and trimmings a pint of water, an
onion sliced and fried of a nice brown, the carrots, mace, seasoning,
and herbs. let these stew gently for -/ hour, strain the liquor, and
thicken with a little flour and butter. lay in the fowl, thoroughly warm
it through, add the ketchup, and garnish with sippets of toasted bread.
time.—altogether -/ hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold fowl, d.
seasonable at any time.
 skin-disease in fowls.—skin-disease is, nine times out of ten,
 caused by the feathers being swarmed by parasites. poor feeding
 will induce this, even if cleanliness be observed;
 uncleanliness, however liberal the bill of fare, will be taken
 as an invitation by the little biting pests, and heartily
 responded to. mix half a teaspoonful of hydro-oxalic acid with
 twelve teaspoonfuls of water,—apply to the itching parts with
 an old shaving-brush.
 obstruction of the crop.—obstruction of the crop is occasioned
 by weakness or greediness. you may know when a bird is so
 afflicted by his crop being distended almost to bursting.
 mowbray tells of a hen of his in this predicament; when the crop
 was opened, a quantity of new beans were discovered in a state
 of vegetation. the crop should be slit from the bottom to the
 top with a sharp pair of scissors, the contents taken out, and
 the slit sewed up again with line white thread.
minced fowl—an entree (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl,  hard-boiled eggs,
salt, cayenne, and pounded mace,  onion,  faggot of savoury herbs, 
tablespoonfuls of cream,  oz. of butter, two teaspoonfuls of flour, /
teaspoonful of finely-minced lemon-peel,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice.
mode.—cut out from the fowl all the white meat, and mince it finely
without any skin or bone; put the bones, skin, and trimmings into a
stewpan with an onion, a bunch of savoury herbs, a blade of mace, and
nearly a pint of water; let this stew for an hour, then strain the
liquor. chop the eggs small; mix them with the fowl; add salt, cayenne,
and pounded mace, put in the gravy and remaining ingredients; let the
whole just boil, and serve with sippets of toasted bread.
time.—rather more than  hour.
average cost, exclusive of the fowl, d.
seasonable at any time.
note.—another way to make this is to mince the fowl, and warm it in
white sauce or béchamel. when dressed like this,  or  poached eggs may
be placed on the top: oysters, or chopped mushrooms, or balls of oyster
forcemeat, may be laid round the dish.
 the moulting season.—during the moulting season beginning
 properly at the end of september, the fowls will require a
 little extra attention. keep them dry and warm, and feed them
 liberally on warm and satisfying food. if in any fowl the moult
 should seem protracted, examine it for broken feather-stumps
 still beaded in the skin: if you find any, extract them
 carefully with a pair of tweezers. if a fowl is hearty and
 strong, six weeks will see him out of his trouble; if he is
 weakly, or should take cold during the time, he will not
 thoroughly recover in less than three months. it is seldom or
 ever that hens will lay during the moult; while the cock, during
 the same period, will give so little of his consideration to the
 frivolities of love, that you may as well, nay, much better,
 keep him by himself till he perfectly recovers. a moulting
 chicken makes but a sorry dish.
hashed fowl, indian fashion (an entree).
.—ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl,  or  sliced
onions,  apple,  oz. of butter, pounded mace, pepper and salt to
taste,  tablespoonful of curry-powder,  tablespoonfuls of vinegar, 
tablespoonful of flour,  teaspoonful of pounded sugar,  pint of gravy.
mode.—cut the onions into slices, mince the apple, and fry these in
the butter; add pounded mace, pepper, salt, curry-powder, vinegar,
flour, and sugar in the above proportions; when the onion is brown, put
it the gravy, which should be previously made from the bones and
trimmings of the fowls, and stew for / hour; add the fowl cut into
nice-sized joints, let it warm through, and when quite tender, serve.
the dish should be garnished with au edging of boiled rice.
time.— hour. average cost, exclusive of the fowl, d.
seasonable at any time.
 the scour or dysentery.—the scour, or dysentery, or diarrhoea,
 is induced variously. a sudden alteration in diet will cause it,
 as will a superabundance of green food. the best remedy is a
 piece of toasted biscuit sopped in ale. if the disease has too
 tight a hold on the bird to be quelled by this, give six drops
 of syrup of white poppies and six drops of castor-oil, mixed
 with a little oatmeal or ground rice. restrict the bird's diet,
 for a few days, to dry food,—crushed beans or oats, stale
 bread-crumbs, &c.
 fowl scollops (cold meat cookery).
 . ingredients.—the remains of cold roast or boiled fowl, /
 pint of béchamel, no. , or white sauce, no.  or .
 mode.—strip off the skin from the fowl; cut the meat into
 thin slices, and warm them in about / pint, or rather more, of
 béchamel, or white sauce. when quite hot, serve, and garnish the
 dish with rolled ham or bacon toasted.
 time.— minute to simmer the slices of fowl.
 seasonable at any time.
[illustration: the feather legged bantam.]
 the feather legged bantam.—since the introduction of the bantam
 into europe, it has ramified into many varieties, none of which
 are destitute of elegance, and some, indeed, remarkable for
 their beauty. all are, or ought to be, of small size, but lively
 and vigorous, exhibiting in their movements both grace and
 stateliness. the variety shown in the engraving is remarkable
 for the tarsi, or beams of the legs, being plumed to the toes,
 with stiff, long feathers, which brush the ground. owing,
 possibly, to the little care taken to preserve this variety from
 admixture, it is now not frequently seen. another variety is
 often red, with a black breast and single dentated comb. the
 tarsi are smooth, and of a dusky blue. when this sort of
 bantam is pure, it yields in courage and spirit to none, and is,
 in fact, a game-fowl in miniature, being as beautiful and
 graceful as it is spirited. a pure white bantam, possessing all
 the qualifications just named, is also bred in the royal aviary
 at windsor.
an indian dish of fowl (an entree).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl,  or  sliced onions,
 tablespoonful of curry-powder, salt to taste.
mode.—divide the fowl into joints; slice and fry the onions in a
little butter, taking care not to burn them; sprinkle over the fowl a
little curry-powder and salt; fry these nicely, pile them high in the
centre of the dish, cover with the onion, and serve with a cut lemon on
a plate. care must be taken that the onions are not greasy: they should
be quite dry, but not burnt.
time.— minutes to fry the onions,  minutes to fry the fowl.
average cost, exclusive of the fowl, d.
seasonable during the winter month.
[illustration: speckled hamburgs.]
 the speckled hamburg.—of the speckled, or spangled hamburg
 which is a favourite breed with many persons, there are two
 varieties,—the golden-speckled and the silver-speckled. the
 general colour of the former is golden, or orange-yellow, each
 feather having a glossy dark brown or black tip, particularly
 remarkable on the hackles of the cock and the wing-coverts, and
 also on the darker feathers of the breast. the female is yellow,
 or orange-brown, the feathers in like manner being margined with
 black. the silver-speckled variety is distinguished by the
 ground-colour of the plumage being of a silver-white, with
 perhaps a tinge of straw-yellow, every leather being margined
 with a semi-lunar mark of glossy black. both of these varieties
 are extremely beautiful, the hens laying freely. first-rate
 birds command a high price.
fowl saute with peas (an entree).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowl,  oz. of butter,
pepper, salt, and pounded mace to taste,  dessertspoonful of flour, /
pint of weak stock,  pint of green peas,  teaspoonful of pounded
sugar.
mode.—cut the fowl into nice pieces; put the butter into a stew-pan;
sautez or fry the fowl a nice brown colour, previously sprinkling it
with pepper, salt, and pounded mace. dredge in the flour, shake the
ingredients well round, then add the stock and peas, and stew till the
latter are tender, which will be in about  minutes; put in the pounded
sugar, and serve, placing the chicken round, and the peas in the middle
of the dish. when liked, mushrooms may be substituted for the peas.
time.—altogether  minutes.
average cost, exclusive of the fowl, d.
seasonable from june to august.
boudin a la reine (an entree).
(m. ude's recipe.)
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast fowls,  pint of béchamel
no. , salt and cayenne to taste, egg and bread crumbs.
mode.—take the breasts and nice white meat from the fowls; cut it
into small dice of an equal size, and throw them into some good
béchamel, made by recipe no. ; season with salt and cayenne, and put
the mixture into a dish to cool. when this preparation is quite cold,
cut it into  equal parts, which should be made into boudins of a long
shape, the size of the dish they are intended to be served on; roll them
in flour, egg and bread-crumb them, and be careful that the ends are
well covered with the crumbs, otherwise they would break in the
frying-pan; fry them a nice colour, put them before the fire to drain
the greasy moisture from them, and serve with the remainder of the
béchamel poured round: this should be thinned with a little stock.
time.— minutes to fry the boudins.
average cost, exclusive of the fowl, s. d.
sufficient for  entrée.
[illustration: sebright bantams.]
 sir john sebright's bantams.—above all bantams is placed, the
 celebrated and beautiful breed called sir john sebright's silver
 bantams. this breed, which sir john brought to perfection after
 years of careful trials, is very small, with un-feathered legs,
 and a rose comb and short hackles. the plumage is gold or
 silver, spangled, every feather being of a golden orange, or of
 a silver white, with a glossy jet-black margin; the cocks have
 the tail folded like that of a hen, with the sickle feathers
 shortened straight, or nearly so, and broader than usual. the
 term hen-cocks is, in consequence, often applied to them; but
 although the sickle feathers are thus modified, no bird
 possesses higher courage, or a more gallant carriage. the
 attitude of the cock is, indeed, singularly proud; and he is
 often seen to bear himself so haughtily, that his head, thrown
 back as if in disdain, nearly touches the two upper
 feathers—sickles they can scarcely be called—of his tail.
 half-bred birds of this kind are not uncommon, but birds of the
 pure breed are not to be obtained without trouble and expense;
 indeed, some time ago, it was almost impossible to procure
 either a fowl or an egg. "the finest," says the writer whom we
 have consulted as to this breed, "we have ever seen, were in sir
 john's poultry-yard, adjacent to turnham-green common, in the
 byroad leading to acton."
. ingredients.—a cold roast fowl, mayonnaise sauce no. ,  or 
young lettuces,  hard-boiled eggs, a few water-cresses, endive.
mode.—cut the fowl into neat joints, lay them in a deep dish, piling
them high in the centre, sauce the fowl with mayonnaise made by recipe
no. , and garnish the dish with young lettuces cut in halves,
water-cresses, endive, and hard-boiled eggs: these may be sliced in
rings, or laid on the dish whole, cutting off at the bottom a piece of
the white, to make the egg stand. all kinds of cold meat and solid fish
may be dressed ŕ la mayonnaise, and make excellent luncheon or supper
dishes. the sauce should not be poured over the fowls until the moment
of serving. should a very large mayonnaise be required, use  fowls
instead of , with an equal proportion of the remaining ingredients.
average cost, with one fowl, s. d.
sufficient for a moderate-sized dish.
seasonable from april to september.
[illustration: black spanish.]
 black spanish.—the real spanish fowl is recognized by its
 uniformly black colour burnished with tints of green; its
 peculiar white face, and the large development of its comb and
 wattle. the hens are excellent layers, and their eggs are of a
 very large size. they are, however, bad nurses; consequently,
 their eggs should be laid in the nest of other varieties to be
 hatched. "in purchasing spanish," says an authority, "blue legs,
 the entire absence of white or coloured feathers in the plumage,
 and a large, white face, with a very large high comb, which
 should be erect in the cock, though pendent in the hens, should
 be insisted on." the flesh of this fowl is esteemed; but, from
 the smallness of its body when compared with that of the
 dorking, it is not placed on an equality with it for the table.
 otherwise, however, they are profitable birds, and their
 handsome carriage, and striking contrast of colour in the comb,
 face, and plumage, are a high recommendation to them as kept
 fowls. for a town fowl, they are perhaps better adapted than any
 other variety.
fowl pillau, based on m. soyer's recipe (an indian dish).
. ingredients.— lb. of rice,  oz. of butter, a fowl,  quarts of
stock or good broth,  cardamum-seeds, / oz. of coriander-seed, /
oz. of cloves, / oz. of allspice, / oz. of mace, / oz. of
cinnamon, / oz. of peppercorns,  onions,  thin slices of bacon, 
hard-boiled eggs.
mode.—well wash  lb. of the best patna rice, put it into a
frying-pan with the butter, which keep moving over a slow fire until the
rice is lightly browned. truss the fowl as for boiling, put it into a
stewpan with the stock or broth; pound the spices and seeds thoroughly
in a mortar, tie them in a piece of muslin, and put them in with the
fowl. let it boil slowly until it is nearly done; then add the rice,
which should stew until quite tender and almost dry; cut the onions into
slices, sprinkle them with flour, and fry, without breaking them, of a
nice brown colour. have ready the slices of bacon curled and grilled,
and the eggs boiled hard. lay the fowl in the form of a pyramid upon a
dish, smother with the rice, garnish with the bacon, fried onions, and
the hard-boiled eggs cut into quarters, and serve very hot. before
taking the rice out, remove the spices.
time.—/ hour to stew the fowl without the rice; / hour with it.
average cost, s. d. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: sultans.]
 the serai ta-ook, or fowls of the sultan.—this fowl is the size
 of our english polands, and is the latest species introduced to
 england. they have a white and flowing plumage, a full-sized,
 compact poland tuft on the head, are muffed, have a full flowing
 tail, short legs well feathered, and five toes upon each foot.
 their comb consists merely of two little points, and their
 wattles are very small: their colour is that of a pure white. in
 january, , they arrived in this country from constantinople;
 and they take their name from sarai, the turkish word for
 sultan's palace, and ta-ook, the turkish for fowl. they are
 thus called the "fowls of the sultan," a name which has the
 twofold advantage of being the nearest to be found to that by
 which they have been known in their own country, and of
 designating the country whence they come. their habits are
 described as being generally brisk and happy-tempered, but not
 so easily kept in as cochin-chinas. they are excellent layers;
 but they are non-sitters and small eaters: their eggs are large
 and white. brahmas or cochins will clear the crop of a grass-run
 long before they will, and, with scattered food, they soon
 satisfy themselves and walk away.
. ingredients.—a fowl, a large bunch of water-cresses, 
tablespoonfuls of vinegar, / pint of gravy.
mode.—truss and roast a fowl by recipe no. , taking care that it
is nicely frothed and brown. wash and dry the water-cresses, pick them
nicely, and arrange them in a flat layer on a dish. sprinkle over a
little salt and the above proportion of vinegar; place over these the
fowl, and pour over it the gravy. a little gravy should be served in a
tureen. when not liked, the vinegar may be omitted.
time.—from / to  hour, according to size.
average cost, in full season, s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
roast fowl, stuffed.
. ingredients.—a large fowl, forcemeat no. , a little flour.
mode.—select a large plump fowl, fill the breast with forcemeat, made
by recipe no. , truss it firmly, the same as for a plain roast fowl,
dredge it with flour, and put it down to a bright fire. roast it for
nearly or quite an hour, should it be very large; remove the skewers,
and serve with a good brown gravy and a tureen of bread sauce.
time.—large fowl, nearly or quite  hour.
average cost, in full season, s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable all the year, but scarce in early spring.
note.—sausage-meat stuffing may be substituted for the above: this is
now a very general mode of serving fowl.
[illustration: pencilled hamburg.]
 pencilled hamburg.—this variety of the hamburg fowl is of two
 colours, golden and silver, and is very minutely marked. the
 hens of both should have the body clearly pencilled across with
 several bars of black, and the hackle in both, sexes should be
 perfectly free from dark marks. the cocks do not exhibit the
 pencillings, but are white or brown in the golden or silver
 birds respectively. their form is compact, and their attitudes
 graceful and sprightly. the hens do not sit, but lay extremely
 well; hence one of their common names, that of dutch every-day
 layers. they are also known in different parts of the country,
 as chitteprats, creoles, or corals, bolton bays and grays, and,
 in some parts of yorkshire, by the wrong name of corsican fowls.
 they are imported in large numbers from holland, but those bred
 in this country are greatly superior in size.
. ingredients.—a set of duck or goose giblets,  lb. of rump-steak,
 onion, / teaspoonful of whole black pepper, a bunch of savoury
herbs, plain crust.
mode.—clean, and put the giblets into a stewpan with an onion, whole
pepper, and a bunch of savoury herbs; add rather more than a pint of
water, and simmer gently for about -/ hour. take them out, let them
cool, and cut them into pieces; line the bottom of a pie-dish with a few
pieces of rump-steak; add a layer of giblets and a few more pieces of
steak; season with pepper and salt, and pour in the gravy (which should
be strained), that the giblets were stewed in; cover with a plain crust,
and bake for rather more than -/ hour in a brisk oven. cover a piece
of paper over the pie, to prevent the crust taking too much colour.
time.—-/ hour to stew the giblets, about  hour to bake the pie.
average cost, exclusive of the giblets, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
 the brent goose.—this is the smallest and most numerous species
 of the geese which visit the british islands. it makes its
 appearance in winter, and ranges over the whole of the coasts
 and estuaries frequented by other migrant geese. mr. selby
 states that a very large body of these birds annually resort to
 the extensive sandy and muddy flats which lie between the
 mainland and holy island, on the northumbrian coast, and which
 are covered by every flow of the tide. this part of the coast
 appears to have been a favourite resort of these birds from time
 immemorial, where they have always received the name of ware
 geese, no doubt from their continually feeding on marine
 vegetables. their flesh is very agreeable.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast goose,  onions,  oz. of
butter,  pint of boiling water,  dessertspoonful of flour, pepper and
salt to taste,  tablespoonful of port wine,  tablespoonfuls of
mushroom ketchup.
mode.—cut up the goose into pieces of the size required; the inferior
joints, trimmings, &c., put into a stewpan to make the gravy; slice and
fry the onions in the butter of a very pale brown; add these to the
trimmings, and pour over about a pint of boiling water; stew these
gently for / hour, then skim and strain the liquor. thicken it with
flour, and flavour with port wine and ketchup, in the above proportion;
add a seasoning of pepper and salt, and put in the pieces of goose; let
these get thoroughly hot through, but do not allow them to boil, and
serve with sippets of toasted bread.
time.—altogether, rather more than  hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold goose, d.
seasonable from september to march.
 the wild goose.—this bird is sometimes called the "gray-lag"
 and is the original of the domestic goose. it is, according to
 pennant, the only species which the britons could take young,
 and familiarize. "the gray-lag," says mr. gould, "is known to
 persia, and we believe it is generally dispersed over asia
 minor." it is the bird that saved the capitol by its vigilance,
 and by the romans was cherished accordingly.
. ingredients.—goose,  large onions,  sage-leaves, / lb. of
bread crumbs, -/ oz. of butter, salt and pepper to taste,  egg.
choosing and trussing.—select a goose with a clean white skin, plump
breast, and yellow feet: if these latter are red, the bird is old.
should the weather permit, let it hang for a few days: by so doing, the
flavour will be very much improved. pluck, singe, draw, and carefully
wash and wipe the goose; cut off the neck close to the back, leaving the
skin long enough to turn over; cut off the feet at the first joint, and
separate the pinions at the first joint. beat the breast-bone flat with
a rolling-pin, put a skewer through the under part of each wing, and
having drawn up the legs closely, put a skewer into the middle of each,
and pass the same quite through the body. insert another skewer into the
small of the leg, bring it close down to the side bone, run it through,
and do the same to the other side. now cut off the end of the vent, and
make a hole in the skin sufficiently large for the passage of the rump,
in order to keep in the seasoning.
[illustration: roast goose.]
mode.—make a sage-and-onion stuffing of the above ingredients, by
recipe no. ; put it into the body of the goose, and secure it firmly
at both ends, by passing the rump through the hole made in the skin, and
the other end by tying the skin of the neck to the back; by this means
the seasoning will not escape. put it down to a brisk fire, keep it well
basted, and roast from -/ to  hours, according to the size. remove
the skewers, and serve with a tureen of good gravy, and one of well-made
apple-sauce. should a very highly-flavoured seasoning be preferred, the
onions should not be parboiled, but minced raw: of the two methods, the
mild seasoning is far superior. a ragoűt, or pie, should be made of the
giblets, or they may be stewed down to make gravy. be careful to serve
the goose before the breast falls, or its appearance will be spoiled by
coming flattened to table. as this is rather a troublesome joint to
carve, a large quantity of gravy should not be poured round the goose,
but sent in a tureen.
time.—a large goose, -/ hour; a moderate-sized one, -/ to -/
hour.
seasonable from september to march; but in perfection from michaelmas
to christmas.
average cost, s. d. each. sufficient for  or  persons.
note.—a teaspoonful of made mustard, a saltspoonful of salt, a few
grains of cayenne, mixed with a glass of port wine, are sometimes poured
into the goose by a slit made in the apron. this sauce is, by many
persons, considered an improvement.
[illustration: emden goose.]
 the goose.—this bird is pretty generally distributed over the
 face of the globe, being met with in north america, lapland,
 iceland, arabia, and persia. its varieties are numerous; but in
 england there is only one species, which is supposed to be a
 native breed. the best geese are found on the borders of
 suffolk, and in norfolk and berkshire; but the largest flocks
 are reared in the fens of lincolnshire and cambridge. they
 thrive best where they have an easy access to water, and large
 herds of them are sent every year to london, to be fattened by
 the metropolitan poulterers. "a michaelmas goose," says dr.
 kitchener, "is as famous in the mouths of the million as the
 minced-pie at christmas; yet for those who eat with delicacy, it
 is, at that time, too full-grown. the true period when the goose
 is in the highest perfection is when it has just acquired its
 full growth, and not begun to harden; if the march goose is
 insipid, the michaelmas goose is rank. the fine time is between
 both; from the second week in june to the first in september."
 it is said that the michaelmas goose is indebted to queen
 elizabeth for its origin on the table at that season. her
 majesty happened to dine on one at the table of an english
 baronet, when she received the news of the discomfiture of the
 spanish armada. in commemoration of this event, she commanded
 the goose to make its appearance at table on every michaelmas.
 we here give an engraving of the emden goose.
. ingredients.—goose,  oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—geese are called green till they are about four months old, and
should not be stuffed. after it has been singed and trussed, the same as
in the preceding recipe, put into the body a seasoning of pepper and
salt, and the butter to moisten it inside. roast before a clear fire for
about / hour, froth and brown it nicely, and serve with a brown gravy,
and, when liked, gooseberry-sauce. this dish should be garnished with
water-cresses.
time.—about / hour. average cost, s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in june, july, and august.
[illustration: toulouse goose.]
 the egyptian goose.—especial attention has been directed to
 this bird by herodotus, who says it was held sacred by the
 ancient egyptians, which has been partially confirmed by modern
 travellers. mr. salt remarks, "horus apollo says the old geese
 stay with their young in the most imminent danger, at the risk
 of their own lives, which i have myself frequently witnessed.
 vielpanser is the goose of the nile, and wherever this goose is
 represented on the walls of the temples in colours, the
 resemblance may be clearly traced." the goose is also said to
 have been a bird under the care of isis. it has been placed by
 mr. gould amongst the birds of europe; not from the number of
 half-reclaimed individuals which are annually shot in britain,
 but from the circumstance of its occasionally visiting the
 southern parts of the continent from its native country, africa.
 the toulouse goose, of which we give an engraving, is a
 well-known bird.
roast guinea-fowl, larded.
. ingredients.—a guinea-fowl, lardoons, flour, and salt.
mode.—when this bird is larded, it should be trussed the same as a
pheasant; if plainly roasted, truss it like a turkey. after larding and
trussing it, put it down to roast at a brisk fire; keep it well basted,
and a short time before serving, dredge it with a little flour, and let
it froth nicely. serve with a little gravy in the dish, and a tureen of
the same, and one of well-made bread-sauce.
time.—guinea-fowl, larded, -/ hour; plainly roasted, about  hour.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable in winter.
note.—the breast, if larded, should be covered with a piece of paper,
and removed about  minutes before serving.
[illustration: guinea-fowls.]
 the guinea-fowl.—the bird takes its name from guinea, in
 africa, where it is found—wild, and in great abundance. it is
 gregarious in its habits, associating in flocks of two or three
 hundred, delighting in marshy grounds, and at night perching
 upon trees, or on high situations. its size is about the same as
 that of a common hen, but it stands higher on its legs. though
 domesticated, it retains much of its wild nature, and is apt to
 wander. the hens lay abundantly, and the eggs are excellent. in
 their flesh, however, they are not so white as the common fowl,
 but more inclined to the colour of the pheasant, for which it
 frequently makes a good substitute at table. the flesh is both
 savoury and easy of digestion, and is in season when game is out
 of season.
lark pie (an entree).
. ingredients.—a few thin slices of beef, the same of bacon, 
larks, flour; for stuffing,  teacupful of bread crumbs, / teaspoonful
of minced lemon-peel,  teaspoonful of minced parsley,  egg, salt and
pepper to taste,  teaspoonful of chopped shalot, / pint of weak stock
or water, puff-paste.
mode.—make a stuffing of bread crumbs, minced lemon-peel, parsley,
and the yolk of an egg, all of which should be well mixed together; roll
the larks in flour, and stuff them. line the bottom of a pie-dish with a
few slices of beef and bacon; over these place the larks, and season
with salt, pepper, minced parsley, and chopped shalot, in the above
proportion. pour in the stock or water, cover with crust, and bake for
an hour in a moderate oven. during the time the pie is baking, shake it
 or  times, to assist in thickening the gravy, and serve very hot.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d. a dozen.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—in full season in november.
. ingredients.—larks, egg and bread crumbs, fresh butter.
mode.—these birds are by many persons esteemed a great delicacy, and
may be either roasted or broiled. pick, gut, and clean them; when they
are trussed, brush them over with the yolk of an egg; sprinkle with
bread crumbs, and roast them before a quick fire; baste them continually
with fresh butter, and keep sprinkling with the bread crumbs until the
birds are well covered. dish them on bread crumbs fried in clarified
butter, and garnish the dish with slices of lemon. broiled larks are
also very excellent: they should be cooked over a clear fire, and would
take about  minutes or / hour.
time.—/ hour to roast;  minutes to broil.
seasonable.—in full season in november.
note.—larks may also be plainly roasted, without covering them with
egg and bread crumbs; they should be dished on fried crumbs.
. ingredients.—pigeons,  oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—take care that the pigeons are quite fresh, and carefully
pluck, draw, and wash them; split the backs, rub the birds over with
butter, season them with pepper and salt, and broil them over a moderate
fire for / hour or  minutes. serve very hot, with either
mushroom-sauce or a good gravy. pigeons may also be plainly boiled, and
served with parsley and butter; they should be trussed like boiled
fowls, and take from / hour to  minutes to boil.
time.—to broil a pigeon, from / hour to  minutes; to boil one,
the same time.
average cost, from d. to d. each.
seasonable from april to september, but in the greatest perfection
from midsummer to michaelmas.
 the pouter pigeon.—this is a very favourite pigeon, and,
 without doubt, the most curious of his species. he is a tail
 strong bird, as he had need be to carry about his great inflated
 crop, frequently as large and as round as a middling-sized
 turnip. a perfect pouter, seen on a windy day, is certainly a
 ludicrous sight: his feathered legs have the appearance of white
 trousers; his tapering tail looks like a swallow-tailed coat;
 his head is entirely concealed by his immense windy
 protuberance; and, altogether, he reminds you of a little
 "swell" of a past century, staggering under a bale of linen. the
 most common pouters are the blues, buffs, and whites, or an
 intermixture of all these various colours. the pouter is not a
 prolific breeder, is a bad nurse, and more likely to degenerate,
 if not repeatedly crossed and re-crossed with irish stock, than
 any other pigeon: nevertheless, it is a useful bird to keep if
 you are founding a new colony, as it is much attached to its
 home, and little apt to stray; consequently it is calculated to
 induce more restless birds to fettle down and make themselves
 comfortable. if you wish to breed pouters, you cannot do worse
 than intrust them with the care of their own eggs.
. ingredients.—pigeons,  oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste.
trussing.—pigeons, to be good, should be eaten fresh (if kept a
little, the flavour goes off), and they should be drawn as soon as
killed. cut off the heads and necks, truss the wings over the backs, and
cut off the toes at the first joint: previous to trussing, they should
be carefully cleaned, as no bird requires so much washing.
[illustration: roast pigeon.]
mode.—wipe the birds very dry, season them inside with pepper and
salt, and put about / oz. of butter into the body of each: this makes
them moist. put them down to a bright fire, and baste them well the
whole of the time they are cooking (they will be done enough in from 
to  minutes); garnish with fried parsley, and serve with a tureen of
parsley and butter. bread-sauce and gravy, the same as for roast fowl,
are exceedingly nice accompaniments to roast pigeons, as also egg-sauce.
time.—from  minutes to / hour. average cost, d. to d. each.
seasonable from april to september; but in the greatest perfection
from midsummer to michaelmas.
 the pigeon—the pigeon tribe forms a connecting ling between the
 passerine birds and poultry. they are widely distributed over
 the world, some of the species being found even in the arctic
 regions. their chief food is grain, and they drink much; not at
 intervals, like other birds, but by a continuous draught, like
 quadrupeds. the wild pigeon, or stockdove, is the parent whence
 all the varieties of the domestic pigeon are derived. in the
 wild state it is still found in many parts of this island,
 making its nest in the holes of rocks, in the hollows of trees,
 or in old towers, but never, like the ringdove, on branches. the
 blue house-pigeon is the variety principally reared for the
 table in this country, and is produced from our farmyards in
 great numbers. when young, and still fed by their parents, they
 are most preferable for the table, and are called squabs;
 under six months they are denominated squeakers, and at six
 months they begin to breed. their flesh is accounted savoury,
 delicate, and stimulating, and the dark-coloured birds are
 considered to have the highest flavour, whilst the light are
 esteemed to have the more delicate flesh.
 the pigeon-house, or dovecot.—the first thing to be done
 towards keeping pigeons is to provide a commodious place for
 their reception; and the next is, to provide the pigeons
 themselves. the situation or size of the dovecot will
 necessarily depend on convenience; but there is one point which
 must invariably be observed, and that is, that every pair of
 pigeons has two holes or rooms to nest in. this is
 indispensable, as, without it, there will be no security, but
 the constant prospect of confusion, breaking of eggs, and the
 destruction of young. the proper place for the pigeon-house is
 the poultry-yard; but it does very well near dwellings, stables,
 brewhouses, bakehouses, or such offices. some persons keep
 pigeons in rooms, and have them making their nests on the floor.
 the object is to escape the danger of the young falling out; but
 in such cases, there is a great risk of rats or other vermin
 getting at the pigeons.
 aspect of the pigeon-house.—the front of the pigeon-house
 should have a southwest aspect, and, if a room be selected for
 the purpose, it is usual to break a hole in the roof of the
 building for the passage of the pigeons, but which can be closed
 at convenience. a platform ought to be laid at the entrance for
 the pigeons to perch upon, with some kind of defence against
 strange cats, which will frequently depopulate a whole dovecot.
 yet, although cats are dangerous neighbours for the birds, they
 are necessary to defend them from the approach of rats and mice,
 which will not only suck the eggs, but destroy the birds. the
 platform should be painted white, and renewed as the paint wears
 off, white being a favourite colour with pigeons, and also most
 conspicuous as a mark to enable them to find their house. the
 boxes ought also to be similarly painted, and renewed when
 necessary, for which purpose lime and water will do very well.
 the necessity of cleanliness.—as cleanliness in human
 habitations is of the first importance, so is it in the
 pigeon-house. there the want of it will soon render the place a
 nuisance not to be approached, and the birds, both young and
 old, will be so covered with vermin and filth, that they will
 neither enjoy health nor comforts, whilst early mortality
 amongst them will be almost certain. in some cases, the
 pigeon-house is cleaned daily; but it should always be done, at
 any rate, once a week, and the floor covered with sifted gravel,
 frequently renewed. pigeons being exceedingly fond of water, and
 having a prescience of the coming of rain, they may be seen upon
 the house-tops waiting upon it until late in the evening, and
 then spreading their wings to receive the luxury of the
 refreshing shower. when they are confined in a room, therefore,
 they should be allowed a wide pan of water, to be often renewed.
 this serves them for a bath, which cools, refreshes, and assists
 them to keep their bodies clear of vermin.
 breeding pigeons.—in breeding pigeons, it is necessary to match
 a cock and hen, and shut them up together, or place them near to
 each other, and in the course of a day or two there is little
 doubt of their mating. various rules have been laid down for the
 purpose of assisting to distinguish the cock from the hen
 pigeon; but the masculine forwardness and action of the cock is
 generally so remarkable, that he is easily ascertained. the
 pigeon being monogamous, the male attaches and confines himself
 to one female, and the attachment is reciprocal, and the
 fidelity of the dove to its mate is proverbial. at the age of
 six months, young pigeons are termed squeakers, and then begin
 to breed, when properly managed. their courtship, and the
 well-known tone of voice in the cock, just then acquired and
 commencing, are indications of their approaching union.
 nestlings, while fed by cock and hen, are termed squabs, and
 are, at that age, sold and used for the table. the dove-house
 pigeon is said to breed monthly, when well supplied with food.
 at all events, it may be depended on, that pigeons of almost any
 healthy and well-established variety will breed eight or nine
 times in the year; whence it may readily be conceived how vast
 are the numbers that may be raised.
[illustration: carrier pigeons.]
 the carrier pigeon.—without doubt the carrier is entitled to
 rank first in the pigeon family, with the exception, perhaps, of
 the blue-rock pigeons. no domestic fowl can be traced to so
 remote an antiquity. when greece was in its glory, carrier
 pigeons were used to convey to distant parts the names of the
 victors at the olympian games. during the holy war, when acre
 was besieged by king richard, saladin habitually corresponded
 with the besieged by means of carrier pigeons. a shaft from an
 english crossbow, however, happened to bring one of those
 feathered messengers to the ground, and the stratagem was
 discovered, the design of the saracens revealed, and so turned
 against the designers, that acre was in the hands of the
 christians before the wily saladin dreamt of such a thing.
pigeon pie (epsom grand-stand recipe).
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of rump-steak,  or  pigeons,  slices of
ham, pepper and salt to taste,  oz. of butter,  eggs, puff crust.
mode.—cut the steak into pieces about  inches square, and with it
line the bottom of a pie-dish, seasoning it well with pepper and salt.
clean the pigeons, rub them with pepper and salt inside and out, and put
into the body of each rather more than / oz. of butter; lay them on
the steak, and a piece of ham on each pigeon. add the yolks of  eggs,
and half fill the dish with stock; place a border of puff paste round
the edge of the dish, put on the cover, and ornament it in any way that
may be preferred. clean three of the feet, and place them in a hole made
in the crust at the top: this shows what kind of pie it is. glaze the
crust,—that is to say, brush it over with the yolk of an egg,—and bake
it in a well-heated oven for about -/ hour. when liked, a seasoning
of pounded mace may be added.
time.—-/ hour, or rather less. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
[illustration: tumbler pigeons.]
 tumbler pigeons.—the smaller the size of this variety, the
 greater its value. the head should be round and smooth, the neck
 thin, and the tail similar to that of the turbit. highly-bred
 birds of this variety will attain an elevation in their flight
 beyond that of any other pigeons; and it is in seeing these
 little birds wing themselves so far into the skies that the
 fanciers take such delight. for four or five hours tumblers have
 been known to keep on the wing; and it is when they are almost
 lost to the power of human vision that they exhibit those
 pantomimic feats which give them their name, and which are
 marked by a tumbling over-and-over process, which suggests the
 idea of their having suddenly become giddy, been deprived of
 their self-control, or overtaken by some calamity. this
 acrobatic propensity in these pigeons has been ascribed by some
 to the absence of a proper power in the tail; but is nothing
 more than a natural habit, for which no adequate reason can be
 assigned. of this variety, the almond tumbler is the most
 beautiful; and the greater the variation of the colour in the
 flight and tail, the greater their value.
[illustration: runt pigeons.]
 the runt pigeon.—this is generally esteemed among the largest
 of the pigeon varieties, and being possessed of proportionate
 strength, with a strong propensity to exercise it, they keep the
 dovecot in a state of almost continual commotion by domineering
 over the weaker inmates. they breed tolerably well, however, and
 are valuable for the table. there is both the leghorn and the
 spanish runt, variously plumaged; but when red, white, or black
 mottled, are most highly esteemed. one of the great advantages
 connected with the runt is, that he is not likely to fly away
 from home. being heavy birds, they find it difficult, when well
 fed, to mount even to a low housetop. again, they require no
 loft, or special dwelling-place, but, if properly tended, will
 be perfectly satisfied, and thrive as well, in a rabbit-hutch as
 any where. their flavour is very good; and it is not an uncommon
 thing for a squeaker runt to exceed a pound and a quarter in
 weight.
[illustration: nun pigeons.]
 the nun pigeon.—the tumbler bears a strong resemblance to this
 variety, which is characterized by a tuft of feathers rising
 from the back of the head, and which, on the whole, is an
 extremely pretty little bird. according to the colour of the
 head, it is called the red, black, or yellow-headed nun. to be a
 perfect bird, it should have a small head and beak; and the
 larger the tuft at the back of his head, the handsomer the bird
 is esteemed, and proportionately valuable in the eyes of
 pigeon-fanciers.
[illustration: trumpeter pigeons.]
 the trumpeter pigeon.—from the circumstance of this bird
 imitating the sound of a trumpet, instead of cooing, like other
 pigeons, it has received its designation. it is of the middle
 size, having its legs and feet covered with feathers, and its
 plumage generally of a mottled black-and-white. it has a tuft
 springing from the root of its beak, and the larger this topknot
 is, the higher the estimation in which the breed is held. in
 their powers of trumpeting some are more expert than others; and
 whether this has any effect in influencing their own estimate of
 themselves, we cannot say; but they are rather select in the
 choice of their company. if two of them are put in a
 pigeon-house with other doves, it will be found that they
 confine their association almost entirely to each other. as much
 as two guineas have been paid for a well-trained docile bird of
 this kind.
[illustration: wood-pigeon.]
 the wood, or wild pigeon.—buffon enumerates upwards of thirty
 varieties of the pigeon, which he derives from one root,—viz.
 the stockdove, or common wild pigeon. all the varieties of
 colour and form which we witness, he attributes to human
 contrivance and fancy. nevertheless, there exist essentially
 specific differences in these birds, which would appear to be
 attributable rather to the nature of the region, soil, and
 climate to which they are indigenous, than to the art and
 ingenuity of man. the stockdove, in its wild state, is still
 found in some parts of britain, forming its nest in the holes of
 rocks, old towers, and in the hollows of trees; it never,
 however, like the ringdove, nestles in the branches. multitudes
 of wild pigeons still visit our shores in the winter, coming
 from their more northerly retreats, making their appearance
 about november, and retiring again in the spring. when forests
 of beechwood covered large tracts of the ground of this country,
 these birds used to haunt them in myriads, frequently covering a
 mile of ground in extent when they went out in the morning to
 feed.
. ingredients.— pigeons, a few slices of bacon,  oz. of butter, 
tablespoonfuls of minced parsley, sufficient stock no.  to cover the
pigeons, thickening of butter and flour,  tablespoonful of mushroom
ketchup,  tablespoonful of port wine.
mode.—empty and clean the pigeons thoroughly, mince the livers, add
to these the parsley and butter, and put it into the insides of the
birds. truss them with the legs inward, and put them into a stewpan,
with a few slices of bacon placed under and over them; add the stock,
and stew gently for rather more than / hour. dish the pigeons, strain
the gravy, thicken it with butter and flour, add the ketchup and port
wine, give one boil, pour over the pigeons, and serve.
time.—rather more than / hour. average cost, d. to d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from april to september.
[illustration: fantail pigeons.]
 the fantail pigeon.—this curious variety is inferior in point
 of size to most of the other varieties, and is characterized by
 having a short, slender bill, pendent wings, and naked legs and
 feet. it has the power of erecting its tail in the manner of a
 turkey-cock; during which action, especially when paying court
 to it's mate, it trembles or shakes, like the peacock when
 moving about with his train expanded and in full display. this
 power of erecting and spreading the tail is not confined to the
 male bird alone: the female possesses the same power to an equal
 extent, and otherwise resembles the male in every respect. it is
 not very prolific, and seldom succeeds so well in the aviary or
 pigeon-house as most of the other kinds.
[illustration: jacobin pigeons.]
 the jacobin pigeon.—this variety, having the power to transmit
 to posterity a form precisely similar, with all its peculiar
 characters undiminished, is, among pigeon-fanciers, designated
 as of a pure or permanent race. it is distinguished by a
 remarkable ruff or frill of raised feathers, which, commencing
 behind the head and proceeding down the neck and breast, forms a
 kind of hood, not unlike that worn by a monk. from this
 circumstance, it has obtained its gallic name of nonnain
 capuchin. in size it is one of the smallest of the domestic
 pigeons, and its form is light and elegant. it is a very
 productive species, and, having its flight considerably impeded
 by the size and form of its hooded frill, keeps much at home,
 and is well adapted for the aviary or other buildings where
 pigeons are confined.
[illustration: turbit pigeons.]
 the turbit pigeon.—this variety bears a strong resemblance to
 the jacobin, having a kind of frill in the fore part of its
 neck, occasioned by the breast-feathers lying contrariwise and
 standing straight out. the species is classed in accordance with
 the colour of the shoulders, similarly as the nuns are by the
 colour of their heads. their characteristics of excellence are a
 full frill, short bill, and small round head. in germany it is
 called the ruffle pigeon, in allusion to the feathers on its
 breast; and it has rarely any feathers on its feet. there is a
 peculiarity connected with this bird, which somewhat lowers it
 in the estimation of fanciers: it seldom rears more than one at
 a time, which, therefore, marks it as a bird rather for
 amusement than profit.
[illustration: barb pigeons.]
 the barb pigeon.—the name of this variety is a contraction of
 barbary, from which country it originally comes. it is both
 prolific and has excellent qualities as a nurse. the kind most
 esteemed is that of one uniform colour, that of blue-black being
 preferable to any other. speckled or mottled barbs are esteemed
 the most common of all pigeons. it is not unlike the carrier
 pigeon, and, at a small distance, might easily be mistaken for
 the latter. it has a short beak and a small wattle. a spongy,
 pinky skin round the eyes is its chief characteristic, however,
 and this increases in size till the bird is three or four years
 old. this peculiarity is hardly distinguishable in very young
 birds.
[illustration: blue rock-pigeon.]
 the rock pigeon.—this variety, in its wild state, is found upon
 the rocky parts of the west of scotland, and the bold shores of
 the western isles, more abundant than in any other parts of the
 british islands. as the shores of the mainland are exposed to
 the muds of the atlantic, and the comparatively small islands
 are surrounded by that ocean, the low grounds exposed to the
 west are seldom covered with snow for any length of time, and
 thus the birds easily find a supply of food. the numbers which
 there congregate are often very great, and the din of their
 united cry is sometimes very loud and even alarming. the love of
 home and the certainty of returning to it is very conspicuous in
 the rock-pigeon or biset, as it is called by the french.
 flocks from different parts of the coasts often meet on the
 feeding-grounds; but when the time of returning to rest comes
 round, each one keeps to its own party.
 [illustration: owl pigeons.]
 the owl pigeon.—this pigeon does not seem to be so well known
 as it formerly was, if we may judge from the fact that few
 modern writers mention it. like the turbit pigeon, the owl has a
 remarkable tuft of feathers on the breast, it having been
 compared by some to the frill of a shirt, and by others to a
 full-blown white rose. in size, it is not quite so large a
 pigeon as the jacobin. it is said to be preferred in france,
 above other varieties, as a bird to rear and kill for the table.
 in england it is very far from being common; indeed, we have
 applied to several keepers of pigeons, who have fancied
 themselves acquainted with all the varieties of this bird, and
 they have been able to tell us nothing of it. mr. harrison weir,
 our artist, however, has made his portrait from the life.
[illustration: boiled rabbit.]
. ingredients.—rabbit; water.
mode.—for boiling, choose rabbits with smooth and sharp claws, as
that denotes they are young: should these be blunt and rugged, the ears
dry and tough, the animal is old. after emptying and skinning it, wash
it well in cold water, and let it soak for about / hour in warm water,
to draw out the blood. bring the head round to the side, and fasten it
there by means of a skewer run through that and the body. put the rabbit
into sufficient hot water to cover it, let it boil very gently until
tender, which will be in from / to / hour, according to its size and
age. dish it, and smother it either with onion, mushroom, or liver
sauce, or parsley-and-butter; the former is, however, generally
preferred to any of the last-named sauces. when liver-sauce is
preferred, the liver should be boiled for a few minutes, and minced very
finely, or rubbed through a sieve before it is added to the sauce.
time.—a very young rabbit, / hour; a large one, / hour; an old
one,  hour or longer.
average cost, from s. to s. d. each.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
 the rabbit.—though this animal is an inhabitant of most
 temperate climates, it does not reach so far north as the hare.
 the wild rabbit is a native of great britain, and is found in
 large numbers in the sandy districts of norfolk and
 cambridgeshire. its flesh is, by some, considered to have a
 higher flavour than that of the tame rabbit, although it is
 neither so white nor so delicate. the animal, however, becomes
 larger and fatter in the tame than in the wild state; but it is
 not desirable to have it so fat as it can be made.
. ingredients.— rabbit,  oz. of butter,  onions,  pint of stock
no. ,  tablespoonful of curry powder,  tablespoonful of flour, 
teaspoonful of mushroom powder, the juice of / lemon, / lb. of rice.
mode.—empty, skin, and wash the rabbit thoroughly, and cut it neatly
into joints. put it into a stewpan with the butter and sliced onions,
and let them acquire a nice brown colour, but do not allow them to
blacken. pour in the stock, which should be boiling; mix the curry
powder and flour smoothly with a little water, add it to the stock, with
the mushroom powder, and simmer gently for rather more than / hour;
squeeze in the lemon-juice, and serve in the centre of a dish, with an
edging of boiled rice all round. where economy is studied, water may be
substituted for the stock; in this case, the meat and onions must be
very nicely browned. a little sour apple and rasped cocoa-nut stewed
with the curry will be found a great improvement.
time.—altogether / hour.
average cost, from s. to s. d. each.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable in winter.
[illustration: wild rabbits.]
 the common or wild rabbit.—warrens, or inclosures, are
 frequently made in favourable localities, and some of them are
 so large as to comprise , acres. the common wild rabbit is
 of a grey colour, and is esteemed the best for the purposes of
 food. its skin is valuable as an article of commerce, being used
 for the making of hats. another variety of the rabbit, however,
 called the "silver-grey," has been lately introduced to this
 country, and is still more valuable. its colour is a black
 ground, thickly interspersed with grey hairs; and its powers as
 a destroyer and consumer of vegetable food are well known to be
 enormous, especially by those who have gardens in the vicinity
 of a rabbit-warren.
. ingredients.— rabbit, flour, dripping,  oz. of butter, 
teaspoonful of minced shalot,  tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup.
mode.—cut the rabbit into neat joints, and flour them well; make the
dripping boiling in a fryingpan, put in the rabbit, and fry it a nice
brown. have ready a very hot dish, put in the butter, shalot, and
ketchup; arrange the rabbit pyramidically on this, and serve as quickly
as possible.
time.— minutes. average cost, from s. to s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
note.—the rabbit may be brushed over with egg, and sprinkled with
bread crumbs, and fried as above. when cooked in this manner, make a
gravy in the pan by recipe no. , and pour it round, but not over, the
pieces of rabbit.
 varieties in rabbits.—almost everybody knows that a rabbit is a
 furry animal, that lives on plants, and burrows in the ground;
 that it has its varieties as well as other animals, and that it
 is frequently an especial favourite with boys. among its
 varieties, the short-legged, with width and substance of loin,
 is the most hardy, and fattens the most expeditiously. it has,
 besides, the soundest liver, rabbits generally being subject to
 defects of that part. it is also the smallest variety. there is
 a very large species of the hare-colour, having much bone,
 length and depth of carcase, large and long ears, with full
 eyes, resembling those of the hare: it might readily be taken
 for a hybrid or mule, but for the objection to its breeding. its
 flesh is high-coloured, substantial, and more savoury than that
 of the common rabbit; and, cooked like the hare, it makes a good
 dish. the large white, and yellow and white species, have whiter
 and more delicate flesh, and, cooked in the same way, will rival
 the turkey. rabbits are divided into four kinds, distinguished
 as warreners, parkers, hedgehogs, and sweethearts. the warrener,
 as his name implies, is a member of a subterranean community,
 and is less effeminate than his kindred who dwell upon the
 earth and have "the world at their will," and his fur is the
 most esteemed. after him, comes the parker, whose favourite
 resort is a gentleman's pleasure-ground, where he usually breeds
 in great numbers, and from which he frequently drives away the
 hares. the hedgehog is a sort of vagabond rabbit, that, tinker
 like, roams about the country, and would have a much better coat
 on his back if he was more settled in his habits, and remained
 more at home. the sweetheart is a tame rabbit, with its fur so
 sleek, soft, and silky, that it is also used to some extent in
 the important branch of hat-making.
. ingredients.— rabbit, / lb. of butter, salt and pepper to
taste,  blades of pounded mace,  dried mushrooms,  tablespoonfuls of
minced parsley,  teaspoonfuls of flour,  glasses of sherry,  pint of
water.
mode.—empty, skin, and wash the rabbit thoroughly, and cut it into
joints. put the butter into a stewpan with the pieces of rabbit; add
salt, pepper, and pounded mace, and let it cook until three parts done;
then put in the remaining ingredients, and boil for about  minutes: it
will then be ready to serve. fowls or hare may be dressed in the same
manner.
time.—altogether,  minutes. average cost, from s. to s. d.
each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
. ingredients.— rabbit, a few slices of ham, salt and white pepper
to taste,  blades of pounded mace, / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, a
few forcemeat balls,  hard-boiled eggs, / pint of gravy, puff crust.
mode.—cut up the rabbit (which should be young), remove the
breastbone, and bone the legs. put the rabbit, slices of ham, forcemeat
balls, and hard eggs, by turns, in layers, and season each layer with
pepper, salt, pounded mace, and grated nutmeg. pour in about / pint of
water, cover with crust, and bake in a well-heated oven for about -/
hour. should the crust acquire too much colour, place a piece of paper
over it to prevent its burning. when done, pour in at the top, by means
of the hole in the middle of the crust, a little good gravy, which may
be made of the breast- and leg-bones of the rabbit and  or 
shank-bones, flavoured with onion, herbs, and spices.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, from s. to s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
note.—the liver of the rabbit may be boiled, minced, and mixed with the
forcemeat balls, when the flavour is liked.
 fecundity of the rabbit.—the fruitfulness of this animal has
 been the subject of wonder to all naturalists. it breeds seven
 times in the year, and generally begets seven or eight young
 ones at a time. if we suppose this to happen regularly for a
 period of four years, the progeny that would spring from a
 single pair would amount to more than a million. as the rabbit,
 however, has many enemies, it can never be permitted to increase
 in numbers to such an extent as to prove injurious to mankind;
 for it not only furnishes man with an article of food, but is,
 by carnivorous animals of every description, mercilessly
 sacrificed. notwithstanding this, however, in the time of the
 roman power, they once infested the balearic islands to such an
 extent, that the inhabitants were obliged to implore the
 assistance of a military force from augustus to exterminate
 them.
. ingredients.— rabbit,  teaspoonfuls of flour,  sliced onions, 
oz. of butter, a few thin slices of bacon, pepper and salt to taste, 
slices of lemon,  bay-leaf,  glass of port wine.
mode.—slice the onions, and put them into a stewpan with the flour
and butter; place the pan near the fire, stir well as the butter melts,
till the onions become a rich brown colour, and add, by degrees, a
little water or gravy till the mixture is of the consistency of cream.
cut some thin slices of bacon; lay in these with the rabbit, cut into
neat joints; add a seasoning of pepper and salt, the lemon and bay-leaf,
and let the whole simmer until tender. pour in the port wine, give one
boil, and serve.
time.—about / hour to simmer the rabbit.
average cost, from s. to s. d. each. sufficient for  or 
persons.
seasonable from september to february.
 the rabbit-house.—rabbit-keeping is generally practised by a
 few individuals in almost every town, and by a few in almost
 every part of the country. forty years ago, there were in the
 metropolis one or two considerable feeders, who, according to
 report, kept from , to , breeding does. these large
 establishments, however, have ceased to exist, and london
 receives the supply of tame as well as wild rabbits chiefly from
 the country. where they are kept, however, the rabbit-house
 should be placed upon a dry foundation, and be well ventilated.
 exposure to rain, whether externally or internally, is fatal to
 rabbits, which, like sheep, are liable to the rot, springing
 from the same causes. thorough ventilation and good air are
 indispensable where many rabbits are kept, or they will neither
 prosper nor remain healthy for any length of time. a thorough
 draught or passage for the air is, therefore, absolutely
 necessary, and should be so contrived as to be checked in cold
 or wet weather by the closing or shutting of opposite doors or
 windows.
. ingredients.— rabbit, forcemeat no. , buttered paper,
sausage-meat.
[illustration: roast rabbit.]
mode.—empty, skin, and thoroughly wash the rabbit; wipe it dry, line
the inside with sausage-meat and forcemeat made by recipe no. , and
to which has been added the minced liver. sew the stuffing inside,
skewer back the head between the shoulders, cut off the fore-joints of
the shoulders and legs, bring: them close to the body, and secure them
by means of a skewer. wrap the rabbit in buttered paper, and put it down
to a bright clear fire; keep it well basted, and a few minutes before it
is done remove the paper, flour and froth it, and let it acquire a nice
brown colour. take out the skewers, and serve with brown gravy and
red-currant jelly. to bake the rabbit, proceed in the same manner as
above; in a good oven, it will take about the same time as roasting.
time.—a young rabbit,  minutes; a large one, about / hour.
average cost, from s. to s. d. each. sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
 the hutch.—hutches are generally placed one above another to
 the height required by the number of rabbits and the extent of
 the room. where a large stock is kept, to make the most of room,
 the hutches may be placed in rows, with a sufficient interval
 between for feeding and cleaning, instead of being, in the usual
 way, joined to the wall. it is preferable to rest the hutches
 upon stands, about a foot above the ground, for the convenience
 of cleaning under them. each of the hutches intended for
 breeding should have two rooms,—a feeding and a bed-room. those
 are single for the use of the weaned rabbits, or for the bucks,
 which are always kept separate. the floors should be planed
 smooth, that wet may run off, and a common hoe, with a short
 handle, and a short broom, are most convenient implements for
 cleaning these houses.
. ingredients.— rabbit,  large onions,  cloves,  small
teaspoonful of chopped lemon-peel, a few forcemeat balls, thickening of
butter and flour,  large tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup.
mode.—cut the rabbit into small joints; put them into a stewpan, add
the onions sliced, the cloves, and minced lemon-peel. pour in sufficient
water to cover the meat, and, when the rabbit is nearly done, drop in a
few forcemeat balls, to which has been added the liver, finely chopped.
thicken the gravy with flour and butter, put in the ketchup, give one
boil, and serve.
time.—rather more than / hour. average cost, s. to s. d each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
[illustration: lop-eared rabbit.]
 fancy rabbits.—the graceful fall of the ears is the first thing
 that is looked to by the fancier; next, the dewlap, if the
 animal is in its prime; then the colours and marked points, and,
 lastly, the shape and general appearance. the ears of a fine
 rabbit should extend not less than seven inches, measured from
 tip to tip in a line across the skull; but even should they
 exceed this length, they are admitted with reluctance into a
 fancy stock, unless they have a uniform and graceful droop. the
 dewlap, which is a fold of skin under the neck and throat, is
 only seen in fancy rabbits, after they have attained their full
 growth: it commences immediately under the jaw, and adds greatly
 to the beauty of their appearance. it goes down the throat and
 between the fore legs, and is so broad that it projects beyond
 the chin.
 the difference between the fancy and common rabbit in the back,
 independent of the ears, is sufficient to strike the common
 observer. fancy rabbits fetch a very high price; so much as five
 and ten guineas, and even more, is sometimes given for a
 first-rate doe. if young ones are first procured from a good
 family, the foundation of an excellent stock can be procured for
 a much smaller sum. sometimes the ears, instead of drooping
 down, slope backwards: a rabbit with this characteristic is
 scarcely admitted into a fancy lot, and is not considered worth
 more than the common variety. the next position is when one ear
 lops outwards, and the other stands erect: rabbits of this kind
 possess but little value, however fine the shape and beautiful
 the colour, although they sometimes breed as good specimens as
 finer ones.
 the forward or horn-lop is one degree nearer perfection than the
 half-lop: the ears, in this case, slope forward and down over
 the forehead. rabbits with this peculiarity are often perfect in
 other respects, with the exception of the droop of the ears, and
 often become the parents of perfect young ones: does of this
 kind often have the power of lifting an ear erect. in the
 ear-lop, the ears spread out in an horizontal position, like the
 wings of a bird in flight, or the arms of a man swimming. a
 great many excellent does have this characteristic, and some of
 the best-bred bucks in the fancy are entirely so. sometimes a
 rabbit drops one ear completely, but raises the other so neatly
 horizontally as to constitute an ear-lop: this is superior to
 all others, except the perfect fall, which is so rarely to be
 met with, that those which are merely ear-lopped are considered
 as valuable rabbits, if well bred and with other good qualities.
 "the real lop has ears that hang down by the side of the cheek,
 slanting somewhat outward in their descent, with the open part
 of the ear inward, and sometimes either backwards or forwards
 instead of perpendicular: when the animals stand in an easy
 position, the tips of the ears touch the ground. the hollows of
 the ears, in a fancy rabbit of a first-rate kind, should be
 turned so completely backwards that only the outer part of them
 should remain in front: they should match exactly in their
 descent, and should slant outwards as little as possible."
 the same authority asserts that perfect lops are so rare, that a
 breeder possessing twenty of the handsomest and most perfect
 does would consider himself lucky if, in the course of a year,
 he managed to raise twelve full-lopped rabbits out of them all.
 as regards variety and purity of colour an experienced breeder
 says:—
 "the fur of fancy rabbits may be blue, or rather lead-colour,
 and white, or black and white, or tawny and white, that is,
 tortoiseshell-coloured. but it is not of so much importance what
 colours the coat of a rabbit displays, as it is that those
 colours shall be arranged in a particular manner, forming
 imaginary figures or fancied resemblances to certain objects.
 hence the peculiarities of their markings have been denoted by
 distinctive designations. what is termed 'the blue butterfly
 smut' was, for some time, considered the most valuable of fancy
 rabbits. it is thus named on account of having bluish or
 lead-coloured spots on either side of the nose, having some
 resemblance to the spread wings of a butterfly, what may be
 termed the groundwork of the rabbit's face being white. a black
 and white rabbit may also have the face marked in a similar
 manner, constituting a 'black butterfly smut.'
 "but a good fancy rabbit must likewise have other marks, without
 which it cannot be considered a perfect model of its kind. there
 should be a black or blue patch on its back, called the saddle;
 the tail must be of the same colour with the back and snout;
 while the legs should be all white; and there ought to be dark
 stripes on both sides of the body in front, passing backwards to
 meet the saddle, and uniting on the top of the shoulders at the
 part called the withers in a horse. these stripes form what is
 termed the 'chain' having somewhat the appearance of a chain or
 collar hanging round the neck."
 "among thorough-bred fancy rabbits, perhaps not one in a hundred
 will have all these markings clearly and exactly displayed on
 the coat; but the more nearly the figures on the coat of a
 rabbit approach to the pattern described, the greater will be
 its value, so far, at least, as relates to colour. the beauty
 and consequent worth of a fancy rabbit, however, depends a good
 deal on its shape, or what is styled its carriage. a rabbit is
 said to have a good carriage when its back is finely arched,
 rising full two inches above the top of its head, which must be
 held so low as for the muzzle and the points of the ears to
 reach almost to the ground."
stewed rabbit, larded.
. ingredients.— rabbit, a few strips of bacon, rather more than 
pint of good broth or stock, a bunch of savoury herbs, salt and pepper
to taste, thickening of butter and flour,  glass of sherry.
mode.—well wash the rabbit, cut it into quarters, lard them with
blips of bacon, and fry them; then put them into a stewpan with the
broth, herbs, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; simmer gently until
the rabbit is tender, then strain the gravy, thicken it with butter and
flour, add the sherry, give one boil, pour it over the rabbit, and
serve. garnish with slices of cut lemon.
time.—rather more than / hour.
average cost, s. to s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to february.
[illustration: the hare-rabbit.]
 the hare-rabbit.—there has been lately introduced to french
 tables an animal called the "hare-rabbit," partaking of the
 nature, characteristics, and qualifications of both the hare and
 the rabbit. it is highly spoken of, both as regards flesh and
 flavour; and it is said to be the only hybrid which is able to
 perpetuate its race. we hope that some enterprising individual
 will soon secure for english, tables what would seem to be a
 really valuable addition to our other game and poultry dishes;
 although it will be rather difficult to exactly assign its
 proper position, as within or without the meaning of "game," as
 by law established. only a few specimens have been seen in
 england at present, but there is no reason to doubt that our
 rabbit-fanciers will prove equal to the occasion, and cope
 successfully with our neighbours across the channel in
 introducing a new animal serviceable in the kitchen.
[illustration: angora rabbit.]
 the angora rabbit.—this is one of the handsomest of all
 rabbits. it takes its name from being an inhabitant of angora, a
 city and district of asia minor. like the well-known angora goat
 and cat, both of which are valuable on account of the fineness
 of their wool and fur, this rabbit is prized for its long,
 waved, silky fur, which, as an article of commerce is highly
 esteemed. we are not aware whether it is eaten by the
 inhabitants, and but few specimens have been introduced into
 england, where, doubtless, the beauty of its coat would
 materially suffer from the more humid and less genial character
 of the climate. to the rabbits of the ancient and mountainous
 district of angora the words of the wise man would seem most to
 apply, "the conies are but feeble folk, yet make they their
 houses in the rocks."
[illustration: himalaya rabbits.]
 the himalaya rabbit.—amidst the mighty himalaya mountains,
 whose peaks are the highest on the globe, the pretty rabbit here
 portrayed is found; and his colour seems to be like the snow,
 which, above the altitude of from , to , feet,
 perpetually crowns the summits of these monarchs of the world.
 it is, at present, a very rare animal in england, but will,
 doubtless, be more extensively known in the course of a few
 years. from the earth-tunnelling powers of this little animal,
 martial declares that mankind learned the art of fortification,
 mining, and covered roads.
. ingredients.—turkey; forcemeat no. .
choosing and trussing.—hen turkeys are preferable for boiling, on
account of their whiteness and tenderness, and one of moderate size
should be selected, as a large one is not suitable for this mode of
cooking. they should not be dressed until they have been killed  or 
days, as they will neither look white, nor will they be tender. pluck
the bird, carefully draw, and singe it with a piece of white paper, wash
it inside and out, and wipe it thoroughly dry with a cloth. cut off the
head and neck, draw the strings or sinews of the thighs, and cut off the
legs at the first joint; draw the legs into the body, fill the breast
with forcemeat made by recipe no. ; run a skewer through the wing and
the middle joint of the leg, quite into the leg and wing on the opposite
side; break the breastbone, and make the bird look as round and as
compact as possible.
[illustration: boiled turkey.]
mode.—put the turkey into sufficient hot water to cover it; let it
come to a boil, then carefully remove all the scum: if this is attended
to, there is no occasion to boil the bird in a floured cloth; but it
should be well covered with the water. let it simmer very gently for
about -/ hour to -/ hour, according to the size, and serve with
either white, celery, oyster, or mushroom sauce, or parsley-and-butter,
a little of which should be poured over the turkey. boiled ham, bacon,
tongue, or pickled pork, should always accompany this dish; and when
oyster sauce is served, the turkey should be stuffed with oyster
forcemeat.
time.—a small turkey, -/ hour; a large one, -/ hour.
average cost, s. d. to s. d. each, but more expensive at
christmas, on account of the great demand.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from december to february.
 the turkey.—the turkey, for which fine bird we are indebted to
 america, is certainly one of the most glorious presents made by
 the new world to the old. some, indeed, assert that this bird
 was known to the ancients, and that it was served at the
 wedding-feast of charlemagne. this opinion, however, has been
 controverted by first-rate authorities, who declare that the
 french name of the bird, dindon, proves its origin; that the
 form of the bird is altogether foreign, and that it is found in
 america alone in a wild state. there is but little doubt, from
 the information which has been gained at considerable trouble,
 that it appeared, generally, in europe about the end of the th
 century; that it was first imported into france by jesuits, who
 had been sent out missionaries to the west; and that from france
 it spread over europe. to this day, in many localities in
 france, a turkey is called a jesuit. on the farms of n. america,
 where turkeys are very common, they are raised either from eggs
 which have been found, or from young ones caught in the woods:
 they thus preserve almost entirely their original plumage. the
 turkey only became gradually acclimated, both on the continent
 and in england: in the middle of the th century, scarcely 
 out of  young turkeys lived; now, generally speaking,  out
 of the same number arrive at maturity.
croquettes of turkey (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold turkey; to every / lb. of meat
allow  oz. of ham or bacon,  shalots,  oz. of butter,  tablespoonful
of flour, the yolks of  eggs, egg and bread crumbs.
mode.—the smaller pieces, that will not do for a fricassée or hash,
answer very well for this dish. mince the meat finely with ham or bacon
in the above proportion; make a gravy of the bones and trimmings, well
seasoning it; mince the shalots, put them into a stewpan with the
butter, add the flour; mix well, then put in the mince, and about /
pint of the gravy made from the bones. (the proportion of the butter
must be increased or diminished according to the quantity of mince.)
when just boiled, add the yolks of  eggs; put the mixture out to cool,
and then shape it in a wineglass. cover the croquettes with egg and
bread crumbs, and fry them a delicate brown. put small pieces of
parsley-stems for stalks, and serve with, rolled bacon cut very thin.
time.— minutes to fry the croquettes.
seasonable from december to february.
 the wild turkey.—in its wild state, the turkey is gregarious,
 going together in extensive flocks, numbering as many as five
 hundred. these frequent the great swamps of america, where they
 roost; but, at sunrise, leave these situations to repair to the
 dry woods, in search of berries and acorns. they perch on the
 boughs of trees, and, by rising from branch to branch, attain
 the height they desire. they usually mount to the highest tops,
 apparently from an instinctive conception that the loftier they
 are the further they are out of danger. they fly awkwardly, but
 run with great swiftness, and, about the month of march become
 so fat as not to be able to take a flight beyond three or four
 hundred yards, and are then, also, easily run down by a
 horseman. now, however, it rarely happens that wild turkeys are
 seen in the inhabited parts of america. it is only in the
 distant and more unfrequented parts that they are found in great
 numbers.
fricasseed turkey (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast or boiled turkey; a strip
of lemon-peel, a bunch of savoury herbs,  onion, pepper and salt to
taste,  pint of water,  tablespoonfuls of cream, the yolk of an egg.
mode.—cut some nice slices from the remains of a cold turkey, and put
the bones and trimmings into a stewpan, with the lemon-peel, herbs,
onion, pepper, salt, add the water; stew for an hour, strain the gravy,
and lay in the pieces of turkey. when warm through, add the cream and
the yolk of an egg; stir it well round, and, when getting thick, take
out the pieces, lay them on a hot dish, and pour the sauce over. garnish
the fricassée with sippets of toasted bread. celery or cucumbers, cut
into small pieces, may be put into the sauce; if the former, it must be
boiled first.
time.— hour to make the gravy.
average cost, exclusive of the cold turkey, d.
seasonable from december to february.
 the turkey.—this is one of the gallinaceous birds, the
 principal genera of which are pheasants, turkeys, peacocks,
 bustards, pintatoes, and grouse. they live mostly on the ground,
 scraping the earth with their feet, and feeding on seeds and
 grains, which, previous to digestion, are macerated in their
 crops. they usually associate in families, consisting of one
 male and several females. turkeys are particularly fond of the
 seeds of nettles, whilst the seeds of the foxglove will poison
 them. the common turkey is a native of north america, and, in
 the reign of henry viii., was introduced into england. according
 to tusser's "five hundred points of good husbandry," it began
 about the year  to form a dish at our rural christmas
 feasts:—
"beefe, mutton, and pork, shred pies of the best,
pig, veal, goose, and capon, and turkey well drest;
cheese, apples, and nuts, jolly carols to hear,
as then in the country is counted good cheer."
the turkey is one of the most difficult birds to rear, and its
flesh is much esteemed.
 the disposition of the turkey.—among themselves, turkeys are
 extremely furious, whilst amongst other animals they are usually
 both weak and cowardly. the domestic cock frequently makes them
 keep at a distance, whilst they will rarely attack him but in a
 united body, when the cock is rather crushed by their weight
 than defeated by their prowess. the disposition of the female is
 in general much more gentle than that of the male. when leading
 forth her young to collect their food, though so large and
 apparently so powerful a bird, she gives them very slight
 protection from the attacks of any rapacious animal which may
 appear against them. she rather warns them of their danger than
 offers to defend them; yet she is extremely affectionate to her
 young.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast turkey,  onion, pepper and
salt to taste, rather more than  pint of water,  carrot,  turnip, 
blade of mace, a bunch of savoury herbs,  tablespoonful of mushroom
ketchup,  tablespoonful of port wine, thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—cut the turkey into neat joints; the best pieces reserve for
the hash, the inferior joints and trimmings put into a stewpan with an
onion cut in slices, pepper and salt, a carrot, turnip, mace, herbs, and
water in the above proportion; simmer these for an hour, then strain the
gravy, thicken it with butter and flour, flavour with ketchup and port
wine, and lay in the pieces of turkey to warm through; if there is any
stuffing left, put that in also, as it so much improves the flavour of
the gravy. when it boils, serve, and garnish the dish with sippets of
toasted bread.
time.— hour to make the gravy.
seasonable from december to february.
 hunting turkeys.—formerly, in canada, hunting turkeys was one
 of the principal diversions of the natives of that country. when
 they discovered the retreat of the birds, which was generally
 near a field of nettles, or where grain of any kind was
 plentiful, they would send a well-trained dog into the midst of
 the flock. the turkeys no sooner perceived their enemy than they
 would run off at full speed, and with such swiftness that they
 would leave the dog far behind. he, however, would follow in
 their wake, and as they could not, for a great length of time,
 continue at their speed, they were at last forced to seek
 shelter in the trees. there they would sit, spent with fatigue,
 till the hunters would approach, and, with long poles, knock
 them down one after the other.
. ingredients.—turkey; forcemeat no. .
choosing and trussing.—choose cock turkeys by their short spurs and
black legs, in which case they are young; if the spurs are long, and the
legs pale and rough, they are old. if the bird has been long killed, the
eyes will appear sunk and the feet very dry; but, if fresh, the contrary
will be the case. middling-sized fleshy turkeys are by many persons
considered superior to those of an immense growth, as they are,
generally speaking, much more tender. they should never be dressed the
same day they are killed; but, in cold weather, should hang at least 
days; if the weather is mild,  or  days will be found sufficient.
carefully pluck the bird, singe it with white paper, and wipe it
thoroughly with a cloth; draw it, preserve the liver and gizzard, and be
particular not to break the gall-bag, as no washing will remove the
bitter taste it imparts where it once touches. wash it inside well,
and wipe it thoroughly dry with a cloth; the outside merely requires
nicely wiping, as we have just stated. cut off the neck close to the
back, but leave enough of the crop-skin to turn over; break the leg-bone
close below the knee, draw out the strings from the thighs, and flatten
the breastbone to make it look plump. have ready a forcemeat made by
recipe no. ; fill the breast with this, and, if a trussing-needle is
used, sew the neck over to the back; if a needle is not at hand, a
skewer will answer the purpose. run a skewer through the pinion and
thigh into the body to the pinion and thigh on the other side, and press
the legs as much as possible between the breast and the side bones, and
put the liver under one pinion and the gizzard under the other. pass a
string across the back of the bird, catch it over the points of the
skewer, tie it in the centre of the back, and be particular that the
turkey is very firmly trussed. this may be more easily accomplished with
a needle and twine than with skewers.
[illustration: roast turkey.]
mode.—fasten a sheet of buttered paper on to the breast of the bird,
put it down to a bright fire, at some little distance at first
(afterwards draw it nearer), and keep it well basted the whole of the
time it is cooking. about / hour before serving, remove the paper,
dredge the turkey lightly with flour, and put a piece of butter into the
basting-ladle; as the butter melts, baste the bird with it. when of a
nice brown and well frothed, serve with a tureen of good brown gravy and
one of bread sauce. fried sausages are a favourite addition to roast
turkey; they make a pretty garnish, besides adding very much to the
flavour. when these are not at hand, a few forcemeat balls should be
placed round the dish as a garnish. turkey may also be stuffed with
sausage-meat, and a chestnut forcemeat with the same sauce is, by many
persons, much esteemed as an accompaniment to this favourite dish.—see
coloured plate, a.
time.—small turkey, -/ hour; moderate-sized one, about  lbs., 
hours; large turkey, -/ hours, or longer.
average cost, from s. to s., but expensive at christmas, on
account of the great demand.
sufficient.—a moderate-sized turkey for  or  persons.
seasonable from december to february.
 english turkeys.—these are reared in great numbers in suffolk,
 norfolk, and several other counties, whence they were wont to be
 driven to the london market in flocks of several hundreds; the
 improvements in our modes of travelling now, however, enable
 them to be brought by railway. their drivers used to manage them
 with great facility, by means of a bit of red rag tied to the
 end of a long stick, which, from the antipathy these birds have
 to that colour, effectually answered the purpose of a scourge.
 there are three varieties of the turkey in this country,—the
 black, the white, and the speckled, or copper-coloured. the
 black approaches nearest to the original stock, and is esteemed
 the best. its flesh is white and tender, delicate, nourishing,
 and of excellent flavour; it greatly deteriorates with age,
 however, and is then good for little but stewing.
. ingredients.—turkey poult; butter.
choosing and trussing.—choose a plump bird, and truss it in the
following manner:—after it has been carefully plucked, drawn, and
singed, skin the neck, and fasten the head under the wing; turn the legs
at the first joint, and bring the feet close to the thighs, as a
woodcock should be trussed, and do not stuff it.
mode.—put it down to a bright fire, keep it well basted, and at first
place a piece of paper on the breast to prevent its taking too much
colour. about  minutes before serving, dredge it lightly with flour,
and baste well; when nicely frothed, send it to table immediately, with
a little gravy in the dish, and some in a tureen. if at hand, a few
water-cresses may be placed round the turkey as a garnish, or it may be
larded.
time.—about  hour. average cost, s. to s. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—in full season from june to october.
 the future of the turkey.—human ingenuity subjects almost every
 material to the purposes of ornament or use and the feathers of
 turkeys have been found adapted for more ends than one. the
 american indians convert then into an elegant clothing, and, by
 twisting the inner ribs into a strong double string, with hemp
 or the inner bark of the mulberry tree, work it like matting.
 this fabric has a very rich and glossy appearance and is as fine
 as silk shag. the natives of louisiana used to make fans of the
 tail; and four of that appendage joined together was formerly
 constructed into a parasol by the french.
(miss acton's recipe.)
. after the fowl has been drawn and singed, wipe it inside and out
with a clean cloth, but do not wash it. take off the head, cut through
the skin all round the first joint of the legs, and pull them from the
fowl, to draw out the large tendons. raise the flesh first from the
lower part of the backbone, and a little also from the end of the
breastbone, if necessary; work the knife gradually to the socket of the
thigh; with the point of the knife detach the joint from it, take the
end of the bone firmly in the fingers, and cut the flesh clean from it
down to the next joint, round which pass the point of the knife
carefully, and when the skin is loosened from it in every part, cut
round the next bone, keeping; the edge of the knife close to it, until
the whole of the leg is done. remove the bones of the other leg in the
same manner; then detach the flesh from the back—and breast-bone
sufficiently to enable you to reach the upper joints of the wings;
proceed with these as with the legs, but be especially careful not to
pierce the skin of the second joint: it is usual to leave the pinions
unboned, in order to give more easily its natural form to the fowl when
it is dressed. the merrythought and neck-bones may now easily be cut
away, the back-and side-bones taken out without being divided, and the
breastbone separated carefully from the flesh (which, as the work
progresses, must be turned back from the bones upon the fowl, until it
is completely inside out). after the one remaining bone is removed, draw
the wings and legs back to their proper form, and turn the fowl right
side outwards.
. a turkey is boned exactly in the same manner; but as it requires a
very large proportion of forcemeat to fill it entirely, the logs and
wings are sometimes drawn into the body, to diminish the expense of
this. if very securely trussed, and sewn, the bird may be either boiled,
or stewed in rich gravy, as well as roasted, after being boned and
forced; but it must be most gently cooled, or it may burst.
another mode of boning a turkey or fowl. (miss acton's recipe.)
. cut through the skin down the centre of the back, and raise the
flesh carefully on either side with the point of a sharp knife, until
the sockets of the wings and thighs are reached. till a little practice
has been gained, it will perhaps be bettor to bone these joints before
proceeding further; but after they are once detached from it, the whole
of the body may easily be separated from the flesh and taken out entire:
only the neck-bones and merrythought will then remain to be removed. the
bird thus prepared may either be restored to its original form, by
filling the legs and wings with forcemeat, and the body with the livers
of two or three fowls, mixed with alternate layers of parboiled tongue
freed from the rind, fine sausage-meat, or veal forcemeat, or thin
slices of the nicest bacon, or aught else of good flavour, which will
give a marbled appearance to the fowl when it is carved; and then be
sewn up and trussed as usual; or the legs and wings may be drawn inside
the body, and the bird being first flattened on a table, may be covered
with sausage-meat, and the various other ingredients we have named, so
placed that it shall be of equal thickness in every part; then tightly
rolled, bound firmly together with a fillet of broad tape, wrapped in a
thin pudding-cloth, closely tied at both ends, and dressed as
follows:—put it into a braising-pan, stewpan, or thick iron saucepan,
bright in the inside, and fitted as nearly as may be to its size; add
all the chicken-bones, a bunch of sweet herbs, two carrots, two
bay-leaves, a large blade of mace, twenty-four white peppercorns, and
any trimmings or bones of undressed veal which may be at hand; cover the
whole with good veal broth, add salt, if needed, and stew it very
softly, from an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half; let it cool in
the liquor in which it was stewed; and after it is lifted out, boil down
the gravy to a jelly and strain it; let it become cold, clear off the
fat, and serve it cut into large dice or roughed, and laid round the
fowl, which is to be served cold. if restored to its form, instead of
being rolled, it must be stewed gently for an hour, and may then be sent
to table hot, covered with mushroom, or any other good sauce that may be
preferred; or it may be left until the following day, and served
garnished with the jelly, which should be firm, and very clear and
well-flavoured: the liquor in which a calf's foot has been boiled down,
added to the broth, will give it the necessary degree of consistence.
. first carve them entirely into joints, then remove the bones,
beginning with the legs and wings, at the head of the largest bone; hold
this with the fingers, and work the knife as directed in the recipe
above. the remainder of the birds is too easily done to require any
instructions.
. ingredients.—wheatears; fresh butter.
mode.—after the birds are picked, gutted, and cleaned, truss them
like larks, put them down to a quick fire, and baste them well with
fresh butter. when done, which will be in about  minutes, dish them on
fried bread crumbs, and garnish the dish with slices of lemon.
time.— minutes.
seasonable from july to october.
 the wheatear.—the wheatear is an annual visitor of england: it
 arrives about the middle of march and leaves in september. the
 females come about a fortnight before the males, and continue to
 arrive till the middle of may. they are in season from july to
 october, and are taken in large numbers on the south downs, in
 the neighbourhood of eastbourne, brighton, and other parts of
 sussex. they are taken by means of snares and nets, and numbers
 of them are eaten on the spot by the inhabitants. the larger
 ones are sent to london and potted, where they are by many as
 much esteemed as the ortolans of the continent. mr. pennant
 assigns as the reason of their abounding on the downs about
 eastbourne, the existence of a species of fly which forms their
 favourite food, and which feeds on the wild thyme on the
 adjacent hills.
[illustration: the guinea-pig.]
 . the guinea-pig.—this common hutch-companion of the rabbit,
 although originally a native of brazil, propagates freely in
 england and other european countries. were it not that they
 suffer cruelly from cats, and numerous other enemies, and that
 it is the habit of the males to devour their own offspring,
 their numbers would soon become overwhelming. rats, however, it
 is said, carefully avoid them; and for this reason they are
 frequently bred by rabbit-fanciers, by way of protection for
 their young stock against those troublesome vermin. the lower
 tier of a rabbit-hutch is esteemed excellent quarters by the
 guinea-pig: here, as he runs loose, he will devour the waste
 food of his more admired companion. home naturalists assert that
 the guinea-pig will breed at two months old, the litter varying
 from four to twelve at a time. it is varied in colour,—white,
 fawn, and black, and a mixture of the three colours, forming a
 tortoiseshell, which is the more generally admired hue.
 occasionally, the white ones have red eyes, like those of the
 ferret and the white rabbit. their flesh, although eatable, is
 decidedly unfit for food; they have been tasted, however, we
 presume by some enthusiast eager to advance the cause of
 science, or by some eccentric epicure in search of a new
 pleasure for his palate. unless it has been that they deter rats
 from intruding within the rabbit-hutch, they are as useless as
 they are harmless. the usual ornament of an animal's hind
 quarters is denied them; and were it not for this fact, and also
 for their difference in colour, the shaksperean locution, "a rat
 without a tail," would designate them very properly.
[illustration: the cygnet.]
. the cygnet.—the cygnet, or the young swan, was formerly
much esteemed; but it has "fallen from its high estate," and is
now rarely seen upon the table. we are not sure that it is not
still fattened in norwich for the corporation of that place.
persons who have property on the river there, take the young
birds, and send them to some one who is employed by the
corporation, to be fed; and for this trouble he is paid, or was
wont to be paid, about half a guinea a bird. it is as the future
bird of elegance and grace that the young swan is mostly
admired; when it has become old enough to grace the waters, then
it is that all admire her, when she with
"archčd neck,
between her white wings mantling,
proudly rows
her state with oary feet."
[illustration: roast duck.]
. no dishes require so much knowledge and skill in their carving as
do game and poultry; for it is necessary to be well acquainted with the
anatomy of the bird and animal in order to place the knife at exactly
the proper point. a tough fowl and an old goose are sad triers of a
carver's powers and temper, and, indeed, sometimes of the good humour of
those in the neighbourhood of the carver; for a sudden tilt of the dish
may eventuate in the placing a quantity of the gravy in the lap of the
right or left-hand supporter of the host. we will endeavour to assist
those who are unacquainted with the "gentle art of carving," and also
those who are but slightly acquainted with it, by simply describing the
rules to follow, and referring to the distinctly-marked illustrations of
each dish, which will further help to bring light to the minds of the
uninitiated. if the bird be a young duckling, it may be carved like a
fowl, viz., by first taking off the leg and the wing on either side, as
described at no. ; but in cases where the duckling is very small, it
will be as well not to separate the leg from the wing, as they will not
then form too large a portion for a single serving. after the legs and
wings are disposed of, the remainder of the duck will be also carved in
the same manner as a fowl; and not much difficulty will be experienced,
as ducklings are tender, and the joints are easily broken by a little
gentle forcing, or penetrated by the knife. in cases where the duck is a
large bird, the better plan to pursue is then to carve it like a goose,
that is, by cutting pieces from the breast in the direction indicated by
the lines marked from  to , commencing to carve the slices close to
the wing, and then proceeding upwards from that to the breastbone. if
more should be wanted than can be obtained from both sides of the
breast, then the legs and wings must be attacked, in the same way as is
described in connection with carving a fowl. it may be here remarked,
that as the legs of a duck are placed far more backward than those of a
fowl, their position causing the waddling motion of the bird, the
thigh-bones will be found considerably nearer towards the backbone than
in a chicken: this is the only difference worth mentioning. the carver
should ask each guest if a portion of stuffing would be agreeable; and
in order to get at this, a cut should be made below the breast, as shown
by the line from  to , at the part called the "apron," and the spoon
inserted. (as described in the recipe, it is an excellent plan, when a
couple of ducks are served, to have one with, and the other without
stuffing.) as to the prime parts of a duck, it has been said that "the
wing of a flier and the leg of a swimmer" are severally the best
portions. some persons are fond of the feet of the duck; and, in
trussing, these should never be taken off. the leg, wing, and neckbone
are here shown; so that it will be easy to see the shape they should be
when cut off.
[illustration: leg, wing, and neckbone of duck.]
[illustration: boiled fowl.]
[illustration: leg, wing, and neckbone of fowl.]
. this will not be found a very difficult member of the poultry
family to carve, unless, as may happen, a very old farmyard occupant,
useless for egg-laying purposes, has, by some unlucky mischance, been
introduced info the kitchen as a "fine young chicken." skill, however,
and the application of a small amount of strength, combined with a fine
keeping of the temper, will even get over that difficulty. fixing the
fork firmly in the breast, let the knife be sharply passed along the
line shown from  to ; then cut downwards from that line to fig. ; and
the wing, it will be found, can be easily withdrawn. the shape of the
wing should be like the accompanying engraving. let the fork be placed
inside the leg, which should be gently forced away from the body of the
fowl; and the joint, being thus discovered, the carver can readily cut
through it, and the leg can be served. when the leg is displaced, it
should be of the same shape as that shown in the annexed woodcut. the
legs and wings on either side having been taken off, the carver should
draw his knife through the flesh in the direction of the line  to : by
this means the knife can be slipped underneath the merrythought, which,
being lifted up and pressed backward, will immediately come off. the
collar—or neck-bones are the next to consider: these lie on each side
of the merrythought, close under the upper part of the wings; and, in
order to free these from the fowl, they must also be raised by the knife
at their broad end, and turned from the body towards the breastbone,
until the shorter piece of the bone, as shown in the cut, breaks off.
there will now be left only the breast, with the ribs. the breast can
be, without difficulty, disengaged from the ribs by cutting through the
latter, which will offer little impediment. the side-bones are now to be
taken off; and to do this, the lower end of the back should be turned
from the carver, who should press the point of the knife through the top
of the backbone, near the centre, bringing it down towards the end of
the back completely through the bone. if the knife is now turned in the
opposite direction, the joint will be easily separated from the
vertebra. the backbone being now uppermost, the fork should be pressed
firmly down on it, whilst at the same time the knife should be employed
in raising up the lower small end of the fowl towards the fork, and thus
the back will be dislocated about its middle. the wings, breast, and
merrythought are esteemed the prime parts of a fowl, and are usually
served to the ladies of the company, to whom legs, except as a matter of
paramount necessity, should not be given. byron gave it as one reason
why he did not like dining with ladies, that they always had the wings
of the fowls, which he himself preferred. we heard a gentleman who, when
he might have had a wing, declare his partiality for a leg, saying that
he had been obliged to eat legs for so long a time, that he had at last
come to like them better than the other more prized parts. if the fowl
is, capon-like, very large, slices maybe carved from its breast in the
same manner as from a turkey's.
[illustration: roast fowl.]
. generally speaking, it is not necessary so completely to cut up a
fowl as we have described in the preceding paragraphs, unless, indeed, a
large family party is assembled, and there are a number of "little
mouths" to be filled, or some other such circumstances prevail. a roast
fowl is carved in the same manner as a boiled fowl, no. ; viz., by
cutting along the line from.  to , and then round the leg between it
and the wing. the markings and detached pieces, as shown in the
engravings under the heading of "boiled fowl," supersede the necessity
of our lengthily again describing the operation. it may be added, that
the liver, being considered a delicacy, should be divided, and one half
served with each wing. in the case of a fowl being shifted, it will be
proper to give each guest a portion, unless it be not agreeable to some
one of the party.
[illustration: roast goose.]
[illustration: leg, wing, and neck-bone of goose.]
. it would not be fair to say that this dish bodes a great deal of
happiness to an inexperienced carver, especially if there is a large
party to serve, and the slices off the breast should not suffice to
satisfy the desires and cravings of many wholesome appetites, produced,
may be, by the various sports in vogue at michaelmas and christmas. the
beginning of the task, however, is not in any way difficult. evenly-cut
slices, not too thick or too thin, should be carved from the breast in
the direction of the line from  to ; after the first slice has been
cut, a hole should be made with the knife in the part called the apron,
passing it round the line, as indicated by the figures , , : here the
stuffing is located, and some of this should be served on each plate,
unless it is discovered that it is not agreeable to the taste of some
one guest. if the carver manages cleverly, he will be able to cut a very
large number of fine slices off the breast, and the more so if he
commences close down by the wing, and carves upwards towards the ridge
of the breastbone. as many slices as can be taken from the breast being
carved, the wings should be cut off; and the same process as described
in carving boiled fowl, is made use of in this instance, only more
dexterity and greater force will most probably be required: the shape of
the leg, when disengaged from the body of the goose, should be like that
shown in the accompanying engraving. it will be necessary, perhaps, in
taking off the leg, to turn the goose on its side, and then, pressing
down the small end of the leg, the knife should be passed under it from
the top quite down to the joint; the leg being now turned back by the
fork, the knife must cut through the joint, loosening the thigh-bone
from its socket. the merrythought, which in a goose is not so large as
might be expected, is disengaged in the same way as that of a fowl—by
passing the knife under it, and pressing it backwards towards the neck.
the neck-bones, of which we give a cut, are freed by the same process as
are those of a fowl; and the same may be said of all the other parts of
this bird. the breast of a goose is the part most esteemed; all parts,
however, are good, and full of juicy flavour.
[illustration: pigeon.]
. a very straightforward plan is adopted in carving a pigeon: the
knife is carried sharply in the direction of the line as shown from  to
, entirely through the bird, cutting it into two precisely equal and
similar parts. if it is necessary to make three pieces of it, a small
wing should be cut off with the leg on either side, thus serving two
guests; and, by this means, there will be sufficient meat left on the
breast to send to the third guest.
[illustration: boiled rabbit.]
. in carving a boiled rabbit, let the knife be drawn on each side of
the backbone, the whole length of the rabbit, as shown by the dotted
line  to : thus the rabbit will be in three parts. now let the back be
divided into two equal parts in the direction of the line from  to ;
then let the leg be taken off, as shown by the line  to , and the
shoulder, as shown by the line  to . this, in our opinion, is the best
plan to carve a rabbit, although there are other modes which are
preferred by some.
[illustration: roast rabbit.]
a roast rabbit is rather differently trussed from one that is meant to
be boiled; but the carving is nearly similar, as will be seen by the
cut. the back should be divided into as many pieces as it will give, and
the legs and shoulders can then be disengaged in the same manner as
those of the boiled animal.
[illustration: roast turkey.]
. a noble dish is a turkey, roast or boiled. a christmas dinner,
with the middle classes of this empire, would scarcely be a christmas
dinner without its turkey; and we can hardly imagine an object of
greater envy than is presented by a respected portly pater-familias
carving, at the season devoted to good cheer and genial charity, his own
fat turkey, and carving it well. the only art consists, as in the
carving of a goose, in getting from the breast as many fine slices as
possible; and all must have remarked the very great difference in the
large number of people whom a good carver will find slices for, and the
comparatively few that a bad carver will succeed in serving. as we have
stated in both the carving of a duck and goose, the carver should
commence cutting slices close to the wing from,  to , and then proceed
upwards towards the ridge of the breastbone: this is not the usual plan,
but, in practice, will be found the best. the breast is the only part
which is looked on as fine in a turkey, the legs being very seldom cut
off and eaten at table: they are usually removed to the kitchen, where
they are taken off, as here marked, to appear only in a form which seems
to have a special attraction at a bachelor's supper-table,—we mean
devilled: served in this way, they are especially liked and relished.
a boiled turkey is carved in the same manner as when roasted.
[illustration]
. the common law of england has a maxim, that goods, in which no
person can claim any property, belong, by his or her prerogative, to the
king or queen. accordingly, those animals, those ferae naturae, which
come under the denomination of game, are, in our laws, styled his or her
majesty's, and may therefore, as a matter of course, be granted by the
sovereign to another; in consequence of which another may prescribe to
possess the same within a certain precinct or lordship. from this
circumstance arose the right of lords of manors or others to the game
within their respective liberties; and to protect these species of
animals, the game laws were originated, and still remain in force. there
are innumerable acts of parliament inflicting penalties on persons who
may illegally kill game, and some of them are very severe; but they
cannot be said to answer their end, nor can it be expected that they
ever will, whilst there are so many persons of great wealth who have not
otherwise the means of procuring game, except by purchase, and who will
have it. these must necessarily encourage poaching, which, to a very
large extent, must continue to render all game laws nugatory as to their
intended effects upon the rustic population.
. the object of these laws, however, is not wholly confined to the
restraining of the illegal sportsman. even qualified or privileged
persons must not kill game at all seasons. during the day, the hours
allowed for sporting are from one hour before sunrise till one hour
after sunset; whilst the time of killing certain species is also
restricted to certain seasons. for example, the season for
bustard-shooting is from december  to march ; for grouse, or red
grouse, from august  to december ; heath-fowl, or black-game, from
august  to december ; partridges from september  to february ;
pheasants from october  to february ; widgeons, wild ducks, wild
geese, wild fowls, at any time but in june, july, august, and september.
hares may be killed at any time of the year, under certain restrictions
defined by an act of parliament of the th of george iii.
is called hunting, which, to this day, is followed in the field and the
forest, with gun and greyhound. birds, on the contrary, are not hunted,
but shot in the air, or taken with nets and other devices, which is
called fowling; or they are pursued and taken by birds of prey, which is
called hawking, a species of sport now fallen almost entirely into
desuetude in england, although, in some parts, showing signs of being
revived.
. in pursuing four-footed beasts, such as deer, boars, and hares,
properly termed hunting, mankind were, from the earliest ages, engaged.
it was the rudest and the most obvious manner of acquiring human support
before the agricultural arts had in any degree advanced. it is an
employment, however, requiring both art and contrivance, as well as a
certain fearlessness of character, combined with the power of
considerable physical endurance. without these, success could not be
very great; but, at best, the occupation is usually accompanied with
rude and turbulent habits; and, when combined with these, it constitutes
what is termed the savage state of man. as culture advances, and as the
soil proportionably becomes devoted to the plough or to the sustenance
of the tamer or more domesticated animals, the range of the huntsman is
proportionably limited; so that when a country has attained to a high
state of cultivation, hunting becomes little else than an amusement of
the opulent. in the case of fur-bearing animals, however, it is somewhat
different; for these continue to supply the wants of civilization with
one of its most valuable materials of commerce.
. the themes which form the minstrelsy of the earliest ages, either
relate to the spoils of the chase or the dangers of the battle-field.
even the sacred writings introduce us to nimrod, the first mighty hunter
before the lord, and tell us that ishmael, in the solitudes of arabia,
became a skilful bow-man; and that david, when yet young, was not afraid
to join in combat with the lion or the bear. the greek mythology teems
with hunting exploits. hercules overthrows the nemaean lion, the
erymanthean boar, and the hydra of lerna; diana descends to the earth,
and pursues the stag; whilst aesculapius, nestor, theseus, ulysses, and
achilles are all followers of the chase. aristotle, sage as he was,
advises young men to apply themselves early to it; and plato finds in it
something divine. horace exalts it as a preparative exercise for the
path of glory, and several of the heroes of homer are its ardent
votaries. the romans followed the hunting customs of the greeks, and the
ancient britons were hunters before julius caesar invaded their shores.
. although the ancient britons followed hunting, however, they did
not confine themselves solely to its pursuit. they bred cattle and
tilled the ground, and, to some extent, indicated the rudimentary state
of a pastoral and agricultural life; but, in every social change, the
sports of the field maintained their place. after the expulsion of the
danes, and during the brief restoration of the saxon monarchy, these
were still followed: even edward the confessor, who would join in no
other secular amusements, took the greatest delight, says william of
malmesbury, "to follow a pack of swift hounds in pursuit of game, and to
cheer them with his voice."
. nor was edward the only english sovereign who delighted in the
pleasures of the chase. william the norman, and his two sons who
succeeded him, were passionately fond of the sport, and greatly
circumscribed the liberties of their subjects in reference to the
killing of game. the privilege of hunting in the royal forests was
confined to the king and his favourites; and in order that these
umbrageous retreats might be made more extensive, whole villages were
depopulated, places of worship levelled with the ground, and every means
adopted that might give a sufficient amplitude of space, in accordance
with the royal pleasure, for the beasts of the chase. king john was
likewise especially attached to the sports of the field; whilst edward
iii. was so enamoured of the exercise, that even during his absence at
the wars in france, he took with him sixty couples of stag-hounds and as
many hare-hounds, and every day amused himself either with hunting or
hawking. great in wisdom as the scotch solomon, james i., conceited
himself to be, he was much addicted to the amusements of hunting,
hawking, and shooting. yea, it is oven asserted that his precious time
was divided between hunting, the bottle, and his standish: to the first
he gave his fair weather, to the second his dull, and to the third his
cloudy. from his days down to the present, the sports of the field have
continued to hold their high reputation, not only for the promotion of
health, but for helping to form that manliness of character which enters
so largely into the composition of the sons of the british soil. that it
largely helps to do this there can be no doubt. the late duke of
grafton, when hunting, was, on one occasion, thrown into a ditch. a
young curate, engaged in the same chase, cried out, "lie still, my
lord!" leapt over him, and pursued his sport. such an apparent want of
feeling might be expected to have been resented by the duke; but not so.
on his being helped up by his attendant, he said, "that man shall have
the first good living that falls to my disposal: had he stopped to have
given me his sympathy, i never would have given him anything." such was
the manly sentiment of the duke, who delighted in the exemplification of
a spirit similarly ardent as his own in the sport, and above the
baseness of an assumed sorrow.
. that hunting has in many instances been carried to an excess is
well known, and the match given by the prince esterhazy, regent of
hungary, on the signing of the treaty of peace with france, is not the
least extraordinary upon record. on that occasion, there were killed 
deer,  wild boars,  hares, and  foxes: this was the achievement
of one day. enormous, however, as this slaughter may appear, it is
greatly inferior to that made by the contemporary king of naples on a
hunting expedition. that sovereign had a larger extent of ground at his
command, and a longer period for the exercise of his talents;
consequently, his sport, if it can so be called, was proportionably
greater. it was pursued during his journey to vienna, in austria,
bohemia, and moravia; when he killed  bears, , boars, , deer,
, does, , roebucks, , rabbits,  wolves,  badgers,
, hares, and  foxes. in birds, during the same expedition, he
killed , pheasants and , partridges. such an amount of
destruction can hardly be called sport; it resembles more the
indiscriminate slaughter of a battle-field, where the scientific engines
of civilized warfare are brought to bear upon defenceless savages.
. deer and hares may be esteemed as the only four-footed animals now
hunted in britain for the table; and even those are not followed with
the same ardour as they were wont to be. still, there is no country in
the world where the sport of hunting on horseback is carried to such an
extent as in great britain, and where the pleasures of the chase are so
well understood, and conducted on such purely scientific principles. the
fox, of all "the beasts of the field," is now considered to afford the
best sport. for this, it is infinitely superior to the stag; for the
real sportsman can only enjoy that chase when the deer is sought for and
found like other game which are pursued with hounds. in the case of
finding an outlying fallow-deer, which is unharboured, in this manner,
great sport is frequently obtained; but this is now rarely to be met
with in britain. in reference to hare-hunting, it is much followed in
many parts of this and the sister island; but, by the true foxhunter, it
is considered as a sport only fit to be pursued by women and old men.
although it is less dangerous and exciting than the fox-chase, however,
it has great charms for those who do not care for the hard riding which
the other requires.
. the art of taking or killing birds is called "fowling," and is
either practised as an amusement by persons of rank or property, or for
a livelihood by persons who use nets and other apparatus. when practised
as an amusement, it principally consists of killing them with a light
firearm called a "fowling-piece," and the sport is secured to those who
pursue it by the game laws. the other means by which birds are taken,
consist in imitating their voices, or leading them, by other artifices,
into situations where they become entrapped by nets, birdlime, or
otherwise. for taking large numbers of birds, the pipe or call is the
most common means employed; and this is done during the months of
september and october. we will here briefly give a description of the
modus operandi pursued in this sport. a thin wood is usually the spot
chosen, and, under a tree at a little distance from the others, a cabin
is erected, and there are only such branches left on the tree as are
necessary for the placing of the birdlime, and which are covered with
it. around the cabin are placed avenues with twisted perches, also
covered with birdlime. having thus prepared all that is necessary, the
birdcatcher places himself in the cabin, and, at sunrise and sunset,
imitates the cry of a small bird calling the others to its assistance.
supposing that the cry of the owl is imitated, immediately different
kinds of birds will flock together at the cry of their common enemy,
when, at every instant, they will be seen falling to the ground, their
wings being of no use to them, from their having come in contact with
the birdlime. the cries of those which are thus situated now attract
others, and thus are large numbers taken in a short space of time. if
owls were themselves desired to be taken, it is only during the night
that this can be done, by counterfeiting the squeak of the mouse. larks,
other birds, and water-fowl, are sometimes taken by nets; but to
describe fully the manner in which this is done, would here occupy too
much space.
. feathered game have from time immemorial given gratification to
the palate of man. with the exception of birds of prey, and some other
species, moses permitted his people to eat them; and the egyptians made
offerings to their priests of their most delicate birds. the ancient
greeks commenced their repasts with little roasted birds; and feathered
game, amongst the romans, was served as the second course. indeed,
several of the ancient gourmands of the "imperial city" were so fond
of game, that they brought themselves to ruin by eating flamingoes and
pheasants. "some modern nations, the french among others," says monsieur
soyer, "formerly ate the heron, crane, crow, stork, swan, cormorant, and
bittern. the first three especially were highly esteemed; and
laillevant, cook of charles vii., teaches us how to prepare these
meagre, tough birds. belon says, that in spite of its revolting taste
when unaccustomed to it, the bittern is, however, among the delicious
treats of the french. this writer also asserts, that a falcon or a
vulture, either roasted or boiled, is excellent eating; and that if one
of these birds happened to kill itself in flying after game, the
falconer instantly cooked it. lebaut calls the heron a royal viand."
. the heron was hunted by the hawk, and the sport of hawking is
usually placed at the head of those amusements that can only be
practised in the country. this precedency it probably obtained from its
being a pastime to generally followed by the nobility, not in great
britain only, but likewise on the continent. in former times, persons of
high rank rarely appeared in public without their dogs and their hawks:
the latter they carried with them when they journeyed from one country
to another, and sometimes even took them to battle with them, and would
not part with them when taken prisoners, even to obtain their own
liberty. such birds were esteemed as the ensigns of nobility, and no
action was reckoned more dishonourable in a man of rank than that of
giving up his hawk. we have already alluded to the hunting propensities
of our own edward iii., and we may also allude to his being equally
addicted to hawking. according to froissart, when this sovereign invaded
france, he took with him thirty falconers on horseback, who had charge
of his hawks, and every day, as his royal fancy inclined him, he either
hunted, or went to the river for the purpose of hawking. in the great
and powerful, the pursuit of game as a sport is allowable, but in those
who have to earn their bread by the sweat of their brow, it is to be
condemned. in burton's "anatomy of melancholy" we find a humorous story,
told by poggius, the florentine, who reprobates this folly in such
persons. it is this. a physician of milan, that cured madmen, had a pit
of water in his house, in which he kept his patients, some up to the
knees, some to the girdle, some to the chin, pro modo insaniae, as
they were more or less affected. one of them by chance, that was well
recovered, stood in the door, and seeing a gallant pass by with a hawk
on his fist, well mounted, with his spaniels after him, would needs know
to what use all this preparation served. he made answer, to kill certain
fowl. the patient demanded again, what his fowl might be worth which he
killed in a year? he replied, five or ten crowns; and when he urged him
further, what his dogs, horse, and hawks stood him in, he told him four
hundred crowns. with that the patient bade him begone, as he loved his
life and welfare; "for if our master come and find thee here, he will
put thee in the pit, amongst the madmen, up to the chin." thus reproving
the madness of such men as will spend themselves in those vain sports,
to the neglect of their business and necessary affairs.
. as the inevitable result of social progress is, at least to limit,
if not entirely to suppress, such sports as we have here been treating
of, much of the romance of country life has passed away. this is more
especially the case with falconry, which had its origin about the middle
of the fourth century, although, lately, some attempts have been rather
successfully made to institute a revival of the "gentle art" of hawking.
julius firmicus, who lived about that time, is, so far as we can find,
the first latin author who speaks of falconers, and the art of teaching
one species of birds to fly after and catch others. the occupation of
these functionaries has now, however, all but ceased. new and nobler
efforts characterize the aims of mankind in the development of their
civilization, and the sports of the field have, to a large extent, been
superseded by other exercises, it may be less healthful and
invigorating, but certainly more elegant, intellectual, and humanizing.
[illustration]
. ingredients.—black-cock, butter, toast.
[illustration: roast black-cock.]
mode.—let these birds hang for a few days, or they will be tough and
tasteless, if not well kept. pluck and draw them, and wipe the insides
and outsides with a damp cloth, as washing spoils the flavour. cut off
the heads, and truss them, the same as a roast fowl, cutting off the
toes, and scalding and peeling the feet. trussing them with the head on,
as shown in the engraving, is still practised by many cooks, but the
former method is now considered the best. put them down to a brisk fire,
well baste them with butter, and serve with a piece of toast under, and
a good gravy and bread sauce. after trussing, some cooks cover the
breast with vine-leaves and slices of bacon, and then roast them. they
should be served in the same manner and with the same accompaniments as
with the plainly-roasted birds.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, from s. to s. the brace; but seldom bought.
sufficient,— or  for a dish.
seasonable from the middle of august to the end of december.
[illustration: the black-cock.]
 the black-cock, heath-cock, moor-fowl, or heath-poult.—this
 bird sometimes weighs as much as four pounds, and the hen about
 two. it is at present confined to the more northern parts of
 britain, culture and extending population having united in
 driving it into more desolate regions, except, perhaps, in a few
 of the more wild and less-frequented portions of england. it may
 still be found in the new forest, in hampshire, dartmoor, and
 sedgmoor, in devonshire, and among the hills of somersetshire,
 contiguous to the latter. it may also be found in staffordshire,
 in north wales, and again in the north of england; but nowhere
 so plentiful as in some parts of the highlands of scotland. the
 males are hardly distinguishable from the females until they are
 about half-grown, when the black feathers begin to appear, first
 about the sides and breast. their food consists of the tops of
 birch and heath, except when the mountain berries are ripe, at
 which period they eagerly and even voraciously pick the
 bilberries and cranberries from the bushes. large numbers of
 these birds are found in norway, almost rivalling the turkey in
 point of size. some of them have begun to be imported into
 london, where they are vended in the shops; but the flavour of
 their flesh is not equal to that of the scotch bird.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast wild duck,  pint of good
brown gravy,  tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs,  glass of claret, salt,
cayenne, and mixed spices to taste;  tablespoonful of lemon or seville
orange-juice.
mode.—cut the remains of the duck into neat joints, put them into a
stewpan, with all the above ingredients; let them get gradually hot by
the side of the fire, and occasionally stir the contents; when on the
point of boiling, serve, and garnish the dish with sippets of toasted
bread.
time.—about / hour.
seasonable from november to february.
. ingredients.— wild ducks,  shalots,  pint of stock no. , 
glass of port wine,  oz. of butter, a little flour, the juice of /
lemon, cayenne and salt to taste.
mode.—ducks that have been dressed and left from the preceding day
will answer for this dish. cut them into joints, reserve the legs,
wings, and breasts until wanted; put the trimmings into a stewpan with
the shalots and stock, and let them simmer for about / hour, and
strain the gravy. put the butter into a stewpan; when melted, dredge in
a little flour, and pour in the gravy made from the bones; give it one
boil, and strain it again; add the wine, lemon-juice, and cayenne; lay
in the pieces of duck, and let the whole gradually warm through, but do
not allow it to boil, or the duck will be hard. the gravy should not be
too thick, and should be very highly seasoned. the squeeze of a seville
orange is a great improvement to this dish.
time.—about / hour to make the gravy; / hour for the duck
gradually to warm through.
seasonable from november to february.
. ingredients.—wild duck, flour, butter.
[illustration: roast wild duck.]
mode.—carefully pluck and draw them; cut off the heads close to the
necks, leaving sufficient skin to turn over, and do not cut off the
feet; some twist each leg at the knuckle, and rest the claws on each
side of the breast; others truss them as shown in our illustration.
roast the birds before a quick fire, and, when they are first put down,
let them remain for  minutes without basting (this will keep the gravy
in); afterwards baste plentifully with butter, and a few minutes before
serving dredge them lightly with flour; baste well, and send them to
table nicely frothed, and full of gravy. if overdone, the birds will
lose their flavour. serve with a good gravy in the dish, or orange
gravy, no. ; and send to table with them a cut lemon. to take off the
fishy taste which wild fowl sometimes have, baste them for a few minutes
with hot water to which have been added an onion and a little salt; then
take away the pan, and baste with butter.—see coloured plate, g.
time.—when liked underdressed,  to  minutes; well done,  to 
minutes.
average cost, s. to s. the couple.
sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from november to february.
[illustration: the wild duck.]
 the wild duck.—the male of the wild dock is called a mallard;
 and the young ones are called flappers. the time to try to find
 a brood of these is about the month of july, among the rushes of
 the deepest and most retired parts of some brook or stream,
 where, if the old bird is sprung, it may be taken as a certainty
 that its brood is not far off. when once found, flappers are
 easily killed, as they attain their full growth before their
 wings are fledged. consequently, the sport is more like hunting
 water-rats than shooting birds. when the flappers take wing,
 they assume the name of wild ducks, and about the month of
 august repair to the corn-fields, where they remain until they
 are disturbed by the harvest-people. they then frequent the
 rivers pretty early in the evening, and give excellent sport to
 those who have patience to wait for them. in order to know a
 wild duck, it is necessary only to look at the claws, which
 should be black.
hashed game (cold meat cookery).
. ingredients.—the remains of cold game,  onion stuck with 
cloves, a few whole peppers, a strip of lemon-peel, salt to taste,
thickening of butter and flour,  glass of port wine,  tablespoonful of
lemon-juice,  tablespoonful of ketchup,  pint of water or weak stock.
mode.—cut the remains of cold game into joints, reserve the best
pieces, and the inferior ones and trimmings put into a stewpan with the
onion, pepper, lemon-peel, salt, and water or weak stock; stew these for
about an hour, and strain the gravy; thicken it with butter and flour;
add the wine, lemon-juice, and ketchup; lay in the pieces of game, and
let them gradually warm through by the side of the fire; do not allow it
to boil, or the game will be hard. when on the point of simmering,
serve, and garnish the dish with sippets of toasted bread.
time.—altogether -/ hour.
seasonable from august to march.
note.—any kind of game may be hashed by the above recipe, and the
flavour may be varied by adding flavoured vinegars, curvy powder, &c.;
but we cannot recommend these latter ingredients, as a dish of game
should really have a gamy taste; and if too many sauces, essences, &c.,
are added to the gravy, they quite overpower and destroy the flavour the
dish should possess.
. ingredients.—grouse; cayenne, salt, and pepper to taste;  lb. of
rump-steak, / pint of well-seasoned broth, puff paste.
mode.—line the bottom of a pie-dish with the rump-steak cut into neat
pieces, and, should the grouse be large, cut them into joints; but, if
small, they may be laid in the pie whole; season highly with salt,
cayenne, and black pepper; pour in the broth, and cover with a puff
paste; brush the crust over with the yolk of an egg, and bake from /
to  hour. if the grouse is cut into joints, the backbones and trimmings
will make the gravy, by stewing them with an onion, a little sherry, a
bunch of herbs, and a blade of mace: this should be poured in after the
pie is baked.
time.—/ to  hour.
average cost, exclusive of the grouse, which are seldom bought, s.
d.
seasonable from the th of august to the beginning of december.
[illustration: roast grouse.]
. ingredients.—grouse, butter, a thick slice of toasted bread.
mode.—let the birds hang as long as possible; pluck and draw them;
wipe, but do not wash them, inside and out, and truss them without the
head, the same as for a roast fowl. many persons still continue to truss
them with the head under the wing, but the former is now considered the
most approved method. put them down to a sharp clear fire; keep them
well basted the whole of the time they are cooking, and serve them on a
buttered toast, soaked in the dripping-pan, with a little melted butter
poured over them, or with bread-sauce and gravy.—see coloured plate,
time.—/ hour; if liked very thoroughly done,  minutes.
average cost, s. to s. d. the brace; but seldom bought.
sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from the th of august to the beginning of december.
[illustration: red grouse.]
 grouse.—these birds are divided into wood grouse, black grouse,
 red grouse, and white grouse. the wood grouse is further
 distinguished as the cock of the wood, or capercalzie, and is as
 large as the turkey, being about two feet nine inches in length,
 and weighing from twelve to fifteen pounds. the female is
 considerably less than the male, and, in the colour of her
 feathers, differs widely from the other. this beautiful species
 is found principally in lofty, mountainous regions, and is very
 rare in great britain; but in the pine forests of russia,
 sweden, and other northern countries, it is very common. in
 these it has its habitat, feeding on the cones of the trees, and
 the fruits of various kinds of plants, especially the berry of
 the jumper. black grouse is also distinguished as black-game, or
 the black-cock. it is not larger than the common hen, and weighs
 only about four pounds. the female is about one-third less than
 the male, and also differs considerably from him in point of
 colour. like the former, they are found chiefly in high
 situations, and are common in russia, siberia, and other
 northern countries. they are also found in the northern parts of
 great britain, feeding in winter on the various berries and
 fruits belonging to mountainous countries, and, in summer,
 frequently descending to the lower lands, to feed upon corn. the
 red grouse, gorcock, or moor-cock, weighs about nineteen ounces,
 and the female somewhat less. in the wild heathy tracts of the
 northern counties of england it is plentiful, also in wales and
 the highlands of scotland. mr. pennant considered it peculiar to
 britain, those found in the mountainous parts of spain, france,
 and italy, being only varieties of the same bird. white grouse,
 white game, or ptarmigan, is nearly the same size as the red
 grouse, and is found in lofty situations, where it supports
 itself in the severest weather. it is to be met with in most of
 the northern countries of europe, and appears even in greenland.
 in the hebrides, orkneys, and the highlands of scotland, it is
 also found; and sometimes, though rarely, among the fells of
 northumberland and cumberland. in winter they fly in flocks, and
 are so little familiar with the sight of man, that they are
 easily shot, and even snared. they feed on the wild produce of
 the hills, which sometimes imparts to their flesh a bitter but
 not unpalatable taste. according to buffon, it is dark-coloured,
 and somewhat flavoured like the hare.
(soyer's recipe.)
. ingredients.— eggs, butter, fresh salad,  or  grouse; for the
sauce,  teaspoonful of minced shalot,  teaspoonful of pounded sugar,
the yolk of  egg,  teaspoonful of minced parsley, / oz. of salt, 
tablespoonfuls of oil,  tablespoonfuls of chili vinegar,  gill of
cream.
mode.—boil the eggs hard, shell them, throw them into cold water cut
a thin slice off the bottom to facilitate the proper placing of them in
the dish, cut each one into four lengthwise, and make a very thin flat
border of butter, about one inch from the edge of the dish the salad is
to be served on; fix the pieces of egg upright close to each other, the
yolk outside, or the yolk and white alternately; lay in the centre a
fresh salad of whatever is in season, and, having previously roasted the
grouse rather underdone, cut it into eight or ten pieces, and prepare
the sauce as follows:—put the shalots into a basin, with the sugar, the
yolk of an egg, the parsley, and salt, and mix in by degrees the oil and
vinegar; when these ingredients are well mixed, put the sauce on ice or
in a cool place. when ready to serve, whip the cream rather thick, which
lightly mix with it; then lay the inferior parts of the grouse on the
salad, sauce over so as to cover each piece, then lay over the salad and
the remainder of the grouse, pour the rest of the sauce over, and serve.
the eggs may be ornamented with a little dot of radishes or beetroot on
the point. anchovy and gherkin, cut into small diamonds, may be placed
between, or cut gherkins in slices, and a border of them laid round.
tarragon or chervil-leaves are also a pretty addition. the remains of
cold black-game, pheasant, or partridge may be used in the above manner,
and will make a very delicate dish.
average cost, s. d.
seasonable from the th of august to the beginning of december.
[illustration: the capercalzie.]
 the capercalzie.—this bird was to be met with formerly both in
 ireland and scotland, but is now extinct. the male lives
 separate from the females, except in the breeding season. its
 manners and habits are very like those of black grouse, except
 that it seems to be wholly confined to forests of pine, on the
 tender shoots of which it feeds. it is by no means uncommon in
 the woods of norway, whence we received it. it is also found
 abundant in russia, siberia, italy, and in some portions of the
 alps. it was, in , last seen in scotland, in the woods of
 strathglass. recent attempts have been made to re-introduce it
 into that country, but without success; principally owing, as we
 should imagine, to the want of sufficient food suitable for its
 sustenance.
 grouse.—under this general term are included several species of
 game birds, called black, red, woodland, and white grouse. the
 black is larger than the red (see no. ), and is not so
 common, and therefore held in higher estimation. the red,
 however, is a bird of exquisite flavour, and is a native of the
 mountainous districts of scotland and the north of england. it
 feeds on the tops of the heath and the berries that grow amongst
 them: its colour is a rich chestnut, striped with black. the
 woodland, or cock of the wood, is the largest among the bird
 tribes which pass under the denomination of game. it is smaller
 than the turkey, and was originally common in our mountains; but
 it is now to be found only in the mountains of scotland, though
 it still abounds in the north of europe, germany, and in the
 alps. it is esteemed as delicious eating, and its plumage is
 extremely beautiful. the white grouse, or ptarmigan, is not a
 plentiful bird in britain; but it is still found in the islands,
 and weighs about half a pound. the london market is supplied by
 norway and scotland; those from the former country being
 esteemed the best. when young, it is held in high estimation,
 being considered as little different from common grouse.
. ingredients.—hare, forcemeat no. , a little milk, butter.
choosing and trussing.—choose a young hare; which may be known by its
smooth and sharp claws, and by the cleft in the lip not being much
spread. to be eaten in perfection, it must hang for some time; and, if
properly taken care of, it may be kept for several days. it is better to
hang without being paunched; but should it be previously emptied, wipe
the inside every day, and sprinkle over it a little pepper and ginger,
to prevent the musty taste which long keeping in the damp occasions, and
which also affects the stuffing. after it is skinned, wash it well, and
soak for an hour in warm water to draw out the blood; if old, let it lie
in vinegar for a short time, but wash it well afterwards in several
waters. make a forcemeat by recipe no. , wipe the hare dry, fill the
belly with it, and sew it up. bring the hind and fore legs close to the
body towards the head, run a skewer through each, fix the head between
the shoulders by means of another skewer, and be careful to leave the
ears on. pat a string round the body from skewer to skewer, and tie it
above the back.
[illustration: roast hare.]
mode.—the hare should be kept at a distance from the fire when it is
first laid down, or the outside will become dry and hard before the
inside is done. baste it well with milk for a short time, and afterwards
with butter; and particular attention must be paid to the basting, so as
to preserve the meat on the back juicy and nutritive. when it is almost
roasted enough, flour the hare, and baste well with butter. when nicely
frothed, dish it, remove the skewers, and send it to table with a little
gravy in the dish, and a tureen of the same. red-currant jelly must also
not be forgotten, as this is an indispensable accompaniment to roast
hare. for economy, good beef dripping may be substituted for the milk
and butter to baste with; but the basting, as we have before stated,
must be continued without intermission. if the liver is good, it maybe
parboiled, minced, and mixed with the stuffing; but it should not be
used unless quite fresh.—see coloured plate, e.
time.—a middling-sized hare, -/ hour; a large hare, -/ to 
hours.
average cost, from s. to s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to the end of february.
the hare.—this little animal is found generally distributed over
europe, and, indeed, in most parts of the northern world. its extreme
timidity is the endowment which providence has bestowed upon it as a
means of defence; it is therefore attentive to every sound, and is
supplied with ears both long and tubular, with which it can hear with
great acuteness. its eyes, also, are so constructed, and placed so
prominent in its head, that it can see both before and behind it. it
lives entirely upon vegetables, but its flesh is considered dry,
notwithstanding that it is deemed, in many respects, superior to that of
the rabbit, being more savoury, and of a much higher flavour. its
general time of feeding is the evening; but during the day, if not
disturbed, it adheres closely to its form.
[illustration: the hare.]
potted hare (a luncheon or breakfast dish).
. ingredients.— hare, a few slices of bacon, a large bunch of
savoury herbs,  cloves, / teaspoonful of whole allspice,  carrots, 
onions, salt and pepper to taste,  pint of water,  glasses of sherry.
mode.—skin, empty, and wash the hare; cut it down the middle, and put
it into a stewpan, with a few slices of bacon under and over it; add the
remaining ingredients, and stew very gently until the hare is tender,
and the flesh will separate easily from the bones. when done enough,
take it up, remove the bones, and pound the meat, with the bacon, in a
mortar, until reduced to a perfectly smooth paste. should it not be
sufficiently seasoned, add a little cayenne, salt, and pounded mace, but
be careful that these are well mixed with the other ingredients. press
the meat into potting-pots, pour over clarified butter, and keep in a
dry place. the liquor that the hare was stewed in, should be saved for
hashes, soups, &c. &c.
time.—about / hours to stew the hare.
seasonable from september to the end of february.
broiled hare (a supper or luncheon dish).
. ingredients.—the leg and shoulders of a roast hare, cayenne and
salt to taste, a little butter.
mode.—cut the legs and shoulders of a roast hare, season them highly
with salt and cayenne, and broil them over a very clear fire for 
minutes. dish them on a hot dish, rub over them a little cold butter,
and send to table very quickly.
time.— minutes.
seasonable from september to the end of february.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold roast hare,  blade of pounded
mace,  or  allspice, pepper and salt to taste,  onion, a bunch of
savoury herbs,  tablespoonfuls of port wine, thickening of butter and
flour,  tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup.
mode.—cut the cold hare into neat slices, and put the head, bones,
and trimmings into a stewpan, with / pint of water; add the mace,
allspice, seasoning, onion, and herbs, and stew for nearly an hour, and
strain the gravy; thicken it with butter and flour, add the wine and
ketchup, and lay in the pieces of hare, with any stuffing that may be
left. let the whole gradually heat by the side of the fire, and, when it
has simmered for about  minutes, serve, and garnish the dish with
sippets of toasted bread. send red-currant jelly to table with it.
time.—rather more than  hour.
average cost, exclusive of the cold hare, d.
seasonable from september to the end of february.
(very good.)
. ingredients.— hare, -/ lb. of gravy beef, / lb. of butter,
 onion,  lemon,  cloves; pepper, cayenne, and salt to taste; / pint
of port wine.
mode.—skin, paunch, and wash the hare, cut it into pieces, dredge
them with flour, and fry in boiling butter. have ready -/ pint of
gravy, made from the above proportion of beef, and thickened with a
little flour. put this into a jar; add the pieces of fried hare, an
onion stuck with six cloves, a lemon peeled and cut in half, and a good
seasoning of pepper, cayenne, and salt; cover the jar down tightly, put
it up to the neck into a stewpan of boiling water, and let it stew until
the hare is quite tender, taking care to keep the water boiling. when
nearly done, pour in the wine, and add a few forcemeat balls, made by
recipe no. : these must be fried or baked in the oven for a few
minutes before they are put to the gravy. serve with red-currant jelly.
time,—-/ to  hours. if the hare is very old, allow -/ hours.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to the end of february.
(a quicker and more economical way.)
. ingredients.— hare, a bunch of sweet herbs,  onions, each stuck
with  cloves,  whole allspice, / teaspoonful of black pepper, a
strip of lemon-peel, thickening of butter and flour,  tablespoonfuls of
mushroom ketchup, / pint of port wine.
mode.—wash the hare nicely, cut it up into joints (not too large),
and flour and brown them as in the preceding recipe; then put them into
a stewpan with the herbs, onions, cloves, allspice, pepper, and
lemon-peel; cover with hot water, and when it boils, carefully remove
all the scum, and let it simmer gently till tender, which will be in
about -/ hour, or longer, should the hare be very old. take out the
pieces of hare, thicken the gravy with flour and butter, add the ketchup
and port wine, let it boil for about  minutes, strain it through a
sieve over the hare, and serve. a few fried forcemeat balls should be
added at the moment of serving, or instead of frying them, they may be
stewed in the gravy, about  minutes before the hare is wanted for
table. do not omit to serve red-currant jelly with it.
time.—altogether  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to the end of february.
note.—should there be any left, rewarm it the next day by putting the
hare, &c. into a covered jar, and placing this jar in a saucepan of
boiling water: this method prevents a great deal of waste.
. ingredients.— or  birds, butter, fried bread crumbs.
[illustration: landrails.]
mode.—pluck and draw the birds, wipe them inside and out with damp
cloths, and truss them in the following manner:—bring the head round
under the wing, and the thighs close to the sides; pass a skewer through
them and the body, and keep the legs straight. roast them before a clear
fire, keep them well basted, and serve on fried bread crumbs, with a
tureen of brown gravy. when liked, bread-sauce may also be sent to table
with them.
time.— to  minutes. average cost,—seldom bought.
sufficient.—allow— for a dish.
seasonable from august th to the middle of september.
[illustration: the landrail.]
 the landrail, or corn-crake.—this bird is migratory in its
 habits, yet from its formation, it seems ill adapted for long
 aërial passages, its wings being short, and placed so forward
 out of the centre of gravity, that it flies in an extremely
 heavy and embarrassed manner, and with its legs hanging down.
 when it alights, it can hardly be sprung a second time, as it
 runs very fast, and seems to depend for its safety more on the
 swiftness of its feet than the celerity of its wings. it makes
 its appearance in england about the same time as the quail, that
 is, in the months of april and may, and frequents the same
 places. its singular cry is first heard when the grass becomes
 long enough to shelter it, and it continues to be heard until
 the grass is cut. the bird, however, is seldom seen, for it
 constantly skulks among the thickest portions of the herbage,
 and runs so nimbly through it, doubling and winding in every
 direction, that it is difficult to get near it. it leaves this
 island before the winter, and repairs to other countries in
 search of its food, which principally consists of slugs, large
 numbers of which it destroys. it is very common in ireland, and,
 whilst migrating to this country, is seen in great numbers in
 the island of anglesea. on its first arrival in england, it is
 so lean as scarcely to weigh above five or six ounces; before
 its departure, however, it has been known to exceed eight
 ounces, and is then most delicious eating.
. ingredients.— leverets, butter, flour.
mode.—leverets should be trussed in the same manner as a hare, but
they do not require stuffing. roast them before a clear fire, and keep
them well basted all the time they are cooking. a few minutes before
serving, dredge them lightly with flour, and froth them nicely. serve
with plain gravy in the dish, and send to table red-currant jelly with
them.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, in full season, s. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from may to august, but cheapest in july and august.
broiled partridge (a luncheon, breakfast, or supper dish).
. ingredients.— partridges, salt and cayenne to taste, a small
piece of butter, brown gravy or mushroom sauce.
mode.—pluck, draw, and cut the partridges in half, and wipe the
inside thoroughly with a damp cloth. season them with salt and cayenne,
broil them over a very clear fire, and dish them on a hot dish; rub a
small piece of butter over each half, and send them to table with brown
gravy or mushroom sauce.
time.—about / hour. average cost, s. d. to s. a brace.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from the st of september to the beginning of february.
. ingredients.— partridges, pepper and salt to taste, 
teaspoonful of minced parsley (when obtainable, a few mushrooms), /
lb. of veal cutlet, a slice of ham, / pint of stock, puff paste.
mode.—line a pie-dish with a veal cutlet; over that place a slice of
ham and a seasoning of pepper and salt. pluck, draw, and wipe the
partridges; cut off the legs at the first joint, and season them inside
with pepper, salt, minced parsley, and a small piece of butter; place
them in the dish, and pour over the stock; line the edges of the dish
with puff paste, cover with the same, brush it over with the yolk of an
egg, and bake for / to  hour.
time.—/ to  hour. average cost, s. d. to s. a brace.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from the st of september to the beginning of february.
note.—should the partridges be very large, split them in half; they
will then lie in the dish more compactly. when at hand, a few mushrooms
should always be added.
. ingredients.—partridges; seasoning to taste of mace, allspice
white pepper, and salt; butter, coarse paste.
mode.—pluck and draw the birds, and wipe them inside with a damp
cloth. pound well some mace, allspice, white pepper, and salt; mix
together, and rub every part of the partridges with this. pack the birds
as closely as possible in a baking-pan, with plenty of butter over them,
and cover with a coarse flour and water crust. tie a paper over this,
and bake for rather more than -/ hour; let the birds get cold, then
cut them into pieces for keeping, pack them closely into a large
potting-pot, and cover with clarified butter. this should be kept in a
cool dry place. the butter used for potted things will answer for
basting, or for paste for meat pies.—see coloured plate, d.
time.—-/ hour.
seasonable from the st of september to the beginning of february.
salmi de perdrix, or hashed partridges.
. ingredients.— young partridges,  shalots, a slice of lean ham,
 carrot,  or  mushrooms, a bunch of savoury herbs,  cloves,  whole
peppers, / pint of stock,  glass of sherry or madeira, a small lump
of sugar.
mode.—after the partridges are plucked and drawn, roast them rather
underdone, and cover them with paper, as they should not be browned; cut
them into joints, take off the skin from the wings, legs, and breasts;
put these into a stewpan, cover them up, and set by until the gravy is
ready. cut a slice of ham into small pieces, and put them, with the
carrots sliced, the shalots, mushrooms, herbs, cloves, and pepper, into
a stewpan; fry them lightly in a little butter, pour in the stock, add
the bones and trimming from the partridges, and simmer for / hour.
strain the gravy, let it cool, and skim off every particle of fat; put
it to the legs, wings, and breasts, add a glass of sherry or madeira and
a small lump of sugar, let all gradually warm through by the side of the
fire, and when on the point of boiling, serve, and garnish the dish with
croűtons. the remains of roast partridge answer very well dressed in
this way, although not so good as when the birds are in the first
instance only half-roasted. this recipe is equally suitable for
pheasants, moor-game, &c.; but care must be taken always to skin the
joints.
time.—altogether  hour.
sufficient.— or  partridges for an entrée.
seasonable from the st of september to the beginning of february.
. ingredients.—partridge; butter.
choosing and trussing.—choose young birds, with dark-coloured bills
and yellowish legs, and let them hang a few days, or there will be no
flavour to the flesh, nor will it be tender. the time they should be
kept, entirely depends on the taste of those for whom they are intended,
as what some persons would consider delicious, would be to others
disgusting and offensive. they may be trussed with or without the head,
the latter mode being now considered the most fashionable. pluck, draw,
and wipe the partridge carefully inside and out; cut off the head,
leaving sufficient skin on the neck to skewer back; bring the legs close
to the breast, between it and the side-bones, and pass a skewer through
the pinions and the thick part of the thighs. when the head is left on,
it should be brought round and fixed on to the point of the skewer.
[illustration: roast partridge.]
mode.—when the bird is firmly and plumply trussed, roast it before a
nice bright fire; keep it well basted, and a few minutes before serving,
flour and froth it well. dish it, and serve with gravy and bread sauce,
and send to table hot and quickly. a little of the gravy should be
poured over the bird.—see coloured plate, d.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, is s. d. to s. a brace.
sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from the st of september to the beginning of february.
[illustration: partridges.]
 the partridge.—this bird is to be found in nearly all the
 temperate countries of europe, but is most abundant in the
 ukraine, although it is unable to bear the extremes of climate,
 whether hot or cold. it was formerly very common in france, and
 is considered a table luxury in england. the instinct of this
 bird is frequently exemplified in a remarkable manner, for the
 preservation of its young. "i have seen it often," says a very
 celebrated writer, and an accurate observer of nature, "and once
 in particular, i saw an extraordinary instance of an old bird's
 solicitude to save its brood. as i was hunting with a young
 pointer, the dog ran on a brood of very small partridges; the
 old bird cried, fluttered, and ran tumbling along just before
 the dog's nose, till she had drawn him to a considerable
 distance, when she took wing, and flew still further off, but
 not out of the field; on this the dog returned to me, near the
 place where the young ones lay concealed in the grass, which the
 old bird no sooner perceived than she flew back to us, settled
 just before the dog's nose again, and by rolling and tumbling
 about, drew off his attention from her young, and thus preserved
 her brood a second time. i have also seen, when a kite has been
 hovering over a covey of young partridges, the old birds fly up
 at the bird of prey, screaming and fighting with all their might
 to preserve their brood." partridges should be chosen young; if
 old, they are valueless. the young ones are generally known by
 their yellow legs and dark-coloured bills.
. ingredients.— or  pheasants, egg and bread crumbs, cayenne and
salt to taste, brown gravy.
mode.—procure  young pheasants that have been hung a few days;
pluck, draw, and wipe them inside; cut them into joints; remove the
bones from the best of these; and the backbones, trimmings, &c., put
into a stewpan, with a little stock, herbs, vegetables, seasoning, &c.,
to make the gravy. flatten and trim the cutlets of a good shape, egg and
bread crumb them, broil them over a clear fire, pile them high in the
dish, and pour under them the gravy made from the bones, which should be
strained, flavoured, and thickened. one of the small bones should be
stuck on the point of each cutlet.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. d. to s. each.
sufficient for  entrées.
seasonable from the st of october to the beginning of february.
. ingredients.—pheasant, flour, butter.
choosing and trussing.—old pheasants may be known by the length and
sharpness of their spurs; in young ones they are short and blunt. the
cock bird is generally reckoned the best, except when the hen is with
egg. they should hang some time before they are dressed, as, if they are
cooked fresh, the flesh will be exceedingly dry and tasteless. after the
bird is plucked and drawn, wipe the inside with a damp cloth, and truss
it in the same manner as partridge, no. . if the head is left on, as
shown in the engraving, bring it round under the wing, and fix it on to
the point of the skewer.
[illustration: roast pheasant.]
mode.—roast it before a brisk fire, keep it well basted, and flour
and froth it nicely. serve with brown gravy, a little of which should be
poured round the bird, and a tureen of bread sauce.  or  of the
pheasant's best tail-feathers are sometimes stuck in the tail as an
ornament; but the fashion is not much to be commended.—see coloured
plate, f.
time.—/ to  hour, according to the size.
average cost, s. d. to s. each. sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from the st of october to the beginning of february.
[illustration: the pheasant.]
 the pheasant.—this beautiful bird is said to have been
 discovered by the argonauts on the banks of the phasis, near
 mount ararat, in their expedition to colchis. it is common,
 however, in almost all the southern parts of the european
 continent, and has been long naturalized in the warmest and most
 woody counties of england. it is very common in france; indeed,
 so common as to be esteemed a nuisance by the farmers. although
 it has been domesticated, this is not easily accomplished, nor
 is its flesh so palatable then as it is in the wild state. mr.
 ude says—"it is not often that pheasants are met with
 possessing that exquisite taste which is acquired only by long
 keeping, as the damp of this climate prevents their being kept
 as long as they are in other countries. the hens, in general,
 are the most delicate. the cocks show their age by their spurs.
 they are only fit to be eaten when the blood begins to run from
 the bill, which is commonly six days or a week after they have
 been killed. the flesh is white, tender, and has a good flavour,
 if you keep it long enough; if not, it is not much different
 from that of a common fowl or hen."
brillat savarin's recipe for roast pheasant, a la sainte alliance.
. when the pheasant is in good condition to be cooked (see no.
), it should be plucked, and not before. the bird should then be
stuffed in the following manner:—take two snipes, and draw them,
putting the bodies on one plate, and the livers, &c., on another. take
off the flesh, and mince it finely with a little beef, lard, a few
truffles, pepper and salt to taste, and stuff the pheasant carefully
with this. cut a slice of bread, larger considerably than the bird, and
cover it with the liver, &c., and a few truffles: an anchovy and a
little fresh butter added to these will do no harm. put the bread, &c.,
into the dripping-pan, and, when the bird is roasted, place it on the
preparation, and surround it with florida oranges.
do not be uneasy, savarin adds, about your dinner; for a pheasant served
in this way is fit for beings better than men. the pheasant itself is a
very good bird; and, imbibing the dressing and the flavour of the
truffle and snipe, it becomes thrice better.
broiled pheasant (a breakfast or luncheon dish).
. ingredients.— pheasant, a little lard, egg and bread crumbs,
salt and cayenne to taste.
mode.—cut the legs off at the first joint, and the remainder of the
bird into neat pieces; put them into a fryingpan with a little lard, and
when browned on both sides, and about half done, take them out and drain
them; brush the pieces over with egg, and sprinkle with bread crumbs
with which has been mixed a good seasoning of cayenne and salt. broil
them over a moderate fire for about  minutes, or rather longer, and
serve with mushroom-sauce, sauce piquante, or brown gravy, in which a
few game-bones and trimmings have been stewed.
time.—altogether / hour. sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from the st of october to the beginning of february.
 the height of excellence in a pheasant.—things edible have
 their degrees of excellence under various circumstances: thus,
 asparagus, capers, peas, and partridges are best when young.
 perfection in others is only reached when they attain maturity:
 let us say, for example, melons and nearly all fruits (we must
 except, perhaps, the medlar), with the majority of those animals
 whose flesh we eat. but others, again, are not good until
 decomposition is about to set in; and here we may mention
 particularly the snipe and the pheasant. if the latter bird be
 eaten so soon as three days after it has been killed, it then
 has no peculiarity of flavour; a pullet would be more relished,
 and a quail would surpass it in aroma. kept, however, a proper
 length of time,—and this can be ascertained by a slight smell
 and change of colour,—then it becomes a highly, flavoured dish,
 occupying, so to speak, the middle distance between chicken and
 venison. it is difficult to define any exact time to "hang" a
 pheasant; but any one possessed of the instincts of
 gastronomical science, can at once detect the right moment when
 a pheasant should be taken down, in the same way as a good cook
 knows whether a bird should be removed from the spit, or have a
 turn or two more.
. ingredients.— plovers, butter, flour, toasted bread.
choosing and trussing.—choose those that feel hard at the vent, as
that shows their fatness. there are three sorts,—the grey, green, and
bastard plover, or lapwing. they will keep good for some time, but if
very stale, the feet will be very dry. plovers are scarcely fit for
anything but roasting; they are, however, sometimes stewed, or made into
a ragoűt, but this mode of cooking is not to be recommended.
mode.—pluck off the feathers, wipe the outside of the birds with a
damp cloth, and do not draw them; truss with the head under the wing,
put them down to a clear fire, and lay slices of moistened toast in the
dripping-pan, to catch the trail. keep them well basted, dredge them
lightly with flour a few minutes before they are done, and let them be
nicely frothed. dish them on the toasts, over which the trail should
be equally spread. pour round the toast a little good gravy, and send
some to table in a tureen.
time.— minutes to / hour.
average cost, s. d. the brace, if plentiful.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable.—in perfection from the beginning of september to the end
of january.
 the plover.—there are two species of this bird, the grey and
 the green, the former being larger than the other, and somewhat
 less than the woodcock. it has generally been classed with those
 birds which chiefly live in the water; but it would seem only to
 seek its food there, for many of the species breed upon the
 loftiest mountains. immense flights of these birds are to be
 seen in the hebrides, and other parts of scotland; and, in the
 winter, large numbers are sent to the london market, which is
 sometimes so much glutted with them that they are sold very
 cheap. previous to dressing, they are kept till they have a game
 flavour; and although their flesh is a favourite with many, it
 is not universally relished. the green is preferred to the grey,
 but both are inferior to the woodcock. their eggs are esteemed
 as a great delicacy. birds of this kind are migratory. they
 arrive in england in april, live with us all the spring and
 summer, and at the beginning of autumn prepare to take leave by
 getting together in flocks. it is supposed that they then retire
 to spain, and frequent the sheep-walks with which that country
 abounds.
[illustration: the plover.]
. ingredients.— or  birds; butter, flour, fried bread crumbs.
mode.—the ptarmigan, or white grouse, when young and tender, are
exceedingly fine eating, and should be kept as long as possible, to be
good. pluck, draw, and truss them in the same manner as grouse, no.
, and roast them before a brisk fire. flour and froth them nicely,
and serve on buttered toast, with a tureen of brown gravy. bread sauce,
when liked, may be sent to table with them, and fried bread crumbs
substituted for the toasted bread.
time.—about / hour. sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from the beginning of february to the end of april.
 the ptarmigan, or white grouse.—this bird is nearly the same
 size as red grouse, and is fond of lofty situations, where it
 braves the severest weather, and is found in most parts of
 europe, as well as in greenland. at hudson's bay they appear in
 such multitudes that so many as sixty or seventy are frequently
 taken at once in a net. as they are as tame as chickens, this is
 done without difficulty. buffon says that the ptarmigan avoids
 the solar heat, and prefers the frosts of the summits of the
 mountains; for, as the snow melts on the sides of the mountains,
 it ascends till it gains the top, where it makes a hole, and
 burrows in the snow. in winter, it flies in flocks, and feeds on
 the wild vegetation of the hills, which imparts to its flesh a
 bitter, but not altogether an unpalatable taste. it is
 dark-coloured, and has something of the flavour of the hare, and
 is greatly relished, and much sought after by some sportsmen.
[illustration: the ptarmigan.]
. ingredients.—quails, butter, toast.
mode.—these birds keep good several days, and should be roasted
without drawing. truss them in the same manner as woodcocks, no. ;
roast them before a clear fire, keep them well basted, and serve on
toast.
time.—about  minutes. average cost.—seldom bought.
sufficient  for a dish.
seasonable from october to december.
[illustration: the quail.]
 the quail.—quails are almost universally diffused over europe,
 asia, and africa. being birds of passage, they are seen in
 immense flocks, traversing the mediterranean sea from europe to
 africa, in the autumn, and returning again in the spring,
 frequently alighting in their passage on many of the islands of
 the archipelago, which, with their vast numbers, they almost
 completely cover. on the western coasts of the kingdom of
 naples, they have appeared in such prodigious numbers, that,
 within the compass of four or five miles, as many as a hundred
 thousand have been taken in a day. "from these circumstances,"
 says a writer on natural history, "it appears highly probable
 that the quails which supplied the israelites with food during
 their journey through the wilderness, were sent thither, on
 their passage to the north, by a wind from the south-west,
 sweeping over egypt and ethiopia towards the shores of the red
 sea." in england they are not very numerous, although they breed
 in it; and many of them are said to remain throughout the year,
 changing their quarters from the interior parts of the country
 for the seacoast.
. ingredients.—snipes, butter, flour, toast.
mode.—these, like woodcocks, should be dressed without being drawn.
pluck, and wipe them outside, and truss them with the head under the
wing, having previously skinned that and the neck. twist the legs at the
first joint, press the feet upon the thighs, and pass a skewer through
these and the body. place four on a skewer, tie them on to the jack or
spit, and roast before a clear fire for about / hour. put some pieces
of buttered toast into the dripping-pan to catch the trails; flour and
froth the birds nicely, dish the pieces of toast with the snipes on
them, and pour round, but not over them, a little good brown gravy. they
should be sent to table very hot and expeditiously, or they will not be
worth eating.—see coloured plate m.
[illustration: roast snipe.]
time.—about / hour. average cost, s. d. to s. the brace.
sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from november to february.
note.—ortolans are trussed and dressed in the same manner.
[illustration: the snipe.]
 the snipe.—this is a migratory bird, and is generally
 distributed over europe. it is found in most parts of england,
 in the high as well as the low lands, depending much on the
 weather. in very wet seasons it resorts to the hills, but at
 other times frequents marshes, where it can penetrate the earth
 with its bill, hunting for worms, which form its principal food.
 in the hebrides and the orkneys snipes are plentiful, and they
 are fattest in frosty weather. in the breeding season the snipe
 changes its note entirely from that which it has in the winter.
 the male will keep on wing for an hour together, mounting like a
 lark, and uttering a shrill piping noise; then, with a bleating
 sound, not unlike that made by an old goat, it will descend with
 great velocity, especially if the female be sitting in her nest,
 from which it will not wander far.
. ingredients.—teal, butter, a little flour.
mode.—choose fat plump birds, after the frost has set in, as they are
generally better flavoured; truss them in the same manner as wild duck,
no. ; roast them before a brisk fire, and keep them well basted.
serve with brown or orange gravy, water-cresses, and a cut lemon. the
remains of teal make excellent hash.
time.—from  to  minutes.
average cost, s. each; but seldom bought.
sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from october to february.
. ingredients.—venison, coarse flour-and-water paste, a little
flour.
mode.—choose a haunch with clear, bright, and thick fat, and the
cleft of the hoof smooth and close; the greater quantity of fat there
is, the better quality will the meat be. as many people object to
venison when it has too much haut goűt, ascertain how long it has been
kept, by running a sharp skewer into the meat close to the bone; when
this is withdrawn, its sweetness can be judged of. with care and
attention, it will keep good a fortnight, unless the weather is very
mild. keep it perfectly dry by wiping it with clean cloths till not the
least damp remains, and sprinkle over powdered ginger or pepper, as a
preventative against the fly. when required for use, wash it in warm
water, and dry it well with a cloth; butter a sheet of white paper,
put it over the fat, lay a coarse paste, about / inch in thickness,
over this, and then a sheet or two of strong paper. tie the whole firmly
on to the haunch with twine, and put the joint down to a strong close
fire; baste the venison immediately, to prevent the paper and string
from burning, and continue this operation, without intermission, the
whole of the time it is cooking. about  minutes before it is done,
carefully remove the paste and paper, dredge the joint with flour, and
baste well with butter until it is nicely frothed, and of a nice
pale-brown colour; garnish the knuckle-bone with a frill of white paper,
and serve with a good, strong, but unflavoured gravy, in a tureen, and
currant jelly; or melt the jelly with a little port wine, and serve that
also in a tureen. as the principal object in roasting venison is to
preserve the fat, the above is the best mode of doing so where expense
is not objected to; but, in ordinary cases, the paste may be dispensed
with, and a double paper placed over the roast instead: it will not
require so long cooking without the paste. do not omit to send very hot
plates to table, as the venison fat so soon freezes: to be thoroughly
enjoyed by epicures, it should be eaten on hot-water plates. the neck
and shoulder may be roasted in the same manner.
[illustration: roast haunch of venison.]
time.—a large haunch of buck venison, with the paste,  to  hours;
haunch of doe venison, -/ to -/ hours. allow less time without the
paste.
average cost, s. d. to s. d. per lb.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable.—buck venison in greatest perfection from june to
michaelmas; doe venison from november to the end of january.
 the deer.—this active tribe of animals principally inhabit wild
 and woody regions. in their contentions, both with each other
 and the rest of the brute creation, these animals not only use
 their horns, but strike very furiously with their fore feet.
 some of the species are employed as beasts of draught, whilst
 the flesh of the whole is wholesome, and that of some of the
 kinds, under the name of "venison," is considered very
 delicious. persons fond of hunting have invented peculiar terms
 by which the objects of their pursuit are characterized: thus
 the stag is called, the first year, a calf, or hind-calf;
 the second, a knobber; the third, a brock; the fourth, a
 staggard; the fifth, a stag; and the sixth, a hart. the
 female is, the first year, called a calf; the second, a
 hearse; and the third, a hind. in britain, the stag has
 become scarcer than it formerly was; but, in the highlands of
 scotland, herds of four or five hundred may still be seen,
 ranging over the vast mountains of the north; and some of the
 stags of a great size. in former times, the great feudal
 chieftains used to hunt with all the pomp of eastern sovereigns,
 assembling some thousands of their clans, who drove the deer
 into the toils, or to such stations as were occupied by their
 chiefs. as this sport, however, was occasionally used as a means
 for collecting their vassals together for the purpose of
 concocting rebellion, an act was passed prohibitory of such
 assemblages. in the "waverley" of sir walter scott, a
 deer-hunting scene of this kind is admirably described.
 venison.—this is the name given to the flesh of some kinds of
 deer, and is esteemed as very delicious. different species of
 deer are found in warm as well as cold climates, and are in
 several instances invaluable to man. this is especially the case
 with the laplander, whose reindeer constitutes a large
 proportion of his wealth. there—
"the reindeer unharness'd in freedom can play,
and safely o'er odin's steep precipice stray,
whilst the wolf to the forest recesses may fly,
and howl to the moon as she glides through the sky."
 in that country it is the substitute for the horse, the cow, the
 goat, and the sheep. from its milk is produced cheese; from its
 skin, clothing; from its tendons, bowstrings and thread; from
 its horns, glue; from its bones, spoons; and its flesh furnishes
 food. in england we have the stag, an animal of great beauty,
 and much admired. he is a native of many parts of europe, and is
 supposed to have been originally introduced into this country
 from france. about a century back he was to be found wild in
 some of the rough and mountainous parts of wales, as well as in
 the forests of exmoor, in devonshire, and the woods on the banks
 of the tamar. in the middle ages the deer formed food for the
 not over abstemious monks, as represented by friar tuck's
 larder, in the admirable fiction of "ivanhoe;" and at a later
 period it was a deer-stealing adventure that drove the
 "ingenious" william shakspeare to london, to become a common
 player, and the greatest dramatist that ever lived.
. ingredients.—the remains of roast venison, its own or mutton
gravy, thickening of butter and flour.
mode.—cut the meat from the bones in neat slices, and, if there is
sufficient of its own gravy left, put the meat into this, as it is
preferable to any other. should there not be enough, put the bones and
trimmings into a stewpan, with about a pint of mutton gravy; let them
stew gently for an hour, and strain the gravy. put a little flour and
butter into the stewpan, keep stirring until brown, then add the
strained gravy, and give it a boil up; skim and strain again, and, when
a little cool, put in the slices of venison. place the stewpan by the
side of the fire, and, when on the point of simmering, serve: do not
allow it to boil, or the meat will be hard. send red-currant jelly to
table with it.
time.—altogether, -/ hour.
seasonable.—buck venison, from june to michaelmas; doe venison, from
november to the end of january.
note.—a small quantity of harvey's sauce, ketchup, or port wine, may
be added to enrich the gravy: these ingredients must, however, be used
very sparingly, or they will overpower the flavour of the venison.
[illustration: fallow-deer (buck). fallow-deer (doe).]
 the fallow-deer.—this is the domestic or park deer; and no two
 animals can make a nearer approach to each other than the stag
 and it, and yet no two animals keep more distinct, or avoid each
 other with a more inveterate animosity. they never herd or
 intermix together, and consequently never give rise to an
 intermediate race; it is even rare, unless they have been
 transported thither, to find fellow-deer in a country where
 stags are numerous. he is very easily tamed, and feeds upon many
 things which the stag refuses: he also browzes closer than the
 stag, and preserves his venison better. the doe produces one
 fawn, sometimes two, but rarely three. in short, they resemble
 the stag in all his natural habits, and the greatest difference
 between them is the duration of their lives: the stag, it is
 said, lives to the age of thirty-five or forty years, and the
 fallow-deer does not live more than twenty. as they are smaller
 than the stag, it is probable that their growth is sooner
 completed.
. ingredients.—a shoulder of venison, a few slices of mutton fat, 
glasses of port wine, pepper and allspice to taste, -/ pint of weak
stock or gravy, / teaspoonful of whole pepper, / teaspoonful of
whole allspice.
mode.—hang the venison till tender; take out the bone, flatten the
meat with a rolling-pin, and place over it a few slices of mutton fat,
which have been previously soaked for  or  hours in port wine;
sprinkle these with a little fine allspice and pepper, roll the meat up,
and bind and tie it securely. put it into a stewpan with the bone and
the above proportion of weak stock or gravy, whole allspice, black
pepper, and port wine; cover the lid down closely, and simmer, very
gently, from -/ to  hours. when quite tender, take off the tape, and
dish the meat; strain the gravy over it, and send it to table with
red-currant jelly. unless the joint is very fat, the above is the best
mode of cooking it.
time.—-/ to  hours.
average cost, s. d. to s. d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—buck venison, from june to michaelmas; doe venison, from
november to the end of january.
[illustration: the roebuck.]
 the roebuck.—this is the certuscapreolus, or common roe, and
 is of a reddish-brown colour. it is an inhabitant of asia, as
 well as of europe. it has great grace in its movements, and
 stands about two feet seven inches high, and has a length of
 about three feet nine. the extent of its horns is from six to
 eight inches.
[illustration: the stag. the hind.]
 the stag.—the stag, or hart, is the male of the red deer, and
 the hind is the female. he is much larger than the fallow-deer,
 and his age is indicated by his horns, which are round instead
 of being palmated, like those of the fallow-deer. during the
 first year he has no horns, but a horny excrescence, which is
 short and rough, and covered with a thin hairy skin. the next
 year, the horns are single and straight; and in the third they
 have two antlers, three the fourth, four the fifth, and five the
 sixth year; although this number is not always certain, for
 sometimes they are more, and often less. after the sixth year,
 the antlers do not always increase; and, although in number they
 may amount to six or seven on each side, yet the animal's age is
 then estimated rather by the size of the antlers and the
 thickness of the branch which sustains them, than by their
 variety. large as these horns seem, however, they are shed every
 year, and their place supplied by new ones. this usually takes
 place in the spring. when the old horns have fallen off, the new
 ones do not make their appearance immediately; but the bones of
 the skull ore seen covered with a transparent periosteum, or
 skin, which enwraps the bones of all animals. after a short
 time, however, the skin begins to swell, and to form a sort of
 tumour. from this, by-and-by, rising from the head, shoot forth
 the antlers from each side; and, in a short time, in proportion
 as the animal is in condition, the entire horns are completed.
 the solidity of the extremities, however, is not perfect until
 the horns have arrived at their full growth. old stags usually
 shed their horns first, which generally happens towards the
 latter end of february or the beginning of march. such as are
 between five and six years old shed them about the middle or
 latter end of march; those still younger in the month of april;
 and the youngest of all not till the middle or latter end of
 may. these rules, though generally true, are subject to
 variations; for a severe winter will retard the shedding of the
 horns.—the hind has no horns, and is less fitted for being
 hunted than the male. she takes the greatest care of her young,
 and secretes them in the most obscure thickets, lest they become
 a prey to their numerous enemies. all the rapacious family of
 the cat kind, with the wolf, the dog, the eagle, and the falcon,
 are continually endeavouring to find her retreat, whilst the
 stag himself is the foe of his own offspring. when she has
 young, therefore, it would seem that the courage of the male is
 transferred to the female, for she defends them with the most
 resolute bravery. if pursued by the hunter, she will fly before
 the hounds for half the day, and then return to her young, whose
 life she has thus preserved at the hazard of her own.
[illustration: eland (bull). eland (cow).]
 the new venison.—the deer population of our splendid english
 parks was, until a few years since, limited to two species, the
 fallow and the red. but as the fallow-deer itself was an
 acclimated animal, of comparatively recent introduction, it came
 to be a question why might not the proprietor of any deer-park
 in england have the luxury of at least half a dozen species of
 deer and antelopes, to adorn the hills, dales, ferny brakes, and
 rich pastures of his domain? the temperate regions of the whole
 world might be made to yield specimens of the noble ruminant,
 valuable either for their individual beauty, or for their
 availability to gastronomic purposes.
 during the last four or live years a few spirited english
 noblemen have made the experiment of breeding foreign deer in
 their parks, and have obtained such a decided success, that it
 may be hoped their example will induce others to follow in a
 course which will eventually give to england's rural scenery a
 new element of beauty, and to english tables a fresh viand of
 the choicest character.
 a practical solution of this interesting question was made by
 viscount hill, at hawkestone park, salop, in january, . on
 that occasion a magnificent eland, an acclimated scion of the
 species whose native home is the south african wilderness, was
 killed for the table. the noble beast was thus described:—"he
 weighed , lbs. as he dropped; huge as a short-horn, but with
 bone not half the size; active as a deer, stately in all his
 paces, perfect in form, bright in colour, with a vast dewlap,
 and strong sculptured horn. this eland in his lifetime strode
 majestic on the hill-side, where he dwelt with his mates and
 their progeny, all english-born, like himself." three pairs of
 the same species of deer were left to roam at large on the
 picturesque elopes throughout the day, and to return to their
 home at pleasure. "here, during winter, they are assisted with
 roots and hay, but in summer they have nothing but the pasture
 of the park; so that, in point of expense, they cost no more
 than cattle of the best description." travellers and sportsmen
 say that the male eland is unapproached in the quality of his
 flesh by any ruminant in south africa; that it grows to an
 enormous size, and lays on fat with as great facility as a true
 short-horn; while in texture and flavour it is infinitely
 superior. the lean is remarkably fine, the fat firm and
 delicate. it was tried in every fashion,—braised brisket,
 roasted ribs, broiled steaks, filet sauté, boiled aitchbone,
 &c.,—and in all, gave evidence of the fact, that a new meat of
 surpassing value had been added to the products of the english
 park.
 when we hear such a gratifying account of the eland, it is
 pleasing to record that lord hastings has a herd of the canadian
 wapiti, a herd of indian nylghaus, and another of the small
 indian hog-deer; that the earl of ducie has been successful in
 breeding the magnificent persian deer. the eland was first
 acclimated in england by the late earl of derby, between the
 years -, at his menagerie at knowsley. on his death, in
 , he bequeathed to the zoological society his breed of
 elands, consisting of two males and three females. here the
 animals have been treated with the greatest success, and from
 the year  to the present time, the females have regularly
 reproduced, without the loss of a single calf.
. ingredients.—widgeons, a little flour, butter.
mode.—these are trussed in the same manner as wild duck, no. ,
but must not be kept so long before they are dressed. put them down to a
brisk fire; flour, and baste them continually with butter, and, when
browned and nicely frothed, send them to table hot and quickly. serve
with brown gravy, or orange gravy, no. , and a cut lemon.
time.—/ hour; if liked well done,  minutes.
average cost, s. each; but seldom bought.
sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from october to february.
[illustration: roast woodcock.]
. ingredients.—woodcocks; butter, flour, toast.
mode.—woodcocks should not be drawn, as the trails are, by epicures,
considered a great delicacy. pluck, and wipe them well outside; truss
them with the legs close to the body, and the feet pressing upon the
thighs; skin the neck and head, and bring the beak round under the wing.
place some slices of toast in the dripping-pan to catch the trails,
allowing a piece of toast for each bird. roast before a clear fire from
 to  minutes; keep them well basted, and flour and froth them
nicely. when done, dish the pieces of toast with the birds upon them,
and pour round a very little gravy; send some more to table in a tureen.
these are most delicious birds when well cooked, but they should not be
kept too long: when the feathers drop, or easily come out, they are fit
for table.—see coloured plate, i .
time.—-when liked underdone,  to  minutes; if liked well done,
allow an extra  minutes.
average cost.—seldom bought.
sufficient,— for a dish.
seasonable from november to february.
[illustration: the woodcock.]
 the woodcock.—this bird being migratory in its habits, has,
 consequently, no settled habitation; it cannot be considered as
 the property of any one, and is, therefore, not game by law. it
 breeds in high northern latitudes, and the time of its
 appearance and disappearance in sweden coincides exactly with
 that of its arrival in and return from great britain. on the
 coast of suffolk its vernal and autumnal visits have been
 accurately observed. in the first week of october it makes its
 appearance in small numbers, but in november and december it
 appears in larger numbers, and always after sunset, and most
 gregariously. in the same manner as woodcocks take their leave
 of us, they quit france, germany, and italy, making the northern
 and colder climates their summer rendezvous. they visit burgundy
 in the latter part of october, but continue there only a few
 weeks, the country being hard, and unable to supply them with
 such sustenance as they require. in the winter, they are found
 as far south as smyrna and aleppo, and, during the same season,
 in barbary, where the africans name them "the ass of the
 partridge." it has been asserted that they have been seen as far
 south as egypt, which is the most remote region to which they
 can be traced on that side of the eastern world; on the other
 side, they are common in japan. those which resort to the
 countries of the levant are supposed to come from the mountains
 of armenia, or the deserts of tartary or siberia. the flesh of
 the woodcock is held in high estimation; hence the bird is
 eagerly sought after by the sportsman.
[illustration: blackcock.]
. skilful carving of game undoubtedly adds to the pleasure of the
guests at a dinner-table; for game seems pre-eminently to be composed of
such delicate limbs and tender flesh that an inapt practitioner appears
to more disadvantage when mauling these pretty and favourite dishes,
than larger and more robust pičces de résistance. as described at
recipe no. , this bird is variously served with or without the head
on; and although we do not personally object to the appearance of the
head as shown in the woodcut, yet it seems to be more in vogue to serve
it without. the carving is not difficult, but should be elegantly and
deftly done. slices from the breast, cut in the direction of the dotted
line from  to , should be taken off, the merrythought displaced and
the leg and wing removed by running the knife along from  to , and
following the directions given under the head of boiled fowl, no. ,
reserving the thigh, which is considered a great delicacy, for the most
honoured guests, some of whom may also esteem the brains of this bird.
[illustration: wild duck.]
. as game is almost universally served as a dainty, and not as a
dish to stand the assaults of an altogether fresh appetite, these dishes
are not usually cut up entirely, but only those parts are served of
each, which are considered the best-flavoured and the primest. of
wild-fowl, the breast alone is considered by epicures worth eating, and
slices are cut from this, in the direction indicated by the lines, from
 to ; if necessary, the leg and wing can be taken off by passing the
knife from  to , and by generally following the directions described
for carving boiled fowl, no. .
[illustration: roast hare.]
. the "grand carver" of olden times, a functionary of no ordinary
dignity, was pleased when he had a hare to manipulate, for his skill and
grace had an opportunity of display. diners ŕ la russe may possibly,
erewhile, save modern gentlemen the necessity of learning the art which
was in auld lang syne one of the necessary accomplishments of the
youthful squire; but, until side-tables become universal, or till we see
the office of "grand carver" once more instituted, it will be well for
all to learn how to assist at the carving of this dish, which, if not
the most elegant in appearance, is a very general favourite. the hare,
having its head to the left, as shown in the woodcut, should be first
served by cutting slices from each side of the backbone, in the
direction of the lines from  to . after these prime parts are disposed
of, the leg should next be disengaged by cutting round the line
indicated by the figures  to . the shoulders will then be taken off by
passing the knife round from  to . the back of the hare should now be
divided by cutting quite through its spine, as shown by the line  to ,
taking care to feel with the point of the knife for a joint where the
back may be readily penetrated. it is the usual plan not to serve any
bone in helping hare; and thus the flesh should be sliced from the legs
and placed alone on the plate. in large establishments, and where
men-cooks are kept, it is often the case that the backbone of the hare,
especially in old animals, is taken out, and then the process of carving
is, of course, considerably facilitated. a great point to be remembered
in connection with carving hare is, that plenty of gravy should
accompany each helping; otherwise this dish, which is naturally dry,
will lose half its flavour, and so become a failure. stuffing is also
served with it; and the ears, which should be nicely crisp, and the
brains of the hare, are esteemed as delicacies by many connoisseurs.
[illustration: roast partridges.]
. there are several ways of carving this most familiar game bird.
the more usual and summary mode is to carry the knife sharply along the
top of the breastbone of the bird, and cut it quite through, thus
dividing it into two precisely equal and similar parts, in the same
manner as carving a pigeon, no. . another plan is to cut it into
three pieces; viz., by severing a small wing and leg on either side from
the body, by following the line  to  in the upper woodcut; thus making
 helpings, when the breast will remain for a third plate. the most
elegant manner is that of thrusting back the body from the legs, and
then cutting through the breast in the direction shown by the line  to
: this plan will give  or more small helpings. a little bread-sauce
should be served to each guest.
[illustration]
. grouse may be carved in the way first described in carving
partridge. the backbone of the grouse is highly esteemed by many, and
this part of many game birds is considered the finest flavoured.
[illustration: roast pheasant.]
. fixing the fork in the breast, let the carver cut slices from it
in the direction of the lines from  to : these are the prime pieces.
if there be more guests to satisfy than these slices will serve, then
let the legs and wings be disengaged in the same manner as described in
carving boiled fowl, no. , the point where the wing joins the
neckbone being carefully found. the merrythought will come off in the
same way as that of a fowl. the most valued parts are the same as those
which are most considered in a fowl.
[illustration: snipe.]
. one of these small but delicious birds may be given, whole, to a
gentleman; but, in helping a lady, it will be better to cut them quite
through the centre, from  to , completely dividing them into equal and
like portions, and put only one half on the plate.
[illustration: haunch of venison.]
. here is a grand dish for a knight of the carving-knife to exercise
his skill upon, and, what will be pleasant for many to know, there is
but little difficulty in the performance. an incision being made
completely down to the bone, in the direction of the line  to , the
gravy will then be able easily to flow; when slices, not too thick,
should be cut along the haunch, as indicated by the line  to ; that
end of the joint marked  having been turned towards the carver, so that
he may have a more complete command over the joint. although some
epicures affect to believe that some parts of the haunch are superior to
others, yet we doubt if there is any difference between the slices cut
above and below the line. it should be borne in mind to serve each guest
with a portion of fat; and the most expeditious carver will be the best
carver, as, like mutton, venison soon begins to chill, when it loses
much of its charm.
[illustration: woodcock.]
. this bird, like a partridge, may be carved by cutting it exactly
into two like portions, or made into three helpings, as described in
carving partridge (no. ). the backbone is considered the tit-bit of
a woodcock, and by many the thigh is also thought a great delicacy. this
bird is served in the manner advised by brillat savarin, in connection
with the pheasant, viz., on toast which has received its drippings
whilst roasting; and a piece of this toast should invariably accompany
each plate.
. landrail, being trussed like snipe, with the exception of its
being drawn, may be carved in the same manner.—see no. .
. ptarmigan, being of much the same size, and trussed in the same
manner, as the red-bird, may be carved in the manner described in
partridge and grouse carving, nos.  and .
. quails, being trussed and served like woodcock, may be similarly
carved.—see no. .
. plovers may be carved like quails or woodcock, being trussed and
served in the same way as those birds.—see no. .
. teal, being of the same character as widgeon and wild duck, may be
treated, in carving, in the same style.
. widgeon may be carved in the same way as described in regard to
wild duck, at no. .
[illustration]
[illustration]
"strange there should be found
who, self-imprison'd in their proud saloons,
renounce the odours of the open field
for the unscented fictions of the loom;
who, satisfied with only pencilled scenes,
prefer to the performance of a god,
th' inferior wonders of an artist's hand!
lovely, indeed, the mimic works of art,
but nature's works far lovelier."—cowper.
. "the animal and vegetable kingdoms," says hogg, in his natural
history of the vegetable kingdom, "may be aptly compared to the primary
colours of the prismatic spectrum, which are so gradually and intimately
blended, that we fail to discover where the one terminates and where the
other begins. if we had to deal with yellow and blue only, the eye would
easily distinguish the one from the other; but when the two are blended,
and form green, we cannot tell where the blue ends and the yellow
begins. and so it is in the animal and vegetable kingdoms. if our powers
of observation were limited to the highest orders of animals and plants,
if there were only mammals, birds, reptiles, fishes, and insects in the
one, and trees, shrubs, and herbs in the other, we should then be able
with facility to define the bounds of the two kingdoms; but as we
descend the scale of each, and arrive at the lowest forms of animals and
plants, we there meet with bodies of the simplest structure, sometimes a
mere cell, whose organization, modes of development and reproduction,
are so anomalous, and partake so much of the character of both, that we
cannot distinguish whether they are plants or whether they are animals."
. whilst it is difficult to determine where the animal begins and
the vegetable ends, it is as difficult to account for many of the
singularities by which numbers of plants are characterized. this,
however, can hardly be regarded as a matter of surprise, when we
recollect that, so far as it is at present known, the vegetable kingdom
is composed of upwards of , species of plants. of this amazing
number the lichens and the mosses are of the simplest and hardiest
kinds. these, indeed, may be considered as the very creators of the
soil: they thrive in the coldest and most sterile regions, many of them
commencing the operations of nature in the growth of vegetables on the
barest rocks, and receiving no other nourishment than such as may be
supplied to them by the simple elements of air and rain. when they have
exhausted their period in such situations as have been assigned them,
they pass into a state of decay, and become changed into a very fine
mould, which, in the active spontaneity of nature, immediately begins to
produce other species, which in their turn become food for various
mosses, and also rot. this process of growth and decay, being, from time
to time, continued, by-and-by forms a soil sufficient for the
maintenance of larger plants, which also die and decay, and so increase
the soil, until it becomes deep enough to sustain an oak, or even the
weight of a tropical forest. to create soil amongst rocks, however, must
not be considered as the only end of the lichen; different kinds of it
minister to the elegant arts, in the form of beautiful dyes; thus the
lichen rocella is used to communicate to silk and wool, various shades
of purple and crimson, which greatly enhance the value of these
materials. this species is chiefly imported from the canary islands,
and, when scarce, as an article of commerce has brought as much as ł
per ton.
. in the vicinity of lichens, the musci, or mosses, are generally to
be found. indeed, wherever vegetation can be sustained, there they are,
affording protection to the roots and seeds of more delicate vegetables,
and, by their spongy texture, retaining a moisture which preserves other
plants from the withering drought of summer. but even in winter we find
them enlivening, by their verdure, the cold bosom of nature. we see them
abounding in our pastures and our woods, attaching themselves to the
living, and still more abundantly to the dead, trunks and branches of
trees. in marshy places they also abound, and become the medium of their
conversion into fruitful fields. this is exemplified by the manner in
which peat-mosses are formed: on the surface of these we find them in a
state of great life and vigour; immediately below we discover them, more
or less, in a state of decomposition; and, still deeper, we find their
stems and branches consolidated into a light brown peat. thus are
extensive tracts formed, ultimately to be brought into a state of
cultivation, and rendered subservient to the wants of man.
. when nature has found a soil, her next care is to perfect the
growth of her seeds, and then to disperse them. whilst the seed remains
confined in its capsule, it cannot answer its purpose; hence, when it is
sufficiently ripe, the pericardium opens, and lets it out. what must
strike every observer with surprise is, how nuts and shells, which we
can hardly crack with our teeth, or even with a hammer, will divide of
themselves, and make way for the little tender sprout which proceeds
from the kernel. there are instances, it is said, such as in the
touch-me-not (impatiens), and the cuckoo-flower (cardamine), in
which the seed-vessels, by an elastic jerk at the moment of their
explosion, cast the seeds to a distance. we are all aware, however, that
many seeds—those of the most composite flowers, as of the thistle and
dandelion—are endowed with, what have not been inappropriately called,
wings. these consist of a beautiful silk-looking down, by which they are
enabled to float in the air, and to be transported, sometimes, to
considerable distances from the parent plant that produced them. the
swelling of this downy tuft within the seed-vessel is the means by which
the seed is enabled to overcome the resistance of its coats, and to
force for itself a passage by which it escapes from its little
prison-house.
[illustration: beeton's book of household management
[illustration: "the free, fair homes of england."]
. birds, as well as quadrupeds, are likewise the means of dispersing
the seeds of plants, and placing them in situations where they
ultimately grow. amongst the latter is the squirrel, which is an
extensive planter of oaks; nay, it may be regarded as having, in some
measure, been one of the creators of the british navy. we have read of a
gentleman who was walking one day in some woods belonging to the duke of
beaufort, near troy house, in monmouthshire, when his attention was
arrested by a squirrel, sitting very composedly upon the ground. he
stopped to observe its motions, when, in a short time, the little animal
suddenly quitted its position, and darted to the top of the tree beneath
which it had been sitting. in an instant it returned with an acorn in
its mouth, and with its paws began to burrow in the earth. after digging
a small hole, it therein deposited an acorn, which it hastily covered,
and then darted up the tree again. in a moment it was down with another,
which it buried in the same manner; and so continued its labour,
gathering and burying, as long as the gentleman had patience to watch
it. this industry in the squirrel is an instinct which directs it to lay
up a store of provision for the winter; and as it is probable that its
memory is not sufficiently retentive to enable it to recollect all the
spots in which it deposits its acorns, it no doubt makes some slips in
the course of the season, and loses some of them. these few spring up,
and are, in time, destined to supply the place of the parent tree. thus
may the sons of britain, in some degree, consider themselves to be
indebted to the industry and defective memory of this little animal for
the production of some of those "wooden walls" which have, for
centuries, been the national pride, and which have so long "braved the
battle and the breeze" on the broad bosom of the great deep, in every
quarter of the civilized globe. as with the squirrel, so with jays and
pies, which plant among the grass and moss, horse-beans, and probably
forget where they have secreted them. mr. white, the naturalist, says,
that both horse-beans and peas sprang up in his field-walks in the
autumn; and he attributes the sowing of them to birds. bees, he also
observes, are much the best setters of cucumbers. if they do not happen
to take kindly to the frames, the best way is to tempt them by a little
honey put on the male and female bloom. when they are once induced to
haunt the frames, they set all the fruit, and will hover with impatience
round the lights in a morning till the glasses are opened.
. some of the acorns planted by the squirrel of monmouthshire may be
now in a fair way to become, at the end of some centuries, venerable
trees; for not the least remarkable quality of oaks is the strong
principle of life with which they are endued. in major rooke's "sketch
of the forest of sherwood" we find it stated that, on some timber cut
down in berkland and bilhaugh, letters were found stamped in the bodies
of the trees, denoting the king's reign in which they were marked. the
bark appears to have been cut off, and then the letters to have been cut
in, and the next year's wood to have grown over them without adhering to
where the bark had been cut out. the ciphers were found to be of james
i., william and mary, and one of king john. one of the ciphers of james
was about one foot within the tree, and one foot from the centre. it was
cut down in . the tree must have been two feet in diameter, or two
yards in circumference, when the mark was cut. a tree of this size is
generally estimated at  years' growth; which number being subtracted
from the middle year of the reign of james, would carry the year back to
, which would be about the period of its being planted. the tree
with the cipher of william and mary displayed its mark about nine inches
within the tree, and three feet three inches from the centre. this tree
was felled in . the cipher of john was eighteen inches within the
tree, and rather more than a foot from the centre. the middle year of
the reign of that monarch was . by subtracting from this , the
number of years requisite for a tree's growth to arrive at the diameter
of two feet, the date of its being planted would seem to have been ,
or about twenty years after the conquest.
[illustration: cellular development.]
. considering the great endurance of these trees, we are necessarily
led to inquire into the means by which they are enabled to arrive at
such strength and maturity; and whether it may be considered as a
humiliation we will not determine, but, with all the ingenious
mechanical contrivances of man, we are still unable to define the limits
of the animal and vegetable kingdoms. "plants have been described by
naturalists, who would determine the limits of the two kingdoms, as
organized living bodies, without volition or locomotion, destitute of a
mouth or intestinal cavity, which, when detached from their place of
growth, die, and, in decay, ferment, but do not putrefy, and which, on
being subjected to analysis, furnish an excess of carbon and no
nitrogen. the powers of chemistry, and of the microscope, however,
instead of confirming these views, tend more and more to show that a
still closer affinity exists between plants and animals; for it is now
ascertained that nitrogen, which was believed to be present only in
animals, enters largely into the composition of plants also. when the
microscope is brought to aid our powers of observation, we find that
there are organized bodies belonging to the vegetable kingdom which
possess very evident powers of locomotion, and which change about in so
very remarkable a manner, that no other cause than that of volition can
be assigned to it." thus it would seem that, in this particular at
least, some vegetables bear a very close resemblance to animal life; and
when we consider the manner in which they are supplied with nourishment,
and perform the functions of their existence, the resemblance would seem
still closer. if, for example, we take a thin transverse slice of the
stem of any plant, or a slice cut across its stem, and immerse it in a
little pure water, and place it under a microscope, we will find that it
consists principally of cells, more or less regular, and resembling
those of a honeycomb or a network of cobweb. the size of these varies in
different plants, as it does in different parts of the same plant, and
they are sometimes so minute as to require a million to cover a square
inch of surface. this singular structure, besides containing water and
air, is the repository or storehouse of various secretions. through it,
the sap, when produced, is diffused sideways through the plant, and by
it numerous changes are effected in the juices which fill its cells. the
forms of the cells are various; they are also subject to various
transformations. sometimes a number of cylindrical cells are laid end to
end, and, by the absorption of the transverse partitions, form a
continuous tube, as in the sap-vessels of plants, or in muscular and
nervous fibre; and when cells are thus woven together, they are called
cellular tissue, which, in the human body, forms a fine net-like
membrane, enveloping or connecting most of its structures. in pulpy
fruits, the cells may be easily separated one from the other; and within
the cells are smaller cells, commonly known as pulp. among the
cell-contents of some plants are beautiful crystals, called raphides.
the term is derived from [greek: rhaphis] a needle, on account of the
resemblance of the crystal to a needle. they are composed of the
phosphate and oxalate of lime; but there is great difference of opinion
as to their use in the economy of the plant, and one of the french
philosophers endeavoured to prove that crystals are the possible
transition of the inorganic to organic matter. the differences, however,
between the highest form of crystal and the lowest form of organic life
known, viz., a simple reproductive cell, are so manifold and striking,
that the attempt to make crystals the bridge over which inorganic matter
passes into organic, is almost totally regarded as futile. in a layer of
an onion, a fig, a section of garden rhubarb, in some species of aloe,
in the bark of many trees, and in portions of the cuticle of the
medicinal squill, bundles of these needle-shaped crystals are to be
found. some of them are as large as -th of an inch, others are as
small as the -th. they are found in all parts of the plant,—in the
stem, bark, leaves, stipules, petals, fruit, roots, and even in the
pollen, with some few exceptions, and they are always situated in the
interior of cells. some plants, as many of the cactus tribe, are made
up almost entirely of these needle-crystals; in some instances, every
cell of the cuticle contains a stellate mass of crystals; in others, the
whole interior is full of them, rendering the plant so exceedingly
brittle, that the least touch will occasion a fracture; so much so, that
some specimens of cactus senilis, said to be a thousand years old,
which were sent a few years since to kew, from south america, were
obliged to be packed in cotton, with all the care of the most delicate
jewellery, to preserve them during transport.
[illustration: siliceous cuticle from under-side of leaf of deutzia
[illustration: siliceous cuticle of grass.]
. besides the cellular tissue, there is what is called a vascular
system, which consists of another set of small vessels. if, for example,
we, early in the spring, cut a branch transversely, we will perceive the
sap oozing out from numerous points over the whole of the divided
surface, except on that part occupied by the pith and the bark; and if a
twig, on which the leaves are already unfolded, be cut from the tree,
and placed with its cut end in a watery solution of brazil-wood, the
colouring matter will be found to ascend into the leaves and to the top
of the twig. in both these cases, a close examination with a powerful
microscope, will discover the sap perspiring from the divided portion of
the stem, and the colouring matter rising through real tubes to the top
of the twig: these are the sap or conducting vessels of the plant. if,
however, we examine a transverse section of the vine, or of any other
tree, at a later period of the season, we find that the wood is
apparently dry, whilst the bark, particularly that part next the wood,
is swelled with fluid. this is contained in vessels of a different kind
from those in which the sap rises. they are found in the bark only in
trees, and may be called returning vessels, from their carrying the sap
downwards after its preparation in the leaf. it is believed that the
passage of the sap in plants is conducted in a manner precisely similar
to that of the blood in man, from the regular contraction and expansion
of the vessels; but, on account of their extreme minuteness, it is
almost an impossibility to be certain upon this point. numerous
observations made with the microscope show that their diameter seldom
exceeds a th part of a line, or a ,th part of an inch.
leuwenhoeck reckoned , vessels in a morsel of oak about one
nineteenth of an inch square.
. in the vascular system of a plant, we at once see the great
analogy which it bears to the veins and arteries in the human system;
but neither it, nor the cellular tissue combined, is all that is
required to perfect the production of a vegetable. there is, besides, a
tracheal system, which is composed of very minute elastic spiral tubes,
designed for the purpose of conveying air both to and from the plant.
there are also fibres, which consist of collections of these cells and
vessels closely united together. these form the root and the stem. if we
attempt to cut them transversely, we meet with difficulty, because we
have to force our way across the tubes, and break them; but if we slit
the wood lengthwise, the vessels are separated without breaking. the
layers of wood, which appear in the stem or branch of a tree cut
transversely, consist of different zones of fibres, each the produce of
one year's growth, and separated by a coat of cellular tissue, without
which they could not be well distinguished. besides all these, there is
the cuticle, which extends over every part of the plant, and covers the
bark with three distinct coats. the liber, or inner bark, is said to
be formed of hollow tubes, which convey the sap downwards to increase
the solid diameter of the tree.
. the root and the stem now demand a slight notice. the former is
designed, not only to support the plant by fixing it in the soil, but
also to fulfil the functions of a channel for the conveyance of
nourishment: it is therefore furnished with pores, or spongioles, as
they are called, from their resemblance to a sponge, to suck up whatever
comes within its reach. it is found in a variety of forms, and hence its
adaptation to a great diversity of soils and circumstances. we have
heard of a willow-tree being dug up and its head planted where its roots
were, and these suffered to spread out in the air like naked branches.
in course of time, the roots became branches, and the branches roots, or
rather, roots rose from the branches beneath the ground, and branches
shot from the roots above. some roots last one year, others two, and
others, like the shrubs and trees which they produce, have an indefinite
period of existence; but they all consist of a collection of fibres,
composed of vascular and cellular tissue, without tracheae, or
breathing-vessels. the stem is the grand distributor of the nourishment
taken up by the roots, to the several parts of the plant. the seat of
its vitality is said to be in the point or spot called the neck, which
separates the stem from the root. if the root of a young plant be cut
off, it will shoot out afresh; if even the stem be taken away, it will
be renewed; but if this part be injured, the plant will assuredly die.
. in accordance with the plan of this work, special notices of
culinary vegetables will accompany the various recipes in which they are
spoken of; but here we cannot resist the opportunity of declaring it as
our conviction, that he or she who introduces a useful or an ornamental
plant into our island, ought justly to be considered, to a large extent,
a benefactor to the country. no one can calculate the benefits which may
spring from this very vegetable, after its qualities have become
thoroughly known. if viewed in no other light, it is pleasing to
consider it as bestowing upon us a share of the blessings of other
climates, and enabling us to participate in the luxury which a more
genial sun has produced.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water, allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt, a piece of soda the size of a shilling;
artichokes.
[illustration: artichokes.]
mode.—wash the artichokes well in several waters; see that no insects
remain about them, and trim away the leaves at the bottom. cut off the
stems and put them into boiling water, to which have been added salt
and soda in the above proportion. keep the saucepan uncovered, and let
them boil quickly until tender; ascertain when they are done by
thrusting a fork in them, or by trying if the leaves can be easily
removed. take them out, let them drain for a minute or two, and serve in
a napkin, or with a little white sauce poured over. a tureen of melted
butter should accompany them. this vegetable, unlike any other, is
considered better for being gathered two or three days; but they must be
well soaked and washed previous to dressing.
time.— to  minutes, after the water boils.
sufficient,—a dish of  or  for  persons.
seasonable from july to the beginning of september.
[illustration: cardoon artichoke.]
 the compositae, or composite flowers.—this family is so
 extensive, as to contain nearly a twelfth part of the whole of
 the vegetable kingdom. it embraces about , species,
 distributed over almost every country; and new discoveries are
 constantly being made and added to the number. towards the poles
 their numbers diminish, and slightly, also, towards the equator;
 but they abound in the tropical and sub-tropical islands, and in
 the tracts of continent not far from the sea-shore. among
 esculent vegetables, the lettuce, salsify, scorzonera, cardoon,
 and artichoke belong to the family.
(entremets, or small dish, to be served with the second course.)
. ingredients.— or  artichokes, salt and water: for the
batter,—/ lb. of flour, a little salt, the yolk of  egg, milk.
mode.—trim and boil the artichokes by recipe no. , and rub them
over with lemon-juice, to keep them white. when they are quite tender,
take them up, remove the chokes, and divide the bottoms; dip each piece
into batter, fry them in hot lard or dripping, and garnish the dish with
crisped parsley. serve with plain melted butter.
time.— minutes to boil the artichokes,  to  minutes to fry them.
sufficient,— or  for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to the beginning of september.
. ingredients.— or  artichokes; to each / gallon of water allow
 heaped tablespoonful of salt, / teaspoonful of pepper,  bunch of
savoury herbs,  oz. of butter.
mode.—cut the ends of the leaves, as also the stems; put the
artichokes into boiling water, with the above proportion of salt,
pepper, herbs, and butter; let them boil quickly until tender, keeping
the lid of the saucepan off, and when the leaves come out easily, they
are cooked enough. to keep them a beautiful green, put a large piece of
cinder into a muslin bag, and let it boil with them. serve with plain
melted butter.
time.— to  minutes.
sufficient,— or  sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to the beginning of september.
. ingredients.— or  artichokes, salt and butter, about / pint
of good gravy.
mode.—trim and cut the artichokes into quarters, and boil them until
tender in water mixed with a little salt and butter. when done, drain
them well, and lay them all round the dish, with the leaves outside.
have ready some good gravy, highly flavoured with mushrooms; reduce it
until quite thick, and pour it round the artichokes, and serve.
time.— to  minutes to boil the artichokes.
sufficient for one side-dish.
seasonable from july to the beginning of september.
 constituent properties of the artichoke.—according to the
 analysis of braconnet, the constituent elements of an artichoke
 are,—starch , albumen , uncrystallizable sugar , gum ,
 fixed oil , woody fibre , inorganic matter , and water .
. ingredients.—to each  gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; artichokes.
mode.—wash, peel, and shape the artichokes in a round or oval form,
and put them into a saucepan with sufficient cold water to cover them,
salted in the above proportion. let them boil gently until tender; take
them up, drain them, and serve them in a napkin, or plain, whichever
mode is preferred; send to table with them a tureen of melted butter or
cream sauce, a little of which may be poured over the artichokes when
they are not served in a napkin.
[illustration: jerusalem artichokes.]
time.—about  minutes after the water boils.
average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient,— for a dish for  persons.
seasonable from september to june.
 uses of the jerusalem artichoke.—this being a tuberous-rooted
 plant, with leafy stems from four to six feet high, it is
 alleged that its tops will afford as much fodder per acre as a
 crop of oats, or more, and its roots half as many tubers as an
 ordinary crop of potatoes. the tubers, being abundant in the
 market-gardens, are to be had at little more than the price of
 potatoes. the fibres of the stems may be separated by
 maceration, and manufactured into cordage or cloth; and this is
 said to be done in some parts of the north and west of france,
 as about hagenau, where this plant, on the poor sandy soils, is
 an object of field culture.
. ingredients.—to each  gallon of water allow  oz. of salt;  or
 artichokes,  oz. butter, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—boil the artichokes as in the preceding recipe until tender;
drain and press the water from them, and beat them up with a fork. when
thoroughly mashed and free from lumps, put them into a saucepan with the
butter and a seasoning of white pepper and salt; keep stirring over the
fire until the artichokes are quite hot, and serve.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to june.
(entremets, or to be served with the second course as a side-dish.)
. ingredients.— to  artichokes,  to  brussels sprouts, /
pint of white sauce, no. .
mode.—peel and cut the artichokes in the shape of a pear; cut a piece
off the bottom of each, that they may stand upright in the dish, and
boil them in salt and water until tender. have ready / pint of white
sauce, made by recipe no. ; dish the artichokes, pour over them the
sauce, and place between each a fine brussels sprout: these should be
boiled separately, and not with the artichokes.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, d. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to june.
 the jerusalem artichoke.—this plant is well known, being, for
 its tubers, cultivated not only as a garden vegetable, but also
 as an agricultural crop. by many it is much esteemed as an
 esculent, when cooked in various ways; and the domesticated
 animals eat both the fresh foliage, and the tubers with great
 relish. by some, they are not only considered nourishing, but
 even fattening.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; asparagus.
[illustration: asparagus on toast. asparagus tongs.]
mode.—asparagus should be dressed as soon as possible after it is
cut, although it may be kept for a day or two by putting the stalks into
cold water; yet, to be good, like every other vegetable, it cannot be
cooked too fresh. scrape the white part of the stems, beginning from
the head, and throw them into cold water; then tie them into bundles
of about  each, keeping the heads all one way, and cut the stalks
evenly, that they may all be the same length; put them into boiling
water, with salt in the above proportion; keep them boiling quickly
until tender, with the saucepan uncovered. when the asparagus is done,
dish it upon toast, which should be dipped in the water it was cooked
in, and leave the white ends outwards each war, with the points meeting
in the middle. serve with a tureen of melted butter.
time.— to  minutes after the water boils.
average cost, in full season, s. d. the  heads.
sufficient.—allow about  heads for  or  persons.
seasonable.—may be had, forced, from january but cheapest in may,
june, and july.
[illustration: asparagus.]
 asparagus.—this plant belongs to the variously-featured family
 of the order liliaceae, which, in the temperate regions of
 both hemispheres, are most abundant, and, between the tropics,
 gigantic in size and arborescent in form. asparagus is a native
 of great britain, and is found on various parts of the seacoast,
 and in the fens of lincolnshire. at kynarve cove, in cornwall,
 there is an island called "asparagus island," from the abundance
 in which it is there found. the uses to which the young shoots
 are applied, and the manure in which they are cultivated in
 order to bring them to the highest state of excellence, have
 been a study with many kitchen-gardeners.
(entremets, or to be served as a side-dish with the second course.)
. ingredients.— heads of asparagus,  oz. of butter, a small
bunch of parsley,  or  green onions, flour,  lump of sugar, the yolks
of  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of cream, salt.
mode.—carefully scrape the asparagus, cut it into pieces of an equal
size, avoiding that which is in the least hard or tough, and throw them
into cold water. then boil the asparagus in salt and water until
three-parts done; take it out, drain, and place it on a cloth to dry the
moisture away from it. put it into a stewpan with the butter, parsley,
and onions, and shake over a brisk fire for  minutes. dredge in a
little flour, add the sugar, and moisten with boiling water. when boiled
a short time and reduced, take out the parsley and onions, thicken with
the yolks of  eggs beaten with the cream; add a seasoning of salt, and,
when the whole is on the point of simmering, serve. make the sauce
sufficiently thick to adhere to the vegetable.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, s. d. a pint.
seasonable in may, june, and july.
 medicinal uses of asparagus.—this plant not only acts as a
 wholesome and nutritious vegetable, but also as a diuretic,
 aperient, and deobstruent. the chemical analysis of its juice
 discovers its composition to be a peculiar crystallizable
 principle, called asparagin, albumen, mannite, malic acid, and
 some salts. thours says, the cellular tissue contains a
 substance similar to sage. the berries are capable of undergoing
 vinous fermentation, and affording alcohol by distillation. in
 their unripe state they possess the same properties as the
 roots, and probably in a much higher degree.
(a delicious dish, to be served with the second course.)
. ingredients.—/ pint of asparagus peas,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls
of flour,  tablespoonful of very finely minced ham,  oz. of butter,
pepper and salt to taste, milk.
mode.—cut up the nice green tender parts of asparagus, about the size
of peas; put them into a basin with the eggs, which should be well
beaten, and the flour, ham, butter, pepper, and salt. mix all these
ingredients well together, and moisten with sufficient milk to make the
pudding of the consistency of thick batter; put it into a pint buttered
mould, tie it down tightly with a floured cloth, place it in boiling
water, and let it boil for  hours; turn it out of the mould on to a
hot dish, and pour plain melted butter round, but not over, the
pudding. green peas pudding may be made in exactly the same manner,
substituting peas for the asparagus.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d. per pint.
seasonable in may, june, and july.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt, a very small piece of soda.
[illustration: scarlet runner.]
mode.—this vegetable should always be eaten young, as, when allowed
to grow too long, it tastes stringy and tough when cooked. cut off the
heads and tails, and a thin strip on each side of the beans, to remove
the strings. then divide each bean into  or  pieces, according to
size, cutting them lengthways in a slanting direction, and, as they are
cut, put them into cold water, with a small quantity of salt dissolved
in it. have ready a saucepan of boiling water, with salt and soda in the
above proportion; put in the beans, keep them boiling quickly, with the
lid uncovered, and be careful that they do not get smoked. when tender,
which may be ascertained by their sinking to the bottom of the saucepan,
take them up, throw them into a colander; and when drained, dish and
serve with plain melted butter. when very young, beans are sometimes
served whole: when they are thus dressed, their colour and flavour are
much better preserved; but the more general way of dressing them is to
cut them into thin strips.
time.—very young beans,  to  minutes; moderate size,  to 
minutes, after the water boils.
average cost, in full season, s. d. a peck; but, when forced, very
expensive.
sufficient.—allow / peck for  or  persons.
seasonable from the middle of july to the end of september; but may be
had, forced, from february to the beginning of june.
. ingredients.—a quart of french beans,  oz. of fresh butter,
pepper and salt to taste, the juice of / lemon.
mode.—cut and boil the beans by the preceding recipe, and when
tender, put them into a stewpan, and shake over the fire, to dry away
the moisture from the beans. when quite dry and hot, add the butter,
pepper, salt, and lemon-juice; keep moving the stewpan, without using a
spoon, as that would break the beans; and when the butter is melted, and
all is thoroughly hot, serve. if the butter should not mix well, add a
tablespoonful of gravy, and serve very quickly.
time.—about / hour to boil the beans;  minutes to shake them over
the fire.
average cost, in full season, about s. d. a peck.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from the middle of july to the end of september.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water, allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; beans.
[illustration: broad bean.]
mode.—this is a favourite vegetable with many persons, but to be
nice, should be young and freshly gathered. after shelling the beans,
put them into boiling water, salted in the above proportion, and let
them boil rapidly until tender. drain them well in a colander; dish, and
serve with them separately a tureen of parsley and butter. boiled bacon
should always accompany this vegetable, but the beans should be cooked
separately. it is usually served with the beans laid round, and the
parsley and butter in a tureen. beans also make an excellent garnish to
a ham, and when used for this purpose, if very old, should have their
skins removed.
time.—very young beans,  minutes; when of a moderate size,  to 
minutes, or longer.
average cost, unshelled, d. per peck.
sufficient.—allow one peck for  or  persons.
seasonable in july and august.
 nutritive properties of the bean.—the produce of beans in meal
 is, like that of peas, more in proportion to the grain than in
 any of the cereal grasses. a bushel of beans is supposed to
 yield fourteen pounds more of flour than a bushel of oats; and a
 bushel of peas eighteen pounds more, or, according to some,
 twenty pounds. a thousand parts of bean flour were found by sir
 ii. davy to yield  parts of nutritive matter, of which 
 were mucilage or starch,  gluten, and  extract, or matter
 rendered insoluble during the process.
. ingredients.— pints of broad beans, / pint of stock or broth,
a small bunch of savoury herbs, including parsley, a small lump of
sugar, the yolk of  egg, / pint of cream, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—procure some young and freshly-gathered beans, and shell
sufficient to make  pints; boil them, as in the preceding recipe, until
nearly done; then drain them and put them into a stewpan, with the
stock, finely-minced herbs, and sugar. stew the beans until perfectly
tender, and the liquor has dried away a little; then beat up the yolk of
an egg with the cream, add this to the beans, let the whole get
thoroughly hot, and when on the point of simmering, serve. should the
beans be very large, the skin should be removed previously to boiling
them.
time.— minutes to boil the beans,  minutes to stew them in the
stock.
average cost, unshelled, d. per peck.
seasonable in july and august.
 origin and varieties of the bean.—this valuable plant is said
 to be a native of egypt, but, like other plants which have been
 domesticated, its origin is uncertain. it has been cultivated in
 europe and asia from time immemorial, and has been long known in
 britain. its varieties may be included under two general
 heads,—the white, or garden beans, and the grey, or field
 beans, of the former, sown in the fields, the mazagan and
 long-pod are almost the only sorts; of the latter, those known
 as the horse-bean, the small or ticks, and the prolific of
 heligoland, are the principal sorts. new varieties are procured
 in the same manner as in other plants.
. ingredients,—beetroot; boiling water.
mode.—when large, young, and juicy, this vegetable makes a very
excellent addition to winter salads, and may easily be converted into an
economical and quickly-made pickle. (see no. .) beetroot is more
frequently served cold than hot: when the latter mode is preferred,
melted butter should be sent to table with it. it may also be stewed
with button onions, or boiled and served with roasted onions. wash the
beets thoroughly; but do not prick or break the skin before they are
cooked, or they would lose their beautiful colour in boiling. put them
into boiling water, and let them boil until tender, keeping them well
covered. if to be served hot, remove the peel quickly, cut the beetroot
into thick slices, and send to table melted butter. for salads, pickle,
&c., let the root cool, then peel, and cut it into slices.
time.—small beetroot, -/ to  hours; large, -/ to  hours.
average cost, in full season, d. each.
seasonable.—may be had at any time.
[illustration: beetroot.]
 beetroot.—the geographical distribution of the order saltworts
 (salxolaceae), to which beetroot belongs, is most common in
 extra-tropical and temperate regions, where they are common
 weeds, frequenting waste places, among rubbish, and on marshes
 by the seashore. in the tropics they are rare. they are
 characterized by the large quantities of mucilage, sugar,
 starch, and alkaline salts which are found in them. many of them
 are used as potherbs, and some are emetic and vermifuge in their
 medicinal properties. the root of garden or red beet is
 exceedingly wholesome and nutritious, and dr. lyon playfair has
 recommended that a good brown bread may be made by rasping down
 this root with an equal quantity of flour. he says that the
 average quality of flour contains about  per cent. of azotized
 principles adapted for the formation of flesh, and the average
 quality of beet contains about  per cent. of the same
 materials.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; brocoli.
[illustration: boiled brocoli.]
mode.—strip off the dead outside leaves, and the inside ones cut off
level with the flower; cut off the stalk close at the bottom, and put
the brocoli into cold salt and water, with the heads downwards. when
they have remained in this for about / hour, and they are perfectly
free from insects, put them into a saucepan of boiling water, salted
in the above proportion, and keep them boiling quickly over a brisk
fire, with the saucepan uncovered. take them up with a slice the moment
they are done; drain them well, and serve with a tureen of melted
butter, a little of which should be poured over the brocoli. if left
in the water after it is done, it will break, its colour will be
spoiled, and its crispness gone.
time.—small brocoli,  to  minutes; large one,  to  minutes.
average cost, d. each.
sufficient,— for  or  persons.
seasonable from october to march; plentiful in february and march.
[illustration: brocoli.]
 the kohl-rabi, or turnip-cabbage.—this variety presents a
 singular development, inasmuch as the stem swells out like a
 large turnip on the surface of the ground, the leaves shooting
 from it all round, and the top being surmounted by a cluster of
 leaves issuing from it. although not generally grown as a garden
 vegetable, if used when young and tender, it is wholesome,
 nutritious, and very palatable.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; a very small piece of soda.
mode.—clean the sprouts from insects, nicely wash them, and pick off
any dead or discoloured leaves from the outsides; put them into a
saucepan of boiling water, with salt and soda in the above proportion;
keep the pan uncovered, and let them boil quickly over a brisk fire
until tender; drain, dish, and serve with a tureen of melted butter, or
with a maître d'hôtel sauce poured over them. another mode of serving
is, when they are dished, to stir in about -/ oz. of butter and a
seasoning of pepper and salt. they must, however, be sent to table very
quickly, as, being so very small, this vegetable soon cools. where the
cook is very expeditious, this vegetable, when cooked, may be arranged
on the dish in the form of a pineapple, and, so served, has a very
pretty appearance.
time.—from  to  minutes after the water boils.
average cost, s. d. per peck.
sufficient.—allow between  and  for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to march.
 savoys and brussels sprouts.—when the green kale, or borecole,
 has been advanced a step further in the path of improvement, it
 assumes the headed or hearting character, with blistered leaves;
 it is then known by the name of savoys and brussels sprouts.
 another of its headed forms, but with smooth glaucous leaves, is
 the cultivated cabbage of our gardens (the borecole oleracea
 capitula of science); and all its varieties of green, red,
 dwarf, tall, early, late, round, conical, flat, and all the
 forms into which it is possible to put it.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; a very small piece of soda.
[illustration: brussels sprouts.]
mode.—pick away all the dead leaves, and wash the greens well in cold
water; drain them in a colander, and put them into fast-boiling water,
with salt and soda in the above proportion. keep them boiling quickly,
with the lid uncovered, until tender; and the moment they are done, take
them up, or their colour will be spoiled; when well drained, serve. the
great art in cooking greens properly, and to have them a good colour, is
to put them into plenty of fast-boiling water, to let them boil very
quickly, and to take them up the moment they become tender.
time.—brocoli sprouts,  to  minutes; young greens,  to 
minutes; sprouts,  minutes, after the water boils.
seasonable.—sprouts of various kinds may be had all the year.
 green kale, or borecole.—when colewort, or wild cabbage, is
 brought into a state of cultivation, its character becomes
 greatly improved, although it still retains the loose open
 leaves, and in this form it is called green kale, or borecole.
 the scientific name is borecole oleracea acephala, and of it
 there are many varieties, both as regards the form and colour of
 the leaves, as well as the height which the plants attain. we
 may observe, that among them, are included the thousand-headed,
 and the cow or tree cabbage.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; a very small piece of soda. mode.—pick off
all the dead outside leaves, cut off as much of the stalk as possible,
and cut the cabbages across twice, at the stalk end; if they should be
very large, quarter them. wash them well in cold water, place them in a
colander, and drain; then put them into plenty of fast-boiling
water, to which have been added salt and soda in the above proportions.
stir them down once or twice in the water, keep the pan uncovered, and
let them boil quickly until tender. the instant they are done, take them
up into a colander, place a plate over them, let them thoroughly drain,
dish, and serve.
time.—large cabbages, or savoys, / to / hour, young summer
cabbage,  to  minutes, after the water boils.
average cost, d. each in full season.
sufficient,— large ones for  or  persons.
seasonable.—cabbages and sprouts of various kinds at any time.
 the cabbage tribe: their origin.—of all the tribes of the
 cruciferae this is by far the most important. its scientific
 name is brassiceae, and it contains a collection of plants
 which, both in themselves and their products, occupy a prominent
 position in agriculture, commerce, and domestic economy. on the
 cliffs of dover, and in many places on the coasts of
 dorsetshire, cornwall, and yorkshire, there grows a wild plant,
 with variously-indented, much-waved, and loose spreading leaves,
 of a sea-green colour, and large yellow flowers. in spring, the
 leaves of this plant are collected by the inhabitants, who,
 after boiling them in two waters, to remove the saltness, use
 them as a vegetable along with their meat. this is the brassica
 oleracea of science, the wild cabbage, or colewort, from which
 have originated all the varieties of cabbage, cauliflower,
 greens, and brocoli.
. ingredients.— red cabbage, a small slice of ham, / oz. of
fresh butter,  pint of weak stock or broth,  gill of vinegar, salt and
pepper to taste,  tablespoonful of pounded sugar.
mode.—cut the cabbage into very thin slices, put it into a stewpan,
with the ham cut in dice, the butter, / pint of stock, and the
vinegar; cover the pan closely, and let it stew for  hour. when it is
very tender, add the remainder of the stock, a seasoning of salt and
pepper, and the pounded sugar; mix all well together, stir over the fire
until nearly all the liquor is dried away, and serve. fried sausages are
usually sent to table with this dish: they should be laid round and on
the cabbage, as a garnish.
time.—rather more than  hour. average cost, d. each.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from september to january.
 the wild cabbage, or colewort.—this plant, as it is found on
 the sea-cliffs of england, presents us with the origin of the
 cabbage tribe in its simplest and normal form. in this state it
 is the true collet, or colewort, although the name is now
 applied to any young cabbage which has a loose and open heart.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water, allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; carrots.
mode.—cut off the green tops, wash and scrape the carrots, and should
there be any black specks, remove them. if very large, cut them in
halves, divide them lengthwise into four pieces, and put them into
boiling water, salted in the above proportion; let them boil until
tender, which may be ascertained by thrusting a fork into them: dish,
and serve very hot. this vegetable is an indispensable accompaniment to
boiled beef. when thus served, it is usually boiled with the beef; a few
carrots are placed round the dish as a garnish, and the remainder sent
to table in a vegetable-dish. young carrots do not require nearly so
much boiling, nor should they be divided: these make a nice addition to
stewed veal, &c.
time.—large carrots, -/ to -/ hours; young ones, about /
hour.
average cost, d. to d, per bunch of .
sufficient,— large carrots for  or  persons.
seasonable.—young carrots from april to june, old ones at any time.
[illustration: carrots.]
 origin of the carrot.—in its wild state, this vegetable is
 found plentifully in britain, both in cultivated lands and by
 waysides, and is known by the name of birds-nest, from its
 umbels of fruit becoming incurved from a hollow cup, like a
 birds-nest. in this state its root is whitish, slender, and
 hard, with an acrid, disagreeable taste, and a strong aromatic
 smell, and was formerly used as an aperient. when cultivated, it
 is reddish, thick, fleshy, with a pleasant odour, and a
 peculiar, sweet, mucilaginous taste. the carrot is said by
 naturalists not to contain much nourishing matter, and,
 generally speaking, is somewhat difficult of digestion.
. ingredients.— large carrots,  oz. of butter, salt to taste, a
very little grated nutmeg,  tablespoonful of finely-minced parsley, 
dessertspoonful of minced onion, rather more than  pint of weak stock
or broth,  tablespoonful of flour.
mode.—wash and scrape the carrots, and cut them into rings of about
/ inch in thickness. put the butter into a stewpan; when it is melted,
lay in the carrots, with salt, nutmeg, parsley, and onion in the above
proportions. toss the stewpan over the fire for a few minutes, and when
the carrots are well saturated with the butter, pour in the stock, and
simmer gently until they are nearly tender. then put into another
stewpan a small piece of butter; dredge in about a tablespoonful of
flour; stir this over the fire, and when of a nice brown colour, add the
liquor that the carrots have been boiling in; let this just boil up,
pour it over the carrots in the other stewpan, and let them finish
simmering until quite tender. serve very hot.
this vegetable, dressed as above, is a favourite accompaniment of roast
pork, sausages, &c. &c.
time.—about / hour. average cost, d. to d. per bunch of .
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—young carrots from april to june, old ones at any time.
 constituents of the carrot.—these are crystallizable and
 uncrystallizable sugar, a little starch, extractive, gluten,
 albumen, volatile oil, vegetable jelly, or pectin, saline
 matter, malic acid, and a peculiar crystallizable ruby-red
 neuter principle, without odour or taste, called carotin. this
 vegetable jelly, or pectin, so named from its singular property
 of gelatinizing, is considered by some as another form of gum or
 mucilage, combined with vegetable acid. it exists more or less
 in all vegetables, and is especially abundant in those roots and
 fruits from which jellies are prepared.
. ingredients.— or  large carrots,  teacupful of broth, pepper
and salt to taste, / teacupful of cream, thickening of butter and
flour.
mode.—scrape the carrots nicely; half-boil, and slice them into a
stewpan; add the broth, pepper and salt, and cream; simmer till tender,
and be careful the carrots are not broken. a few minutes before serving,
mix a little flour with about  oz. of butter; thicken the gravy with
this; let it just boil up, and serve.
time.—about / hour to parboil the carrots, about  minutes to cook
them after they are sliced.
average cost, d. to d. per bunch of .
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—young carrots from april to june, old ones at any time.
 nutritive properties of the carrot.—sir h. davy ascertained the
 nutritive matter of the carrot to amount to ninety-eight parts
 in one thousand; of which ninety-five are sugar and three are
 starch. it is used in winter and spring in the dairy to give
 colour and flavour to butter; and it is excellent in stews,
 haricots, soups, and, when boiled whole, with salt beef. in the
 distillery, owing to the great proportion of sugar in its
 composition, it yields more spirit than the potato. the usual
 quantity is twelve gallons per ton.
(entremets, or to be served with the second course, as a side-dish.)
. ingredients.— or  large carrots, a large lump of sugar,  pint
of weak stock,  oz. of fresh butter, salt to taste.
mode.—scrape and wash the carrots, cut them into slices of an equal
size, and boil them in salt and water, until half done; drain them well,
put them into a stewpan with the sugar and stock, and let them boil over
a brisk fire. when reduced to a glaze, add the fresh butter and a
seasoning of salt; shake the stewpan about well, and when the butter is
well mixed with the carrots, serve. there should be no sauce in the dish
when it comes to table, but it should all adhere to the carrots.
time.—altogether, / hour.
average cost, d. to d. per bunch of .
sufficient for  dish.
seasonable.—young carrots from april to june, old ones at any time.
 the seed of the carrot.—in order to save the seed of carrots,
 the plan is, to select annually the most perfect and best-shaped
 roots in the taking-up season, and either preserve them in sand
 in a cellar till spring, or plant them immediately in an open
 airy part of the garden, protecting them with litter during
 severe frost, or earthing them over, and uncovering them in
 march following. the seed is in no danger from being injured by
 any other plant. in august it is fit to gather, and is best
 preserved on the stalks till wanted.
[illustration: boiled cauliflower.]
[illustration: cauliflower.]
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—choose cauliflowers that are close and white; trim off the
decayed outside leaves, and cut the stalk off flat at the bottom. open
the flower a little in places to remove the insects, which generally are
found about the stalk, and let the cauliflowers lie in salt and water
for an hour previous to dressing them, with their heads downwards: this
will effectually draw out all the vermin. then put them into
fast-boiling water, with the addition of salt in the above proportion,
and let them boil briskly over a good fire, keeping the saucepan
uncovered. the water should be well skimmed; and, when the cauliflowers
are tender, take them up with a slice; let them drain, and, if large
enough, place them upright in the dish. serve with plain melted butter,
a little of which may be poured over the flower.
time.—small cauliflower,  to  minutes, large one,  to 
minutes, after the water boils.
average cost, for large cauliflowers, d. each.
sufficient.—allow  large cauliflower for  persons.
seasonable from the beginning of june to the end of september.
(entremets, or side-dish, to be served with the second course.)
. ingredients.— cauliflowers, / pint of sauce blanche, or french
melted butter, no. ;  oz. of butter; salt and water.
mode.—cleanse the cauliflowers as in the preceding recipe, and cut
the stalks off flat at the bottom; boil them until tender in salt and
water, to which the above proportion of butter has been added, and be
careful to take them up the moment they are done, or they will break,
and the appearance of the dish will be spoiled. drain them well, and
dish them in the shape of a large cauliflower. have ready / pint of
sauce, made by recipe no. , pour it over the flowers, and serve hot
and quickly.
time.—small cauliflowers,  to  minutes, large ones,  to 
minutes, after the water boils.
average cost,—large cauliflowers, in full season, d. each.
sufficient,— large cauliflower for  or  persons.
seasonable from the beginning of june to the end of september.
 cauliflower and brocoli.—these are only forms of the wild
 cabbage in its cultivated state. they are both well known; but
 we may observe, that the purple and white brocoli are only
 varieties of the cauliflower.
(entremets, or side-dish, to be served with the second course.)
. ingredients.— or  cauliflowers, rather more than / pint of
white sauce no. ,  tablespoonfuls of grated parmesan cheese,  oz.
of fresh butter,  tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs.
mode.—cleanse and boil the cauliflowers by recipe no. , and drain
them and dish them with the flowers standing upright. have ready the
above proportion of white sauce; pour sufficient of it over the
cauliflowers just to cover the top; sprinkle over this some rasped
parmesan cheese and bread crumbs, and drop on these the butter, which
should be melted, but not oiled. brown with a salamander, or before the
fire, and pour round, but not over, the flowers the remainder of the
sauce, with which should be mixed a small quantity of grated parmesan
cheese.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, for large cauliflowers,
d. each.
sufficient,— small cauliflowers for  dish.
seasonable from the beginning of june to the end of september.
[illustration: celery in glass.]
. with a good heart, and nicely blanched, this vegetable is
generally eaten raw, and is usually served with the cheese. let the
roots be washed free from dirt, all the decayed and outside leaves being
cut off, preserving as much of the stalk as possible, and all specks or
blemishes being carefully removed. should the celery be large, divide it
lengthwise into quarters, and place it, root downwards, in a
celery-glass, which should be rather more than half filled with water.
the top leaves may be curled, by shredding them in narrow strips with
the point of a clean skewer, at a distance of about  inches from the
top.
average cost, d. per head.
sufficient.—allow  heads for  or  persons.
seasonable from october to april.
note.—this vegetable is exceedingly useful for flavouring soups,
sauces, &c., and makes a very nice addition to winter salad.
. ingredients.— heads of celery; to each / gallon of water allow
 heaped tablespoonful of salt,  blade of pounded mace, / pint of
cream.
mode.—wash the celery thoroughly; trim, and boil it in salt and water
until tender. put the cream and pounded mace into a stewpan; shake it
over the fire until the cream thickens, dish the celery, pour over the
sauce, and serve.
time.—large heads of celery,  minutes; small ones,  to 
minutes.
average cost. d. per head.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from october to april.
alexanders.—this plant is the smyrnium olustratum of science, and is
used in this country in the same way in which celery is. it is a native
of great britain, and is found in its wild state near the seacoast. it
received its name from the italian "herba alexandrina," and is supposed
to have been originally brought from alexandria; but, be this as it may,
its cultivation is now almost entirely abandoned.
stewed celery (with white sauce).
. ingredients.— heads of celery,  oz. of butter; to each /
gallon of water allow  heaped tablespoonful of salt, / pint of white
sauce, no.  or .
mode.—have ready sufficient boiling water just to cover the celery,
with salt and butter in the above proportion. wash the celery well; cut
off the decayed outside leaves, trim away the green tops, and shape the
root into a point; put it into the boiling water; let it boil rapidly
until tender; then take it out, drain well, place it upon a dish, and
pour over about / pint of white sauce, made by either of the recipes
no.  or . it may also be plainly boiled as above, placed on toast,
and melted butter poured over, the same as asparagus is dished.
time.—large heads of celery,  minutes, small ones,  to 
minutes, after the water boils.
average cost, d. per head.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from october to april.
 origin of celery.—in the marshes and ditches of this country
 there is to be found a very common plant, known by the name of
 smallage. this is the wild form of celery; but, by being
 subjected to cultivation, it loses its acrid nature, and becomes
 mild and sweet. in its natural state, it has a peculiar rank,
 coarse taste and smell, and its root was reckoned by the
 ancients as one of the "five greater aperient roots." there is a
 variety of this in which the root becomes turnip-shaped and
 large. it is called celeriae, and is extensively used by the
 germans, and preferred by them to celery. in a raw state, this
 plant does not suit weak stomachs; cooked, it is less difficult
 of digestion, although a large quantity should not he taken.
[illustration: celery.].
. ingredients.— heads of celery, / pint of white stock or weak
broth,  tablespoonfuls of cream, thickening of butter and flour, 
blade of pounded mace, a very little grated nutmeg; pepper and salt to
taste.
mode.—wash the celery, strip off the outer leaves, and cut it into
lengths of about  inches. put these into a saucepan, with the broth,
and stew till tender, which will be in from  to  minutes; then add
the remaining ingredients, simmer altogether for  or  minutes, pour
into a dish, and serve. it may be garnished with sippets of toasted
bread.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, d. per head.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from october to april.
note.—by cutting the celery into smaller pieces, by stewing it a
little longer, and, when done, by pressing it through a sieve, the above
stew may be converted into a puree of celery.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of salad-oil,  tablespoonfuls of
vinegar, salt and pepper to taste; cucumber.
mode.—pare the cucumber, cut it equally into very thin slices, and
commence cutting from the thick end; if commenced at the stalk, the
cucumber will most likely have an exceedingly bitter taste, far from
agreeable. put the slices into a dish, sprinkle over salt and pepper,
and pour over oil and vinegar in the above proportion; turn the cucumber
about, and it is ready to serve. this is a favourite accompaniment to
boiled salmon, is a nice addition to all descriptions of salads, and
makes a pretty garnish to lobster salad.
[illustration: sliced cucumbers.]
[illustration: cucumber.]
average cost, when scarce, s. to s. d.; when cheapest, may be had
for d. each.
seasonable.—forced from the beginning of march to the end of june; in
full season in july, august, and september.
 geographical distribution of the cucumbers.—this family is not
 known in the frigid zone, is somewhat rare in the temperate, but
 in the tropical and warmer regions throughout the world they are
 abundant. they are most plentiful in the continent of hindostan;
 but in america are not near so plentiful. many of the kinds
 supply useful articles of consumption for food, and others are
 actively medicinal in their virtues. generally speaking,
 delicate stomachs should avoid this plant, for it is cold and
 indigestible.
. ingredients.— or  cucumbers, salt and vinegar,  oz. of butter,
flour, / pint of broth,  teaspoonful of minced parsley, a lump of
sugar, the yolks of  eggs, salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—pare and cut the cucumbers into slices of an equal thickness,
and let them remain in a pickle of salt and vinegar for / hour; then
drain them in a cloth, and put them into a stewpan with the butter. fry
them over a brisk fire, but do not brown them, and then dredge over them
a little flour; add the broth, skim off all the fat, which will rise to
the surface, and boil gently until the gravy is somewhat reduced; but
the cucumber should not be broken. stir in the yolks of the eggs, add
the parsley, sugar, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; bring the whole
to the point of boiling, and serve.
time.—altogether,  hour.
average cost, when cheapest, d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in july, august, and september; but may be had, forced,
from the beginning of march.
. ingredients.— or  cucumbers, pepper and salt to taste, flour,
oil or butter.
mode.—pare the cucumbers and cut them into slices of an equal
thickness, commencing to slice from the thick, and not the stalk end of
the cucumber. wipe the slices dry with a cloth, dredge them with flour,
and put them into a pan of boiling oil or butter; keep turning them
about until brown; lift them out of the pan, let them drain, and serve,
piled lightly in a dish. these will be found a great improvement to
rump-steak: they should be placed on a dish with the steak on the top.
time.— minutes. average cost, when cheapest, d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—forced from the beginning of march to the end of june; in
full season in july and august.
 properties and uses of the cucurbits.—the common cucumber is
 the c. sativus of science, and although the whole of the family
 have a similar action in the animal economy, yet there are some
 which present us with great anomalies. the roots of those which
 are perennial contain, besides fecula, which is their base, a
 resinous, acrid, and bitter principle. the fruits of this
 family, however, have in general a sugary taste, and are more or
 less dissolving and perfumed, as we find in the melons, gourds,
 cucumbers, vegetable-marrows, and squashes. but these are
 slightly laxative if partaken of largely. in tropical countries,
 this order furnishes the inhabitants with a large portion of
 their food, which, even in the most arid deserts and most barren
 islands, is of the finest quality. in china, cashmere, and
 persia, they are cultivated on the lakes on the floating
 collections of weeds common in these localities. in india they
 are everywhere abundant, either in a cultivated or wild state,
 and the seeds of all the family are sweet and mucilaginous.
. ingredients.— large cucumbers, flour, butter, rather more than
/ pint of good brown gravy.
mode.—cut the cucumbers lengthwise the size of the dish they are
intended to be served in; empty them of the seeds, and put them into
boiling water with a little salt, and let them simmer for  minutes;
then take them out, place them in another stewpan, with the gravy, and
let them boil over a brisk fire until the cucumbers are tender. should
these be bitter, add a lump of sugar; carefully dish them, skim the
sauce, pour over the cucumbers, and serve.
time.—altogether,  minutes.
average cost, when cheapest, d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in june, july, and august; but may be had, forced, from the
beginning of march.
 the chate.—this cucumber is a native of egypt and arabia, and
 produces a fruit of almost the same substance as that of the
 melon. in egypt it is esteemed by the upper class natives, as
 well as by europeans, as the most pleasant fruit they have.
. ingredients.— cucumbers,  moderate-sized onions, not quite 
pint of white stock, cayenne and salt to taste, the yolks of  eggs, a
very little grated nutmeg.
mode.—pare and slice the cucumbers, take out the seeds, and cut the
onions into thin slices; put these both into a stewpan, with the stock,
and let them boil for / hour or longer, should the cucumbers be very
large. beat up the yolks of  eggs; stir these into the sauce; add the
cayenne, salt, and grated nutmeg; bring it to the point of boiling, and
serve. do not allow the sauce to boil, or it will curdle. this is a
favourite dish with lamb or mutton chops, rump-steaks, &c.
time.—altogether,  minutes.
average cost, when cheapest, d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in july, august, and september; but may be had, forced,
from the beginning of march.
 the melon.—this is another species of the cucumber, and is
 highly esteemed for its rich and delicious fruit. it was
 introduced to this country from jamaica, in ; since which
 period it has continued to be cultivated. it was formerly called
 the musk melon.
[illustration: endive.]
. this vegetable, so beautiful in appearance, makes an excellent
addition to winter salad, when lettuces and other salad herbs are not
obtainable. it is usually placed in the centre of the dish, and looks
remarkably pretty with slices of beetroot, hard-boiled eggs, and curled
celery placed round it, so that the colours contrast nicely. in
preparing it, carefully wash and cleanse it free from insects, which are
generally found near the heart; remove any decayed or dead leaves, and
dry it thoroughly by shaking in a cloth. this vegetable may also be
served hot, stewed in cream, brown gravy, or butter; but when dressed
thus, the sauce it is stewed in should not be very highly seasoned, as
that would destroy and overpower the flavour of the vegetable.
average cost, d. per head.
sufficient,— head for a salad for  persons.
seasonable from november to march.
 endive.—this is the c. endivium of science, and is much used
 as a salad. it belongs to the family of the compositae, with
 chicory, common goats-beard, and others of the same genus.
 withering states, that before the stems of the common
 goats-beard shoot up the roots, boiled like asparagus, have the
 same flavour, and are nearly as nutritious. we are also informed
 by villars that the children in dauphiné universally eat the
 stems and leaves of the young plant before the flowers appear,
 with great avidity. the fresh juice of these tender herbs is
 said to be the best solvent of bile.
. ingredients.— heads of endive, salt and water,  pint of broth,
thickening of butter and flour,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, a small
lump of sugar.
mode.—wash and free the endive thoroughly from insects, remove the
green part of the leaves, and put it into boiling water, slightly
salted. let it remain for  minutes; then take it out, drain it till
there is no water remaining, and chop it very fine. put it into a
stewpan with the broth; add a little salt and a lump of sugar, and boil
until the endive is perfectly tender. when done, which may be
ascertained by squeezing a piece between the thumb and finger, add a
thickening of butter and flour and the lemon-juice: let the sauce boil
up, and serve.
time.— minutes to boil,  minutes to simmer in the broth.
average cost, d. per head.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to march.
. ingredients.— heads of endive,  pint of broth,  oz. of fresh
butter; salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg to taste.
mode.—wash and boil the endive as in the preceding recipe; chop it
rather fine, and put into a stewpan with the broth; boil over a brisk
fire until the sauce is all reduced; then put in the butter, pepper,
salt, and grated nutmeg (the latter must be very sparingly used); mix
all well together, bring it to the boiling point, and serve very hot.
time,— minutes to boil,  minutes to simmer in the broth.
average cost, d. per head.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to march.
to boil haricots blancs, or white haricot beans.
. ingredients.— quart of white haricot beans,  quarts of soft
water,  oz. of butter,  heaped tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—put the beans into cold water, and let them soak from  to 
hours, according to their age; then put them into cold water, salted in
the above proportion, bring them to boil, and let them simmer very
slowly until tender; pour the water away from them, let them stand by
the side of the fire, with the lid of the saucepan partially off, to
allow the beans to dry; then add  oz. of butter and a seasoning of
pepper and salt. shake the beans about for a minute or two, and serve:
do not stir them with a spoon, for fear of breaking them to pieces.
time.—after the water boils, from  to -/ hours.
average cost, d. per quart.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter, when other vegetables are scarce.
note.—haricots blancs, when new and fresh, should be put into boiling
water, and do not require any soaking previous to dressing.
 haricots and lentils.—although these vegetables are not much
 used in this country, yet in france, and other catholic
 countries, from their peculiar constituent properties, they form
 an excellent substitute for animal food during lent and maigre
 days. at the time of the prevalence of the roman religion in
 this country, they were probably much more generally used than
 at present. as reformations are often carried beyond necessity,
 possibly lentils may have fallen into disuse, as an article of
 diet amongst protestants, for fear the use of them might be
 considered a sign of popery.
. ingredients.— quart of white haricot beans, / lb. of fresh
butter,  tablespoonful of minced parsley, pepper and salt to taste, the
juice of / lemon.
[illustration: haricot beans.]
mode.—should the beans be very dry, soak them for an hour or two in
cold water, and boil them until perfectly tender, as in the preceding
recipe. if the water should boil away, replenish it with a little more
cold, which makes the skin of the beans tender. let them be very
thoroughly done; drain them well; then add to them the butter, minced
parsley, and a seasoning of pepper and salt. keep moving the stewpan
over the fire without using a spoon, as this would break the beans; and,
when the various ingredients are well mixed with them, squeeze in the
lemon-juice, and serve very hot.
time.—from  to -/ hours to boil the beans.
average cost, d. per quart.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter.
 haricot beans.—this is the haricot blanc of the french, and
 is a native of india. it ripens readily, in dry summers, in most
 parts of britain, but its culture has hitherto been confined to
 gardens in england; but in germany and switzerland it is grown
 in fields. it is usually harvested by pulling up the plants,
 which, being dried, are stacked and thrashed. the haulm is both
 of little bulk and little use, but the seed is used in making
 the esteemed french dish called haricot, with which it were well
 if the working classes of this country were acquainted. there
 is, perhaps, no other vegetable dish so cheap and easily cooked,
 and, at the same time, so agreeable and nourishing. the beans
 are boiled, and then mixed with a little fat or salt butter, and
 a little milk or water and flour. from , parts of
 kidney-bean einholff obtained , parts of matter analogous to
 starch,  of vegeto-animal matter, and  parts of mucilage.
. ingredients.— quart of white haricot beans,  middling-sized
onions, / pint of good brown gravy, pepper and salt to taste, a little
flour.
mode.—peel and mince the onions not too finely, and fry them in
butter of a light brown colour; dredge over them a little flour, and add
the gravy and a seasoning of pepper and salt. have ready a pint of
haricot beans well boiled and drained; put them with the onions and
gravy, mix all well together, and serve very hot.
time.—from  to -/ hours to boil the beans;  minutes to fry the
onions.
average cost, d. per quart.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter.
. this root, scraped, is always served with hot roast beef, and is
used for garnishing many kinds of boiled fish. let the horseradish
remain in cold water for an hour; wash it well, and with a sharp knife
scrape it into very thin shreds, commencing from the thick end of the
root. arrange some of it lightly in a small glass dish, and the
remainder use for garnishing the joint: it should be placed in tufts
round the border of the dish, with  or  bunches on the meat.
average cost, d. per stick.
seasonable from october to june.
[illustration: horseradish.]
 the horseradish.—this belongs to the tribe alyssidae, and is
 highly stimulant and exciting to the stomach. it has been
 recommended in chronic rheumatism, palsy, dropsical complaints,
 and in cases of enfeebled digestion. its principal use, however,
 is as a condiment to promote appetite and excite the digestive
 organs. the horseradish contains sulphur to the extent of thirty
 per cent, in the number of its elements; and it is to the
 presence of this quality that the metal vessels in which the
 radish is sometimes distilled, are turned into a black colour.
 it is one of the most powerful excitants and antiscorbutics we
 have, and forms the basis of several medical preparations, in
 the form of wines, tinctures, and syrups.
. these form one of the principal ingredients to summer salads;
should be nicely blanched, and be eaten young. they are seldom served in
any other way, but may be stewed and sent to table in a good brown gravy
flavoured with lemon-juice. in preparing them for a salad, carefully
wash them free from dirt, pick off all the decayed and outer leaves, and
dry them thoroughly by shaking them in a cloth. cut off the stalks, and
either halve or cut the lettuces into small pieces. the manner of
cutting them up entirely depends on the salad for which they are
intended. in france the lettuces are sometimes merely wiped with a cloth
and not washed, the cooks there declaring that the act of washing them
injuriously affects the pleasant crispness of the plant: in this case
scrupulous attention must be paid to each leaf, and the grit thoroughly
wiped away.
average cost, when cheapest, d. each.
sufficient.—allow  lettuces for  or  persons.
seasonable from march to the end of august, but may be had all the
year.
[illustration: lettuce.]
 the lettuce.—all the varieties of the garden lettuce have
 originated from the lactuca sativa of science, which has never
 yet been found in a wild state. hence it may be concluded that
 it is merely another form of some species, changed through the
 effects of cultivation. in its young state, the lettuce forms a
 well-known and wholesome salad, containing a bland pellucid
 juice, with little taste or smell, and having a cooling and
 soothing influence on the system. this arises from the large
 quantities of water and mucilage it contains, and not from any
 narcotic principle which it is supposed to possess. during the
 period of flowering, it abounds in a peculiar milky juice, which
 flows from the stem when wounded, and which has been found to be
 possessed of decided medicinal properties.
(a breakfast, luncheon, or supper dish.)
. ingredients.— to  mushroom-flaps, butter, pepper to taste.
mode.—for this mode of cooking, the mushroom flaps are better than
the buttons, and should not be too large. cut off a portion of the
stalk, peel the top, and wipe the mushrooms carefully with a piece of
flannel and a little fine salt. put them into a tin baking-dish, with a
very small piece of butter placed on each mushroom; sprinkle over a
little pepper, and let them bake for about  minutes, or longer should
the mushrooms be very large. have ready a very hot dish, pile the
mushrooms high in the centre, pour the gravy round, and send them to
table quickly, with very hot plates.
time.— minutes; large mushrooms, / hour.
average cost, d. each for large mushroom-flaps.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—meadow mushrooms in september and october; cultivated
mushrooms may be had at any time.
 fungi.—these are common parasitical plants, originating in the
 production of copious filamentous threads, called the mycelium,
 or spawn. rounded tubers appear on the mycelium; some of these
 enlarge rapidly, burst an outer covering, which is left at the
 base, and protrude a thick stalk, bearing at its summit a
 rounded body, which in a short time expands into the pileus or
 cap. the gills, which occupy its lower surface, consist of
 parallel plates, bearing naked sporules over their whole
 surface. some of the cells, which are visible by the microscope,
 produce four small cells at their free summit, apparently by
 germination and constriction. these are the sporules, and this
 is the development of the agarics.
(a breakfast, luncheon, or supper dish.)
. ingredients.—mushroom-flaps, pepper and salt to taste, butter,
lemon-juice.
[illustration: broiled mushrooms.]
mode.—cleanse the mushrooms by wiping them with a piece of flannel
and a little salt; cut off a portion of the stalk, and peel the tops:
broil them over a clear fire, turning them once, and arrange them on a
very hot dish. put a small piece of butter on each mushroom, season with
pepper and salt, and squeeze over them a few drops of lemon-juice. place
the dish before the fire, and when the butter is melted, serve very hot
and quickly. moderate-sized flaps are better suited to this mode of
cooking than the buttons: the latter are better in stews.
time.— minutes for medium-sized mushrooms.
average cost, d. each for large mushrooms.
sufficient.—allow  or  mushrooms to each person.
seasonable.—meadow mushrooms in september and october; cultivated
mushrooms may be had at any time.
[illustration: mushrooms.]
 varieties of the mushroom.—the common mushroom found in our
 pastures is the agaricus campestris of science, and another
 edible british species is a. georgii; but a. primulus is
 affirmed to be the most delicious mushroom. the morel is
 morchella esculenta, and tuber cibarium is the common
 truffle. there is in new zealand a long fungus, which grows from
 the head of a caterpillar, and which forms a horn, as it were,
 and is called sphaeria robertsii.
. ingredients.—to each quart of mushrooms, allow  oz. of butter,
pepper and salt to taste, the juice of  lemon, clarified butter.
mode.—peel the mushrooms, put them into cold water, with a little
lemon-juice; take them out and dry them very carefully in a cloth. put
the butter into a stewpan capable of holding the mushrooms; when it is
melted, add the mushrooms, lemon-juice, and a seasoning of pepper and
salt; draw them down over a slow fire, and let them remain until their
liquor is boiled away, and they have become quite dry, but be careful in
not allowing them to stick to the bottom of the stewpan. when done, put
them into pots, and pour over the top clarified butter. if wanted for
immediate use, they will keep good a few days without being covered
over. to re-warm them, put the mushrooms into a stewpan, strain the
butter from them, and they will be ready for use.
average cost, d. each.
seasonable.—meadow mushrooms in september and october; cultivated
mushrooms may be had at any time.
 localities of the mushroom.—mushrooms are to be met with in
 pastures, woods, and marshes, but are very capricious and
 uncertain in their places of growth, multitudes being obtained
 in one season where few or none were to be found in the
 preceding. they sometimes grow solitary, but more frequently
 they are gregarious, and rise in a regular circular form. many
 species are employed by man as food; but, generally speaking,
 they are difficult of digestion, and by no means very
 nourishing. many of them are also of suspicious qualities.
 little reliance can be placed either on their taste, smell, or
 colour, as much depends on the situation in which they vegetate;
 and even the same plant, it is affirmed, may be innocent when
 young, but become noxious when advanced in age.
. ingredients.— pint mushroom-buttons,  oz. of fresh butter,
white pepper and salt to taste, lemon-juice,  teaspoonful of flour,
cream or milk,  teaspoonful of grated nutmeg.
mode.—cut off the ends of the stalks, and pare neatly a pint of
mushroom-buttons; put them into a basin of water, with a little
lemon-juice, as they are done. when all are prepared, take them from the
water with the hands, to avoid the sediment, and put them into a stewpan
with the fresh butter, white pepper, salt, and the juice of / lemon;
cover the pan closely, and let the mushrooms stew gently from  to 
minutes; then thicken the butter with the above proportion of flour, add
gradually sufficient cream, or cream and milk, to make the sauce of a
proper consistency, and put in the grated nutmeg. if the mushrooms are
not perfectly tender, stew them for  minutes longer, remove every
particle of butter which may be floating on the top, and serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost, from d. to s. per pint.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—meadow mushrooms in september and october.
 to procure mushrooms.—in order to obtain mushrooms at all
 seasons, several methods of propagation have been had recourse
 to. it is said that, in some parts of italy, a species of stone
 is used for this purpose, which is described as being of two
 different kinds; the one is found in the chalk hills near
 naples, and has a white, porous, stalactical appearance; the
 other is a hardened turf from some volcanic mountains near
 florence. these stones are kept in cellars, and occasionally
 moistened with water which has been used in the washing of
 mushrooms, and are thus supplied with their minute seeds. in
 this country, gardeners provide themselves with what is called
 spawn, either from the old manure of cucumber-beds, or
 purchase it from those whose business it is to propagate it.
 when thus procured, it is usually made up for sale in quadrils,
 consisting of numerous white fibrous roots, having a strong
 smell of mushrooms. this is planted in rows, in a dry situation,
 and carefully attended to for five or six weeks, when the bed
 begins to produce, and continues to do so for several months.
. ingredients.— pint of mushroom-buttons,  pint of brown gravy
no. , / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, cayenne and salt to taste.
mode.—make a pint of brown gravy by recipe ; cut nearly all the
stalks away from the mushrooms and peel the tops; put them into a
stewpan, with the gravy, and simmer them gently from  minutes to /
hour. add the nutmeg and a seasoning of cayenne and salt, and serve very
hot.
time.— minutes to / hour.
average cost, d. to s. per pint.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—meadow mushrooms in september and october.
 analysis of fungi.—the fungi have been examined chemically with
 much care, both by mm. bracannot and vauquelin, who designate
 the insoluble spongy matter by the name of fungin, and the
 soluble portion is found to contain the bolotic and the fungic
 acids.
. ingredients.— or  spanish onions, salt, and water.
mode.—put the onions, with their skins on, into a saucepan of boiling
water slightly salted, and let them boil quickly for an hour. then take
them out, wipe them thoroughly, wrap each one in a piece of paper
separately, and bake them in a moderate oven for  hours, or longer,
should the onions be very large. they may be served in their skins, and
eaten with a piece of cold butter and a seasoning of pepper and salt; or
they may be peeled, and a good brown gravy poured over them.
time.— hour to boil,  hours to bake.
average cost, medium-sized, d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to january.
[illustration: onion.]
 the genus allium.—the onion, like the leek, garlic, and shalot,
 belongs to the genus allium, which is a numerous species of
 vegetable; and every one of them possesses, more or less, a
 volatile and acrid penetrating principle, pricking the thin
 transparent membrane of the eyelids; and all are very similar in
 their properties. in the whole of them the bulb is the most
 active part, and any one of them may supply the place of the
 other; for they are all irritant, excitant, and vesicant. with
 many, the onion is a very great favourite, and is considered an
 extremely nutritive vegetable. the spanish kind is frequently
 taken for supper, it being simply boiled, and then seasoned with
 salt, pepper, and butter. some dredge on a little flour, but
 many prefer it without this.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of onions, / pint of water, / lb. of
moist sugar, / pint of vinegar.
mode.—peel and chop the onions fine, and put them into a stewpan (not
tinned), with the water; let them boil for  minutes, then add the
sugar, and simmer gently until the mixture becomes nearly black and
throws out bubbles of smoke. have ready the above proportion of boiling
vinegar, strain the liquor gradually to it, and keep stirring with a
wooden spoon until it is well incorporated. when cold, bottle for use.
time.—altogether,  hour.
 properties of the onion.—the onion is possessed of a white,
 acrid, volatile oil, holding sulphur in solution, albumen, a
 good deal of uncrystallizable sugar and mucilage; phosphoric
 acid, both free and combined with lime; acetic acid, citrate of
 lime, and lignine. of all the species of allium, the onion has
 the volatile principle in the greatest degree; and hence it is
 impossible to separate the scales of the root without the eyes
 being affected. the juice is sensibly acid, and is capable of
 being, by fermentation, converted into vinegar, and, mixed with
 water or the dregs of beer, yields, by distillation, an
 alcoholic liquor. although used as a common esculent, onions are
 not suited to all stomachs; there are some who cannot eat them
 either fried or roasted, whilst others prefer them boiled, which
 is the best way of using them, as, by the process they then
 undergo, they are deprived of their essential oil. the pulp of
 roasted onions, with oil, forms an excellent anodyne and
 emollient poultice to suppurating tumours.
—ingredients.— or  spanish onions,  pint of good broth or
gravy.
mode.—peel the onions, taking care not to cut away too much of the
tops or tails, or they would then fall to pieces; put them into a
stewpan capable of holding them at the bottom without piling them one on
the top of another; add the broth or gravy, and simmer very gently
until the onions are perfectly tender. dish them, pour the gravy round,
and serve. instead of using broth, spanish onions may be stewed with a
large piece of butter: they must be done very gradually over a slow fire
or hot-plate, and will produce plenty of gravy.
time.—to stew in gravy,  hours, or longer if very large.
average cost.—medium-sized, d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to january.
note.—stewed spanish onions are a favourite accompaniment to roast
shoulder of mutton.
 origin of the onion.—this vegetable is thought to have
 originally come from india, through egypt, where it became an
 object of worship. thence it was transmitted to greece, thence
 to italy, and ultimately it was distributed throughout europe,
 in almost every part of which it has, from time immemorial, been
 cultivated. in warm climates it is found to be less acrid and
 much sweeter than in colder latitudes; and in spain it is not at
 all unusual to see a peasant munching an onion, as an englishman
 would an apple. spanish onions, which are imported to this
 country during the winter months, are, when properly roasted,
 perfectly sweet, and equal to many preserves.
. ingredients.—parsnips; to each gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—wash the parsnips, scrape them thoroughly, and, with the point
of the knife, remove any black specks about them, and, should they be
very large, cut the thick part into quarters. put them into a saucepan
of boiling water salted in the above proportion, boil them rapidly until
tender, which may be ascertained by thrusting a fork in them; take them
up, drain them, and serve in a vegetable-dish. this vegetable is usually
served with salt fish, boiled pork, or boiled beef: when sent to table
with the latter, a few should be placed alternately with carrots round
the dish, as a garnish.
time.—large parsnips,  to -/ hour; small ones, / to  hour.
average cost, d. each.
sufficient.—allow  for each person.
seasonable from october to may.
[illustration: the parsnip.]
 the parsnip.—this vegetable is found wild in meadows all over
 europe, and, in england, is met with very frequently on dry
 banks in a chalky soil. in its wild state, the root is white,
 mucilaginous, aromatic, and sweet, with some degree of acrimony:
 when old, it has been known to cause vertigo. willis relates
 that a whole family fell into delirium from having eaten of its
 roots, and cattle never touch it in its wild state. in domestic
 economy the parsnip is much used, and is found to be a highly
 nutritious vegetable. in times of scarcity, an excellent bread
 has been made from the roots, and they also furnish an excellent
 wine, resembling the malmsey of madeira and the canaries: a
 spirit is also obtained from them in as great quantities as from
 carrots. the composition of the parsnip-root has been found to
 be . of water, . starch and fibre, . gum, . sugar, and
 . of albumen.
. ingredients.—green peas; to each / gallon of water allow 
small teaspoonful of moist sugar,  heaped tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—this delicious vegetable, to be eaten in perfection, should be
young, and not gathered or shelled long before it is dressed. shell
the peas, wash them well in cold water, and drain them; then put them
into a saucepan with plenty of fast-boiling water, to which salt and
moist sugar have been added in the above proportion; let them boil
quickly over a brisk fire, with the lid of the saucepan uncovered, and
be careful that the smoke does not draw in. when tender, pour them into
a colander; put them into a hot vegetable-dish, and quite in the centre
of the peas place a piece of butter, the size of a walnut. many cooks
boil a small bunch of mint with the peas, or garnish them with it,
by boiling a few sprigs in a saucepan by themselves. should the peas be
very old, and difficult to boil a good colour, a very tiny piece of soda
may be thrown in the water previous to putting them in; but this must be
very sparingly used, as it causes the peas, when boiled, to have a
smashed and broken appearance. with young peas, there is not the
slightest occasion to use it.
time.—young peas,  to  minutes; the large sorts, such as
marrowfats, &c.,  to  minutes; old peas, / hour.
average cost, when cheapest, d. per peck; when first in season, s.
to s. d. per peck.
sufficient.—allow  peck of unshelled peas for  or  persons.
seasonable from june to the end of august.
 origin of the pea.—all the varieties of garden peas which are
 cultivated have originated from the pisum sativum, a native of
 the south of europe; and field peas are varieties of pisum
 arvense. the everlasting pea is lathyrus latifolius, an old
 favourite in flower-gardens. it is said to yield an abundance of
 honey to bees, which are remarkably fond of it. in this country
 the pea has been grown from time immemorial; but its culture
 seems to have diminished since the more general introduction of
 herbage, plants, and roots.
. ingredients.— quarts of green peas,  oz. of fresh butter, a
bunch of parsley,  green onions, flour, a small lump of sugar, /
teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of flour.
mode.—shell sufficient fresh-gathered peas to fill  quarts; put them
into cold water, with the above proportion of butter, and stir them
about until they are well covered with the butter; drain them in a
colander, and put them in a stewpan, with the parsley and onions; dredge
over them a little flour, stir the peas well, and moisten them with
boiling water; boil them quickly over a large fire for  minutes, or
until there is no liquor remaining. dip a small lump of sugar into some
water, that it may soon melt; put it with the peas, to which add /
teaspoonful of salt. take a piece of butter the size of a walnut, work
it together with a teaspoonful of flour; and add this to the peas, which
should be boiling when it is put in. keep shaking the stewpan, and, when
the peas are nicely thickened, dress them high in the dish, and serve.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, d. per peck.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from june to the end of august.
 varieties of the pea.—the varieties of the pea are numerous;
 but they may be divided into two classes—those grown for the
 ripened seed, and those grown for gathering in a green state.
 the culture of the latter is chiefly confined to the
 neighbourhoods of large towns, and may be considered as in part
 rather to belong to the operations of the gardener than to those
 of the agriculturist. the grey varieties are the early grey, the
 late grey, and the purple grey; to which some add the
 marlborough grey and the horn grey. the white varieties grown in
 fields are the pearl, early charlton, golden hotspur, the common
 white, or suffolk, and other suffolk varieties.
. ingredients.— quart of peas,  lettuce,  onion,  oz. of
butter, pepper and salt to taste,  egg, / teaspoonful of powdered
sugar.
mode.—shell the peas, and cut the onion and lettuce into slices; put
these into a stewpan, with the butter, pepper, and salt, but with no
more water than that which hangs round the lettuce from washing. stew
the whole very gently for rather more than  hour; then stir to it a
well-beaten egg, and about / teaspoonful of powdered sugar. when the
peas, &c., are nicely thickened, serve but, after the egg is added, do
not allow them to boil.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, d. per peck.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from june to the end of august.
[illustration: green pea.]
 the sweet-pea and the heath or wood-pea.—the well-known
 sweet-pea forms a fine covering to a trellis, or lattice-work in
 a flower-garden. its gay and fragrant flowers, with its rambling
 habit, render it peculiarly adapted for such a purpose. the
 wood-pea, or heath-pea, is found in the heaths of scotland, and
 the highlanders of that country are extremely partial to them,
 and dry and chew them to give a greater relish to their whiskey.
 they also regard them as good against chest complaints, and say
 that by the use of them they are enabled to withstand hunger and
 thirst for a long time. the peas have a sweet taste, somewhat
 like the root of liquorice, and, when boiled, have an agreeable
 flavour, and are nutritive. in times of scarcity they have
 served as an article of food. when well boiled, a fork will pass
 through them; and, slightly dried, they are roasted, and in
 holland and flanders served up like chestnuts.
. ingredients.—potatoes.
[illustration: baked potatoes served in napkin.]
mode.—choose large potatoes, as much of a size as possible; wash them
in lukewarm water, and scrub them well, for the browned skin of a baked
potato is by many persons considered the better part of it. put them
into a moderate oven, and bake them for about  hours, turning them
three or four times whilst they are cooking. serve them in a napkin
immediately they are done, as, if kept a long time in the oven, they
have a shrivelled appearance. potatoes may also be roasted before the
fire, in an american oven; but when thus cooked, they must be done very
slowly. do not forget to send to table with them a piece of cold butter.
time.—large potatoes, in a hot oven -/ hour to  hours; in a cool
oven,  to -/ hours.
average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient.—allow  to each person.
seasonable all the year, but not good just before and whilst new
potatoes are in season.
 potato-sugar.—this sugary substance, found in the tubers of
 potatoes, is obtained in the form of syrup or treacle, and has
 not yet been crystallized. it resembles the sugar of grapes,
 has a very sweet taste, and may be used for making sweetmeats,
 and as a substitute for honey. sixty pounds of potatoes,
 yielding eight pounds of dry starch, will produce seven and a
 half pounds of sugar. in russia it is extensively made, as
 good, though of less consistency than the treacle obtained from
 cane-sugar. a spirit is also distilled from the tubers, which
 resembles brandy, but is milder, and has a flavour as if it were
 charged with the odour of violets or raspberries. in france
 this manufacture is carried on pretty extensively, and five
 hundred pounds of the tubers will produce twelve quarts of
 spirit, the pulp being given to cattle.
. ingredients.— or  potatoes; to each / gallon of water allow
 heaped tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—choose potatoes of an equal size, pare them, take out all the
eyes and specks, and as they are peeled, throw them into cold water. put
them into a saucepan, with sufficient cold water to cover them, with
salt in the above proportion, and let them boil gently until tender.
ascertain when they are done by thrusting a fork in them, and take them
up the moment they feel soft through; for if they are left in the water
afterwards, they become waxy or watery. drain away the water, put the
saucepan by the side of the fire, with the lid partially uncovered, to
allow the steam to escape, and let the potatoes get thoroughly dry, and
do not allow them to get burnt. their superfluous moisture will
evaporate, and the potatoes, if a good sort, should be perfectly mealy
and dry. potatoes vary so much in quality and size, that it is difficult
to give the exact time for boiling; they should be attentively watched,
and probed with a fork, to ascertain when they are cooked. send them to
table quickly, and very hot, and with an opening in the cover of the
dish, that a portion of the steam may evaporate, and not fall back on
the potatoes.
time.—moderate-sized old potatoes,  to  minutes after the water
boils; large ones, / hour to  minutes.
average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year, but not good just before and whilst new
potatoes are in season.
note.—to keep potatoes hot, after draining the water from them, put a
folded cloth or flannel (kept for the purpose) on the top of them,
keeping the saucepan-lid partially uncovered. this will absorb the
moisture, and keep them hot some time without spoiling.
 the potato.—the potato belongs to the family of the
 solanaceae, the greater number of which inhabit the tropics,
 and the remainder are distributed over the temperate regions of
 both hemispheres, but do not extend to the arctic and antarctic
 zones. the whole of the family are suspicious; a great number
 are narcotic, and many are deleterious. the roots partake of the
 properties of the plants, and are sometimes even more active.
 the tubercles of such as produce them, are amylaceous and
 nutritive, as in those of the potato. the leaves are generally
 narcotic; but they lose this principle in boiling, as is the
 case with the solanum nigrum, which are used as a vegetable
 when cooked.
. ingredients.— or  potatoes; to each / gallon of water,
allow  heaped tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—to obtain this wholesome and delicious vegetable cooked in
perfection, it should be boiled and sent to table with the skin on. in
ireland, where, perhaps, the cooking of potatoes is better understood
than in any country, they are always served so. wash the potatoes well,
and if necessary, use a clean scrubbing-brush to remove the dirt from
them; and if possible, choose the potatoes so that they may all be as
nearly the same size as possible. when thoroughly cleansed, fill the
saucepan half full with them, and just cover the potatoes with cold
water, salted in the above proportion: they are more quickly boiled with
a small quantity of water, and, besides, are more savoury than when
drowned in it. bring them to boil, then draw the pan to the side of the
fire, and let them simmer gently until tender. ascertain when they are
done by probing them with a fork; then pour off the water, uncover the
saucepan, and let the potatoes dry by the side of the fire, taking care
not to let them burn. peel them quickly, put them in a very hot
vegetable-dish, either with or without a napkin, and serve very quickly.
after potatoes are cooked, they should never be entirely covered up, as
the steam, instead of escaping, falls down on them, and makes them
watery and insipid. in ireland they are usually served up with the skins
on, and a small plate is placed by the side of each guest.
time.—moderate-sized potatoes, with their skins on,  to  minutes
after the water boils; large potatoes,  minutes to / hour, or
longer;  minutes to dry them.
average cost, s. per bushel. sufficient for  persons.
seasonable all the year, but not good just before and whilst new
potatoes are in season.
 analysis of the potato.—next to the cereals, the potato is the
 most valuable plant for the production of human food. its
 tubers, according to analysis conducted by mr. fromberg, in the
 laboratory of the agricultural chemical association in scotland,
 contain the following ingredients:—. per cent. of water,
 . starch, o. dextrine, . of impure saccharine matter,
 and . of fibre with coagulated albumen. in a dried state the
 tuber contains . per cent, of starch, . of dextrine, .
 of impure saccharine matter, . of caseine, gluten, and
 albumen,  of fatty matter, and . of fibre with coagulated
 albumen.
. ingredients.—potatoes; to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—do not have the potatoes dug long before they are dressed, as
they are never good when they have been out of the ground some time.
well wash them, rub off the skins with a coarse cloth, and put them into
boiling water salted in the above proportion. let them boil until
tender; try them with a fork, and when done, pour the water away from
them; let them stand by the side of the fire with the lid of the
saucepan partially uncovered, and when the potatoes are thoroughly dry,
put them into a hot vegetable-dish, with a piece of butter the size of a
walnut; pile the potatoes over this, and serve. if the potatoes are too
old to have the skins rubbed off, boil them in their jackets; drain,
peel, and serve them as above, with a piece of butter placed in the
midst of them.
time.—/ to / hour, according to the size.
average cost, in full season, d. per lb.
sufficient.—allow  lbs. for  or  persons.
seasonable in may and june, but may be had, forced, in march.
 potato starch.—this fecula has a beautiful white crystalline
 appearance, and is inodorous, soft to the touch, insoluble in
 cold, but readily soluble in boiling water. it is on this starch
 that the nutritive properties of the tubers depend. as an
 aliment, it is well adapted for invalids and persons of delicate
 constitution. it may be used in the form of arrow-root, and
 eaten with milk or sugar. for pastry of all kinds it is more
 light and easier of digestion than that made with flour of
 wheat. in confectionery it serves to form creams and jellies,
 and in cookery may be used to thicken soups and sauces. it
 accommodates itself to the chest and stomach of children, for
 whom it is well adapted; and it is an aliment that cannot be too
 generally used, as much on account of its wholesomeness as its
 cheapness, and the ease with which it is kept, which are equal,
 if not superior, to all the much-vaunted exotic feculae; as,
 salep, tapioca, sago, and arrow-root.
. ingredients.—potatoes; boiling water.
mode.—this mode of cooking potatoes is now much in vogue,
particularly where they are wanted on a large scale, it being so very
convenient. pare the potatoes, throw them into cold water as they are
peeled, then put them into a steamer. place the steamer over a saucepan
of boiling water, and steam the potatoes from  to  minutes,
according to the size and sort. when a fork goes easily through them,
they are done; then take them up, dish, and serve very quickly.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient.—allow  large potatoes to each person.
seasonable all the year, but not so good whilst new potatoes are in
season.
 uses of the potato.—potatoes boiled and beaten along with sour
 milk form a sort of cheese, which is made in saxony; and, when
 kept in close vessels, may be preserved for several years. it is
 generally supposed that the water in which potatoes are boiled
 is injurious; and as instances are recorded where cattle having
 drunk it were seriously affected, it may be well to err on the
 safe side, and avoid its use for any alimentary purpose.
 potatoes which have been exposed to the air and become green,
 are very unwholesome. cadet de vaux asserts that potatoes will
 clean linen as well as soap; and it is well known that the
 berries of the s. saponaceum are used in peru for the same
 purpose.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold potatoes; to every lb. allow 
tablespoonfuls of flour,  ditto of minced onions,  oz. of butter,
milk.
mode.—mash the potatoes with a fork until perfectly free from lumps;
stir in the other ingredients, and add sufficient milk to moisten them
well; press the potatoes into a mould, and bake in a moderate oven until
nicely brown, which will be in from  minutes to / hour. turn them
out of the mould, and serve.
time.— minutes to / hour.
seasonable at any time.
 potato bread.—the manner in which this is made is very simple.
 the adhesive tendency of the flour of the potato acts against
 its being baked or kneaded without being mixed with wheaten
 flour or meal; it may, however, be made into cakes in the
 following manner:—a small wooden frame, nearly square, is laid
 on a pan like a frying-pan and is grooved, and so constructed
 that, by means of a presser or lid introduced into the groove,
 the cake is at once fashioned, according to the dimensions of
 the mould. the frame containing the farina may be almost
 immediately withdrawn after the mould is formed upon the pan;
 because, from the consistency imparted to the incipient cake by
 the heat, it will speedily admit of being safely handled: it
 must not, however, be fried too hastily. it will then eat very
 palatably, and might from time to time be soaked for puddings,
 like tapioca, or might be used like the cassada-cake, for, when
 well buttered and toasted, it will be found an excellent
 accompaniment to breakfast. in scotland, cold boiled potatoes
 are frequently squeezed up and mixed with flour or oatmeal, and
 an excellent cake, or scon, obtained.
fried potatoes (french fashion).
. ingredients.—potatoes, hot butter or clarified dripping, salt.
mode.—peel and cut the potatoes into thin slices, as nearly the same
size as possible; make some butter or dripping quite hot in a
frying-pan; put in the potatoes, and fry them on both sides of a nice
brown. when they are crisp and done, take them up, place them on a cloth
before the fire to drain the grease from them, and serve very hot, after
sprinkling them with salt. these are delicious with rump-steak, and, in
france, are frequently served thus as a breakfast dish. the remains of
cold potatoes may also be sliced and fried by the above recipe, but the
slices must be cut a little thicker.
time.—sliced raw potatoes,  minutes; cooked potatoes,  minutes.
average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient,— sliced potatoes for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— to  middling-sized potatoes,  oz. of butter, 
tablespoonfuls of flour, / pint of broth,  tablespoonfuls of vinegar.
mode.—put the butter and flour into a stewpan; stir over the fire
until the butter is of a nice brown colour, and add the broth and
vinegar; peel and cut the potatoes into long thin slices, lay them in
the gravy, and let them simmer gently until tender, which will be in
from  to  minutes, and serve very hot. a laurel-leaf simmered with
the potatoes is an improvement.
time.— to  minutes.
seasonable at any time.
 preserving potatoes.—in general, potatoes are stored or
 preserved in pits, cellars, pies, or camps; but, whatever mode
 is adopted, it is essential that the tubers be perfectly dry;
 otherwise, they will surely rot; and a few rotten potatoes will
 contaminate a whole mass. the pie, as it is called, consists of
 a trench, lined and covered with straw; the potatoes in it being
 piled in the shape of a house roof, to the height of about three
 feet. the camps are shallow pits, filled and ridged up in a
 similar manner, covered up with the excavated mould of the pit.
 in russia and canada, the potato is preserved in boxes, in
 houses or cellars, heated, when necessary, to a temperature one
 or two degrees above the freezing-point, by stoves. to keep
 potatoes for a considerable time, the best way is to place them
 in thin layers on a platform suspended in an ice-cellar: there,
 the temperature being always below that of active vegetation,
 they will not sprout; while, not being above one or two degrees
 below the freezing-point, the tubers will not be frostbitten.
 another mode is to scoop out the eyes with a very small scoop,
 and keep the roots buried in earth; a third mode is to destroy
 the vital principle, by kiln-drying, steaming, or scalding; a
 fourth is to bury them so deep in dry soil, that no change of
 temperature will reach them; and thus, being without air, they
 will remain upwards of a year without vegetating.
. ingredients.—potatoes, salt and water; to every  potatoes allow
 tablespoonful of minced parsley,  oz. of butter, pepper and salt to
taste,  tablespoonfuls of gravy,  tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice.
mode.—wash the potatoes clean, and boil them in salt and water by
recipe no. ; when they are done, drain them, let them cool; then
peel and cut the potatoes into thick slices: if these are too thin, they
would break in the sauce. put the butter into a stewpan with the pepper,
salt, gravy, and parsley; mix these ingredients well together, put in
the potatoes, shake them two or three times, that they may be well
covered with the sauce, and, when quite hot through, squeeze in the
lemon-juice, and serve.
time.—/ to / hour to boil the potatoes;  minutes for them to
heat in the sauce.
average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable all the year.
. ingredients.—potatoes; to every lb. of mashed potatoes allow 
oz. of butter,  tablespoonfuls of milk, salt to taste.
mode.—boil the potatoes in their skins; when done, drain them, and
let them get thoroughly dry by the side of the fire; then peel them,
and, as they are peeled, put them into a clean saucepan, and with a
large fork beat them to a light paste; add butter, milk, and salt in the
above proportion, and stir all the ingredients well over the fire. when
thoroughly hot, dish them lightly, and draw the fork backwards over the
potatoes to make the surface rough, and serve. when dressed in this
manner, they may be browned at the top with a salamander, or before the
fire. some cooks press the potatoes into moulds, then turn them out, and
brown them in the oven: this is a pretty mode of serving, but it makes
them heavy. in whatever way they are sent to table, care must be taken
to have them quite free from lumps.
time.—from / to / hour to boil the potatoes.
average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient,— lb. of mashed potatoes for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
puree de pommes de terre, or, very thin-mashed potatoes.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of mashed potatoes allow / pint of
good broth or stock,  oz. of butter.
mode.—boil the potatoes, well drain them, and pound them smoothly in
a mortar, or beat them up with a fork; add the stock or broth, and rub
the potatoes through a sieve. put the puree into a very clean saucepan
with the butter; stir it well over the fire until thoroughly hot, and it
will then be ready to serve. a puree should be rather thinner than
mashed potatoes, and is a delicious accompaniment to delicately broiled
mutton cutlets. cream or milk may be substituted for the broth when the
latter is not at hand. a casserole of potatoes, which is often used for
ragoűts instead of rice, is made by mashing potatoes rather thickly,
placing them on a dish, and making an opening in the centre. after
having browned the potatoes in the oven, the dish should be wiped clean,
and the ragout or fricassée poured in.
time.—about / hour to boil the potatoes;  or  minutes to warm the
purée.
average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient.—allow  lb. of cooked potatoes for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: sweet potato.]
 varieties of the potato.—these are very numerous. "they
 differ," says an authority, "in their leaves and bulk of haulm;
 in the colour of the skin of the tubers; in the colour of the
 interior, compared with that of the skin; in the time of
 ripening; in being farinaceous, glutinous, or watery; in tasting
 agreeably or disagreeably; in cooking readily or tediously; in
 the length of the subterraneous stolones to which the tubers
 are attached; in blossoming or not blossoming; and finally, in
 the soil which they prefer." the earliest varieties grown in
 fields are,—the early kidney, the nonsuch, the early shaw, and
 the early champion. this last is the most generally cultivated
 round london: it is both mealy and hardy. the sweet potato is
 but rarely eaten in britain; but in america it is often served
 at table, and is there very highly esteemed.
. ingredients.—mashed potatoes, salt and pepper to taste; when
liked, a very little minced parsley, egg, and bread crumbs.
[illustration: potato rissoles.]
mode.—boil and mash the potatoes by recipe no. ; add a seasoning
of pepper and salt, and, when liked, a little minced parsley. roll the
potatoes into small balls, cover them with egg and bread crumbs, and fry
in hot lard for about  minutes; let them drain before the fire, dish
them on a napkin, and serve.
time,— minutes to fry the rissoles.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the flavour of these rissoles may be very much increased by
adding finely-minced tongue or ham, or even chopped onions, when these
are liked.
 qualities of potatoes.—in making a choice from the many
 varieties of potatoes which are everywhere found, the best way
 is to get a sample and taste them, and then fix upon the kind
 which best pleases your palate. the shaw is one of the most
 esteemed of the early potatoes for field culture; and the kidney
 and bread-fruit are also good sorts. the lancashire pink is also
 a good potato, and is much cultivated in the neighbourhood of
 liverpool. as late or long-keeping potatoes, the tartan or
 red-apple stands very high in favour.
. ingredients.—potatoes, salt, and water.
mode.—choose large white potatoes, as free from spots as possible;
boil them in their skins in salt and water until perfectly tender; drain
and dry them thoroughly by the side of the fire, and peel them. put a
hot dish before the fire, rub the potatoes through a coarse sieve on to
this dish; do not touch them afterwards, or the flakes will fall, and
serve as hot as possible.
time.—/ to / hour to boil the potatoes.
average cost, s. per bushel.
sufficient,— potatoes for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 the potato as an article of human food.—this valuable esculent,
 next to wheat, is of the greatest importance in the eye of the
 political economist. from no other crop that can be cultivated
 does the public derive so much benefit; and it has been
 demonstrated that an acre of potatoes will feed double the
 number of people that can be fed from an acre of wheat.
. ingredients.—salsify; to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt,  oz. of butter,  tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice.
mode.—scrape the roots gently, so as to strip them only of their
outside peel; cut them into pieces about  inches long, and, as they are
peeled, throw them into water with which has been mixed a little
lemon-juice, to prevent their discolouring. put them into boiling water,
with salt, butter, and lemon-juice in the above proportion, and let them
boil rapidly until tender; try them with a fork; and, when it penetrates
easily, they are done. drain the salsify, and serve with a good white
sauce or french melted butter.
time.— to  minutes. seasonable in winter.
note.—this vegetable may be also boiled, sliced, and fried in batter
of a nice brown. when crisp and a good colour, they should be served
with fried parsley in the centre of the dish, and a little fine salt
sprinkled over the salsify.
 salsify.—this esculent is, for the sake of its roots,
 cultivated in gardens. it belongs to the composite class of
 flowers, which is the most extensive family in the vegetable
 kingdom. this family is not only one of the most natural and
 most uniform in structure, but there is also a great similarity
 existing in the properties of the plants of which it is
 composed. generally speaking, all composite flowers are tonic or
 stimulant in their medical virtues.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt.
[illustration: boiled sea-kale.]
mode.—well wash the kale, cut away any wormeaten pieces, and tie it
into small bunches; put it into boiling water, salted in the above
proportion, and let it boil quickly until tender. take it out, drain,
untie the bunches, and serve with plain melted butter or white sauce, a
little of which may be poured over the kale. sea-kale may also be
parboiled and stewed in good brown gravy: it will then take about /
hour altogether.
time.— minutes; when liked very thoroughly done, allow an extra 
minutes.
average cost, in full season, d. per basket.
sufficient.—allow  heads for  or  persons.
seasonable from february to june.
[illustration: sea-kale.]
 sea-kale.—this plant belongs to the asparagus tribe, and grows
 on seashores, especially in the west of england, and in the
 neighbourhood of dublin. although it is now in very general use,
 it did not come into repute till . it is easily cultivated,
 and is esteemed as one of the most valuable esculents indigenous
 to britain. as a vegetable, it is stimulating to the appetite,
 easily digestible, and nutritious. it is so light that the most
 delicate organizations may readily eat it. the flowers form a
 favourite resort for bees, as their petals contain a great
 amount of saccharine matter.
. ingredients.— heads of celery,  pint of french beans, lettuce,
and endive.
[illustration: french beans.]
[illustration: chervil.]
mode.—boil the celery and beans separately until tender, and cut the
celery into pieces about  inches long. put these into a salad-bowl or
dish; pour over either of the sauces no. , , or , and garnish
the dish with a little lettuce finely chopped, blanched endive, or a few
tufts of boiled cauliflower. this composition, if less agreeable than
vegetables in their raw state, is more wholesome; for salads, however
they may be compounded, when eaten uncooked, prove to some people
indigestible. tarragon, chervil, burnet, and boiled onion, may be added
to the above salad with advantage, as also slices of cold meat, poultry,
or fish.
seasonable from july to october.
 acetarious vegetables.—by the term acetarious vegetables, is
 expressed a numerous class of plants, of various culture and
 habit, which are principally used as salads, pickles, and
 condiments. they are to be considered rather as articles of
 comparative luxury than as ordinary food, and are more desirable
 for their coolness, or their agreeable flavour, than for their
 nutritive powers.
 cauliflower.—the cauliflower is less indigestible than the
 cabbage; it possesses a most agreeable flavour, and is
 sufficiently delicate to be served at the tables of the wealthy.
 it is a wholesome vegetable, but should be eaten moderately, as
 it induces flatulence. persons of weak constitutions and
 delicate stomachs should abstain from cauliflower as much as
 possible. they may be prepared in a variety of ways; and, in
 selecting them, the whitest should be chosen; those tinged with
 green or yellow being of indifferent quality.
. ingredients.— lettuces,  handfuls of mustard-and-cress, 
young radishes, a few slices of cucumber.
[illustration: salad in bowl.]
mode.—let the herbs be as fresh as possible for a salad, and, if at
all stale or dead-looking, let them lie in water for an hour or two,
which will very much refresh them. wash and carefully pick them over,
remove any decayed or wormeaten leaves, and drain them thoroughly by
swinging them gently in a clean cloth. with a silver knife, cut the
lettuces into small pieces, and the radishes and cucumbers into thin
slices; arrange all these ingredients lightly on a dish, with the
mustard-and-cress, and pour under, but not over the salad, either of the
sauces no. , , or , and do not stir it up until it is to be
eaten. it may be garnished with hard-boiled eggs, cut in slices, sliced
cucumbers, nasturtiums, cut vegetable-flowers, and many other things
that taste will always suggest to make a pretty and elegant dish. in
making a good salad, care must be taken to have the herbs freshly
gathered, and thoroughly drained before the sauce is added to them, or
it will be watery and thin. young spring onions, cut small, are by many
persons considered an improvement to salads; but, before these are
added, the cook should always consult the taste of her employer. slices
of cold meat or poultry added to a salad make a convenient and
quickly-made summer luncheon-dish; or cold fish, flaked, will also be
found exceedingly nice, mixed with it.
average cost, d. for a salad for  or  persons; but more expensive
when the herbs are forced.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from may to september.
 cucumbers.—the cucumber is refreshing, but neither nutritious
 nor digestible, and should be excluded from the regimen of the
 delicate. there are various modes of preparing cucumbers. when
 gathered young, they are called gherkins: these, pickled, are
 much used in seasonings.
 [illustration: cucumber-slice.]
 radishes.—this is the common name given to the root of the
 raphanus satious, one of the varieties of the cultivated
 horseradish. there are red and white radishes; and the french
 have also what they call violet and black ones, of which the
 black are the larger. radishes are composed of nearly the same
 constituents as turnips, that is to say, mostly fibre and
 nitrogen; and, being generally eaten raw, it is on the last of
 these that their flavour depends. they do not agree with people,
 except those who are in good health, and have active digestive
 powers; for they are difficult of digestion, and cause
 flatulency and wind, and are the cause of headaches when eaten
 to excess. besides being eaten raw, they are sometimes, but
 rarely, boiled; and they also serve as a pretty garnish for
 salads. in china, the radish may be found growing naturally,
 without cultivation; and may be occasionally met with in england
 as a weed, in similar places to where the wild turnip grows; it,
 however, thrives best in the garden, and the ground it likes
 best is a deep open loam, or a well-manured sandy soil.
[illustration: turnip radishes.]
[illustration: long radishes.]
. ingredients.—endive, mustard-and-cress, boiled beetroot,  or 
hard-boiled eggs, celery.
mode.—the above ingredients form the principal constituents of a
winter salad, and may be converted into a very pretty dish, by nicely
contrasting the various colours, and by tastefully garnishing it. shred
the celery into thin pieces, after having carefully washed and cut away
all wormeaten pieces; cleanse the endive and mustard-and-cress free from
grit, and arrange these high in the centre of a salad-bowl or dish;
garnish with the hard-boiled eggs and beetroot, both of which should be
cut in slices; and pour into the dish, but not over the salad, either of
the sauces no. , , or . never dress a salad long before it is
required for table, as, by standing, it loses its freshness and pretty
crisp and light appearance; the sauce, however, may always be prepared a
few hours beforehand, and when required for use, the herbs laid lightly
over it.
average cost, d. for a salad for  or  persons.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from the end of september to march.
 salads.—salads are raw vegetables, of which, among us, the
 lettuce is the most generally used; several others, however,
 such as cresses, celery, onions, beetroot, &c., are occasionally
 employed. as vegetables eaten in a raw state are apt to ferment
 on the stomach, and as they have very little stimulative power
 upon that organ, they are usually dressed with some condiments,
 such as pepper, vinegar, salt, mustard, and oil. respecting the
 use of these, medical men disagree, especially in reference to
 oil, which is condemned by some and recommended by others.
. ingredients.— or  cold boiled potatoes,  tablespoonfuls of
tarragon or plain vinegar,  tablespoonfuls of salad-oil, pepper and
salt to taste,  teaspoonful of minced parsley.
mode.—cut the potatoes into slices about / inch in thickness; put
these into a salad-bowl with oil and vinegar in the above proportion;
season with pepper, salt, and a teaspoonful of minced parsley; stir the
salad well, that all the ingredients may be thoroughly incorporated, and
it is ready to serve. this should be made two or three hours before it
is wanted for table. anchovies, olives, or pickles may be added to this
salad, as also slices of cold beef, fowl, or turkey.
seasonable at any time.
chicken salad.—(see no. .)
grouse salad.—(see no. .)
lobster salad.—(see no. .)
to boil spinach (english mode).
. ingredients.— pailfuls of spinach,  heaped tablespoonfuls of
salt,  oz. of butter, pepper to taste.
[illustration: spinach garnished with croűtons.]
mode.—pick the spinach carefully, and see that no stalks or weeds are
left amongst it; wash it in several waters, and, to prevent it being
gritty, act in the following manner:—have ready two large pans or tubs
filled with water; put the spinach into one of these, and thoroughly
wash it; then, with the hands, take out the spinach, and put it into
the other tub of water (by this means all the grit will be left at the
bottom of the tub); wash it again, and, should it not be perfectly free
from dirt, repeat the process. put it into a very large saucepan, with
about / pint of water, just sufficient to keep the spinach from
burning, and the above proportion of salt. press it down frequently with
a wooden spoon, that it may be done equally; and when it has boiled for
rather more than  minutes, or until it is perfectly tender, drain it
in a colander, squeeze it quite dry, and chop it finely. put the spinach
into a clean stewpan, with the butter and a seasoning of pepper; stir
the whole over the fire until quite hot; then put it on a hot dish, and
garnish with sippets of toasted bread.
time.— to  minutes to boil the spinach,  minutes to warm with
the butter.
average cost for the above quantity, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—spring spinach from march to july; winter spinach from
november to march.
note.—grated nutmeg, pounded mace, or lemon-juice may also be added
to enrich the flavour; and poached eggs are also frequently served with
spinach: they should be placed on the top of it, and it should be
garnished with sippets of toasted bread.—see coloured plate u.
 varieties of spinach.—these comprise the strawberry spinach,
 which, under that name, was wont to be grown in our
 flower-gardens; the good king harry, the garden oracle, the
 prickly, and the round, are the varieties commonly used. the
 oracle is a hardy sort, much esteemed in france, and is a native
 of tartary, introduced in . the common spinach has its
 leaves round, and is softer and more succulent than any of the
 brassica tribe.
spinach dressed with cream, a la francaise.
. ingredients.— pailfuls of spinach,  tablespoonfuls of salt, 
oz. of butter,  tablespoonfuls of cream,  small teaspoonful of pounded
sugar, a very little grated nutmeg.
mode.—boil and drain the spinach as in recipe no. ; chop it
finely, and put it into a stewpan with the butter; stir over a gentle
fire, and, when the butter has dried away, add the remaining
ingredients, and simmer for about  minutes. previously to adding the
cream, boil it first, in case it should curdle. serve on a hot dish, and
garnish either with sippets of toasted bread or leaves of puff-paste.
time.— to  minutes to boil the spinach;  minutes to stew with
the cream.
average cost for the above quantity, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—spring spinach from march to july; winter spinach from
november to march.
[illustration: spinach.]
 spinach.—this is a persian plant. it has been cultivated in our
 gardens about two hundred years, and is the most wholesome of
 vegetables. it is not very nutritious, but is very easily
 digested. it is very light and laxative. wonderful properties
 have been ascribed to spinach. it is an excellent vegetable, and
 very beneficial to health. plainly dressed, it is a resource for
 the poor; prepared luxuriantly, it is a choice dish for the
 rich.
 spinach.—this vegetable belongs to a sub-order of the
 salsolaceae, or saltworts, and is classified under the head of
 spirolobeae, with leaves shaped like worms, and of a succulent
 kind. in its geographical distribution it is commonly found in
 extratropical and temperate regions, where they grow as weeds in
 waste places, and among rubbish, and in marshes by the seashore.
 in the tropics the order is rarely found. many of them are used
 as potherbs, and some of them are emetic and vermifuge in their
 medicinal properties.
. ingredients.— pailfuls of spinach,  tablespoonfuls of salt, 
oz. of butter,  teaspoonful of flour,  tablespoonfuls of good gravy;
when liked, a very little grated nutmeg.
mode.—pick, wash, and boil the spinach, as in recipe no. , and
when quite tender, drain and squeeze it perfectly dry from the water
that hangs about it. chop it very fine, put the butter into a stewpan,
and lay the spinach over that; stir it over a gentle fire, and dredge in
the flour. add the gravy, and let it boil quickly for a few minutes,
that it may not discolour. when the flavour of nutmeg is liked, grate
some to the spinach, and when thoroughly hot, and the gravy has dried
away a little, serve. garnish the dish with sippets of toasted bread.
time.— to  minutes to boil the spinach;  minutes to simmer in
the gravy.
average cost for the above quantity, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—spring spinach from march to july; winter spinach from
october to february.
note.—for an entremets or second-course dish, spinach, dressed by the
above recipe may be pressed into a hot mould; it should then be turned
out quickly, and served very hot.
(excellent.)
. ingredients.— or  tomatoes, pepper and salt to taste,  oz. of
butter, bread crumbs.
mode.—take off the stalks from the tomatoes; cut them into thick
slices, and put them into a deep baking-dish; add a plentiful seasoning
of pepper and salt, and butter in the above proportion; cover the whole
with bread crumbs; drop over these a little clarified butter; bake in a
moderate oven from  minutes to / hour, and serve very hot. this
vegetable, dressed as above, is an exceedingly nice accompaniment to all
kinds of roast meat. the tomatoes, instead of being cut in slices, may
be baked whole; but they will take rather longer time to cook.
time.— minutes to / hour.
average cost, in full season, d. per basket.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in august, september, and october; but may be had, forced,
much earlier.
[illustration: the tomato.]
 tomatoes.—the tomato is a native of tropical countries, but is
 now cultivated considerably both in france and england. its skin
 is of a brilliant red, and its flavour, which is somewhat sour,
 has become of immense importance in the culinary art. it is used
 both fresh and preserved. when eaten fresh, it is served as an
 entremets; but its principal use is in sauce and gravy; its
 flavour stimulates the appetite, and is almost universally
 approved. the tomato is a wholesome fruit, and digests easily.
 from july to september, they gather the tomatoes green in
 france, not breaking them away from the stalk; they are then
 hung, head downwards, in a dry and not too cold place; and there
 they ripen.
hot tomato sauce, or puree of tomatoes.
(see no. .)
[illustration: stewed tomatoes.]
. ingredients.— tomatoes, pepper and salt to taste,  oz. of
butter,  tablespoonfuls of vinegar.
mode.—slice the tomatoes into a lined saucepan; season them with
pepper and salt, and place small pieces of butter on them. cover the lid
down closely, and stew from  to  minutes, or until the tomatoes are
perfectly tender; add the vinegar, stir two or three times, and serve
with any kind of roast meat, with which they will be found a delicious
accompaniment.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, in full season, d. per basket.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from august to october; but may be had, forced, much
earlier.
 analysis of the tomato.—the fruit of the love-apple is the only
 part used as an esculent, and it has been found to contain a
 particular acid, a volatile oil, a brown, very fragrant
 extracto-resinous matter, a vegeto-mineral matter,
 muco-saccharine, some salts, and, in all probability, an
 alkaloid. the whole plant has a disagreeable odour, and its
 juice, subjected to the action of the fire, emits a vapour so
 powerful as to cause vertigo and vomiting.
. ingredients.— tomatoes, about / pint of good gravy, thickening
of butter and flour, cayenne and salt to taste.
mode.—take out the stalks of the tomatoes; put them into a wide
stewpan, pour over them the above proportion of good brown gravy, and
stew gently until they are tender, occasionally carefully turning
them, that they may be equally done. thicken the gravy with a little
butter and flour worked together on a plate; let it just boil up after
the thickening is added, and serve. if it be at hand, these should be
served on a silver or plated vegetable-dish.
time.— to  minutes, very gentle stewing.
average cost, in full season, d. per basket.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in august, september, and october; but maybe had, forced,
much earlier.
 the tomato, or love-apple.—this vegetable is a native of mexico
 and south america, but is also found in the east indies, where
 it is supposed to have been introduced by the spaniards. in this
 country it is much more cultivated than it formerly was; and the
 more the community becomes acquainted with the many agreeable
 forms in which the fruit can be prepared, the more widely will
 its cultivation be extended. for ketchup, soups, and sauces, it
 is equally applicable, and the unripe fruit makes one of the
 best pickles.
. ingredients.—truffles, buttered paper.
mode.—select some fine truffles; cleanse them, by washing them in
several waters with a brush, until not a particle of sand or grit
remains on them; wrap each truffle in buttered paper, and bake in a hot
oven for quite an hour; take off the paper, wipe the truffles, and serve
them in a hot napkin.
time.— hour. average cost.—not often bought in this country.
seasonable from november to march.
[illustration: truffles.]
 the common truffle.—this is the tuber cibarium of science,
 and belongs to that numerous class of esculent fungi
 distinguished from other vegetables not only by the singularity
 of their forms, but by their chemical composition. upon
 analysis, they are found not only to contain the usual
 components of the vegetable kingdom, such as carbon, oxygen, and
 hydrogen, but likewise a large proportion of nitrogen; from
 which they approach more nearly to the nature of animal flesh.
 it was long ago observed by dr. darwin, that all the mushrooms
 cooked at our tables, as well as those used for ketchup,
 possessed an animal flavour; and soup enriched by mushrooms only
 has sometimes been supposed to contain meat.
. ingredients.— fine black truffles, a few slices of fat bacon, 
carrot,  turnip,  onions, a bunch of savoury herbs, including parsley,
 bay-leaf,  cloves,  blade of pounded mace,  glasses of champagne,
/ pint of stock.
mode.—carefully select the truffles, reject those that have a musty
smell, and wash them well with a brush, in cold water only, until
perfectly clean. put the bacon into a stewpan, with the truffles and the
remaining ingredients; simmer these gently for an hour, and let the
whole cool in the stewpan. when to be served, rewarm them, and drain
them on a clean cloth; then arrange them on a delicately white napkin,
that it may contrast as strongly as possible with the truffles, and
serve. the trimmings of truffles are used to flavour gravies, stock,
sauces, &c.; and are an excellent addition to ragouts, made dishes of
fowl, &c.
time.— hour. average cost.—not often bought in this country.
seasonable from november to march.
 the truffle.—the truffle belongs to the family of the mushroom.
 it is certain that the truffle must possess, equally with other
 plants, organs of reproduction; yet, notwithstanding all the
 efforts of art and science, it has been impossible to subject it
 to a regular culture. truffles grow at a considerable depth
 under the earth, never appearing on the surface. they are found
 in many parts of france: those of périgord magny are the most
 esteemed for their odour. there are three varieties of the
 species,—the black, the red, and the white: the latter are of
 little value. the red are very rare, and their use is
 restricted. the black has the highest repute, and its
 consumption is enormous. when the peasantry go to gather
 truffles, they take a pig with them to scent out the spot where
 they grow. when that is found, the pig turns up the surface with
 his snout, and the men then dig until they find the truffles.
 good truffles are easily distinguished by their agreeable
 perfume; they should be light in proportion to their size, and
 elastic when pressed by the finger. to have them in perfection,
 they should be quite fresh, as their aroma is considerably
 diminished by any conserving process. truffles are stimulating
 and beating. weak stomachs digest them with difficulty. some of
 the culinary uses to which they are subjected render them more
 digestible; but they should always be eaten sparingly. their
 chief use is in seasoning and garnitures. in short, a professor
 has said, "meats with truffles are the most distinguished dishes
 that opulence can offer to the epicure." the truffle grows in
 clusters, some inches below the surface of the soil, and is of
 an irregular globular form. those which grow wild in england are
 about the size of a hen's egg, and have no roots. as there is
 nothing to indicate the places where they are, dogs have been
 trained to discriminate their scent, by which they are
 discovered. hogs are very fond of them, and frequently lead to
 their being found, from their rutting up the ground in search of
 them.
. ingredients.— truffles, / pint of salad-oil, pepper and salt
to taste,  tablespoonful of minced parsley, a very little finely-minced
garlic,  blades of pounded mace,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice.
mode.—after cleansing and brushing the truffles, cut them into thin
slices, and put them in a baking-dish, on a seasoning of oil, pepper,
salt, parsley, garlic, and mace in the above proportion. bake them for
nearly an hour, and, just before serving, add the lemon-juice, and send
them to table very hot.
time.—nearly  hour.
average cost.—not often bought in this country.
seasonable from november to march.
 where truffles are found.—in this country, the common truffle
 is found on the downs of hampshire, wiltshire, and kent; and
 they abound in dry light soils, and more especially in oak and
 chestnut forests. in france they are plentiful, and many are
 imported from the south of that country and italy, where they
 are much larger and in greater perfection: they lose, however,
 much of their flavour by drying. truffles have in england been
 tried to be propagated artificially, but without success.
. ingredients.— truffles,  tablespoonful of minced parsley, 
minced shalot, salt and pepper to taste,  oz. of butter, 
tablespoonfuls of good brown gravy, the juice of / lemon, cayenne to
taste.
mode.—wash the truffles and cut them into slices about the size of a
penny-piece; put them into a sauté pan, with the parsley, shalot, salt,
pepper, and  oz. of butter; stir them over the fire, that they may all
be equally done, which will be in about  minutes, and drain off some
of the butter; then add a little more fresh butter,  tablespoonfuls of
good gravy, the juice of / lemon, and a little cayenne; stir over the
fire until the whole is on the point of boiling, when serve.
time.—altogether,  minutes.
average cost.—not often bought in this country.
seasonable from november to march.
 uses of the truffle.—like the morel, truffles are seldom eaten
 alone, but are much used in gravies, soups, and ragoűts. they
 are likewise dried for the winter months, and, when reduced to
 powder, form a useful culinary ingredient; they, however, have
 many virtues attributed to them which they do not possess. their
 wholesomeness is, perhaps, questionable, and they should be
 eaten with moderation.
. ingredients.—turnips; to each / gallon of water allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—pare the turnips, and, should they be very large, divide them
into quarters; but, unless this is the case, let them be cooked whole.
put them into a saucepan of boiling water, salted in the above
proportion, and let them boil gently until tender. try them with a fork,
and, when done, take them up in a colander; let them thoroughly drain,
and serve. boiled turnips are usually sent to table with boiled mutton,
but are infinitely nicer when mashed than served whole: unless nice and
young, they are scarcely worth the trouble of dressing plainly as above.
time.—old turnips, / to -/ hour; young ones, about  to 
minutes.
average cost, d. per bunch.
sufficient.—allow a bunch of  turnips for  or  persons.
seasonable.—may be had all the year; but in spring only useful for
flavouring gravies, &c.
[illustration: turnips.]
 the turnip.—this vegetable is the brassica rapa of science,
 and grows wild in england, but cannot be brought exactly to
 resemble what it becomes in a cultivated state. it is said to
 have been originally introduced from hanover, and forms an
 excellent culinary vegetable, much used all over europe, where
 it is either eaten alone or mashed and cooked in soups and
 stews. they do not thrive in a hot climate; for in india they,
 and many more of our garden vegetables, lose their flavour and
 become comparatively tasteless. the swede is the largest
 variety, but it is too coarse for the table.
. ingredients.— or  large turnips; to each / gallon of water
allow  heaped tablespoonful of salt,  oz. of butter, cayenne or white
pepper to taste.
mode.—pare the turnips, quarter them, and put them into boiling
water, salted in the above proportion; boil them until tender; then
drain them in a colander, and squeeze them as dry as possible by
pressing them with the back of a large plate. when quite free from
water, rub the turnips with a wooden spoon through the colander, and put
them into a very clean saucepan; add the butter, white pepper, or
cayenne, and, if necessary, a little salt. keep stirring them over the
fire until the butter is well mixed with them, and the turnips are
thoroughly hot; dish, and serve. a little cream or milk added after the
turnips are pressed through the colander, is an improvement to both the
colour and flavour of this vegetable.
time.—from / to / hour to boil the turnips;  minutes to warm
them through.
average cost, d. per bunch.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—may be had all the year; but in spring only good for
flavouring gravies.
 vegetables reduced to purée.—persons in the flower of youth,
 having healthy stomachs, and leading active lives, may eat all
 sorts of vegetables, without inconvenience, save, of course, in
 excess. the digestive functions possess great energy during the
 period of youth: the body, to develop itself, needs nourishment.
 physical exercise gives an appetite, which it is necessary to
 satisfy, and vegetables cannot resist the vigorous action of the
 gastric organs. as old proverb says, "at twenty one can digest
 iron." but for aged persons, the sedentary, or the delicate, it
 is quite otherwise. then the gastric power has considerably
 diminished, the digestive organs have lost their energy, the
 process of digestion is consequently slower, and the least
 excess at table is followed by derangement of the stomach for
 several days. those who generally digest vegetables with
 difficulty, should eat them reduced to a pulp or purée, that is
 to say, with their skins and tough fibres removed. subjected to
 this process, vegetables which, when entire, would create
 flatulence and wind, are then comparatively harmless. experience
 has established the rule, that nourishment is not complete
 without the alliance of meat with vegetables. we would also add,
 that the regime most favourable to health is found in variety:
 variety pleases the senses, monotony is disagreeable. the eye is
 fatigued by looking always on one object, the ear by listening
 to one sound, and the palate by tasting one flavour. it is the
 same with the stomach: consequently, variety of food is one of
 the essentials for securing good digestion.
. ingredients.— large turnips,  oz. of butter, pepper and salt to
taste, rather more than / pint of weak stock or broth,  tablespoonful
of flour.
mode.—make the butter hot in a stewpan, lay in the turnips, after
having pared and cut them into dice, and season them with pepper and
salt. toss them over the fire for a few minutes, then add the broth, and
simmer the whole gently till the turnips are tender. brown the above
proportion of flour with a little butter; add this to the turnips, let
them simmer another  minutes, and serve. boiled mutton is usually sent
to table with this vegetable, and may be cooked with the turnips by
placing it in the midst of them: the meat would then be very delicious,
as, there being so little liquid with the turnips, it would almost be
steamed, and consequently very tender.
time.— minutes. average cost, d. per bunch.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable.—may be had all the year.
 turnips.—good turnips are delicate in texture, firm, and sweet.
 the best sorts contain a sweet juicy mucilage, uniting with the
 aroma a slightly acid quality, which is completely neutralized
 in cooking. the turnip is prepared in a variety of ways. ducks
 stuffed with turnips have been highly appreciated. it is useful
 in the regimen of persons afflicted with chronic visceral
 irritations. the turnip only creates flatulency when it is soft,
 porous, and stringy. it is then, consequently, bad.
(an entremets, or to be served with the second course as a side-dish.)
. ingredients.— or  turnips,  oz. of butter, / pint of white
sauce, no.  or .
mode.—peel and cut the turnips in the shape of pears or marbles; boil
them in salt and water, to which has been added a little butter, until
tender; then take them out, drain, arrange them on a dish, and pour over
the white sauce made by recipe no.  or , and to which has been
added a small lump of sugar. in winter, when other vegetables are
scarce, this will be found a very good and pretty-looking dish: when
approved, a little mustard may be added to the sauce.
time.—about / hour to boil the turnips.
average cost, d. per bunch.
sufficient for  side-dish. seasonable in winter.
 the french navet.—this is a variety of the turnip; but, instead
 of being globular, has more the shape of the carrot. its flavour
 being excellent, it is much esteemed on the continent for soups
 and made dishes. two or three of them will impart as much
 flavour as a dozen of the common turnips will. accordingly, when
 stewed in gravy, they are greatly relished. this flavour resides
 in the rind, which is not cut off, but scraped. this variety was
 once grown in england, but now it is rarely found in our
 gardens, though highly deserving of a place there. it is of a
 yellowish-white colour, and is sometimes imported to the london
 market.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water, allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; turnip-greens.
mode.—wash the greens well in two or three waters, and pick off all
the decayed and dead leaves; tie them in small bunches, and put them
into plenty of boiling water, salted in the above proportion. keep them
boiling quickly, with the lid of the saucepan uncovered, and when
tender, pour them into a colander; let them drain, arrange them in a
vegetable-dish, remove the string that the greens were tied with, and
serve.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, d. for a dish for  persons.
seasonable in march, april, and may.
 cabbage, turnip-tops, and greens.—all the cabbage tribe, which
 comprises coleworts, brocoli, cauliflower, sprouts, and
 turnip-tops, in order to be delicate, should be dressed young,
 when they have a rapid growth; but, if they have stood the
 summer, in order to be tender, they should be allowed to have a
 touch of frost. the cabbage contains much vegetable albumen, and
 several parts sulphur and nitrate of potass. cabbage is heavy,
 and a long time digesting, which has led to a belief that it is
 very nourishing. it is only fit food for robust and active
 persons; the sedentary or delicate should carefully avoid it.
 cabbage may be prepared in a variety of ways: it serves as a
 garniture to several recherché dishes,—partridge and cabbage
 for example. bacon and cabbage is a very favourite dish; but
 only a good stomach can digest it.
. ingredients.—to each / gallon of water, allow  heaped
tablespoonful of salt; vegetable marrows.
[illustration: vegetable marrow on toast.]
mode.—have ready a saucepan of boiling water, salted in the above
proportion; put in the marrows after peeling them, and boil them until
quite tender. take them up with a slice, halve, and, should they be very
large, quarter them. dish them on toast, and send to table with them a
tureen of melted butter, or, in lieu of this, a small pat of salt
butter. large vegetable marrows may be preserved throughout the winter
by storing them in a dry place; when wanted for use, a few slices should
be cut and boiled in the same manner as above; but, when once begun, the
marrow must be eaten quickly, as it keeps but a short time after it is
cut. vegetable marrows are also very delicious mashed: they should be
boiled, then drained, and mashed smoothly with a wooden spoon. heat them
in a saucepan, add a seasoning of salt and pepper, and a small piece of
butter, and dish with a few sippets of toasted bread placed round as a
garnish.
time.—young vegetable marrows  to  minutes; old ones, / to /
hour.
average cost, in full season, s. per dozen.
sufficient.—allow  moderate-sized marrow for each person.
seasonable in july, august, and september; but may be preserved all
the winter.
. ingredients.— medium-sized vegetable marrows, egg and bread
crumbs, hot lard.
mode.—peel, and boil the marrows until tender in salt and water; then
drain them and cut them in quarters, and take out the seeds. when
thoroughly drained, brush the marrows over with egg, and sprinkle with
bread crumbs; have ready some hot lard, fry the marrow in this, and,
when of a nice brown, dish; sprinkle over a little salt and pepper, and
serve.
time.—about / hour to boil the marrow,  minutes to fry it.
average cost, in full season, s. per dozen.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable in july, august, and september.
[illustration: vegetable marrow.]
 the vegetable marrow.—this vegetable is now extensively used,
 and belongs to the cucurbits. it is the c. ovifera of science,
 and, like the melon, gourd, cucumber, and squash, is widely
 diffused in the tropical or warmer regions of the globe. of the
 nature of this family we have already spoken when treating of
 the cucumber.
cut vegetables for soups, &c.
[illustration: vegetable-cutter.]
. the annexed engraving represents a cutter for shaping vegetables
for soups, ragouts, stews, &c.; carrots and turnips being the usual
vegetables for which this utensil is used. cut the vegetables into
slices about / inch in thickness, stamp them out with the cutter, and
boil them for a few minutes in salt and water, until tender. turnips
should be cut in rather thicker slices than carrots, on account of the
former boiling more quickly to a pulp than the latter.
 carrots.—several species of carrots are cultivated,—the red,
 the yellow, and the which. those known as the crecy carrots are
 considered the best, and are very sweet. the carrot has been
 classed by hygienists among flatulent vegetables, and as
 difficult of digestion. when the root becomes old, it is almost
 as hard as wood; but the young carrot, which has not reached its
 full growth, is tender, relishing, nutritious, and digests well
 when properly cooked.
. ingredients.— or  moderate-sized marrows, / pint of white
sauce, no. .
[illustration: vegetable marrow in white sauce.]
mode.—pare the marrows; cut them in halves, and shape each half at
the top in a point, leaving the bottom end flat for it to stand upright
in the dish. boil the marrows in salt and water until tender; take them
up very carefully, and arrange them on a hot dish. have ready / pint
of white sauce, made by recipe no. ; pour this over the marrows, and
serve.
time.—from  to  minutes to boil the marrows.
average cost, in full season, s. per dozen.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in july, august, and september.
boiled indian wheat or maize.
. ingredients.—the ears of young and green indian wheat; to every
/ gallon of water allow  heaped tablespoonful of salt.
mode.—this vegetable, which makes one of the most delicious dishes
brought to table, is unfortunately very rarely seen in britain; and we
wonder that, in the gardens of the wealthy, it is not invariably
cultivated. our sun, it is true, possesses hardly power sufficient to
ripen maize; but, with well-prepared ground, and in a favourable
position, it might be sufficiently advanced by the beginning of autumn
to serve as a vegetable. the outside sheath being taken off and the
waving fibres removed, let the ears be placed in boiling water, where
they should remain for about  minutes (a longer time may be necessary
for larger ears than ordinary); and, when sufficiently boiled and well
drained, they may be sent to table whole, and with a piece of toast
underneath them. melted butter should be served with them.
time.— to  minutes. average cost.—seldom bought.
sufficient,— ear for each person. seasonable in autumn.
note.—william cobbett, the english radical writer and politician, was
a great cultivator and admirer of maize, and constantly ate it as a
vegetable, boiled. we believe he printed a special recipe for it, but we
have been unable to lay our hands on it. mr. buchanan, the present
president of the united states, was in the habit, when ambassador here,
of receiving a supply of indian corn from america in hermetically-sealed
cases; and the publisher of this work remembers, with considerable
satisfaction, his introduction to a dish of this vegetable, when in
america. he found it to combine the excellences of the young green pea
and the finest asparagus; but he felt at first slightly awkward in
holding the large ear with one hand, whilst the other had to be employed
in cutting off with a knife the delicate green grains.
[illustration]
[illustration]
. puddings and pastry, familiar as they may be, and unimportant as
they may be held in the estimation of some, are yet intimately connected
with the development of agricultural resources in reference to the
cereal grasses. when they began to be made is uncertain; but we may
safely presume, that a simple form of pudding was amongst the first
dishes made after discovering a mode of grinding wheat into flour.
traditional history enables us to trace man back to the time of the
deluge. after that event he seems to have recovered himself in the
central parts of asia, and to have first risen to eminence in the arts
of civilization on the banks of the nile. from this region, greece,
carthage, and some other parts along the shores of the mediterranean
sea, were colonized. in process of time, greece gave to the romans the
arts which she had thus received from egypt, and these subsequently
diffused them over europe. how these were carried to or developed in
india and china, is not so well ascertained; and in america their
ancient existence rests only on very indistinct traditions. as to who
was the real discoverer of the use of corn, we have no authentic
knowledge. the traditions of different countries ascribe it to various
fabulous personages, whose names it is here unnecessary to introduce. in
egypt, however, corn must have grown abundantly; for abraham, and after
him jacob, had recourse to that country for supplies during times of
famine.
. the habits of a people, to a great extent, are formed by the
climate in which they live, and by the native or cultivated productions
in which their country abounds. thus we find that the agricultural
produce of the ancient egyptians is pretty much the same as that of the
present day, and the habits of the people are not materially altered. in
greece, the products cultivated in antiquity were the same kinds of
grains and legumes as are cultivated at present, with the vine, the fig,
the olive, the apple, and other fruits. so with the romans, and so with
other nations. as to the different modes of artificially preparing those
to please the taste, it is only necessary to say that they arise from
the universal desire of novelty, characteristic of man in the
development of his social conditions. thus has arisen the whole science
of cookery, and thus arose the art of making puddings. the porridge of
the scotch is nothing more than a species of hasty pudding, composed of
oatmeal, salt, and water; and the "red pottage" for which esau sold his
birthright, must have been something similar. the barley-gruel of the
lacedaemonians, of the athenian gladiators and common people, was the
same, with the exception of the slight seasoning it had beyond the
simplicity of scottish fare. here is the ancient recipe for the athenian
national dish:—"dry near the fire, in the oven, twenty pounds of
barley-flour; then parch it; add three pounds of linseed-meal, half a
pound of coriander-seed, two ounces of salt, and the quantity of water
necessary." to this sometimes a little millet was added, in order to
give the paste greater cohesion and delicacy.
. oatmeal amongst the greeks and romans was highly esteemed, as was
also rice, which they considered as beneficial to the chest. they also
held in high repute the irion, or indian wheat of the moderns. the flour
of this cereal was made into a kind of hasty pudding, and, parched or
roasted, as eaten with a little salt. the spelt, or red wheat, was
likewise esteemed, and its flour formed the basis of the carthaginian
pudding, for which we here give the scientific recipe:—"put a pound of
red-wheat flour into water, and when it has steeped some time, transfer
it to a wooden bowl. add three pounds of cream cheese, half a pound of
honey, and one egg. beat the whole together, and cook it on a slow fire
in a stewpan." should this be considered unpalatable, another form has
been recommended. "sift the flour, and, with some water, put it into a
wooden vessel, and, for ten days, renew the water twice each day. at the
end of that period, press out the water and place the paste in another
vessel. it is now to be reduced to the consistence of thick lees, and
passed through a piece of new linen. repeat this last operation, then
dry the mass in the sun and boil it in milk. season according to taste."
these are specimens of the puddings of antiquity, and this last recipe
was held in especial favour by the romans.
. however great may have been the qualifications of the ancients,
however, in the art of pudding-making, we apprehend that such
preparations as gave gratification to their palates, would have
generally found little favour amongst the insulated inhabitants of great
britain. here, from the simple suet dumpling up to the most complicated
christmas production, the grand feature of substantiality is primarily
attended to. variety in the ingredients, we think, is held only of
secondary consideration with the great body of the people, provided that
the whole is agreeable and of sufficient abundance.
. although from puddings to pastry is but a step, it requires a
higher degree of art to make the one than to make the other. indeed,
pastry is one of the most important branches of the culinary science. it
unceasingly occupies itself with ministering pleasure to the sight as
well as to the taste; with erecting graceful monuments, miniature
fortresses, and all kinds of architectural imitations, composed of the
sweetest and most agreeable products of all climates and countries. at a
very early period, the orientals were acquainted with the art of
manipulating in pastry; but they by no means attained to the taste,
variety, and splendour of design, by which it is characterized amongst
the moderns. at first it generally consisted of certain mixtures of
flour, oil, and honey, to which it was confined for centuries, even
among the southern nations of the european continent. at the
commencement of the middle ages, a change began to take place in the art
of mixing it. eggs, butter, and salt came into repute in the making of
paste, which was forthwith used as an inclosure for meat, seasoned with
spices. this advance attained, the next step was to inclose cream,
fruit, and marmalades; and the next, to build pyramids and castles; when
the summit of the art of the pastry-cook may be supposed to have been
achieved.
. a few general remarks respecting the various ingredients of which
puddings and pastry are composed, may be acceptable as preliminary to
the recipes in this department of household management.
. flour should be of the best quality, and perfectly dry, and
sifted before being used; if in the least damp, the paste made from it
will certainly be heavy.
. butter, unless fresh is used, should be washed from the salt,
and well squeezed and wrung in a cloth, to get out all the water and
buttermilk, which, if left in, assists to make the paste heavy.
. lard should be perfectly sweet, which may be ascertained by
cutting the bladder through, and, if the knife smells sweet, the lard is
good.
. suet should be finely chopped, perfectly free from skin, and
quite sweet; during the process of chopping, it should be lightly
dredged with flour, which prevents the pieces from sticking together.
beef suet is considered the best; but veal suet, or the outside fat of a
loin or neck of mutton, makes good crusts; as also the skimmings in
which a joint of mutton has been boiled, but without vegetables.
. clarified beef dripping, directions for which will be found in
recipes nos.  and , answers very well for kitchen pies, puddings,
cakes, or for family use. a very good short crust may be made by mixing
with it a small quantity of moist sugar; but care must be taken to use
the dripping sparingly, or a very disagreeable flavour will be imparted
to the paste.
. strict cleanliness must be observed in pastry-making; all the
utensils used should be perfectly free from dust and dirt, and the
things required for pastry, kept entirely for that purpose.
[illustration: paste-board and rolling-pin.]
. in mixing paste, add the water very gradually, work the whole
together with the knife-blade, and knead it until perfectly smooth.
those who are inexperienced in pastry-making, should work the butter in
by breaking it in small pieces and covering the paste rolled out. it
should then be dredged with flour, and the ends folded over and rolled
out very thin again: this process must be repeated until all the butter
is used.
[illustration: paste-pincers and jagger, for ornamenting the edges of
. the art of making paste requires much practice, dexterity, and
skill: it should be touched as lightly as possible, made with cool hands
and in a cool place (a marble slab is better than a board for the
purpose), and the coolest part of the house should be selected for the
process during warm weather.
. to insure rich paste being light, great expedition must be used in
the making and baking; for if it stand long before it is put in the
oven, it becomes flat and heavy.
[illustration: paste-cutter and corner-cutter.]
[illustration: ornamental-paste cutter.]
. puff-paste requires a brisk oven, but not too hot, or it would
blacken the crust; on the other hand, if the oven be too slack, the
paste will be soddened, and will not rise, nor will it have any colour.
tart-tins, cake-moulds, dishes for baked puddings, pattypans, &c.,
should all be buttered before the article intended to be baked is put in
them: things to be baked on sheets should be placed on buttered paper.
raised-pie paste should have a soaking heat, and paste glazed must have
rather a slack oven, that the icing be not scorched. it is better to ice
tarts, &c. when they are three-parts baked.
[illustration: patty-pans, plain and fluted.]
[illustration: pie-dish.]
[illustration: raised-pie mould.]
[illustration: raised-pie mould, open.]
. to ascertain when the oven is heated to the proper degree for
puff-paste, put a small piece of the paste in previous to baking the
whole, and then the heat can thus be judged of.
. the freshness of all pudding ingredients is of much importance, as
one bad article will taint the whole mixture.
. when the freshness of eggs is doubtful, break each one
separately in a cup, before mixing them altogether. should there be a
bad one amongst them, it can be thrown away; whereas, if mixed with the
good ones, the entire quantity would be spoiled. the yolks and whites
beaten separately make the articles they are put into much lighter.
. raisins and dried fruits for puddings should be carefully picked,
and, in many cases, stoned. currants should be well washed, pressed in a
cloth, and placed on a dish before the fire to get thoroughly dry; they
should then be picked carefully over, and every piece of grit or stone
removed from amongst them. to plump them, some cooks pour boiling water
over them, and then dry them before the fire.
. batter pudding should be smoothly mixed and free from lumps. to
insure this, first mix the flour with a very small proportion of milk,
and add the remainder by degrees. should the pudding be very lumpy, it
may be strained through a hair sieve.
. all boiled puddings should be put on in boiling water, which
must not be allowed to stop simmering, and the pudding must always be
covered with the water; if requisite, the saucepan should be kept filled
up.
[illustration: boiled-pudding mould.]
. to prevent a pudding boiled in a cloth from sticking to the bottom
of the saucepan, place a small plate or saucer underneath it, and set
the pan on a trivet over the fire. if a mould is used, this precaution
is not necessary; but care must be taken to keep the pudding well
covered with water.
. for dishing a boiled pudding as soon as it comes out of the pot,
dip it into a basin of cold water, and the cloth will then not adhere to
it. great expedition is necessary in sending puddings to table, as, by
standing, they quickly become heavy, batter puddings particularly.
[illustration: boiled-pudding mould.]
. for baked or boiled puddings, the moulds, cups, or basins, should
be always buttered before the mixture is put in them, and they should be
put into the saucepan directly they are filled.
. scrupulous attention should be paid to the cleanliness of
pudding-cloths, as, from neglect in this particular, the outsides of
boiled puddings frequently taste very disagreeably. as soon as possible
after it is taken off the pudding, it should be soaked in water, and
then well washed, without soap, unless it be very greasy. it should be
dried out of doors, then folded up and kept in a dry place. when wanted
for use, dip it in boiling water, and dredge it slightly with flour.
[illustration: pudding-basin.]
. the dry ingredients for puddings are better for being mixed some
time before they are wanted; the liquid portion should only be added
just before the pudding is put into the saucepan.
. a pinch of salt is an improvement to the generality of puddings;
but this ingredient should be added very sparingly, as the flavour
should not be detected.
. when baked puddings are sufficiently solid, turn them out of the
dish they were baked in, bottom uppermost, and strew over them fine
sifted sugar.
. when pastry or baked puddings are not done through, and yet the
outside is sufficiently brown, cover them over with a piece of white
paper until thoroughly cooked: this prevents them from getting burnt.
[illustration]
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  lb. of butter, and not
quite / pint of water.
mode.—carefully weigh the flour and butter, and have the exact
proportion; squeeze the butter well, to extract the water from it, and
afterwards wring it in a clean cloth, that no moisture may remain. sift
the flour; see that it is perfectly dry, and proceed in the following
manner to make the paste, using a very clean paste-board and
rolling-pin:—supposing the quantity to be  lb. of flour, work the
whole into a smooth paste, with not quite / pint of water, using a
knife to mix it with: the proportion of this latter ingredient must be
regulated by the discretion of the cook; if too much be added, the
paste, when baked, will be tough. roll it out until it is of an equal
thickness of about an inch; break  oz. of the butter into small pieces;
place these on the paste, sift over it a little flour, fold it over,
roll out again, and put another  oz. of butter. repeat the rolling and
buttering until the paste has been rolled out  times, or equal
quantities of flour and butter have been used. do not omit, every time
the paste is rolled out, to dredge a little flour over that and the
rolling-pin, to prevent both from sticking. handle the paste as lightly
as possible, and do not press heavily upon it with the rolling-pin. the
next thing to be considered is the oven, as the baking of pastry
requires particular attention. do not put it into the oven until it is
sufficiently hot to raise the paste; for the best-prepared paste, if not
properly baked, will be good for nothing. brushing the paste as often as
rolled out, and the pieces of butter placed thereon, with the white of
an egg, assists it to rise in leaves or flakes. as this is the great
beauty of puff-paste, it is as well to try this method.
average cost, s. d. per lb.
 butter.—about the second century of the christian era, butter
 was placed by galen amongst the useful medical agents; and about
 a century before him, dioscorides mentioned that he had noticed
 that fresh butter, made of ewes' and goats' milk, was served at
 meals instead of oil, and that it took the place of fat in
 making pastry. thus we have undoubted authority that, eighteen
 hundred years ago, there existed a knowledge of the useful
 qualities of butter. the romans seem to have set about making it
 much as we do; for pliny tells us, "butter is made from milk;
 and the use of this element, so much sought after by barbarous
 nations, distinguished the rich from the common people. it is
 obtained principally from cows' milk; that from ewes is the
 fattest; goats also supply some. it is produced by agitating the
 milk in long vessels with narrow openings: a little water is
 added."
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  oz. of butter,  oz.
of lard, not quite / pint of water.
mode.—this paste may be made by the directions in the preceding
recipe, only using less butter and substituting lard for a portion of
it. mix the flour to a smooth paste with not quite / pint of water;
then roll it out  times, the first time covering the paste with butter,
the second with lard, and the third with butter. keep the rolling-pin
and paste slightly dredged with flour, to prevent them from sticking,
and it will be ready for use.
average cost, s. per lb.
 butter in haste.—in his "history of food," soyer says that to
 obtain butter instantly, it is only necessary, in summer, to put
 new milk into a bottle, some hours after it has been taken from
 the cow, and shake it briskly. the clots which are thus formed
 should be thrown into a sieve, washed and pressed together, and
 they constitute the finest and most delicate butter that can
 possibly be made.
common paste, for family pies.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of flour, / lb. of butter, rather more
than / pint of water.
mode.—rub the butter lightly into the flour, and mix it to a smooth
paste with the water; roll it out  or  times, and it will be ready for
use. this paste may be converted into an excellent short crust for sweet
tart, by adding to the flour, after the butter is rubbed in, 
tablespoonfuls of fine-sifted sugar.
average cost, d. per lb.
 to keep butter fresh.—one of the best means to preserve butter
 fresh is, first to completely press out all the buttermilk, then
 to keep it under water, renewing the water frequently, and to
 remove it from the influence of heat and air, by wrapping it in
 a wet cloth.
french puff-paste, or feuilletage.
(founded on m. ude's recipe.)
. ingredients.—equal quantities of flour and butter—say  lb. of
each; / saltspoonful of salt, the yolks of  eggs, rather more than
/ pint of water.
mode.—weigh the flour; ascertain that it is perfectly dry, and sift
it; squeeze all the water from the butter, and wring it in a clean cloth
till there is no moisture remaining. put the flour on the paste-board,
work lightly into it  oz. of the butter, and then make a hole in the
centre; into this well put the yolks of  eggs, the salt, and about /
pint of water (the quantity of this latter ingredient must be regulated
by the cook, as it is impossible to give the exact proportion of it);
knead up the paste quickly and lightly, and, when quite smooth, roll it
out square to the thickness of about / inch. presuming that the butter
is perfectly free from moisture, and as cool as possible, roll it into
a ball, and place this ball of butter on the paste; fold the paste over
the butter all round, and secure it by wrapping it well all over.
flatten the paste by rolling it lightly with the rolling-pin until it is
quite thin, but not thin enough to allow the butter to break through,
and keep the board and paste dredged lightly with flour during the
process of making it. this rolling gives it the first turn. now fold
the paste in three, and roll out again, and, should the weather be very
warm, put it in a cold place on the ground to cool between the several
turns; for, unless this is particularly attended to, the paste will be
spoiled. roll out the paste again twice, put it by to cool, then roll
it out twice more, which will make  turnings in all. now fold the
paste in two, and it will be ready for use. if properly baked and well
made, this crust will be delicious, and should rise in the oven about 
or  inches. the paste should be made rather firm in the first instance,
as the ball of butter is liable to break through. great attention must
also be paid to keeping the butter very cool, as, if this is in a liquid
and soft state, the paste will not answer at all. should the cook be
dexterous enough to succeed in making this, the paste will have a much
better appearance than that made by the process of dividing the butter
into  parts, and placing it over the rolled-out paste; but, until
experience has been acquired, we recommend puff-paste made by recipe no.
. the above paste is used for vols-au-vent, small articles of
pastry, and, in fact, everything that requires very light crust.
average cost, s. d. per lb.
 what to do with rancid butter.—when butter has become very
 rancid, it should be melted several times by a moderate heat,
 with or without the addition of water, and as soon as it has
 been well kneaded, after the cooling, in order to extract any
 water it may have retained, it should be put into brown
 freestone pots, sheltered from the contact of the air. the
 french often add to it, after it has been melted, a piece of
 toasted bread, which helps to destroy the tendency of the batter
 to rancidity.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow the yolk of  egg, the
juice of  lemon, / saltspoonful of salt, cold water,  lb. of fresh
butter.
mode.—put the flour on to the paste-board; make a hole in the centre,
into which put the yolk of the egg, the lemon-juice, and salt; mix the
whole with cold water (this should be iced in summer, if convenient)
into a soft flexible paste, with the right hand, and handle it as little
as possible; then squeeze all the buttermilk from the butter, wring it
in a cloth, and roll out the paste; place the butter on this, and fold
the edges of the paste over, so as to hide it; roll it out again to the
thickness of / inch; fold over one third, over which again pass the
rolling-pin; then fold over the other third, thus forming a square;
place it with the ends, top, and bottom before you, shaking a little
flour both under and over, and repeat the rolls and turns twice again,
as before. flour a baking-sheet, put the paste on this, and let it
remain on ice or in some cool place for / hour; then roll twice more,
turning it as before; place it again upon the ice for / hour, give it
 more rolls, making  in all, and it is ready for use when required.
average cost, s. d. per lb.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow / lb. of butter, 
tablespoonful of sifted sugar, / pint of water.
mode.—rub the butter into the flour, after having ascertained that
the latter is perfectly dry; add the sugar, and mix the whole into a
stiff paste, with about / pint of water. roll it out two or three
times, folding the paste over each time, and it will be ready for use.
average cost, s. d. per lb.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  oz. of butter, the
yolks of  eggs,  oz. of sifted sugar, about / pint of milk.
mode.—rub the butter into the flour, add the sugar, and mix the whole
as lightly as possible to a smooth paste, with the yolks of eggs well
beaten, and the milk. the proportion of the latter ingredient must be
judged of by the size of the eggs: if these are large, so much will not
be required, and more if the eggs are smaller.
average cost, s. per lb.
 sugar and beetroot.—there are two sorts of beet,—white and
 red; occasionally, in the south, a yellow variety is met with.
 beetroot contains twenty parts sugar. everybody knows that the
 beet has competed with the sugar-cane, and a great part of the
 french sugar is manufactured from beet. beetroot has a
 refreshing, composing, and slightly purgative quality. the young
 leaves, when cooked, are a substitute for spinach; they are also
 useful for mixing with sorrel, to lessen its acidity. the large
 ribs of the leaves are serviceable in various culinary
 preparations; the root also may be prepared in several ways, but
 its most general use is in salad. some writers upon the subject
 have expressed their opinion that beetroot is easily digested,
 but those who have taken pains to carefully analyze its
 qualities make quite a contrary statement. youth, of course, can
 digest it; but to persons of a certain age beet is very
 indigestible, or rather, it does not digest at all. it is not
 the sugary pulp which is indigestible, but its fibrous network
 that resists the action of the gastric organs. thus, when the
 root is reduced to a puree, almost any person may eat it.
 french sugar.—it had long been thought that tropical heat was
 not necessary to form sugar, and, about , it was discovered
 that many plants of the temperate zone, and amongst others the
 beet, contained it. towards the beginning of the th century,
 circumstances having, in france, made sugar scarce, and
 consequently dear, the government caused inquiries to be
 instituted as to the possibility of finding a substitute for it.
 accordingly, it was ascertained that sugar exists in the whole
 vegetable kingdom; that it is to be found in the grape,
 chestnut, potato; but that, far above all, the beet contains it
 in a large proportion. thus the beet became an object of the
 most careful culture; and many experiments went to prove that in
 this respect the old world was independent of the new. many
 manufactories came into existence in all parts of france, and
 the making of sugar became naturalized in that country.
. ingredients.—to every pound of flour allow  oz. of sifted sugar,
 oz. of butter, about / pint of boiling milk.
mode.—crumble the butter into the flour as finely as possible, add
the sugar, and work the whole up to a smooth paste with the boiling
milk. roll it out thin, and bake in a moderate oven.
average cost, d. per lb.
 qualities of sugar.—sugars obtained from various plants are in
 fact, of the same nature, and have no intrinsic difference when
 they have become equally purified by the same processes. taste,
 crystallization, colour, weight, are absolutely identical; and
 the most accurate observer cannot distinguish the one from the
 other.
butter crust, for boiled puddings.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  oz. of butter, /
pint of water.
mode.—with a knife, work the flour to a smooth paste with / pint of
water; roll the crust out rather thin; place the butter over it in small
pieces; dredge lightly over it some flour, and fold the paste over;
repeat the rolling once more, and the crust will be ready for use. it
may be enriched by adding another  oz. of butter; but, for ordinary
purposes, the above quantity will be found quite sufficient.
average cost, d. per lb.
dripping crust, for kitchen puddings, pies, &c.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  oz. of clarified beef
dripping, / pint of water.
mode.—after having clarified the dripping, by either of the recipes
no.  or , weigh it, and to every lb. of flour allow the above
proportion of dripping. with a knife, work the flour into a smooth paste
with the water, rolling it out  times, each time placing on the crust 
oz. of the dripping, broken into small pieces. if this paste is lightly
made, if good dripping is used, and not too much of it, it will be
found good; and by the addition of two tablespoonfuls of fine moist
sugar, it may be converted into a common short crust for fruit pies.
average cost, d. per pound.
 water:—what the ancients thought of it.—all the nations of
 antiquity possessed great veneration for water: thus, the
 egyptians offered prayers and homage to water, and the nile was
 an especial object of their adoration; the persians would not
 wash their hands; the scythians honoured the danube; the greeks
 and romans erected altars to the fountains and rivers; and some
 of the architectural embellishments executed for fountains in
 greece were remarkable for their beauty and delicacy. the purity
 of the water was a great object of the care of the ancients; and
 we learn that the athenians appointed four officers to keep
 watch and ward over the water in their city. these men had to
 keep the fountains in order and clean the reservoirs, so that
 the water might be preserved pure and limpid. like officers were
 appointed in other greek cities.
suet crust, for pies or puddings.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  or  oz. of beef suet,
/ pint of water.
mode.—free the suet from skin and shreds; chop it extremely fine, and
rub it well into the flour; work the whole to a smooth paste with the
above proportion of water; roll it out, and it is ready for use. this
crust is quite rich enough for ordinary purposes, but when a better one
is desired, use from / to / lb. of suet to every lb. of flour. some
cooks, for rich crusts, pound the suet in a mortar, with a small
quantity of butter. it should then be laid on the paste in small pieces,
the same as for puff-crust, and will be found exceedingly nice for hot
tarts.  oz. of suet to every lb. of flour will make a very good crust;
and even / lb. will answer very well for children, or where the crust
is wanted very plain.
average cost, d. per lb.
pate brisee, or french crust, for raised pies.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow / saltspoonful of
salt,  eggs, / pint of water,  oz. of butter.
mode.—spread the flour, which should be sifted and thoroughly dry, on
the paste-board; make a hole in the centre, into which put the butter;
work it lightly into the flour, and when quite fine, add the salt; work
the whole into a smooth paste with the eggs (yolks and whites) and
water, and make it very firm. knead the paste well, and let it be rather
stiff, that the sides of the pie may be easily raised, and that they do
not afterwards tumble or shrink.
average cost, s. per lb.
note.—this paste may be very much enriched by making it with equal
quantities of flour and butter; but then it is not so easily raised as
when made plainer.
 water supply in rome.—nothing in italy is more extraordinary
 than the remains of the ancient aqueducts. at first, the romans
 were contented with the water from the tiber. ancus martius was
 the first to commence the building of aqueducts destined to
 convey the water of the fountain of piconia from tibur to rome,
 a distance of some , paces. appius claudius continued the
 good work, and to him is due the completion of the celebrated
 appian way. in time, the gigantic waterways greatly multiplied,
 and, by the reign of nero, there were constructed nine principal
 aqueducts, the pipes of which were of bricks, baked tiles,
 stone, lead, or wood. according to the calculation of vigenerus,
 half a million hogsheads of water were conveyed into rome every
 day, by upwards of , small pipes not one-third of an inch
 in diameter. the water was received in large closed basins,
 above which rose splendid monuments: these basins supplied other
 subterranean conduits, connected with various quarters of the
 city, and these conveyed water to small reservoirs furnished
 with taps for the exclusive use of certain streets. the water
 which was not drinkable ran out, by means of large pipes, into
 extensive inclosures, where it served to water cattle. at these
 places the people wished their linen; and here, too, was a
 supply of the necessary element in case of fire.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow / pint of water, -/
oz. of butter, -/ oz. of lard, / saltspoonful of salt.
mode.—put into a saucepan the water; when it boils, add the butter
and lard; and when these are melted, make a hole in the middle of the
flour; pour in the water gradually; beat it well with a wooden spoon,
and be particular in not making the paste too soft. when it is well
mixed, knead it with the hands until quite stiff, dredging a little
flour over the paste and board, to prevent them from sticking. when it
is well kneaded, place it before the fire, with a cloth covered over it,
for a few minutes; it will then be more easily worked into shape. this
paste does not taste so nicely as the preceding one, but is worked with
greater facility, and answers just as well for raised pies, for the
crust is seldom eaten.
average cost, d, per lb.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow / lb. of lard or
flead, / pint of water, / saltspoonful of salt.
mode.—clear the flead free from skin, and slice it into thin flakes;
rub it into the flour, add the salt, and work the whole into a smooth
paste, with the above proportion of water; fold the paste over two or
three times, beat it well with the rolling-pin, roll it out, and it will
be ready for use. the crust made from this will be found extremely
light, and may be made into cakes or tarts; it may also be very much
enriched by adding more flead to the same proportion of flour.
average cost, d. per lb.
 nutritious qualities of flour.—the gluten of grain and the
 albumen of vegetable juices are identical in composition with
 the albumen of blood. vegetable caseine has also the composition
 of animal caseine. the finest wheat flour contains more starch
 than the coarser; the bran of wheat is proportionably richer in
 gluten. rye and rye-bread contain a substance resembling
 starch-gum (or dextrine, as it is called) in its properties,
 which is very easily converted into sugar. the starch of barley
 approaches in many properties to cellulose, and is, therefore,
 less digestible. oats are particularly rich in plastic
 substances; scotch oats are richer than those grown in england
 or in germany. this kind of grain contains in its ashes, after
 deduction of the silica of the husks, very nearly the same
 ingredients as are found in the ashes of the juice of flesh.
 fine american flour is one of the varieties which is richest in
 gluten, and is consequently one of the most nutritious.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sweet almonds,  bitter ones,  eggs, 
oz. of butter, the rind of / lemon,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 
oz. of sugar.
mode.—blanch and pound the almonds smoothly in a mortar, with a
little rose- or spring-water; stir in the eggs, which should be well
beaten, and the butter, which should be warmed; add the grated
lemon-peel and -juice, sweeten, and stir well until the whole is
thoroughly mixed. line some pattypans with puff-paste, put in the
mixture, and bake for  minutes, or rather less in a quick oven.
time.— minutes, or rather less.
average cost, d.
sufficient for about  cheesecakes.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: almond and blossom.]
 almonds.—almonds are the fruit of the amygdalus commenis, and
 are cultivated throughout the whole of the south of europe,
 syria, persia, and northern africa; but england is mostly
 supplied with those which are grown in spain and the south of
 france. they are distinguished into sweet and bitter, the
 produce of different varieties. of the sweet, there are two
 varieties, distinguished in commerce by the names of jordan and
 valentia almonds. the former are imported from malaga, and are
 longer, narrower, more pointed, and more highly esteemed than
 the latter, which are imported from valentia. bitter almonds are
 principally obtained from morocco, and are exported from
 mogador.
almond paste, for second-course dishes.
. ingredients.— lb. of sweet almonds,  bitter ones,  lb. of very
finely sifted sugar, the whites of  eggs.
mode.—blanch the almonds, and dry them thoroughly; put them into a
mortar, and pound them well, wetting them gradually with the whites of 
eggs. when well pounded, put them into a small preserving-pan, add the
sugar, and place the pan on a small but clear fire (a hot-plate is
better); keep stirring until the paste is dry, then take it out of the
pan, put it between two dishes, and, when cold, make it into any shape
that fancy may dictate.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. for the above quantity.
sufficient for  small dishes of pastry.
seasonable at any time.
 bitter almonds.—the bitter almond is a variety of the common
 almond, and is injurious to animal life, on account of the great
 quantity of hydrocyanic acid it contains, and is consequently
 seldom used in domestic economy, unless it be to give flavour to
 confectionery; and even then it should he used with great
 caution. a single drop of the essential oil of bitter almonds is
 sufficient to destroy a bird, and four drops have caused the
 death of a middle-sized dog.
(very rich.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of almonds,  bitter ditto,  glass of
sherry,  eggs, the rind and juice of / lemon,  oz. of butter,  pint
of cream,  tablespoonfuls of sugar.
mode.—blanch and pound the almonds to a smooth paste with the water;
mix these with the butter, which should be melted; beat up the eggs,
grate the lemon-rind, and strain the juice; add these, with the cream,
sugar, and wine, to the other ingredients, and stir them well together.
when well mixed, put it into a pie-dish lined with puff-paste, and bake
for / hour.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—to make this pudding more economically, substitute milk for the
cream; but then add rather more than  oz. of finely grated bread.
 uses of the sweet almond.—the kernels of the sweet almond are
 used either in a green or ripe state, and as an article in the
 dessert. into cookery, confectionery, perfumery, and medicine,
 they largely enter, and in domestic economy, should always be
 used in preference to bitter almonds. the reason for advising
 this, is because the kernels do not contain any hydrocyanic or
 prussic acid, although it is found in the leaves, flowers, and
 bark of the tree. when young and green, they are preserved in
 sugar, like green apricots. they furnish the almond-oil; and the
 farinaceous matter which is left after the oil is expressed,
 forms the pâte d'amandes of perfumers. in the arts, the oil is
 employed for the same purposes as the olive-oil, and forms the
 basis of kalydor, macassar oil, gowland's lotion, and many other
 articles of that kind vended by perfumers. in medicine, it is
 considered a nutritive, laxative, and an emollient.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sweet almonds,  bitter ones, / lb. of
butter,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of sifted sugar,  tablespoonfuls of
cream,  tablespoonful of brandy.
[illustration: almond puddings.]
mode.—blanch and pound the almonds to a smooth paste with a spoonful
of water; warm the butter, mix the almonds with this, and add the other
ingredients, leaving out the whites of  eggs, and be particular that
these are well beaten. mix well, butter some cups, half fill them, and
bake the puddings from  minutes to / hour. turn them out on a dish,
and serve with sweet sauce.
time.— minutes to / hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 the husks of almonds.—in the environs of alicante, the husks of
 almonds are ground to a powder, and enter into the composition
 of common soap, the large quantity of alkaline principle they
 contain rendering them suitable for this purpose. it is said
 that in some parts of the south of france, where they are
 extensively grown, horses and mules are fed on the green and dry
 husks; but, to prevent any evil consequences arising from this
 practice, they are mixed with chopped straw or oats.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of flour,  oz. of butter,  oz. of
pounded sugar,  oz. of sweet almonds,  bitter almonds.
mode.—blanch and pound the almonds in a mortar to a smooth paste;
melt the butter, dredge in the flour, and add the sugar and pounded
almonds. beat the mixture well, and put it into cups or very tiny
jelly-pots, which should be well buttered, and bake in a moderate oven
for about  minutes, or longer should the puffs be large. turn them out
on a dish, the bottom of the puff upper-most, and serve.
time.— minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour, / lb. of treacle, / lb. of
suet, the rind and juice of  lemon, a few strips of candied lemon-peel,
 tablespoonfuls of cream,  eggs.
mode.—chop the suet finely; mix with it the flour, treacle,
lemon-peel minced, and candied lemon-peel; add the cream, lemon-juice,
and  well-beaten eggs; beat the pudding well, put it into a buttered
basin, tie it down with a cloth, and boil from -/ to  hours.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time, but more suitable for a winter pudding.
 treacle, or molasses.—treacle is the uncrystallizable part of
 the saccharine juice drained from the muscovado sugar, and is
 either naturally so or rendered uncrystallizable through some
 defect in the process of boiling. as it contains a large
 quantity of sweet or saccharine principle and is cheap, it is of
 great use as an article of domestic economy. children are
 especially fond of it; and it is accounted wholesome. it is also
 useful for making beer, rum, and the very dark syrups.
baked apple dumplings (a plain family dish).
. ingredients.— apples, / lb.. of suet-crust no. , sugar to
taste.
mode.—pare and take out the cores of the apples without dividing
them, and make / lb. of suet-crust by recipe no. ; roll the apples
in the crust, previously sweetening them with moist sugar, and taking
care to join the paste nicely. when they are formed into round balls,
put them on a tin, and bake them for about / hour, or longer should
the apples be very large; arrange them pyramidically on a dish, and sift
over them some pounded white sugar. these may be made richer by using
one of the puff-pastes instead of suet.
time.—from / to / hour, or longer. average cost, -/d. each.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from august to march, but flavourless after the end of
january.
 uses of the apple.—it is well known that this fruit forms a
 very important article of food, in the form of pies and
 puddings, and furnishes several delicacies, such as sauces,
 marmalades, and jellies, and is much esteemed as a dessert
 fruit. when flattened in the form of round cakes, and baked in
 ovens, they are called beefings; and large quantities are
 annually dried in the sun in america, as well as in normandy,
 and stored for use during winter, when they may be stewed or
 made into pies. in a roasted state they are remarkably
 wholesome, and, it is said, strengthening to a weak stomach. in
 putrid and malignant fevers, when used with the juice of lemons
 and currants, they are considered highly efficacious.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of apple pulp, / lb. of sifted sugar, /
lb. of butter,  eggs, the rind and juice of  lemon.
mode.—pare, core, and boil sufficient apples to make / lb. when
cooked; add to these the sugar, the butter, which should be melted; the
eggs, leaving out  of the whites, and take grated rind and juice of 
lemon; stir the mixture well; line some patty-pans with puff-paste, put
in the mixture, and bake about  minutes.
time.—about  minutes.
average cost, for the above quantity, with the paste, s. d.
sufficient for about  or  cheesecakes.
seasonable from august to march.
[illustration: apple and blossom.]
 the apple.—the most useful of all the british fruits is the
 apple, which is a native of britain, and may be found in woods
 and hedges, in the form of the common wild crab, of which all
 our best apples are merely seminal varieties, produced by
 culture or particular circumstances. in most temperate climates
 it is very extensively cultivated, and in england, both as
 regards variety and quantity, it is excellent and abundant.
 immense supplies are also imported from the united states and
 from france. the apples grown in the vicinity of new york are
 universally admitted to be the finest of any; but unless
 selected and packed with great care, they are apt to spoil
 before reaching england.
. ingredients.— apples, / lb. of suet-crust no. , sugar to
taste.
mode.—pare and take out the cores of the apples without dividing
them; sweeten, and roll each apple in a piece of crust, made by recipe
no. ; be particular that the paste is nicely joined; put the
dumplings into floured cloths, tie them securely, and put them into
boiling water. keep them boiling from / to / hour; remove the
cloths, and send them hot and quickly to table. dumplings boiled in
knitted cloths have a very pretty appearance when they come to table.
the cloths should be made square, just large enough to hold one
dumpling, and should be knitted in plain knitting, with very coarse
cotton.
time.—/ to  hour, or longer should the dumplings be very large.
average cost, /d. each.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable from august to march, but flavourless after the end of
january.
 lambswool, or lamasool.—this old english beverage is composed
 of apples mixed with ale, and seasoned with sugar and spice. it
 takes its name from lamaes abhal, which, in ancient british,
 signifies the day of apple fruit, from being drunk on the apple
 feast in autumn. in france, a beverage, called by the parisians
 raisinée, is made by boiling any given quantity of new wine,
 skimming it as often as fresh scum rises, and, when it is boiled
 to half its bulk, straining it. to this apples, pared and cut
 into quarters, are added; the whole is then allowed to simmer
 gently, stirring it all the time with a long wooden spoon, till
 the apples are thoroughly mixed with the liquor, and the whole
 forms a species of marmalade, which is extremely agreeable to
 the taste, having a slight flavour of acidity, like lemon mixed
 with honey.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of the pulp of apples, / lb. of loaf
sugar,  oz. of butter, the rind of  lemon,  eggs, puff-paste.
mode.—peel, core, and cut the apples, as for sauce; put them into a
stewpan, with only just sufficient water to prevent them from burning,
and let them stew until reduced to a pulp. weigh the pulp, and to every
/ lb. add sifted sugar, grated lemon-rind, and  well-beaten eggs.
beat these ingredients well together; then melt the butter, stir it to
the other things, put a border of puff-paste round the dish, and bake
for rather more than / hour. the butter should not be added until the
pudding is ready for the oven.
time.—/ to / hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from august to march.
(more economical.)
. ingredients.— large apples,  oz. of moist sugar, / lb. of
butter,  eggs,  pint of bread crumbs.
mode.—pare, core, and cut the apples, as for sauce, and boil them
until reduced to a pulp; then add the butter, melted, and the eggs,
which should be well whisked. beat up the pudding for  or  minutes;
butter a pie-dish; put in a layer of bread crumbs, then the apple, and
then another layer of bread crumbs; flake over these a few tiny pieces
of butter, and bake for about / hour.
time.—about / hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from august to march.
note.—a very good economical pudding may be made merely with apples,
boiled and sweetened, with the addition of a few strips of lemon-peel. a
layer of bread crumbs should be placed above and below the apples, and
the pudding baked for / hour.
 constituents of the apple.—all apples contain sugar, malic
 acid, or the acid of apples; mucilage, or gum; woody fibre, and
 water; together with some aroma, on which their peculiar flavour
 depends. the hard acid kinds are unwholesome if eaten raw; but
 by the process of cooking, a great deal of this acid is
 decomposed and converted into sugar. the sweet and mellow kinds
 form a valuable addition to the dessert. a great part of the
 acid juice is converted into sugar as the fruit ripens, and even
 after it is gathered, by natural process, termed maturation;
 but, when apples decay, the sugar is changed into a bitter
 principle, and the mucilage becomes mouldy and offensive. old
 cheese has a remarkable effect in meliorating the apple when
 eaten; probably from the volatile alkali or ammonia of the
 cheese neutralizing its acid.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of suet, / lb. of
currants, / lb. of apples, / lb. of moist sugar,  eggs,  sweet
almonds, / saltspoonful of grated nutmeg,  wineglassful of brandy.
mode.—chop the suet very fine; wash the currants, dry them, and pick
away the stalks and pieces of grit; pare, core, and chop the apple, and
grate the bread into fine crumbs, and mince the almonds. mix all these
ingredients together, adding the sugar and nutmeg; beat up the eggs,
omitting the whites of three; stir these to the pudding, and when all is
well mixed, add the brandy, and put the pudding into a buttered mould;
tie down with a cloth, put it into boiling water, and let it boil for 
hours.
time.— hours.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from august to march.
 to preserve apples.—the best mode of preserving apples is to
 carry them at once to the fruit-room, where they should be put
 upon shelves, covered with white paper, after gently wiping each
 of the fruit. the room should be dry, and well aired, but should
 not admit the sun. the finer and larger kinds of fruit should
 not be allowed to touch each other, but should be kept separate.
 for this purpose, a number of shallow trays should be provided,
 supported by racks or stands above each other. in very cold
 frosty weather, means should be adopted for warming the room.
(very good.)
. ingredients.— moderate-sized apples,  tablespoonfuls of
finely-chopped suet,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of flour,  pint of milk,
a little grated nutmeg.
mode.—mix the flour to a smooth batter with the milk; add the eggs,
which should be well whisked, and put this batter into a well-buttered
pie-dish. wipe the apples clean, but do not pare them; cut them in
halves, and take out the cores; lay them in the batter, rind uppermost;
shake the suet on the top, over which, also grate a little nutmeg; bake
in a moderate oven for an hour, and cover, when served, with sifted loaf
sugar. this pudding is also very good with the apples pared, sliced, and
mixed with the batter.
time.— hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—crust no. , apples, sugar to taste,  small
teaspoonful of finely-minced lemon-peel,  tablespoonfuls of
lemon-juice.
mode.—make a butter-crust by recipe no. , or a suet one by recipe
no. , using for a moderate-sized pudding from / to  lb. of flour,
with the other ingredients in proportion. butter a basin; line it with
some of the paste; pare, core, and cut the apples into slices, and fill
the basin with these; add the sugar, the lemon-peel and juice, and cover
with crust; pinch the edges together, flour the cloth, place it over the
pudding, tie it securely, and put it into plenty of fast-boiling water.
let it boil from -/ to -/ hours, according to the size; then turn
it out of the basin and send to table quickly. apple puddings may also
be boiled in a cloth without a basin; but, when made in this way, must
be served without the least delay, as the crust so soon becomes heavy.
apple pudding is a very convenient dish to have when the dinner-hour is
rather uncertain, as it does not spoil by being boiled an extra hour;
care, however, must be taken to keep it well covered with the water all
the time, and not to allow it to stop boiling.
time.—from -/ to -/ hours, according to the size of the pudding
and the quality of the apples.
average cost, d.
sufficient, made with  lb. of flour, for  or  persons.
seasonable from august to march; but the apples become flavourless and
scarce after february.
. ingredients.—puff-paste no.  or , apples; to every lb. of
unpared apples allow  oz. of moist sugar, / teaspoonful of
finely-minced lemon-peel,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice.
mode.—make / lb. of puff-paste by either of the above-named
recipes, place a border of it round the edge of a pie-dish, and fill it
with apples pared, cored, and cut into slices; sweeten with moist sugar,
add the lemon-peel and juice, and  or  tablespoonfuls of water; cover
with crust, cut it evenly round close to the edge of the pie-dish, and
bake in a hot oven from / to / hour, or rather longer, should the
pie be very large. when it is three-parts done, take it out of the oven,
put the white of an egg on a plate, and, with the blade of a knife,
whisk it to a froth; brush the pie over with this, then sprinkle upon it
some sifted sugar, and then a few drops of water. put the pie back into
the oven, and finish baking, and be particularly careful that it does
not catch or burn, which it is very liable to do after the crust is
iced. if made with a plain crust, the icing may be omitted.
time.—/ hour before the crust is iced;  to  minutes afterwards.
average cost, d.
sufficient.—allow  lbs. of apples for a tart for  persons.
seasonable from august to march; but the apples become flavourless
after february.
note.—many things are suggested for the flavouring of apple pie; some
say  or  tablespoonfuls of beer, others the same quantity of sherry,
which very much improve the taste; whilst the old-fashioned addition of
a few cloves is, by many persons, preferred to anything else, as also a
few slices of quince.
[illustration: quince.]
 quinces.—the environs of corinth originally produced the most
 beautiful quinces, but the plant was subsequently introduced
 into gaul with the most perfect success. the ancients preserved
 the fruit by placing it, with its branches and leaves, in a
 vessel filled with honey or sweet wine, which was reduced to
 half the quantity by ebullition. quinces may be profitably
 cultivated in this country as a variety with other fruit-trees,
 and may be planted in espaliers or as standards. a very
 fine-flavoured marmalade may be prepared from quinces, and a
 small portion of quince in apple pie much improves its flavour.
 the french use quinces for flavouring many sauces. this fruit
 has the remarkable peculiarity of exhaling an agreeable odour,
 taken singly; but when in any quantity, or when they are stowed
 away in a drawer or close room, the pleasant aroma becomes an
 intolerable stench, although the fruit may be perfectly sound;
 it is therefore desirable that, as but a few quinces are
 required for keeping, they should be kept in a high and dry
 loft, and out of the way of the rooms used by the family.
. ingredients.—puff-crust no.  or , apples; to every lb. of
pared and cored apples, allow  oz. of moist sugar, / teaspoonful of
minced lemon-peel,  tablespoonful of lemon-juice, / pint of boiled
custard.
mode.—make an apple tart by the preceding recipe, with the exception
of omitting the icing. when the tart is baked, cut out the middle of the
lid or crust, leaving a border all round the dish. fill up with a
nicely-made boiled custard, grate a little nutmeg over the top, and the
pie is ready for table. this tart is usually eaten cold; is rather an
old-fashioned dish, but, at the same time, extremely nice.
time.—/ to / hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from august to march.
. ingredients.— teacupfuls of rice, apples, moist sugar, cloves.
mode.—boil the rice in milk until three-parts done; then strain it
off, and pare and core the apples without dividing them. put a small
quantity of sugar and a clove into each apple, put the rice round them,
and tie each ball separately in a cloth. boil until the apples are
tender; then take them up, remove the cloths, and serve.
time.—/ hour to boil the rice separately; / to  hour with the
apple.
seasonable from august to march.
(german recipe.)
. ingredients.— or  apples, sugar to taste, the rind of  small
lemon,  eggs, / pint of cream or milk, / lb. of butter, / lb. of
good short crust no. ,  oz. of sweet almonds.
mode.—pare, core, and cut the apples into small pieces; put
sufficient moist sugar to sweeten them into a basin; add the lemon-peel,
which should be finely minced, and the cream; stir these ingredients
well, whisk the eggs, and melt the butter; mix altogether, add the
sliced apple, and let these be well stirred into the mixture. line a
large round plate with the paste, place a narrow rim of the same round
the outer edge, and lay the apples thickly in the middle. blanch the
almonds, cut them into long shreds, and strew over the top of the
apples, and bake from / to / hour, taking care that the almonds do
not get burnt: when done, strew some sifted sugar over the top, and
serve. this tourte may be eaten either hot or cold, and is sufficient to
fill  large-sized plates.
time.—/ to / hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  large-sized tourtes.
seasonable from august to march.
 apples.—no fruit is so universally popular as the apple. it is
 grown extensively for cider, but many sorts are cultivated for
 the table. the apple, uncooked, is less digestible than the
 pear; the degree of digestibility varying according to the
 firmness of its texture and flavour. very wholesome and
 delicious jellies, marmalades, and sweetmeats are prepared from
 it. entremets of apples are made in great variety. apples, when
 peeled, cored, and well cooked, are a most grateful food for the
 dyspeptic.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of fresh butter, / lb. of powdered sugar,
/ lb. of flour, / lb. of currants,  eggs.
mode.—beat the butter to a thick cream, strew in, by degrees, the
sugar, and mix both these well together; then dredge the flour in
gradually, add the currants, and moisten with the eggs, which should be
well beaten. when all the ingredients are well stirred and mixed, butter
a mould that will hold the mixture exactly, tie it down with a cloth,
put the pudding into boiling water, and boil for  hours; when turned
out, strew some powdered sugar over it, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— large apricots, / pint of bread crumbs,  pint
of milk,  oz. of pounded sugar, the yolks of  eggs,  glass of sherry.
mode.—make the milk boiling hot, and pour it on to the bread crumbs;
when half cold, add the sugar, the well-whisked yolks of the eggs, and
the sherry. divide the apricots in half, scald them until they are soft,
and break them up with a spoon, adding a few of the kernels, which
should be well pounded in a mortar; then mix the fruit and other
ingredients together, put a border of paste round the dish, fill with
the mixture, and bake the pudding from / to / hour.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, in full season, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in august, september, and october.
. ingredients.— or  apricots, sugar to taste, puff-paste or
short crust.
mode.—break the apricots in half, take out the stones, and put them
into a pie-dish, in the centre of which place a very small cup or jar,
bottom uppermost; sweeten with good moist sugar, but add no water. line
the edge of the dish with paste, put on the cover, and ornament the pie
in any of the usual modes. bake from / to / hour, according to size;
and if puff-paste is used, glaze it about  minutes before the pie is
done, and put it into the oven again to set the glaze. short crust
merely requires a little sifted sugar sprinkled over it before being
sent to table.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, in full season, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in august, september, and october; green ones rather
earlier.
note.—green apricots make very good tarts, but they should be boiled
with a little sugar and water before they are covered with the crust.
 apricots.—the apricot is indigenous to the plains of armenia,
 but is now cultivated in almost every climate, temperate or
 tropical. there are several varieties. the skin of this fruit
 has a perfumed flavour, highly esteemed. a good apricot, when
 perfectly ripe, is an excellent fruit. it has been somewhat
 condemned for its laxative qualities, but this has possibly
 arisen from the fruit having been eaten unripe, or in too great
 excess. delicate persons should not eat the apricot uncooked,
 without a liberal allowance of powdered sugar. the apricot makes
 excellent jam and marmalade, and there are several foreign
 preparations of it which are considered great luxuries.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of arrowroot, -/ pint of milk, 
oz. of butter, the rind of / lemon,  heaped tablespoonfuls of moist
sugar, a little grated nutmeg.
mode.—mix the arrowroot with as much cold milk as will make it into a
smooth batter, moderately thick; put the remainder of the milk into a
stewpan with the lemon-peel, and let it infuse for about / hour; when
it boils, strain it gently to the batter, stirring it all the time to
keep it smooth; then add the butter; beat this well in until thoroughly
mixed, and sweeten with moist sugar. put the mixture into a pie-dish,
round which has been placed a border of paste, grate a little nutmeg
over the top, and bake the pudding from  to -/ hour, in a moderate
oven, or boil it the same length of time in a well-buttered basin. to
enrich this pudding, stir to the other ingredients, just before it is
put in the oven,  well-whisked eggs, and add a tablespoonful of brandy.
for a nursery pudding, the addition of the latter ingredients will be
found quite superfluous, as also the paste round the edge of the dish.
time.— to -/ hour, baked or boiled. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 arrowroot.—in india, and in the colonies, by the process of
 rasping, they extract from a vegetable (maranta arundinacea) a
 sediment nearly resembling tapioca. the grated pulp is sifted
 into a quantity of water, from which it is afterwards strained
 and dried, and the sediment thus produced is called arrowroot.
 its qualities closely resemble those of tapioca.
. ingredients.— oz. of grated bread,  oz. of currants,  oz. of
apples,  oz. of sugar,  eggs, a few drops of essence of lemon, a
little grated nutmeg.
mode.—pare, core, and mince the apples very finely, sufficient, when
minced, to make  oz.; add to these the currants, which should be well
washed, the grated bread, and sugar; whisk the eggs, beat these up with
the remaining ingredients, and, when all is thoroughly mixed, put the
pudding into a buttered basin, tie it down with a cloth, and boil for 
hours.
time.— hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from august to march.
(very rich.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of puff-paste,  eggs,  oz. of sugar, /
lb. of butter,  oz. of almonds, jam.
mode.—cover a dish with thin paste, and put over this a layer of any
kind of jam, / inch thick; put the yolks of  eggs into a basin with
the white of , and beat these well; add the sifted sugar, the butter,
which should be melted, and the almonds, which should be well pounded;
beat all together until well mixed, then pour it into the dish over the
jam, and bake for an hour in a moderate oven.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ pint of bread crumbs,  pint of milk,  eggs, 
oz. of sugar,  oz. of butter,  oz. of pounded almonds, jam.
mode.—put the bread crumbs at the bottom of a pie-dish, then over
them a layer of jam of any kind that may be preferred; mix the milk and
eggs together; add the sugar, butter, and pounded almonds; beat fill
well together; pour it into the dish, and bake in a moderate oven for 
hour.
time.— hour. average cost. s. d. to s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
(author's recipe.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of suet, / lb. of raisins weighed after
being stoned, / lb. of flour, / pint of milk, / saltspoonful of
salt.
mode.—prepare the suet, by carefully freeing it from skin, and chop
it finely; stone the raisins, and cut them in halves, and mix both these
ingredients with the salt and flour; moisten the whole with the above
proportion of milk, stir the mixture well, and tie the pudding in a
floured cloth, which has been previously wrung out in boiling water. put
the pudding into a saucepan of boiling water, and let it boil, without
ceasing, -/ hours. serve merely with plain sifted sugar, a little of
which may be sprinkled over the pudding.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter, when fresh fruit is not obtainable.
note.—this pudding the editress cannot too highly recommend. the
recipe was kindly given to her family by a lady who bore the title here
prefixed to it; and with all who have partaken of it, it is an especial
favourite. nothing is of greater consequence, in the above directions,
than attention to the time of boiling, which should never be less than
that mentioned.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of barberries allow / lb. of lump
sugar; paste.
[illustration: leaf in puff-paste.]
mode.—pick the barberries from the stalks, and put the fruit into a
stone jar; place this jar in boiling water, and let it simmer very
slowly until the fruit is soft; then put it into a preserving-pan with
the sugar, and boil gently for  minutes; line a tartlet-pan with
paste, bake it, and, when the paste is cold, fill with the barberries,
and ornament the tart with a few baked leaves of paste, cut out, as
shown in the engraving.
time.—/ hour to bake the tart.
average cost, d. per pint.
seasonable in autumn.
[illustration: barberry.]
 barberries (berberris vulgaris.)—a fruit of such great
 acidity, that even birds refuse to eat it. in this respect, it
 nearly approaches the tamarind. when boiled with sugar, it makes
 a very agreeable preserve or jelly, according to the different
 modes of preparing it. barberries are also used as a dry
 sweetmeat, and in sugarplums or comfits; are pickled with
 vinegar, and are used for various culinary purposes. they are
 well calculated to allay heat and thirst in persons afflicted
 with fevers. the berries, arranged on bunches of nice curled
 parsley, make an exceedingly pretty garnish for supper-dishes,
 particularly for white meats, like boiled fowl ŕ la béchamel,
 the three colours, scarlet, green, and white, contrasting so
 well, and producing a very good effect.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of milk,  tablespoonfuls of flour,  oz.
of butter,  eggs, a little salt.
mode.—mix the flour with a small quantity of cold milk; make the
remainder hot, and pour it on to the flour, keeping the mixture well
stirred; add the butter, eggs, and salt; beat the whole well, and put
the pudding into a buttered pie-dish; bake for / hour, and serve with
sweet sauce, wine sauce, or stewed fruit. baked in small cups, this
makes very pretty little puddings, and should be eaten with the same
accompaniments as above.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
baked batter pudding, with dried or fresh fruit.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of milk,  tablespoonfuls of flour, 
eggs,  oz. of finely-shredded suet, / lb. of currants, a pinch of
salt.
mode.—mix the milk, flour, and eggs to a smooth batter; add a little
salt, the suet, and the currants, which should be well washed, picked,
and dried; put the mixture into a buttered pie-dish, and bake in a
moderate oven for -/ hour. when fresh fruits are in season, this
pudding is exceedingly nice, with damsons, plums, red currants,
gooseberries, or apples; when made with these, the pudding must be
thickly sprinkled over with sifted sugar. boiled batter pudding, with
fruit, is made in the same manner, by putting the fruit into a buttered
basin, and filling it up with batter made in the above proportion, but
omitting the suet. it must be sent quickly to table, and covered
plentifully with sifted sugar.
time.—baked batter pudding, with fruit, -/ to -/ hour; boiled
ditto, -/ to -/ hour, allowing that both are made with the above
proportion of batter. smaller puddings will be done enough in / or 
hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time, with dried fruits.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of butter,  pint of milk, 
tablespoonfuls of flour, a little salt.
mode.—put the flour into a basin, and add sufficient milk to moisten
it; carefully rub down all the lumps with a spoon, then pour in the
remainder of the milk, and stir in the butter, which should be
previously melted; keep beating the mixture, add the eggs and a pinch of
salt, and when the batter is quite smooth, put it into a well-buttered
basin, tie it down very tightly, and put it into boiling water; move the
basin about for a few minutes after it is put into the water, to prevent
the flour settling in any part, and boil for -/ hour. this pudding
may also be boiled in a floured cloth that has been wetted in hot water;
it will then take a few minutes less than when boiled in a basin. send
these puddings very quickly to table, and serve with sweet sauce, wine
sauce, stewed fruit, or jam of any kind: when the latter is used, a
little of it may be placed round the dish in small quantities, as a
garnish.
time.—-/ hour in a basin,  hour in a cloth. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs,  pint of milk, -/ oz. of loaf sugar, 
tablespoonfuls of flour.
mode.—make the batter with the above ingredients, put it into a
well-buttered basin, tie it down with a cloth, and boil for  hour. as
soon as it is turned out of the basin, put a small jar of orange
marmalade all over the top, and send the pudding very quickly to table.
time.— hour. average cost, with the marmalade, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time; but more suitable for a winter pudding.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of grated bread,  pint of milk,  eggs, 
oz. of butter,  oz. of moist sugar,  oz. of candied peel,  bitter
almonds,  tablespoonful of brandy.
mode.—put the milk into a stewpan, with the bitter almonds; let it
infuse for / hour; bring it to the boiling point; strain it on to the
bread crumbs, and let these remain till cold; then add the eggs, which
should be well whisked, the butter, sugar, and brandy, and beat the
pudding well until all the ingredients are thoroughly mixed; line the
bottom of a pie-dish with the candied peel sliced thin, put in the
mixture, and bake for nearly / hour.
time.—nearly / hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—a few currants may be substituted for the candied peel, and
will be found an excellent addition to this pudding: they should be
beaten in with the mixture, and not laid at the bottom of the pie-dish.
. ingredients.—odd pieces of crust or crumb of bread; to every
quart allow / teaspoonful of salt,  teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, 
oz. of moist sugar, / lb. of currants, -/ oz. of butter.
mode.—break the bread into small pieces, and pour on them as much
boiling water as will soak them well. let these stand till the water is
cool; then press it out, and mash the bread with a fork until it is
quite free from lumps. measure this pulp, and to every quart stir in
salt, nutmeg, sugar, and currants in the above proportion; mix all well
together, and put it into a well-buttered pie-dish. smooth the surface
with the back of a spoon, and place the butter in small pieces over the
top; bake in a moderate oven for -/ hour, and serve very hot. boiling
milk substituted for the boiling water would very much improve this
pudding.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, d., exclusive of the bread.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of milk, / pint of bread crumbs, sugar
to taste,  eggs,  oz. of butter,  oz. of currants, / teaspoonful of
grated nutmeg.
mode.—make the milk boiling, and pour it on the bread crumbs; let
these remain till cold; then add the other ingredients, taking care that
the eggs are well beaten and the currants well washed, picked, and
dried. beat the pudding well, and put it into a buttered basin; tie it
down tightly with a cloth, plunge it into boiling water, and boil for
-/ hour; turn it out of the basin, and serve with sifted sugar. any
odd pieces or scraps of bread answer for this pudding; but they should
be soaked overnight, and, when wanted for use, should have the water
well squeezed from them.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 bread.—bread contains, in its composition, in the form of
 vegetable albumen and vegetable fibrine, two of the chief
 constituents of flesh, and, in its incombustible constituents,
 the salts which are indispensable for sanguification, of the
 same quality and in the same proportion as flesh. but flesh
 contains, besides these, a number of substances which are
 entirely wanting in vegetable food; and on these peculiar
 constituents of flesh depend certain effects, by which it is
 essentially distinguished from other articles of food.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of brown-bread crumbs, / lb. of currants,
/ lb. of suet, / lb. of moist sugar,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of
brandy,  tablespoonfuls of cream, grated nutmeg to taste.
mode.—grate / lb. of crumbs from a stale brown loaf; add to these
the currants and suet, and be particular that the latter is finely
chopped. put in the remaining ingredients; beat the pudding well for a
few minutes; put it into a buttered basin or mould; tie it down tightly,
and boil for nearly  hours. send sweet sauce to table with it.
time.—nearly  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time; but more suitable for a winter pudding.
. ingredients.— pint of milk, / lb. of bread crumbs,  eggs, 
oz. of butter, sugar to taste,  tablespoonfuls of brandy,  teaspoonful
of finely-minced lemon-peel.
mode.—make the milk boiling, pour it on to the bread crumbs, and let
them soak for about / hour. beat the eggs, mix these with the bread
crumbs, add the remaining ingredients, and stir well until all is
thoroughly mixed. butter some small cups; rather more than half fill
them with the mixture, and bake in a moderate oven from  minutes to
/ hour, and serve with sweet sauce. a few currants may be added to
these puddings: about  oz. will be found sufficient for the above
quantity.
time.— minutes to / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  small puddings.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— thin slices of bread and butter, -/ pint of
milk,  eggs, sugar to taste, / lb. of currants, flavouring of
vanilla, grated lemon-peel or nutmeg.
mode.—cut  slices of bread and butter not very thick, and put them
into a pie-dish, with currants between each layer and on the top.
sweeten and flavour the milk, either by infusing a little lemon-peel in
it, or by adding a few drops of essence of vanilla; well whisk the eggs,
and stir these to the milk. strain this over the bread and butter, and
bake in a moderate oven for  hour, or rather longer. this pudding may
be very much enriched by adding cream, candied peel, or more eggs than
stated above. it should not be turned out, but sent to table in the
pie-dish, and is better for being made about  hours before it is baked.
time.— hour, or rather longer. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 butter.—butter is indispensable in almost all culinary
 preparations. good fresh butter, used in moderation, is easily
 digested; it is softening, nutritious, and fattening, and is far
 more easily digested than any other of the oleaginous substances
 sometimes used in its place.
cabinet or chancellor's pudding.
. ingredients.—-/ oz. of candied peel,  oz. of currants, 
dozen sultanas, a few slices of savoy cake, sponge cake, a french roll,
 eggs,  pint of milk, grated lemon-rind, / nutmeg,  table-spoonfuls
of sugar.
[illustration: cabinet pudding.]
mode.—melt some butter to a paste, and with it, well grease the mould
or basin in which the pudding is to be boiled, taking care that it is
buttered in every part. cut the peel into thin slices, and place these
in a fanciful device at the bottom of the mould, and fill in the spaces
between with currants and sultanas; then add a few slices of sponge cake
or french roll; drop a few drops of melted butter on these, and between
each layer sprinkle a few currants. proceed in this manner until the
mould is nearly full; then flavour the milk with nutmeg and grated
lemon-rind; add the sugar, and stir to this the eggs, which should be
well beaten. beat this mixture for a few minutes; then strain it into
the mould, which should be quite full; tie a piece of buttered paper
over it, and let it stand for  hours; then tie it down with a cloth,
put it into boiling water, and let it boil slowly for  hour. in taking
it up, let it stand for a minute or two before the cloth is removed;
then quickly turn it out of the mould or basin, and serve with sweet
sauce separately. the flavouring of this pudding may be varied by
substituting for the lemon-rind essence of vanilla or bitter almonds;
and it may be made much richer by using cream; but this is not at all
necessary.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
a plain cabinet or boiled bread-and-butter pudding.
. ingredients.— oz. of raisins, a few thin slices of bread and
butter,  eggs,  pint of milk, sugar to taste, / nutmeg.
mode.—butter a pudding-basin, and line the inside with a layer of
raisins that have been previously stoned; then nearly fill the basin
with slices of bread and butter with the crust cut off, and, in another
basin, beat the eggs; add to them the milk, sugar, and grated nutmeg;
mix all well together, and pour the whole on to the bread and butter;
let it stand / hour, then tie a floured cloth over it; boil for 
hour, and serve with sweet sauce. care must be taken that the basin is
quite full before the cloth is tied over.
time.— hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—the weight of  eggs in sugar and butter, the weight
of  eggs in flour, the rind of  small lemon,  eggs.
mode.—melt the butter to a liquid state, but do not allow it to oil;
stir to this the sugar and finely-minced lemon-peel, and gradually
dredge in the flour, keeping the mixture well stirred; whisk the eggs;
add these to the pudding; beat all the ingredients until thoroughly
blended, and put them into a buttered mould or basin; boil for  hours,
and serve with sweet sauce.
time.— hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of bread crumbs,  oz. of suet, / lb. of
stoned raisins, / lb. of carrot, / lb. of currants,  oz. of sugar,
 eggs, milk, / nutmeg.
mode.—boil the carrots until tender enough to mash to a pulp; add the
remaining ingredients, and moisten with sufficient milk to make the
pudding of the consistency of thick batter. if to be boiled, put the
mixture into a buttered basin, tie it down with a cloth, and boil for
-/ hours: if to be baked, put it into a pie-dish, and bake for nearly
an hour; turn it out of the dish, strew sifted sugar over it, and serve.
time.—-/ hours to boil;  hour to bake. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
 carrots, says liebig, contain the same kind of sugar as the
 juice of the sugar-cane.
. ingredients.— pint of new milk,  oz. of flour,  oz. of sugar,
 oz. of butter,  oz. of currants,  eggs, brandy and grated nutmeg to
taste.
mode.—mix the flour to a smooth batter with the milk, add the
remaining ingredients gradually, and when well mixed, put it into four
basins or moulds half full; bake for / hour, turn the puddings out on
a dish, and serve with wine sauce.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of cherries,  small tablespoonfuls of
moist sugar, / lb. of short crust, no.  or .
mode.—pick the stalks from the cherries, put them, with the sugar,
into a deep pie-dish just capable of holding them, with a small cup
placed upside down in the midst of them. make a short crust with / lb.
of flour, by either of the recipes  or ; lay a border round the
edge of the dish; put on the cover, and ornament the edges; bake in a
brisk oven from / hour to  minutes; strew finely-sifted sugar over,
and serve hot or cold, although the latter is the more usual mode. it is
more economical to make two or three tarts at one time, as the trimmings
from one tart answer for lining the edges of the dish for another, and
so much paste is not required as when they are made singly. unless for
family use, never make fruit pies in very large dishes; select them,
however, as deep as possible.
time.—/ hour to  minutes.
average cost, in full season, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in june, july, and august.
note.—a few currants added to the cherries will be found to impart a
nice piquant taste to them.
[illustration: cherry.]
 cherries.—according to lucullus, the cherry-tree was known in
 asia in the year of rome . seventy different species of
 cherries, wild and cultivated, exist, which are distinguishable
 from each other by the difference of their form, size, and
 colour. the french distil from cherries a liqueur darned
 kirsch-waser (eau de cérises); the italians prepare, from a
 cherry called marusca, the liqueur named marasquin, sweeter
 and more agreeable than the former. the most wholesome cherries
 have a tender and delicate skin; those with a hard skin should
 be very carefully masticated. sweetmeats, syrups, tarts,
 entremets, &c., of cherries, are universally approved.
. ingredients.— eggs,  pint of milk, sugar to taste, a little
grated lemon-rind,  oz. of raisins,  tablespoonfuls of marmalade, a
few slices of sponge cake.
mode.—sweeten the milk with lump sugar, add a little grated
lemon-rind, and stir to this the eggs, which should be well whisked;
line a buttered mould with the raisins, stoned and cut in half; spread
the slices of cake with the marmalade, and place them in the mould; then
pour in the custard, tie the pudding down with paper and a cloth, and
boil gently for  hour: when cold, turn it out, and serve.
time.— hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pint of bread crumbs,  oz. of finely-chopped
suet, / lb. of currants, a few thin slices of candied peel,  oz. of
sugar, / nutmeg,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of brandy.
mode.—put the bread crumbs into a basin; add the suet, currants,
candied peel, sugar, and nutmeg, grated, and stir these ingredients
until they are thoroughly mixed. beat up the eggs, moisten the pudding
with these, and put in the brandy; beat well for a few minutes, then
form the mixture into round balls or egg-shaped pieces; fry these in hot
butter or lard, letting them stew in it until thoroughly done, and turn
them two or three times, till of a fine light brown; drain them on a
piece of blotting-paper before the fire; dish, and serve with wine
sauce.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  puddings. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour,  oz. of suet, / lb. of currants,
rather more than / pint of water.
mode.—chop the suet finely, mix it with the flour, and add the
currants, which should be nicely washed, picked, and dried; mix the
whole to a limp paste with the water (if wanted very nice, use milk);
divide it into  or  dumplings; tie them in cloths, and boil for -/
hour. they may be boiled without a cloth: they should then be made into
round balls, and dropped into boiling water, and should be moved about
at first, to prevent them from sticking to the bottom of the saucepan.
serve with a cut lemon, cold butter, and sifted sugar.
time.—in a cloth, -/ hour; without, / hour.
average cost,  d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: zante currants.]
 zante currants.—the dried fruit which goes by the name of
 currants in grocers' shops is not a currant really, but a small
 kind of grape, chiefly cultivated in the morea and the ionian
 islands, corfu, zante, &c. those of zante are cultivated in an
 immense plain, under the shelter of mountains, on the shore of
 the island, where the sun has great power, and brings them to
 maturity. when gathered and dried by the sun and air, on mats,
 they are conveyed to magazines, heaped together, and left to
 cake, until ready for shipping. they are then dug out by iron
 crowbars, trodden into casks, and exported. the fertile vale of
 "zante the woody" produces about ,, lbs. of currants
 annually. in cakes and puddings this delicious little grape is
 most extensively used; in fact, we could not make a plum pudding
 without the currant.
(plain and economical.)
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of suet, / lb. of
currants, milk.
mode.—wash the currants, dry them thoroughly, and pick away any
stalks or grit; chop the suet finely; mix all the ingredients together,
and moisten with sufficient milk to make the pudding into a stiff
batter; tie it up in a floured cloth, put it into boiling water, and
boil for -/ hours; serve with a cut lemon, cold butter, and sifted
sugar.
time.—-/ hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
black or red currant pudding.
. ingredients.— quart of red or black currants, measured with the
stalks, / lb. of moist sugar, suet crust no. , or butter crust no.
mode.—make, with / lb. of flour, either a suet crust or butter
crust (the former is usually made); butter a basin, and line it with
part of the crust; put in the currants, which should be stripped from
the stalks, and sprinkle the sugar over them; put the cover of the
pudding on; make the edges very secure, that the juice does not escape;
tie it down with a floured cloth, put it into boiling water, and boil
from -/ to  hours. boiled without a basin, allow / hour less. we
have allowed rather a large proportion of sugar; but we find fruit
puddings are so much more juicy and palatable when well sweetened
before they are boiled, besides being more economical. a few raspberries
added to red-currant pudding are a very nice addition: about / pint
would be sufficient for the above quantity of fruit. fruit puddings are
very delicious if, when they are turned out of the basin, the crust is
browned with a salamander, or put into a very hot oven for a few minutes
to colour it: this makes it crisp on the surface.
time.—-/ to  hours; without a basin,  to -/ hours.
average cost, in full season, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in june, july, and august.
[illustration: currants.]
 currants.—the utility of currants, red, black, or white, has
 long been established in domestic economy. the juice of the red
 species, if boiled with an equal weight of loaf sugar, forms an
 agreeable substance called currant jelly, much employed in
 sauces, and very valuable in the cure of sore throats and colds.
 the french mix it with sugar and water, and thus form an
 agreeable beverage. the juice of currants is a valuable remedy
 in obstructions of the bowels; and, in febrile complaints, it is
 useful on account of its readily quenching thirst, and for its
 cooling effect on the stomach. white and flesh-coloured
 currants have, with the exception of the fullness of flavour, in
 every respect, the same qualities as the red species. both white
 and red currants are pleasant additions to the dessert, but the
 black variety is mostly used for culinary and medicinal
 purposes, especially in the form of jelly for quinsies. the
 leaves of the black currant make a pleasant tea.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of picked currants, / pint of
raspberries,  heaped tablespoonfuls of moist sugar, / lb. of short
crust.
mode.—strip the currants from the stalks, and put them into a deep
pie-dish, with a small cup placed in the midst, bottom upwards; add the
raspberries and sugar; place a border of paste round the edge of the
dish, cover with crust, ornament the edges, and bake from / to /
hour: strew some sifted sugar over before being sent to table. this tart
is more generally served cold than hot.
time.—/ to / hour.
average cost.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in june, july, and august.
[illustration: raspberry.]
 raspberries.—there are two sorts of raspberries, the red and
 the white. both the scent and flavour of this fruit are very
 refreshing, and the berry itself is exceedingly wholesome, and
 invaluable to people of a nervous or bilious temperament. we are
 not aware, however, of its being cultivated with the same amount
 of care which is bestowed upon some other of the berry tribe,
 although it is far from improbable that a more careful
 cultivation would not be repaid by a considerable improvement in
 the size and flavour of the berry; neither, as an eating fruit,
 is it so universally esteemed as the strawberry, with whose
 lusciousness and peculiarly agreeable flavour it can bear no
 comparison. in scotland, it is found in large quantities,
 growing wild, and is eagerly sought after, in the woods, by
 children. its juice is rich and abundant, and to many, extremely
 agreeable.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of milk, the rind of / lemon, / lb.
of moist sugar,  eggs.
mode.—put the milk into a saucepan with the sugar and lemon-rind, and
let this infuse for about  hour, or until the milk is well flavoured;
whisk the eggs, yolks and whites; pour the milk to them, stirring all
the while; then have ready a pie-dish, lined at the edge with paste
ready baked; strain the custard into the dish, grate a little nutmeg
over the top, and bake in a very slow oven for about / hour, or
rather longer. the flavour of this pudding may be varied by substituting
bitter almonds for the lemon-rind; and it may be very much enriched by
using half cream and half milk, and doubling the quantity of eggs.
time.—/ to / hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
note.—this pudding is usually served cold with fruit tarts.
. ingredients.— pint of milk,  tablespoonful of flour,  eggs,
flavouring to taste.
mode.—flavour the milk by infusing in it a little lemon-rind or
cinnamon; whisk the eggs, stir the flour gradually to these, and pour
over them the milk, and stir the mixture well. butter a basin that will
exactly hold it; put in the custard, and tie a floured cloth over;
plunge it into boiling water, and turn it about for a few minutes, to
prevent the flour from settling in one part. boil it slowly for /
hour; turn it out of the basin, and serve. the pudding may be garnished
with red-currant jelly, and sweet sauce may be sent to table with it.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of damsons, / lb. of moist sugar, /
lb. of short or puff crust.
mode.—put the damsons, with the sugar between them, into a deep
pie-dish, in the midst of which, place a small cup or jar turned upside
down; pile the fruit high in the middle, line the edges of the dish with
short or puff crust, whichever may be preferred; put on the cover,
ornament the edges, and bake from / to / hour in a good oven. if
puff-crust is used, about  minutes before the pie is done, take it out
of the oven, brush it over with the white of an egg beaten to a froth
with the blade of a knife; strew some sifted sugar over, and a few drops
of water, and put the tart back to finish baking: with short crust, a
little plain sifted sugar, sprinkled over, is all that will be required.
time.—/ to / hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in september and october.
[illustration: damsons.]
 damsons.—whether for jam, jelly, pie, pudding, water, ice,
 wine, dried fruit or preserved, the damson, or damascene (for
 it was originally brought from damascus, whence its name), is
 invaluable. it combines sugary and acid qualities in happy
 proportions, when full ripe. it is a fruit easily cultivated;
 and, if budded nine inches from the ground on vigorous stocks,
 it will grow several feet high in the first year, and make fine
 standards the year following. amongst the list of the best sorts
 of baking plums, the damson stands first, not only on account of
 the abundance of its juice, but also on account of its soon
 softening. because of the roughness of its flavour, it requires
 a large quantity of sugar.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of damsons, / lb. of moist sugar, /
lb. of suet or butter crust.
mode.—make a suet crust with / lb. of flour by recipe no. ;
line a buttered pudding-basin with a portion of it; fill the basin with
the damsons, sweeten them, and put on the lid; pinch the edges of the
crust together, that the juice does not escape; tie over a floured
cloth, put the pudding into boiling water, and boil from -/ to 
hours.
time.—-/ to  hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in september and october.
. ingredients.— large apples, a little grated nutmeg, 
teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel,  large tablespoonfuls of sugar,  oz.
of currants, / lb. of suet crust no. .
mode.—pare, core, and cut the apples into slices; put them into a
saucepan, with the nutmeg, lemon-peel, and sugar; stir them over the
fire until soft; then have ready the above proportion of crust, roll it
out thin, spread the apples over the paste, sprinkle over the currants,
roll the pudding up, closing the ends properly, tie it in a floured
cloth, and boil for  hours.
time.— hours.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from august to march.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice,  oz. of butter,  eggs, jam,
sufficient milk to soften the rice.
mode.—boil the rice in the milk until very soft; then add the butter
boil it for a few minutes after the latter ingredient is put in, and set
it by to cool. well beat the eggs, stir these in, and line a dish with
puff-paste; put over this a layer of rice, then a thin layer of any kind
of jam, then another layer of rice, and proceed in this manner until the
dish is full; and bake in a moderate oven for / hour. this pudding may
be eaten hot or cold; if the latter, it will be much improved by having
a boiled custard poured over it.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
(very rich.)
. ingredients.— oz. of bread crumbs,  oz. of sago,  oz. of
finely-chopped suet,  oz. of moist sugar, the rind of / lemon, /
pint of rum,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of cream,  small sponge cakes, 
oz. of ratafias, / lb. of jam.
mode.—put the bread crumbs into a basin with the sago, suet, sugar,
minced lemon-peel, rum, and  eggs; stir these ingredients well
together, then add  more eggs and the cream, and let the mixture be
well beaten. then butter a mould, strew in a few bread crumbs, and cover
the bottom with a layer of ratafias; then put in a layer of the mixture,
then a layer of sliced sponge cake spread thickly with any kind of jam;
then add some ratafias, then some of the mixture and sponge cake, and so
on until the mould is full, taking care that a layer of the mixture is
on the top of the pudding. bake in a good oven from / to  hour, and
serve with the following sauce:—put  tablespoonfuls of black-currant
jelly into a stewpan, add  glasses of sherry, and, when warm, turn the
pudding out of the mould, pour the sauce over it, and serve hot.
time.—from  to -/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lbs. of figs,  lb. of suet, / lb. of flour, /
lb. of bread crumbs,  eggs, milk.
mode.—cut the figs into small pieces, grate the bread finely, and
chop the suet very small; mix these well together, add the flour, the
eggs, which should be well beaten, and sufficient milk to form the whole
into a stiff paste; butter a mould or basin, press the pudding into it
very closely, tie it down with a cloth, and boil for  hours, or rather
longer; turn it out of the mould, and serve with melted butter,
wine-sauce, or cream.
time.— hours, or longer. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—suitable for a winter pudding.
(staffordshire recipe.)
. ingredients.— lb. of figs,  oz. of suet, / lb. of flour,
milk.
mode.—chop the suet finely, mix with it the flour, and make these
into a smooth paste with milk; roll it out to the thickness of about /
inch, cut the figs in small pieces, and strew them over the paste; roll
it up, make the ends secure, tie the pudding in a cloth, and boil it
from -/ to  hours.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pint of milk,  oz. of ground rice,  oz. of
butter, / lb. of sugar, flavouring of lemon-peel or bay-leaf,  eggs,
puff-paste, currants.
mode.—infuse  laurel or bay leaves, or the rind of / lemon, in the
milk, and when it is well flavoured, strain it, and add the rice; boil
these for / hour, stirring all the time; then take them off the fire,
stir in the butter, sugar, and eggs, and let these latter be well beaten
before they are added to the other ingredients; when nearly cold, line
some patty-pans with puff-paste, fill with the custard, strew over each
a few currants, and bake from  to  minutes in a moderate oven.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill a dozen patty-pans.
seasonable at any time.
fruit turnovers (suitable for pic-nics).
. ingredients.—puff-paste no. , any kind of fruit, sugar to
taste.
mode.—make some puff-paste by recipe no. ; roll it out to the
thickness of about / inch, and cut it out in pieces of a circular
form; pile the fruit on half of the paste, sprinkle over some sugar, wet
the edges and turn the paste over. press the edges together, ornament
them, and brush the turnovers over with the white of an egg; sprinkle
over sifted sugar, and bake on tins, in a brisk oven, for about 
minutes. instead of putting the fruit in raw, it may be boiled down with
a little sugar first, and then inclosed in the crust; or jam, of any
kind, may be substituted for fresh fruit.
time.— minutes.
sufficient—/ lb. of puff-paste will make a dozen turnovers.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— teaspoonfuls of flour,  teaspoonful of arrowroot,
 pint of milk,  oz. of butter, sugar to taste, the rind of / lemon,
 eggs,  tablespoonfuls of brandy.
mode.—boil the milk with the lemon-rind until well flavoured; then
strain it, and mix with it the flour, arrowroot, butter, and sugar. boil
these ingredients for a few minutes, keeping them well stirred; then
take them off the fire and mix with them the eggs, yolks and whites,
beaten separately and added separately. boil some sugar to candy; line a
mould with this, put in the brandy, then the mixture; tie down with a
cloth, and boil for rather more than  hour. when turned out, the brandy
and sugar make a nice sauce.
time.—rather more than  hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
dampfnudeln, or german puddings.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of butter,  eggs,  small
tablespoonfuls of yeast,  tablespoonfuls of finely-pounded sugar, milk,
a very little salt.
mode.—put the flour into a basin, make a hole in the centre, into
which put the yeast, and rather more than / pint of warm milk; make
this into a batter with the middle of the flour, and let the sponge rise
in a warm temperature. when sufficiently risen, mix the eggs, butter,
sugar, and salt with a little more warm milk, and knead the whole well
together with the hands, beating the dough until it is perfectly smooth,
and it drops from the fingers. then cover the basin with a cloth, put it
in a warm place, and when the dough has nicely risen, knead it into
small balls; butter the bottom of a deep sauté-pan, strew over some
pounded sugar, and let the dampfnudeln be laid in, but do not let them
touch one another; then pour over sufficient milk to cover them, put on
the lid, and let them rise to twice their original size by the side of
the fire. now place them in the oven for a few minutes, to acquire a
nice brown colour, and serve them on a napkin, with custard sauce
flavoured with vanilla, or a compôte of any fruit that may be
preferred.
time.—/ to / hour for the sponge to rise;  to  minutes for
the puddings to rise;  minutes to bake them in a brisk oven.
sufficient for  or  dampfnudeln.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour, / lb. of suet, / lb. of moist
sugar,  large teaspoonfuls of grated ginger.
mode.—shred the suet very fine, mix it with the flour, sugar, and
ginger; stir all well together; butter a basin, and put the mixture in
dry; tie a cloth over, and boil for  hours.
time.— hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of suet, / lb. of
marmalade, / lb. of sugar,  eggs.
mode.—put the bread crumbs into a basin; mix with them the suet,
which should be finely minced, the marmalade, and the sugar; stir all
these ingredients well together, beat the eggs to a froth, moisten the
pudding with these, and when well mixed, put it into a mould or buttered
basin; tie down with a floured cloth, and boil for  hours. when turned
out, strew a little fine-sifted sugar over the top, and serve.
time.— hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
note.—the mould may be ornamented with stoned raisins, arranged in
any fanciful pattern, before the mixture is poured in, which would add
very much to the appearance of the pudding. for a plainer pudding,
double the quantities of the bread crumbs, and if the eggs do not
moisten it sufficiently, use a little milk.
. ingredients.—gooseberries,  eggs, -/ oz. of butter, / pint
of bread crumbs, sugar to taste.
mode.—put the gooseberries into a jar, previously cutting off the
tops and tails; place this jar in boiling water, and let it boil until
the gooseberries are soft enough to pulp; then beat them through a
coarse sieve, and to every pint of pulp add  well-whisked eggs, -/
oz. of butter, / pint of bread crumbs, and sugar to taste; beat the
mixture well, put a border of puff-paste round the edge of a pie-dish,
put in the pudding, bake for about  minutes, strew sifted sugar over,
and serve.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from may to july.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of suet crust no. , -/ pint of green
gooseberries, / lb. of moist sugar.
mode.—line a pudding-basin with suet crust no. , rolled out to
about / inch in thickness, and, with a pair of scissors, cut off the
tops and tails of the gooseberries; fill the basin with the fruit, put
in the sugar, and cover with crust. pinch the edges of the pudding
together, tie over it a floured cloth, put it into boiling water, and
boil from -/ to  hours; turn it out of the basin, and serve with a
jug of cream.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from may to july.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of gooseberries, / lb. of short crust
no. , / lb. of moist sugar.
mode.—with a pair of scissors cut off the tops and tails of the
gooseberries; put them into a deep pie-dish, pile the fruit high in the
centre, and put in the sugar; line the edge of the dish with short
crust, put on the cover, and ornament the edges of the tart; bake in a
good oven for about / hour, and before being sent to table, strew over
it some fine-sifted sugar. a jug of cream, or a dish of boiled or baked
custards, should always accompany this dish.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from may to july.
[illustration: gooseberry.]
 gooseberries.—the red and the white are the two principal
 varieties of gooseberries. the red are rather the more acid;
 but, when covered with white sugar, are most wholesome, because
 the sugar neutralizes their acidity. red gooseberries make an
 excellent jelly, which is light and refreshing, but not very
 nourishing. it is good for bilious and plethoric persons, and to
 invalids generally who need light and digestible food. it is a
 fruit from which many dishes might be made. all sorts of
 gooseberries are agreeable when stewed, and, in this country
 especially, there is no fruit so universally in favour. in
 scotland, there is scarcely a cottage-garden without its
 gooseberry-bush. several of the species are cultivated with the
 nicest care.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of suet, / lb. of currants, / lb. of
raisins, / lb. of flour, / lb. of bread crumbs,  tablespoonfuls of
treacle, / pint of milk.
mode.—chop the suet finely; mix with it the currants, which should be
nicely washed and dried, the raisins, which should be stoned, the flour,
bread crumbs, and treacle; moisten with the milk, beat up the
ingredients until all are thoroughly mixed, put them into a buttered
basin, and boil the pudding for -/ hours.
time.—-/ hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of good figs,  oz.
of suet,  oz. of moist sugar, / saltspoonful of salt,  eggs, nutmeg
to taste.
mode.—mince the suet and figs very finely; add the remaining
ingredients, taking care that the eggs are well whisked; beat the
mixture for a few minutes, put it into a buttered mould, tie it down
with a floured cloth, and boil the pudding for  hours. serve with wine
sauce.
time.— hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of raisins,  lb. of currants,  lb. of suet,
 lb. of bread crumbs,  lb. of moist sugar,  eggs,  tablespoonful of
flour,  lb. of mixed candied peel,  glass of brandy,  drops of
essence of lemon,  drops of essence of almonds, / nutmeg,  blades
of mace,  cloves.
mode.—stone and shred the raisins rather small, chop the suet finely,
and rub the bread until all lumps are well broken; pound the spice to
powder, cut the candied peel into thin shreds, and mix all these
ingredients well together, adding the sugar. beat the eggs to a strong
froth, and as they are beaten, drop into them the essence of lemon and
essence of almonds; stir these to the dry ingredients, mix well, and add
the brandy. tie the pudding firmly in a cloth, and boil it for  hours
at the least:  or  hours would be still better for it. serve with
boiled custard, or red-currant jelly, or brandy sauce.
time.— to  hours.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter.
(parisian recipe.)
[illustration: iced-pudding mould.]
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sweet almonds,  oz. of bitter ones, /
lb. of sugar,  eggs, -/ pint of milk.
mode.—blanch and dry the almonds thoroughly in a cloth, then pound
them in a mortar until reduced to a smooth paste; add to these the
well-beaten eggs, the sugar, and milk; stir these ingredients over the
fire until they thicken, but do not allow them to boil; then strain and
put the mixture into the freezing-pot; surround it with ice, and freeze
it as directed in recipe . when quite frozen, fill an iced-pudding
mould, put on the lid, and keep the pudding in ice until required for
table; then turn it out on the dish, and garnish it with a compôte of
any fruit that may be preferred, pouring a little over the top of the
pudding. this pudding may be flavoured with vanilla, curaçoa, or
maraschino.
time.—/ hour to freeze the mixture.
seasonable.—served all the year round.
iced apple pudding. (french recipe, after caręme.)
. ingredients.— dozen apples, a small pot of apricot-jam, / lb.
of sugar,  seville orange, / pint of preserved cherries, / lb. of
raisins,  oz. of citron,  oz. of almonds,  gill of curaçoa,  gill of
maraschino,  pint of cream.
mode.—peel, core, and cut the apples into quarters, and simmer them
over the fire until soft; then mix with them the apricot-jam and the
sugar, on which the rind of the orange should be previously rubbed; work
all these ingredients through a sieve, and put them into the
freezing-pot. stone the raisins, and simmer them in a little syrup for a
few minutes; add these, with the sliced citron, the almonds cut in dice,
and the cherries drained from their syrup, to the ingredients in the
freezing-pot; put in the curaçoa and maraschino, and freeze again; add
as much whipped cream as will be required, freeze again, and fill the
mould. put the lid on, and plunge the mould into the ice-pot; cover it
with a wet cloth and pounded ice and saltpetre, where it should remain
until wanted for table. turn the pudding out of the mould on to a clean
and neatly-folded napkin, and serve, as sauce, a little iced whipped
cream, in a sauce-tureen or glass dish.
[illustration: ice-spattle.]
[illustration: ice-freezing pail.]
time.—/ hour to freeze the mixture.
seasonable from august to march.
method of working the freezing apparatus.—put into the outer pail
some pounded ice, upon which strew some saltpetre; then fix the pewter
freezing-pot upon this, and surround it entirely with ice and saltpetre.
wipe the cover and edges of the pot, pour in the preparation, and close
the lid; a quarter of an hour after, begin turning the freezing-pan from
right to left, and when the mixture begins to be firm round the sides of
the pot, stir it about with the slice or spattle, that the preparation
may be equally congealed. close the lid again, keep working from right
to left, and, from time to time, remove the mixture from the sides, that
it may be smooth; and when perfectly frozen, it is ready to put in the
mould; the mould should then be placed in the ice again, where it should
remain until wanted for table.
. ingredients.—/ lb of suet-crust no. , / lb. of any kind
of jam.
mode.—make a nice light suet-crust by recipe no. , and roll it
out to the thickness of about / inch. spread the jam equally over it,
leaving a small margin of paste without any, where the pudding joins.
roll it up, fasten the ends securely, and tie it in a floured cloth; put
the pudding into boiling water, and boil for  hours. mincemeat or
marmalade may be substituted for the jam, and makes excellent puddings.
time.— hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—suitable for winter puddings, when fresh fruit is not
obtainable.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter,  lb. of loaf sugar,  eggs, the
rind of  lemons and the juice of .
mode.—put all the ingredients into a stewpan, carefully grating the
lemon-rind and straining the juice. keep stirring the mixture over the
fire until the sugar is dissolved, and it begins to thicken: when of the
consistency of honey, it is done; then put it into small jars, and keep
in a dry place. this mixture will remain good  or  months. when made
into cheesecakes, add a few pounded almonds, or candied peel, or grated
sweet biscuit; line some patty-pans with good puff-paste, rather more
than half fill them with the mixture, and bake for about / hour in a
good brisk oven.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  cheesecakes.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— large lemons,  large apples, / lb. of suet, 
lb. of currants, / lb. of sugar,  oz. of candied lemon-peel,  oz. of
citron, mixed spice to taste.
mode.—pare the lemons, squeeze them, and boil the peel until tender
enough to mash. add to the mashed lemon-peel the apples, which should be
pared, cored, and minced; the chopped suet, currants, sugar, sliced
peel, and spice. strain the lemon-juice to these ingredients, stir the
mixture well, and put it in a jar with a closely-fitting lid. stir
occasionally, and in a week or  days the mincemeat will be ready for
use.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  large or  small pies.
seasonable.—make this about the beginning of december.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of grated bread, / lb. of chopped suet,
/ lb. of moist sugar,  eggs,  large lemon.
[illustration: lemon dumplings.]
mode.—mix the bread, suet, and moist sugar well together, adding the
lemon-peel, which should be very finely minced. moisten with the eggs
and strained lemon-juice; stir well, and put the mixture into small
buttered cups. tie them down and boil for / hour. turn them out on a
dish, strew sifted sugar over them, and serve with wine sauce.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  dumplings.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—the yolks of  eggs,  oz. of pounded sugar, 
lemon, / lb. of butter, puff-crust.
mode.—beat the eggs to a froth; mix with them the sugar and warmed
butter; stir these ingredients well together, putting in the grated rind
and strained juice of the lemon-peel. line a shallow dish with
puff-paste; put in the mixture, and bake in a moderate oven for 
minutes; turn the pudding out of the dish, strew over it sifted sugar,
and serve.
time.— minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of bread crumbs,  pints of milk,  oz. of
butter,  lemon, / lb. of pounded sugar,  eggs,  tablespoonful of
brandy.
mode.—bring the milk to the boiling point, stir in the butter, and
pour these hot over the bread crumbs; add the sugar and very
finely-minced lemon-peel; beat the eggs, and stir these in with the
brandy to the other ingredients; put a paste round the dish, and bake
for / hour.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: lemon.]
 lemon.—the lemon is a variety of the citron. the juice of this
 fruit makes one of our most popular and refreshing
 beverages—lemonade, which is gently stimulating and cooling,
 and soon quenches the thirst. it may he freely partaken by
 bilious and sanguine temperaments; but persons with irritable
 stomachs should avoid it, on account of its acid qualities. the
 fresh rind of the lemon is a gentle tonic, and, when dried and
 grated, is used in flavouring a variety of culinary
 preparations. lemons appear in company with the orange in most
 orange-growing countries. they were only known to the romans at
 a very late period, and, at first, were used only to keep the
 moths from their garments: their acidity was unpleasant to them.
 in the time of pliny, the lemon was hardly known otherwise than
 as an excellent counter-poison.
(very rich.)
. ingredients.—the rind and juice of  large lemons, / lb. of
loaf sugar, / pint of cream, the yolks of  eggs,  oz. of almonds,
/ lb. of butter, melted.
mode.—mix the pounded sugar with the cream, and add the yolks of eggs
and the butter, which should be previously warmed. blanch and pound the
almonds, and put these, with the grated rind and strained juice of the
lemons, to the other ingredients. stir all well together; line a dish
with puff-paste, put in the mixture, and bake for  hour.
time.— hour.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of chopped suet, / lb. of bread crumbs, 
small lemons,  oz. of moist sugar, / lb. of flour,  eggs, milk.
mode.—mix the suet, bread crumbs, sugar, and flour well together,
adding the lemon-peel, which should be very finely minced, and the
juice, which should be strained. when these ingredients are well mixed,
moisten with the eggs and sufficient milk to make the pudding of the
consistency of thick batter; put it into a well-buttered mould, and boil
for -/ hours; turn it out, strew sifted sugar over, and serve with
wine sauce, or not, at pleasure.
time.—-/ hours.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
note.—this pudding may also be baked, and will be found very good. it
will take about  hours.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour,  oz. of lard or dripping, the
juice of  large lemon,  teaspoonful of flour, sugar.
mode.—make the above proportions of flour and lard into a smooth
paste, and roll it out to the thickness of about / inch. squeeze the
lemon-juice, strain it into a cup, stir the flour into it, and as much
moist sugar as will make it into a stiff and thick paste; spread this
mixture over the paste, roll it up, secure the ends, and tie the pudding
in a floured cloth. boil for  hours.
time.— hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
manchester pudding (to eat cold).
. ingredients.— oz. of grated bread, / pint of milk, a strip of
lemon-peel,  eggs,  oz. of butter, sugar to taste, puff-paste, jam, 
tablespoonfuls of brandy.
mode.—flavour the milk with lemon-peel, by infusing it in the milk
for / hour; then strain it on to the bread crumbs, and boil it for 
or  minutes; add the eggs, leaving out the whites of , the butter,
sugar, and brandy; stir all these ingredients well together; cover a
pie-dish with puff-paste, and at the bottom put a thick layer of any
kind of jam; pour the above mixture, cold, on the jam, and bake the
pudding for an hour. serve cold, with a little sifted sugar sprinkled
over.
time.— hour.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ oz. of macaroni,  pints of milk, the rind of
/ lemon,  eggs, sugar and grated nutmeg to taste,  tablespoonfuls of
brandy.
mode.—put the macaroni, with a pint of the milk, into a saucepan with
the lemon-peel, and let it simmer gently until the macaroni is tender;
then put it into a pie-dish without the peel; mix the other pint of milk
with the eggs; stir these well together, adding the sugar and brandy,
and pour the mixture over the macaroni. grate a little nutmeg over the
top, and bake in a moderate oven for / hour. to make this pudding look
nice, a paste should be laid round the edges of the dish, and, for
variety, a layer of preserve or marmalade may be placed on the macaroni:
in this case omit the brandy.
time.—/ hour to simmer the macaroni; / hour to bake the pudding.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
 macaroni is composed of wheaten flour, flavoured with other
 articles, and worked up with water into a paste, to which, by a
 peculiar process, a tubular or pipe form is given, in order that
 it may cook more readily in hot water. that of smaller diameter
 than macaroni (which is about the thickness of a goose-quill) is
 called vermicelli; and when smaller still, fidelini. the
 finest is made from the flour of the hard-grained black-sea
 wheat. macaroni is the principal article of food in many parts
 of italy, particularly naples, where the best is manufactured,
 and from whence, also, it is exported in considerable
 quantities. in this country, macaroni and vermicelli are
 frequently used in soups.
[illustration: macaroni.]
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of manna kroup,  bitter almonds,
 pint of milk, sugar to taste,  eggs.
mode.—blanch and pound the almonds in a mortar; mix them with the
manna kroup; pour over these a pint of boiling milk, and let them steep
for about / hour. when nearly cold, add sugar and the well-beaten
eggs; mix all well together; put the pudding into a buttered dish, and
bake for / hour.
time.—/ hour.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 manna kroup, semora, or semolina, are three names given to a
 flour made from ground wheat and rice. the preparation is white
 when it is made only of these materials; the yellow colour which
 it usually has, is produced by a portion of saffron and yolks of
 eggs. next to vermicelli, this preparation is the most useful
 for thickening either meat or vegetable soups. as a food, it is
 light, nutritious, wholesome, and easily digested. the best
 preparation is brought from arabia, and, next to that, from
 italy.
. ingredients.—the crumb of  rolls,  pint of milk, sugar to
taste,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of brandy,  oz. of chopped suet, 
tablespoonfuls of flour, / lb. of currants, / teaspoonful of grated
nutmeg,  tablespoonfuls of cream.
mode.—slice the roll very thin, and pour upon it a pint of boiling
milk; let it remain covered close for / hour, then beat it up with a
fork, and sweeten with moist sugar; stir in the chopped suet, flour,
currants, and nutmeg. mix these ingredients well together, moisten with
the eggs, brandy, and cream; beat the mixture for  or  minutes, put it
into a buttered dish or mould, and bake in a moderate oven for -/
hour. turn it out, strew sifted sugar over, and serve.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter, / lb. of powdered lump sugar, 
eggs, puff-paste, a layer of any kind of jam.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream, stir in the powdered sugar, whisk
the eggs, and add these to the other ingredients. when these are well
mixed, line a dish with puff-paste, spread over a layer of any kind of
jam that may be preferred, pour in the mixture, and bake the pudding for
rather more than / hour.
time.—rather more than / hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— breakfastcupful of vermicelli,  tablespoonfuls of
marmalade, / lb. of raisins, sugar to taste,  eggs, milk.
mode.—pour some boiling milk on the vermicelli, and let it remain
covered for  minutes; then mix with it the marmalade, stoned raisins,
sugar, and beaten eggs. stir all well together, put the mixture into a
buttered mould, boil for -/ hour, and serve with custard sauce.
time.—-/ hour. average cost. s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
marrow dumplings, to serve with roast meat, in soup, with salad, &c.
(german recipe.)
. ingredients.— oz. of beef marrow,  oz. of butter,  eggs, 
penny rolls,  teaspoonful of minced onion,  teaspoonful of minced
parsley, salt and grated nutmeg to taste.
mode.—beat the marrow and butter together to a cream; well whisk the
eggs, and add these to the other ingredients. when they are well
stirred, put in the rolls, which should previously be well soaked in
boiling milk, strained, and beaten up with a fork. add the remaining
ingredients, omitting the minced onion where the flavour is very much
disliked, and form the mixture into small round dumplings. drop these
into boiling broth, and let them simmer for about  minutes or /
hour. they may be served in soup, with roast meat, or with salad, as in
germany, where they are more frequently sent to table than in this
country. they are very good.
time.— minutes to / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  dumplings. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ pint of bread crumbs, -/ pint of milk,  oz.
of marrow,  eggs, / lb. of raisins or currants, or  oz. of each;
sugar and grated nutmeg to taste.
mode.—make the milk boiling, pour it hot on to the bread crumbs, and
let these remain covered for about / hour; shred the marrow, beat up
the eggs, and mix these with the bread crumbs; add the remaining
ingredients, beat the mixture well, and either put it into a buttered
mould and boil it for -/ hours, or put it into a pie-dish edged with
puff-paste, and bake for rather more than / hour. before sending it to
table, sift a little pounded sugar over, after being turned out of the
mould or basin.
time.—-/ hours to boil, / hour to bake. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of suet, / lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of
moist sugar, the rind and juice of  large lemon.
mode.—chop the suet finely, mix it with the bread crumbs and sugar,
and mince the lemon-rind and strain the juice; stir these into the other
ingredients, mix well, and put the mixture into small buttered cups, and
bake for rather more than / hour; turn them out on the dish, and serve
with lemon-sauce. the above ingredients may be made into small balls,
and boiled for about / hour; they should then be served with the same
sauce as when baked.
time.—rather more than / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient to fill  or  moderate-sized cups. seasonable at any
time.
. ingredients.— lbs. of raisins,  lbs. of currants, -/ lb. of
lean beef,  lbs. of beef suet,  lbs. of moist sugar,  oz. of citron,
 oz. of candied lemon-peel,  oz. of candied orange-peel,  small
nutmeg,  pottle of apples, the rind of  lemons, the juice of , /
pint of brandy.
mode.—stone and cut the raisins once or twice across, but do not
chop them; wash, dry, and pick the currants free from stalks and grit,
and mince the beef and suet, taking care that the latter is chopped very
fine; slice the citron and candied peel, grate the nutmeg, and pare,
core, and mince the apples; mince the lemon-peel, strain the juice, and
when all the ingredients are thus prepared, mix them well together,
adding the brandy when the other things are well blended; press the
whole into a jar, carefully exclude the air, and the mincemeat will be
ready for use in a fortnight.
average cost for this quantity, s.
seasonable.—make this about the beginning of december.
. ingredients.— large lemons,  large apples,  lb. of stoned
raisins,  lb. of currants,  lb. of suet,  lbs. of moist sugar,  oz.
of sliced candied citron,  oz. of sliced candied orange-peel, and the
same quantity of lemon-peel,  teacupful of brandy,  tablespoonfuls of
orange marmalade.
mode.—grate the rinds of the lemons; squeeze out the juice, strain
it, and boil the remainder of the lemons until tender enough to pulp or
chop very finely. then add to this pulp the apples, which should be
baked, and their skins and cores removed; put in the remaining
ingredients one by one, and, as they are added, mix everything very
thoroughly together. put the mincemeat into a stone jar with a
closely-fitting lid, and in a fortnight it will be ready for use.
seasonable.—this should be made the first or second week in december.
. ingredients.—good puff-paste no. , mincemeat no. .
[illustration: mince pies.]
mode.—make some good puff-paste by recipe no. ; roll it out to
the thickness of about / inch, and line some good-sized pattypans with
it; fill them with mincemeat, cover with the paste, and cut it off all
round close to the edge of the tin. put the pies into a brisk oven, to
draw the paste up, and bake for  minutes, or longer, should the pies
be very large; brush them over with the white of an egg, beaten with the
blade of a knife to a stiff froth; sprinkle over pounded sugar, and put
them into the oven for a minute or two, to dry the egg; dish the pies on
a white d'oyley, and serve hot. they may be merely sprinkled with
pounded sugar instead of being glazed, when that mode is preferred. to
re-warm them, put the pies on the pattypans, and let them remain in the
oven for  minutes or / hour, and they will be almost as good as if
freshly made.
time.— to  minutes;  minutes to re-warm them.
average cost, d. each.
sufficient—/ lb. of paste for  pies. seasonable at christmas
time.
. ingredients.—the remains of cold plum-pudding, brandy, custard
made with  eggs to every pint of milk.
mode.—cut the remains of a good cold plum-pudding into
finger-pieces, soak them in a little brandy, and lay them cross-barred
in a mould until full. make a custard with the above proportion of milk
and eggs, flavouring it with nutmeg or lemon-rind; fill up the mould
with it; tie it down with a cloth, and boil or steam it for an hour.
serve with a little of the custard poured over, to which has been added
a tablespoonful of brandy.
time.— hour.
average cost, exclusive of the pudding, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
nesselrode pudding. (a fashionable iced pudding—caręme's recipe.)
. ingredients.— chestnuts,  lb. of sugar, flavouring of vanilla,
 pint of cream, the yolks of  eggs,  glass of maraschino,  oz. of
candied citron,  oz. of currants,  oz. of stoned raisins, / pint of
whipped cream,  eggs.
mode.—blanch the chestnuts in boiling water, remove the husks, and
pound them in a mortar until perfectly smooth, adding a few spoonfuls of
syrup. then rub them through a fine sieve, and mix them in a basin with
a pint of syrup made from  lb. of sugar, clarified, and flavoured with
vanilla,  pint of cream, and the yolks of  eggs. set this mixture
over a slow fire, stirring it without ceasing, and just as it begins
to boil, take it off and pass it through a tammy. when it is cold, put
it into a freezing-pot, adding the maraschino, and make the mixture set;
then add the sliced citron, the currants, and stoned raisins (these two
latter should be soaked the day previously in maraschino and sugar
pounded with vanilla); the whole thus mingled, add a plateful of whipped
cream mixed with the whites of  eggs, beaten to a froth with a little
syrup. when the pudding is perfectly frozen, put it into a
pineapple-shaped mould; close the lid, place it again in the
freezing-pan, covered over with pounded ice and saltpetre, and let it
remain until required for table; then turn the pudding out, and serve.
time.—/ hour to freeze the mixture.
seasonable from october to february.
. ingredients.— oz. of stale sponge cake or bruised ratafias, 
oranges,  pint of milk,  eggs, / lb. of sugar.
mode.—bruise the sponge cake or ratafias into fine crumbs, and pour
upon them the milk, which should be boiling. rub the rinds of  of the
oranges on sugar, and add this, with the juice of the remainder, to the
other ingredients. beat up the eggs, stir them in, sweeten to taste, and
put the mixture into a pie-dish previously lined with puff-paste. bake
for rather more than / hour; turn it out of the dish, strew sifted
sugar over, and serve.
time.—rather more than  hour. average cost, s, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from november to may.
[illustration: orange.]
 orange (citrus aurantium).—the principal varieties are the
 sweet, or china orange, and the bitter, or seville orange; the
 maltese is also worthy of notice, from its red blood-like pulp.
 the orange is extensively cultivated in the south of europe, and
 in devonshire, on walls with a south aspect, it bears an
 abundance of fruit. so great is the increase in the demand for
 the orange, and so ample the supply, that it promises to rival
 the apple in its popularity. the orange-tree is considered young
 at the age of a hundred years. the pulp of the orange consists
 of a collection of oblong vesicles filled with a sugary and
 refreshing juice. the orange blossom is proverbially chosen for
 the bridal wreath, and, from the same flower, an essential oil
 is extracted hardly less esteemed than the celebrated ottar of
 roses. of all marmalades, that made from the seville orange is
 the best. the peel and juice of the orange are much used in
 culinary preparations. from oranges are made preserves,
 comfitures, jellies, glacés, sherbet, liqueurs, and syrups. the
 juice of the orange in a glass d'eau sucrée makes a refreshing
 and wholesome drink. from the clarified pulp of the orange the
 french make a delicious jelly, which they serve in small pots,
 and call cręme. the rasped peel of the orange is used in
 several sweet entremets, to which it communicates its perfume.
 the confectioner manufactures a variety of dainties from all
 parts of the orange. confections of orange-peel are excellent
 tonics and stomachics. persons with delicate stomachs should
 abstain from oranges at dessert, because their acidity is likely
 to derange the digestive organs.
small dishes of pastry for entremets, supper-dishes, &c.
fanchonnettes, or custard tartlets.
. ingredients.—for the custard,  eggs, / pint of milk,  oz. of
butter,  oz. of pounded sugar,  dessertspoonfuls of flour, flavouring
to taste; the whites of  eggs,  oz. of pounded sugar.
mode.—well beat the eggs; stir to them the milk, the butter, which
should be beaten to a cream, the sugar, and flour; mix these ingredients
well together, put them into a very clean saucepan, and bring them to
the simmering point, but do not allow them to boil. flavour with essence
of vanilla, bitter almonds, lemon, grated chocolate, or any flavouring
ingredient that may be preferred. line some round tartlet-pans with good
puff-paste; fill them with the custard, and bake in a moderate oven for
about  minutes; then take them out of the pans; let them cool, and in
the mean time whisk the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth; stir into
this the pounded sugar, and spread smoothly over the tartlets a little
of this mixture. put them in the oven again to set the icing, but be
particular that they do not scorch: when the icing looks crisp, they are
done. arrange them, piled high in the centre, on a white napkin, and
garnish the dish, and in between the tartlets, with strips of bright
jelly, or very firmly-made preserve.
time.— minutes to bake the tartlets;  minutes after being iced.
average cost, exclusive of the paste, s.
sufficient to fill  or  tartlets.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the icing may be omitted on the top of the tartlets, and a
spoonful of any kind of preserve put at the bottom of the custard
instead: this varies both the flavour and appearance of this dish.
. ingredients.—puff-paste no. ; to every / lb. of paste allow
 oz. of almonds, sifted sugar, the white of an egg.
mode.—roll the paste out to the thickness of / inch, and, with a
round fluted cutter, stamp out as many pieces as may be required. work
the paste up again, roll it out, and, with a smaller cutter, stamp out
some pieces the size of a shilling. brush the larger pieces over with
the white of an egg, and place one of the smaller pieces on each. blanch
and cut the almonds into strips lengthwise; press them slanting into the
paste closely round the rings; and when they are all completed, sift
over some pounded sugar, and bake for about / hour or  minutes.
garnish between the almonds with strips of apple jelly, and place in the
centre of the ring a small quantity of strawberry jam; pile them high on
the dish, and serve.
time.—/ hour or  minutes.
sufficient.— or  for a dish.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—puff-paste, the white of an egg, sifted sugar, jelly
or preserve.
mode.—make some good puff-paste by recipe no.  (trimmings answer
very well for little dishes of this sort); roll it out to the thickness
of / inch, and, with a round fluted paste-cutter, stamp out as many
round pieces as may be required; brush over the upper side with the
white of an egg; roll up the pieces, pressing the paste lightly together
where it joins; place the rolls on a baking-sheet, and bake for about
/ hour. a few minutes before they are done, brush them over with the
white of an egg; strew over sifted sugar, put them back in the oven; and
when the icing is firm and of a pale brown colour, they are done. place
a strip of jelly or preserve across each roll, dish them high on a
napkin, and serve cold.
time.—/ hour before being iced;  to  minutes after.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient.—/ lb. of puff-paste for  dishes.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—puff-paste, jam of any kind, the white of an egg,
sifted sugar.
mode.—roll the paste out thin; put half of it on a baking-sheet or
tin, and spread equally over it apricot, greengage, or any preserve that
may be preferred. lay over this preserve another thin paste; press the
edges together all round; and mark the paste in lines with a knife on
the surface, to show where to cut it when baked. bake from  minutes to
/ hour; and, a short time before being done, take the pastry out of
the oven, brush it over with the white of an egg, sift over pounded
sugar, and put it back in the oven to colour. when cold, cut it into
strips; pile these on a dish pyramidically, and serve. these strips, cut
about  inches long, piled in circular rows, and a plateful of flavoured
whipped cream poured in the middle, make a very pretty dish.
time.— minutes to  hour. average cost, with / lb. of paste,
s.
sufficient.—/ lb. of paste will make  dishes of sandwiches.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of sweet almonds, / lb. of sifted sugar,
the rind of / lemon, the white of  egg, puff-paste.
mode.—blanch the almonds, and chop them fine; rub the sugar on the
lemon-rind, and pound it in a mortar; mix this with the almonds and the
white of the egg. roll some puff-paste out; cut it in any shape that may
be preferred, such as diamonds, rings, ovals, &c., and spread the above
mixture over the paste. bake the bouchées in an oven, not too hot, and
serve cold.
time.—/ hour, or rather more. average cost, s.
sufficient for / lb. of puff-paste. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—puff-paste, the white of an egg, pounded sugar.
mode.—roll some good puff-paste out thin, and cut it into -/-inch
squares; brush each square over with the white of an egg, then fold down
the corners, so that they all meet in the middle of each piece of paste;
slightly press the two pieces together, brush them over with the egg,
sift over sugar, and bake in a nice quick oven for about / hour. when
they are done, make a little hole in the middle of the paste, and fill
it up with apricot jam, marmalade, or red-currant jelly. pile them high
in the centre of a dish, on a napkin, and garnish with the same preserve
the tartlets are filled with.
time.—/ hour or  minutes.
average cost, with / lb. of puff-paste, s.
sufficient for  dishes of pastry.
seasonable at any time.
note.—it should be borne in mind, that, for all dishes of small
pastry, such as the preceding, trimmings of puff-pasty, left from larger
tarts, answer as well as making the paste expressly.
puits d'amour, or puff-paste rings.
. ingredients.—puff-paste no. , the white of an egg, sifted
loaf sugar.
mode.—make some good puff-paste by recipe no. ; roll it out to
the thickness of about / inch, and, with a round fluted paste-cutter,
stamp out as many pieces as may be required; then work the paste up
again, and roll it out to the same thickness, and with a smaller cutter,
stamp out sufficient pieces to correspond with the larger ones. again
stamp out the centre of these smaller rings; brush over the others with
the white of an egg, place a small ring on the top of every large
circular piece of paste, egg over the tops, and bake from  to 
minutes. sift over sugar, put them back in the oven to colour them; then
fill the rings with preserve of any bright colour. dish them high on a
napkin, and serve. so many pretty dishes of pastry may be made by
stamping puff-paste out with fancy cutters, and filling the pieces, when
baked, with jelly or preserve, that our space will not allow us to give
a separate recipe for each of them; but, as they are all made from one
paste, and only the shape and garnishing varied, perhaps it is not
necessary, and by exercising a little ingenuity, variety may always be
obtained. half-moons, leaves, diamonds, stars, shamrocks, rings, etc.,
are the most appropriate shapes for fancy pastry.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, with / lb. of paste, s.
sufficient for  dishes of pastry.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs,  apples, / lb. of bread crumbs,  oz. of
sugar,  oz. of currants, salt and grated nutmeg to taste, the rind of
/ lemon, / wineglassful of brandy.
mode.—pare, core, and mince the apples into small pieces, and mix
them with the other dry ingredients; beat up the eggs, moisten the
mixture with these, and beat it well; stir in the brandy, and put the
pudding into a buttered mould; tie it down with a cloth, boil for -/
hour, and serve with sweet sauce.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of split peas,  oz. of butter,  eggs,
pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—put the peas to soak over-night, in rain-water, and float off
any that are wormeaten or discoloured. tie them loosely in a clean
cloth, leaving a little room for them to swell, and put them on to boil
in cold rain-water, allowing -/ hours after the water has simmered
up. when the peas are tender, take them up and drain; rub them through a
colander with a wooden spoon; add the butter, eggs, pepper, and salt;
beat all well together for a few minutes, until the ingredients are well
incorporated; then tie them tightly in a floured cloth; boil the pudding
for another hour, turn it on to the dish, and serve very hot. this
pudding should always be sent to table with boiled leg of pork, and is
an exceedingly nice accompaniment to boiled beef.
time.—-/ hours to boil the peas, tied loosely in the cloth;  hour
for the pudding.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to march.
. ingredients.— lbs. of flour,  lb. of currants,  lb. of
raisins,  lb. of suet,  eggs,  pint of milk, a few slices of candied
peel.
mode.—chop the suet finely; mix with it the flour, currants, stoned
raisins, and candied peel; moisten with the well-beaten eggs, and add
sufficient milk to make the pudding of the consistency of very thick
batter. put it into a buttered dish, and bake in a good oven from -/
to -/ hours; turn it out, strew sifted sugar over, and serve. for a
very plain pudding, use only half the quantity of fruit, omit the eggs,
and substitute milk or water for them. the above ingredients make a
large family pudding; for a small one, half the quantity would be found
ample; but it must be baked quite -/ hour.
time.—large pudding, -/ to -/ hours; half the size, -/ hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter.
[illustration: raisin-grape.]
 raisin grape.—all the kinds of raisins have much the same
 virtues; they are nutritive and balsamic, but they are very
 subject to fermentation with juices of any kind; and hence, when
 eaten immoderately, they often bring on colics. there are many
 varieties of grape used for raisins; the fruit of valencia is
 that mostly dried for culinary purposes, whilst most of the
 table kinds are grown in malaga, and called muscatels. the
 finest of all table raisins come from provence or italy; the
 most esteemed of all are those of roquevaire; they are very
 large and very sweet. this sort is rarely eaten by any but the
 most wealthy. the dried malaga, or muscatel raisins, which come
 to this country packed in small boxes, and nicely preserved in
 bunches, are variable in their quality, but mostly of a rich
 flavour, when new, juicy, and of a deep purple hue.
an excellent plum-pudding, made without eggs.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour,  oz. of raisins,  oz. of
currants, / lb. of chopped suet, / lb. of brown sugar, / lb. of
mashed carrot, / lb. of mashed potatoes,  tablespoonful of treacle, 
oz. of candied lemon-peel,  oz. of candied citron.
mode.—mix the flour, currants, suet, and sugar well together; have
ready the above proportions of mashed carrot and potato, which stir into
the other ingredients; add the treacle and lemon-peel; but put no liquid
in the mixture, or it will be spoiled. tie it loosely in a cloth, or, if
put in a basin, do not quite fill it, as the pudding should have room to
swell, and boil it for  hours. serve with brandy-sauce. this pudding is
better for being mixed over-night.
time.— hours.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of muscatel raisins, -/ lb. of
currants,  lb. of sultana raisins,  lbs. of the finest moist sugar, 
lbs. of bread crumbs,  eggs,  lbs. of finely-chopped suet,  oz. of
mixed candied peel, the rind of  lemons,  oz. of ground nutmeg,  oz.
of ground cinnamon, / oz. of pounded bitter almonds, / pint of
brandy.
mode.—stone and cut up the raisins, but do not chop them; wash and
dry the currants, and cut the candied peel into thin slices. mix all the
dry ingredients well together, and moisten with the eggs, which should
be well beaten and strained, to the pudding; stir in the brandy, and,
when all is thoroughly mixed, well butter and flour a stout new
pudding-cloth; put in the pudding, tie it down very tightly and closely,
boil from  to  hours, and serve with brandy-sauce. a few sweet
almonds, blanched and cut in strips, and stuck on the pudding, ornament
it prettily. this quantity may be divided and boiled in buttered moulds.
for small families this is the most desirable way, as the above will be
found to make a pudding of rather large dimensions.
time.— to  hours. average cost, s. d.
seasonable in winter. sufficient for  or  persons.
note.—the muscatel raisins can be purchased at a cheap rate loose
(not in bunches): they are then scarcely higher in price than the
ordinary raisins, and impart a much richer flavour to the pudding.
[illustration: sultana grape.]
 sultana grape.—we have elsewhere stated that the small black
 grape grown in corinth and the ionian isles is, when dried, the
 common currant of the grocers' shops; the white or yellow grape,
 grown in the same places, is somewhat larger than the black
 variety, and is that which produces the sultana raisin. it has
 been called sultana from its delicate qualities and unique
 growth: the finest are those of smyrna. they have not sufficient
 flavour and sugary properties to serve alone for puddings and
 cakes, but they are peculiarly valuable for mixing, that is to
 say, for introducing in company with the richer sorts of
 valencias or muscatels. in white puddings, or cakes, too, where
 the whiteness must be preserved, the sultana raisin should be
 used. but the greatest value of this fruit in the cuisine is
 that of its saving labour; for it has no stones. half muscatels
 and half sultanas are an admirable mixture for general purposes.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour,  lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of
stoned raisins, / lb. of currants, / lb. of suet,  or  eggs, milk,
 oz. of candied peel,  teaspoonful of powdered allspice, /
saltspoonful of salt.
mode.—let the suet be finely chopped, the raisins stoned, and the
currants well washed, picked, and dried. mix these with the other dry
ingredients, and stir all well together; beat and strain the eggs to the
pudding, stir these in, and add just sufficient milk to make it mix
properly. tie it up in a well-floured cloth, put it into boiling water,
and boil for at least  hours. serve with a sprig of holly placed in the
middle of the pudding, and a little pounded sugar sprinkled over it.
time.— hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  children. seasonable at christmas.
 raisins.—raisins are grapes, prepared by suffering them to
 remain on the vine until they are perfectly ripe, and then
 drying them in the sun or by the heat of an oven. the sun-dried
 grapes are sweet, the oven-dried of an acid flavour. the common
 way of drying grapes for raisins is to tie two or three bunches
 of them together, whilst yet on the vine, and dip them into a
 hot lixivium of wood-ashes mixed with a little of the oil of
 olives: this disposes them to shrink and wrinkle, after which
 they are left on the vine three or four days, separated, on
 sticks in a horizontal situation, and then dried in the sun at
 leisure, after being cut from the tree.
(very good.)
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of raisins, / lb. of currants, / lb.
of mixed peel, / lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of suet,  eggs, 
wineglassful of brandy.
[illustration: christmas plum-pudding in mould.]
mode.—stone and cut the raisins in halves, but do not chop them;
wash, pick, and dry the currants, and mince the suet finely; cut the
candied peel into thin slices, and grate down the bread into fine
crumbs. when all these dry ingredients are prepared, mix them well
together; then moisten the mixture with the eggs, which should be well
beaten, and the brandy; stir well, that everything may be very
thoroughly blended, and press the pudding into a buttered mould; tie
it down tightly with a floured cloth, and boil for  or  hours. it may
be boiled in a cloth without a mould, and will require the same time
allowed for cooking. as christmas puddings are usually made a few days
before they are required for table, when the pudding is taken out of the
pot, hang it up immediately, and put a plate or saucer underneath to
catch the water that may drain from it. the day it is to be eaten,
plunge it into boiling water, and keep it boiling for at least  hours;
then turn it out of the mould, and serve with brandy-sauce. on
christmas-day a sprig of holly is usually placed in the middle of the
pudding, and about a wineglassful of brandy poured round it, which, at
the moment of serving, is lighted, and the pudding thus brought to table
encircled in flame.
time.— or  hours the first time of boiling;  hours the day it is
to be served.
average cost, s.
sufficient for a quart mould for  or  persons.
seasonable on the th of december, and on various festive occasions
till march.
note.—five or six of these puddings should be made at one time, as
they will keep good for many weeks, and in cases where unexpected guests
arrive, will be found an acceptable, and, as it only requires warming
through, a quickly-prepared dish. moulds of every shape and size are
manufactured for these puddings, and may be purchased of messrs. r. & j.
slack, , strand.
 brandy is the alcoholic or spirituous portion of wine, separated
 from the aqueous part, the colouring matter, &c., by
 distillation. the word is of german origin, and in its german
 form, brantuein, signifies burnt wine, or wine that has
 undergone the action of fire; brandies, so called, however, have
 been made from potatoes, carrots, beetroot, pears, and other
 vegetable substances; but they are all inferior to true brandy.
 brandy is prepared in most wine countries, but that of france is
 the most esteemed. it is procured not only by distilling the
 wine itself, but also by fermenting and distilling the marc,
 or residue of the pressings of the grape. it is procured
 indifferently from red or white wine, and different wines yield
 very different proportions of it, the strongest, of course,
 giving the largest quantity. brandy obtained from marc has a
 more acrid taste than that from wine. the celebrated brandy of
 cognac, a town in the department of charente, and that brought
 from andraye, seem to owe their excellence from being made from
 white wine. like other spirit, brandy is colourless when
 recently distilled; by mere keeping, however, owing, probably,
 to some change in the soluble matter contained in it, it
 acquires a slight colour, which is much increased by keeping in
 casks, and is made of the required intensity by the addition of
 burnt sugar or other colouring matter. what is called british
 brandy is not, in fact, brandy, which is the name, as we have
 said, of a spirit distilled from wine; but is a spirit made
 chiefly from malt spirit, with the addition of mineral acids and
 various flavouring ingredients, the exact composition being kept
 secret. it is distilled somewhat extensively in this country;
 real brandy scarcely at all. the brandies imported into england
 are chiefly from bordeaux, rochelle, and cognac.
. ingredients.— lb. of suet,  lb. of currants,  lb. of stoned
raisins,  eggs, / grated nutmeg,  oz. of sliced candied peel, 
teaspoonful of ground ginger, / lb. of bread crumbs, / lb. of flour,
/ pint of milk.
[illustration: baked pudding or cake-mould.]
mode.—chop the suet finely; mix with it the dry ingredients; stir
these well together, and add the well-beaten eggs and milk to moisten
with. beat up the mixture well, and should the above proportion of milk
not be found sufficient to make it of the proper consistency, a little
more should be added. press the pudding into a mould, tie it in a
floured cloth, and boil for  hours, or rather longer, and serve with
brandy-sauce.
time.— hours, or longer. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable in winter.
note.—the above pudding may be baked instead of boiled; it should be
put into a buttered mould or tin, and baked for about  hours; a smaller
one would take about -/ hour.
 citron.—the fruit of the citron-tree (citrus medica) is
 acidulous, antiseptic, and antiscorbutic: it excites the
 appetite, and stops vomiting, and, like lemon-juice, has been
 greatly extolled in chronic rheumatism, gout, and scurvy. mixed
 with cordials, it is used as an antidote to the machineel
 poison. the candied peel is prepared in the same manner as
 orange or lemon-peel; that is to say, the peel is boiled in
 water until quite soft, and then suspended in concentrated syrup
 (in the cold), after which it is either dried in a current of
 warm air, or in a stove, at a heat not exceeding °
 fahrenheit. the syrup must be kept fully saturated with sugar by
 reboiling it once or twice during the process. it may be dusted
 with powdered lump sugar, if necessary. the citron is supposed
 to be the median, assyrian, or persian apple of the greeks. it
 is described by risso as having a majestic appearance, its
 shining leaves and rosy flowers being succeeded by fruit whose
 beauty and size astonish the observer, whilst their odour
 gratifies his senses. in china there is an enormous variety, but
 the citron is cultivated in all orange-growing countries.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of suet crust no. -/ pint of orleans or
any other kind of plum, / lb. of moist sugar.
mode.—line a pudding-basin with suet crust rolled out to the
thickness of about / inch; fill the basin with the fruit, put in the
sugar, and cover with crust. fold the edges over, and pinch them
together, to prevent the juice escaping. tie over a floured cloth, put
the pudding into boiling water, and boil from  to -/ hours. turn it
out of the basin, and serve quickly.
time.— to -/ hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable, with various kinds of plums, from the beginning of august
to the beginning of october.
[illustration: plum.]
 plums.—almost all the varieties of the cultivated plum are
 agreeable and refreshing: it is not a nourishing fruit, and if
 indulged in to excess, when unripe, is almost certain to cause
 diarrhoea and cholera. weak and delicate persons had better
 abstain from plums altogether. the modes of preparing plums are
 as numerous as the varieties of the fruit. the objections raised
 against raw plums do not apply to the cooked fruit, which even
 the invalid may eat in moderation.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of good short crust no. , -/ pint of
plums, / lb. of moist sugar.
[illustration: plum tart.]
mode.—line the edges of a deep tart-dish with crust made by recipe
no. ; fill the dish with plums, and place a small cup or jar, upside
down, in the midst of them. put in the sugar, cover the pie with crust,
ornament the edges, and bake in a good oven from / to / hour. when
puff-crust is preferred to short crust, use that made by recipe no.
, and glaze the top by brushing it over with the white of an egg
beaten to a stiff froth with a knife; sprinkle over a little sifted
sugar, and put the pie in the oven to set the glaze.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable, with various kinds of plums, from the beginning of august
to the beginning of october.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of rump-steak or mutton cutlets, pepper
and salt to taste, / pint of weak broth or gravy,  oz. of butter,
mashed potatoes.
[illustration: potato-pasty pan.]
mode.—place the meat, cut in small pieces, at the bottom of the pan;
season it with pepper and salt, and add the gravy and butter broken,
into small pieces. put on the perforated plate, with its valve-pipe
screwed on, and fill up the whole space to the top of the tube with
nicely-mashed potatoes mixed with a little milk, and finish the surface
of them in any ornamental manner. if carefully baked, the potatoes will
be covered with a delicate brown crust, retaining all the savoury steam
rising from the meat. send it to table as it comes from the oven, with a
napkin folded round it.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of mashed potatoes,  oz. of butter,  eggs,
/ pint of milk,  tablespoonfuls of sherry, / saltspoonful of salt,
the juice and rind of  small lemon,  oz. of sugar.
mode.—boil sufficient potatoes to make / lb. when mashed; add to
these the butter, eggs, milk, sherry, lemon-juice, and sugar; mince the
lemon-peel very finely, and beat all the ingredients well together. put
the pudding into a buttered pie-dish, and bake for rather more than /
hour. to enrich it, add a few pounded almonds, and increase the quantity
of eggs and butter.
time.—/ hour, or rather longer. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. to glaze pastry, which is the usual method adopted for meat or
raised pies, break an egg, separate the yolk from the white, and beat
the former for a short time. then, when the pastry is nearly baked, take
it out of the oven, brush it over with this beaten yolk of egg, and put
it back in the oven to set the glaze.
. to ice pastry, which is the usual method adopted for fruit tarts
and sweet dishes of pastry, put the white of an egg on a plate, and with
the blade of a knife beat it to a stiff froth. when the pastry is nearly
baked, brush it over with this, and sift over some pounded sugar; put it
back into the oven to set the glaze, and, in a few minutes, it will be
done. great care should be taken that the paste does not catch or burn
in the oven, which it is very liable to do after the icing is laid on.
sufficient—allow  egg and -/ oz. of sugar to glaze  tarts.
[illustration: sugar canes.]
 sugar has been happily called "the honey of reeds." the
 sugar-cane appears to be originally a native of the east indies.
 the chinese have cultivated it for , years. the egyptians,
 phoenicians, and jews knew nothing about it. the greek
 physicians are the first who speak of it. it was not till the
 year  that a venetian discovered the method of purifying
 brown sugar and making loaf sugar. he gained an immense fortune
 by this discovery. our supplies are now obtained from barbadoes,
 jamaica, mauritius, ceylon, the east and west indies generally,
 and the united states; but the largest supplies come from cuba.
 sugar is divided into the following classes:—refined sugar,
 white clayed, brown clayed, brown raw, and molasses. the
 sugarcane grows to the height of six, twelve, or even sometimes
 twenty feet. it is propagated from cuttings, requires much
 hoeing and weeding, giving employment to thousands upon
 thousands of slaves in the slave countries, and attains maturity
 in twelve or thirteen months. when ripe, it is cut down close to
 the stole, the stems are divided into lengths of about three
 feet, which are made up into bundles, and carried to the mill,
 to be crushed between rollers. in the process of crushing, the
 juice runs down into a reservoir, from which, after a while, it
 is drawn through a siphon; that is to say, the clear fluid is
 taken from the scum. this fluid undergoes several processes of
 drying and refining; the methods varying in different
 manufactories. there are some large establishments engaged in
 sugar-refining in the neighbourhoods of blackwall and bethnal
 green, london. the process is mostly in the hands of german
 workmen. sugar is adulterated with fine sand and sawdust. pure
 sugar is highly nutritious, adding to the fatty tissue of the
 body; but it is not easy of digestion.
(plain and economical.)
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of stoned raisins, / lb. of
suet, a pinch of salt,  oz. of sugar, a little grated nutmeg, milk.
mode.—chop the suet finely; stone the raisins and cut them in halves;
mix these with the suet, add the salt, sugar, and grated nutmeg, and
moisten the whole with sufficient milk to make it of the consistency of
thick batter. put the pudding into a buttered pie-dish, and bake for
-/ hour, or rather longer. turn it out of the dish, strew sifted
sugar over, and serve. this is a very plain recipe, and suitable where
there is a family of children. it, of course, can be much improved by
the addition of candied peel, currants, and rather a larger proportion
of suet: a few eggs would also make the pudding richer.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable in winter.
 introduction of sugar.—sugar was first known as a drug, and
 used by the apothecaries, and with them was a most important
 article. at its first appearance, some said it was heating;
 others, that it injured the chest; others, that it disposed
 persons to apoplexy; the truth, however, soon conquered these
 fancies, and the use of sugar has increased every day, and there
 is no household in the civilized world which can do without it.
(plain and economical.)
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of stoned raisins, / lb.
of chopped suet, / saltspoonful of salt, milk.
mode.—after having stoned the raisins and chopped the suet finely,
mix them with the flour, add the salt, and when these dry ingredients
are thoroughly mixed, moisten the pudding with sufficient milk to make
it into rather a stiff paste. tie it up in a floured cloth, put it into
boiling water, and boil for  hours: serve with sifted sugar. this
pudding may, also, be made in a long shape, the same as a rolled
jam-pudding, and will then not require so long boiling;—-/ hours
would then be quite sufficient.
time.—made round,  hours; in a long shape, -/ hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable in winter.
. ingredients.— or  sticks of fine rhubarb, / lb. of moist
sugar, / lb. of suet-crust no. .
mode.—make a suet-crust with / lb. of flour, by recipe no. ,
and line a buttered basin with it. wash and wipe the rhubarb, and, if
old, string it—that is to say, pare off the outside skin. cut it into
inch lengths, fill the basin with it, put in the sugar, and cover with
crust. pinch the edges of the pudding together, tie over it a floured
cloth, put it into boiling water, and boil from  to -/ hours. turn
it out of the basin, and serve with a jug of cream and sifted sugar.
time.— to -/ hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable in spring.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of puff-paste no. , about  sticks of
large rhubarb, / lb. of moist sugar.
mode.—make a puff-crust by recipe no. ; line the edges of a deep
pie-dish with it, and wash, wipe, and cut the rhubarb into pieces about
 inch long. should it be old and tough, string it, that is to say, pare
off the outside skin. pile the fruit high in the dish, as it shrinks
very much in the cooking; put in the sugar, cover with crust, ornament
the edges, and bake the tart in a well-heated oven from / to / hour.
if wanted very nice, brush it over with the white of an egg beaten to a
stiff froth, then sprinkle on it some sifted sugar, and put it in the
oven just to set the glaze: this should be done when the tart is nearly
baked. a small quantity of lemon-juice, and a little of the peel minced,
are by many persons considered an improvement to the flavour of rhubarb
tart.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in spring.
[illustration: rhubarb.]
 rhubarb.—this is one of the most useful of all garden
 productions that are put into pies and puddings. it was
 comparatively little known till within the last twenty or thirty
 years, but it is now cultivated in almost every british garden.
 the part used is the footstalks of the leaves, which, peeled and
 cut into small pieces, are put into tarts, either mixed with
 apples or alone. when quite young, they are much better not
 peeled. rhubarb comes in season when apples are going out. the
 common rhubarb is a native of asia; the scarlet variety has the
 finest flavour. turkey rhubarb, the well-known medicinal drug,
 is the root of a very elegant plant (rheum palmatum), coming
 to greatest perfection in tartary. for culinary purposes, all
 kinds of rhubarb are the better for being blanched.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow / lb. of butter, /
pint of water, the yolks of  eggs, / teaspoonful of salt (these are
for the crust);  large fowl or pheasant, a few slices of veal cutlet, a
few slices of dressed ham, forcemeat, seasoning of nutmeg, allspice,
pepper and salt, gravy.
[illustration: raised pie.]
mode.—make a stiff short crust with the above proportion of butter,
flour, water, and eggs, and work it up very smoothly; butter a
raised-pie mould, as shown in no. , and line it with the paste.
previously to making the crust, bone the fowl, or whatever bird is
intended to be used, lay it, breast downwards, upon a cloth, and season
the inside well with pounded mace, allspice, pepper, and salt; then
spread over it a layer of forcemeat, then a layer of seasoned veal, and
then one of ham, and then another layer of forcemeat, and roll the fowl
over, making the skin meet at the back. line the pie with forcemeat, put
in the fowl, and fill up the cavities with slices of seasoned veal and
ham and forcemeat; wet the edges of the pie, put on the cover, pinch the
edges together with the paste-pincers, and decorate it with leaves;
brush it over with beaten yolk of egg, and bake in a moderate oven for 
hours. in the mean time, make a good strong gravy from the bones, pour
it through a funnel into the hole at the top; cover this hole with a
small leaf, and the pie, when cold, will be ready for use. let it be
remembered that the gravy must be considerably reduced before it is
poured into the pie, as, when cold, it should form a firm jelly, and not
be the least degree in a liquid state. this recipe is suitable for all
kinds of poultry or game, using one or more birds, according to the size
of the pie intended to be made; but the birds must always be boned.
truffles, mushrooms, &c., added to this pie, make it much nicer; and, to
enrich it, lard the fleshy parts of the poultry or game with thin strips
of bacon. this method of forming raised pies in a mould is generally
called a timbale, and has the advantage of being more easily made than
one where the paste is raised by the hands; the crust, besides, being
eatable. (see coloured plate n .) time.—large pie,  hours.
average cost, s. d.
seasonable, with poultry, all the year; with game, from september to
march.
. ingredients.— or  lbs. of veal cutlets, a few slices of bacon
or ham, seasoning of pepper, salt, nutmeg, and allspice, forcemeat no.
,  lbs. of hot-water paste no. , / pint of good strong gravy.
mode.—to raise the crust for a pie with the hands is a very difficult
task, and can only be accomplished by skilled and experienced cooks. the
process should be seen to be satisfactorily learnt, and plenty of
practice given to the making of raised pies, as by that means only will
success be insured. make a hot-water paste by recipe no. , and from
the mass raise the pie with the hands; if this cannot be accomplished,
cut out pieces for the top and bottom, and a long piece for the sides;
fasten the bottom and side-piece together by means of egg, and pinch the
edges well together; then line the pie with forcemeat made by recipe no.
, put in a layer of veal, and a plentiful seasoning of salt, pepper,
nutmeg, and allspice, as, let it be remembered, these pies taste very
insipid unless highly seasoned. over the seasoning place a layer of
sliced bacon or cooked ham, and then a layer of forcemeat, veal
seasoning, and bacon, and so on until the meat rises to about an inch
above the paste; taking care to finish with a layer of forcemeat, to
fill all the cavities of the pie, and to lay in the meat firmly and
compactly. brush the top edge of the pie with beaten egg, put on the
cover, press the edges, and pinch them round with paste-pincers. make a
hole in the middle of the lid, and ornament the pie with leaves, which
should be stuck on with the white of an egg; then brush it all over with
the beaten yolk of an egg, and bake the pie in an oven with a soaking
heat from  to  hours. to ascertain when it is done, run a
sharp-pointed knife or skewer through the hole at the top into the
middle of the pie, and if the meat feels tender, it is sufficiently
baked. have ready about / pint of very strong gravy, pour it through a
funnel into the hole at the top, stop up the hole with a small leaf of
baked paste, and put the pie away until wanted for use. should it
acquire too much colour in the baking, cover it with white paper, as the
crust should not in the least degree be burnt. mushrooms, truffles, and
many other ingredients, may be added to enrich the flavour of these
pies, and the very fleshy parts of the meat may be larded. these pies
are more frequently served cold than hot, and form excellent dishes for
cold suppers or breakfasts. the cover of the pie is sometimes carefully
removed, leaving the perfect edges, and the top decorated with square
pieces of very bright aspic jelly: this has an exceedingly pretty
effect.
time.—about  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for a very large pie. seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.— small teacupful of rice,  eggs,  pint of milk, 
oz. of fresh butter,  oz. of beef marrow, / lb. of currants, 
tablespoonfuls of brandy, nutmeg, / lb. of sugar, the rind of /
lemon.
mode.—put the lemon-rind and milk into a stewpan, and let it infuse
till the milk is well flavoured with the lemon; in the mean time, boil
the rice until tender in water, with a very small quantity of salt, and,
when done, let it be thoroughly drained. beat the eggs, stir to them the
milk, which should be strained, the butter, marrow, currants, and
remaining ingredients; add the rice, and mix all well together. line the
edges of the dish with puff-paste, put in the pudding, and bake for
about / hour in a slow oven. slices of candied-peel may be added at
pleasure, or sultana raisins may be substituted for the currants.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—suitable for a winter pudding, when fresh fruits are not
obtainable.
 rice, with proper management in cooking it, forms a very
 valuable and cheap addition to our farinaceous food, and, in
 years of scarcity, has been found eminently useful in lessening
 the consumption of flour. when boiled, it should be so managed
 that the grains, though soft, should be as little broken and as
 dry as possible. the water in which it is dressed should only
 simmer, and not boil hard. very little water should be used, as
 the grains absorb a great deal, and, consequently, swell much;
 and if they take up too much at first, it is difficult to get
 rid of it. baking it in puddings is the best mode of preparing
 it.
(plain and economical; a nice pudding for children.)
. ingredients.— teacupful of rice,  tablespoonfuls of moist
sugar,  quart of milk, / oz. of butter or  small tablespoonfuls of
chopped suet, / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg.
mode.—wash the rice, put it into a pie-dish with the sugar, pour in
the milk, and stir these ingredients well together; then add the butter
cut up into very small pieces, or, instead of this, the above proportion
of finely-minced suet; grate a little nutmeg over the top, and bake the
pudding, in a moderate oven, from -/ to  hours. as the rice is not
previously cooked, care must be taken that the pudding be very slowly
baked, to give plenty of time for the rice to swell, and for it to be
very thoroughly done.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  children. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice.
mode.—wash the rice, tie it in a pudding-cloth, allowing room for the
rice to swell, and put it into a saucepan of cold water; boil it gently
for  hours, and if, after a time, the cloth seems tied too loosely,
take the rice up and tighten the cloth. serve with sweet melted butter,
or cold butter and sugar, or stewed fruit, jam, or marmalade; any of
which accompaniments are suitable for plain boiled rice.
time.— hours after the water boils. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice, -/ pint of new milk,  oz. of
butter,  eggs, / saltspoonful of salt,  large tablespoonfuls of
moist sugar, flavouring to taste.
mode.—stew the rice very gently in the above proportion of new milk,
and, when it is tender, pour it into a basin; stir in the butter, and
let it stand to cool; then beat the eggs, add these to the rice with the
sugar, salt, and any flavouring that may be approved, such as nutmeg,
powdered cinnamon, grated lemon-peel, essence of bitter almonds, or
vanilla. when all is well stirred, put the pudding into a buttered
basin, tie it down with a cloth, plunge it into boiling water, and boil
for -/ hour.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 varieties of rice.—of the varieties of rice brought to our
 market, that from bengal is chiefly of the species denominated
 cargo rice, and is of a coarse reddish-brown cast, but
 peculiarly sweet and large-grained; it does not readily separate
 from the husk, but it is preferred by the natives to all the
 others. patua rice is more esteemed in europe, and is of very
 superior qualify; it is small-grained, rather long and wiry, and
 is remarkably white. the carolina rice is considered as the
 best, and is likewise the dearest in london.
(with dried or fresh fruit; a nice dish for the nursery.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice,  pint of any kind of fresh fruit
that may be preferred, or / lb. of raisins or currants.
mode.—wash the rice, tie it in a cloth, allowing room for it to
swell, and put it into a saucepan of cold water; let it boil for an
hour, then take it up, untie the cloth, stir in the fruit, and tie it up
again tolerably tight, and put it into the water for the remainder of
the time. boil for another hour, or rather longer, and serve with sweet
sauce, if made with dried fruit, and with plain sifted sugar and a
little cream or milk, if made with fresh fruit.
time.— hour to boil the rice without the fruit;  hour, or longer,
afterwards.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  children. seasonable at any time.
note.—this pudding is very good made with apples: they should be pared
cored, and cut into thin slices.
boiled rice for curries, &c.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice, water, salt.
mode.—pick, wash, and soak the rice in plenty of cold water; then
have ready a saucepan of boiling water, drop the rice into it, and keep
it boiling quickly, with the lid uncovered, until it is tender, but not
soft. take it up, drain it, and put it on a dish before the fire to dry:
do not handle it much with a spoon, but shake it about a little with two
forks, that it may all be equally dried, and strew over a little salt.
it is now ready to serve, and may be heaped lightly on a dish by itself,
or be laid round the dish as a border, with a curry or fricassee in the
centre. some cooks smooth the rice with the back of a spoon, and then
brush it over with the yolk of an egg, and set it in the oven to colour;
but the rice well boiled, white, dry, and with every grain distinct, is
by far the more preferable mode of dressing it. during the process of
boiling, the rice should be attentively watched, that it be not
overdone, as, if this is the case, it will have a mashed and soft
appearance.
time.— to  minutes, according to the quality of the rice.
average cost, d.
sufficient for a large dish of curry.
seasonable at any time.
 rice, in the native rough state, with the husk on, is called
 paddy, both in india and america, and it will keep better, and
 for a much longer time, in this state, than after the husk has
 been removed; besides which, prepared rice is apt to become
 dirty from rubbing about in the voyage on board ship, and in the
 warehouses. it is sometimes brought to england in the shape of
 paddy, and the husk detached here. paddy pays less duty than
 shelled rice.
to boil rice for curries, &c.
(soyer's recipe.)
. ingredients.— lb. of the best carolina rice,  quarts of water,
-/ oz. of butter, a little salt.
mode.—wash the rice well in two waters; make  quarts of water
boiling, and throw the rice into it; boil it until three-parts done,
then drain it on a sieve. butter the bottom and sides of a stewpan, put
in the rice, place the lid on tightly, and set it by the side of the
fire until the rice is perfectly tender, occasionally shaking the pan to
prevent its sticking. prepared thus, every grain should be separate and
white. either dish it separately, or place it round the curry as a
border.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  moderate-sized curries.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice, -/ pint of milk,  oz. of
butter, sugar to taste, grated nutmeg or pounded cinnamon.
mode.—wash and pick the rice, drain and put it into a saucepan with
the milk; let it swell gradually, and, when tender, pour off the milk;
stir in the butter, sugar, and nutmeg or cinnamon, and, when the butter
is thoroughly melted, and the whole is quite hot, serve. after the milk
is poured off, be particular that the rice does not burn: to prevent
this, do not cease stirring it.
time.—about / hour to swell the rice.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
rice was held in great esteem by the ancients: they considered it as a
very beneficial food for the chest; therefore it was recommended in
cases of consumption, and to persons subject to spitting of blood.
or rice border, for ragouts, fricassees, &c. (an entree).
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of rice,  pints of weak stock or broth, 
slices of fat ham,  teaspoonful of salt.
[illustration: casserole of rice.]
mode.—a casserole of rice, when made in a mould, is not such a
difficult operation as when it is moulded by the hand. it is an elegant
and inexpensive entrée, as the remains of cold fish, flesh, or fowl may
be served as ragoűts, fricassees, &c., inclosed in the casserole. it
requires great nicety in its preparation, the principal thing to attend
to being the boiling of the rice, as, if this is not sufficiently
cooked, the casserole, when moulded, will have a rough appearance, which
would entirely spoil it. after having washed the rice in two or three
waters, drain it well, and put it into a stewpan with the stock, ham,
and salt; cover the pan closely, and let the rice gradually swell over a
slow fire, occasionally stirring, to prevent its sticking. when it is
quite soft, strain it, pick out the pieces of ham, and, with the back of
a large wooden spoon, mash the rice to a perfectly smooth paste. then
well grease a mould (moulds are made purposely for rice borders), and
turn it upside down for a minute or two, to drain away the fat, should
there be too much; put some rice all round the bottom and sides of it;
place a piece of soft bread in the middle, and cover it with rice; press
it in equally with the spoon, and let it cool. then dip the mould into
hot water, turn the casserole carefully on to a dish, mark where the lid
is to be formed on the top, by making an incision with the point of a
knife about an inch from the edge all round, and put it into a very
hot oven. brush it over with a little clarified butter, and bake about
/ hour, or rather longer; then carefully remove the lid, which will be
formed by the incision having been made all round, and remove the bread,
in small pieces, with the point of a penknife, being careful not to
injure the casserole. fill the centre with the ragoűt or fricassee,
which should be made thick; put on the cover, glaze it, place it in the
oven to set the glaze, and serve as hot as possible. the casserole
should not be emptied too much, as it is liable to crack from the weight
of whatever is put in; and in baking it, let the oven be very hot, or
the casserole will probably break.
time.—about / hour to swell the rice.
sufficient for  moderate-sized casseroles.
seasonable at any time.
sweet casserole of rice (an entremets).
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of rice,  pints of milk, sugar to taste,
flavouring of bitter almonds,  oz. of butter, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—this is made in precisely the same manner as a savoury
casserole, only substituting the milk and sugar for the stock and salt.
put the milk into a stewpan, with sufficient essence of bitter almonds
to flavour it well; then add the rice, which should be washed, picked,
and drained, and let it swell gradually in the milk over a slow fire.
when it is tender, stir in the sugar, butter, and yolks of eggs; butter
a mould, press in the rice, and proceed in exactly the same manner as in
recipe no. . when the casserole is ready, fill it with a compôte of
any fruit that may be preferred, or with melted apricot-jam, and serve.
time.—from / to  hour to swell the rice, / to / hour to bake
the casserole.
average cost, exclusive of the compôte or jam, s. d.
sufficient for  casseroles.
seasonable at any time.
french rice pudding, or gateau de riz.
. ingredients.—to every / lb. of rice allow  quart of milk, the
rind of  lemon, / teaspoonful of salt, sugar to taste,  oz. of
butter,  eggs, bread crumbs.
mode.—put the milk into a stewpan with the lemon-rind, and let it
infuse for / hour, or until the former is well flavoured; then take
out the peel; have ready the rice washed, picked, and drained; put it
into the milk, and let it gradually swell over a very slow fire. stir in
the butter, salt, and sugar, and when properly sweetened, add the yolks
of the eggs, and then the whites, both of which should be well beaten,
and added separately to the rice. butter a mould, strew in some fine
bread crumbs, and let them be spread equally over it; then carefully
pour in the rice, and bake the pudding in a slow oven for  hour. turn
it out of the mould, and garnish the dish with preserved cherries, or
any bright-coloured jelly or jam. this pudding would be exceedingly
nice, flavoured with essence of vanilla.
time.—/ to  hour for the rice to swell; to be baked  hour in a
slow oven.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pints of milk,  tablespoonfuls of ground rice,
sugar to taste,  eggs, flavouring of lemon-rind, nutmeg, bitter almonds
or bay-leaf.
mode.—put -/ pint of the milk into a stewpan, with any of the
above flavourings, and bring it to the boiling-point, and, with the
other / pint of milk, mix the ground rice to a smooth batter; strain
the boiling milk to this, and stir over the fire until the mixture is
tolerably thick; then pour it into a basin, leave it uncovered, and when
nearly or quite cold, sweeten it to taste, and add the eggs, which
should be previously well beaten, with a little salt. put the pudding
into a well-buttered basin, tie it down with a cloth, plunge it into
boiling water, and boil for -/ hour. for a baked pudding, proceed in
precisely the same manner, only using half the above proportion of
ground rice, with the same quantity of all the other ingredients: an
hour will bake the pudding in a moderate oven. stewed fruit, or
preserves, or marmalade, may be served with either the boiled or baked
pudding, and will be found an improvement.
time.—-/ hour to boil,  hour to bake. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of rice,  quart of milk, / lb. of sugar,
the yolks of  eggs,  small teaspoonful of essence of vanilla.
mode.—put the rice into a stewpan, with the milk and sugar, and let
these simmer over a gentle fire until the rice is sufficiently soft to
break up into a smooth mass, and should the milk dry away too much, a
little more may be added. stir the rice occasionally, to prevent its
burning, then beat it to a smooth mixture; add the yolks of the eggs,
which should be well whisked, and the vanilla (should this flavouring
not be liked, essence of bitter almonds may be substituted for it); put
this rice custard into the freezing-pot, and proceed as directed in
recipe no. . when wanted for table, turn the pudding out of the
mould, and pour over the top, and round it, a compôte of oranges, or
any other fruit that may be preferred, taking care that the flavouring
in the pudding harmonizes well with the fruit that is served with it.
time.—/ hour to freeze the mixture.
average cost, s. d.; exclusive of the compôte, s. d.
seasonable.—served all the year round.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice, -/ pint of milk,  oz. of fresh
butter,  eggs, sugar to taste; flavouring of lemon-peel, bitter
almonds, or vanilla; a few strips of candied peel.
mode.—let the rice swell in  pint of the milk over a slow fire,
putting with it a strip of lemon-peel; stir to it the butter and the
other / pint of milk, and let the mixture cool. then add the
well-beaten eggs, and a few drops of essence of almonds or essence of
vanilla, whichever may be preferred; butter well some small cups or
moulds, line them with a few pieces of candied peel sliced very thin,
fill them three parts full, and bake for about  minutes; turn them out
of the cups on to a white d'oyley, and serve with sweet sauce. the
flavouring and candied peel might be omitted, and stewed fruit or
preserve served instead, with these puddings.
time.— minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for  puddings. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— small teaspoonfuls of arrowroot, 
dessert-spoonfuls of pounded sugar, the juice of  lemon, /
teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, / pint of water.
mode.—mix the arrowroot smoothly with the water; put this into a
stewpan; add the sugar, strained lemon-juice, and grated nutmeg. stir
these ingredients over the fire until they boil, when the sauce is ready
for use. a small quantity of wine, or any liqueur, would very much
improve the flavour of this sauce: it is usually served with bread,
rice, custard, or any dry pudding that is not very rich.
time.—altogether,  minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
(german recipe.)
. ingredients.— lb. of cherries,  tablespoonful of flour,  oz.
of butter, / pint of water,  wineglassful of port wine, a little
grated lemon-rind,  pounded cloves,  tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice,
sugar to taste.
mode.—stone the cherries, and pound the kernels in a mortar to a
smooth paste; put the butter and flour into a saucepan; stir them over
the fire until of a pale brown; then add the cherries, the pounded
kernels, the wine, and the water. simmer these gently for / hour, or
until the cherries are quite cooked, and rub the whole through a hair
sieve; add the remaining ingredients, let the sauce boil for another 
minutes, and serve. this is a delicious sauce to serve with boiled
batter pudding, and when thus used, should be sent to table poured over
the pudding.
time.— minutes to / hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable in june, july, and august.
. ingredients.—the rind and juice of  lemon,  tablespoonful of
flour,  oz. of butter,  large wineglassful of sherry,  wineglassful
of water, sugar to taste, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—rub the rind of the lemon on to some lumps of sugar; squeeze
out the juice, and strain it; put the butter and flour into a saucepan,
stir them over the fire, and when of a pale brown, add the wine, water,
and strained lemon-juice. crush the lumps of sugar that were rubbed on
the lemon; stir these into the sauce, which should be very sweet. when
these ingredients are well mixed, and the sugar is melted, put in the
beaten yolks of  eggs; keep stirring the sauce until it thickens, when
serve. do not, on any account, allow it to boil, or it will curdle, and
be entirely spoiled.
time.—altogether,  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—the yolks of  eggs,  tablespoonful of powdered
sugar,  gill of milk, a very little grated lemon-rind,  small
wineglassfuls of brandy.
mode.—separate the yolks from the whites of  eggs, and put the
former into a stewpan; add the sugar, milk, and grated lemon-rind, and
stir over the fire until the mixture thickens; but do not allow it to
boil. put in the brandy; let the sauce stand by the side of the fire,
to get quite hot; keep stirring it, and serve in a boat or tureen
separately, or pour it over the pudding.
time.—altogether,  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter made with milk,
 heaped teaspoonfuls of pounded sugar, flavouring; of grated
lemon-rind, or nutmeg, or cinnamon.
mode.—make / pint of melted butter by recipe no. , omitting the
salt; stir in the sugar, add a little grated lemon-rind, nutmeg, or
powdered cinnamon, and serve. previously to making the melted butter,
the milk can be flavoured with bitter almonds, by infusing about half a
dozen of them in it for about / hour; the milk should then be strained
before it is added to the other ingredients. this simple sauce may be
served for children with rice, batter, or bread pudding.
time.—altogether,  minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
vanilla custard sauce, to serve with puddings.
. ingredients.—/ pint of milk,  eggs,  oz. of sugar,  drops
of essence of vanilla.
mode.—beat the eggs, sweeten the milk; stir these ingredients well
together, and flavour them with essence of vanilla, regulating the
proportion of this latter ingredient by the strength of the essence, the
size of the eggs, &c. put the mixture into a small jug, place this jug
in a saucepan of boiling water, and stir the sauce one way until it
thickens; but do not allow it to boil, or it will instantly curdle.
serve in a boat or tureen separately, with plum, bread, or any kind of
dry pudding. essence of bitter almonds or lemon-rind may be substituted
for the vanilla, when they are more in accordance with the flavouring of
the pudding with which the sauce is intended to be served.
time.—to be stirred in the jug from  to  minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—the yolks of  eggs,  teaspoonful of flour,  oz.
of pounded sugar,  oz. of fresh butter, / saltspoonful of salt, /
pint of sherry or madeira.
mode.—put the butter and flour into a saucepan, and stir them over
the fire until the former thickens; then add the sugar, salt, and wine,
and mix these ingredients well together. separate the yolks from the
whites of  eggs; beat up the former, and stir them briskly to the
sauce; let it remain over the fire until it is on the point of
simmering; but do not allow it to boil, or it will instantly curdle.
this sauce is delicious with plum, marrow, or bread puddings; but should
be served separately, and not poured over the pudding.
time.—from  to  minutes to thicken the butter; about  minutes to
stir the sauce over the fire.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—/ pint of melted butter no. ,  heaped
teaspoonfuls of pounded sugar;  large wineglassful of port or sherry,
or / of a small glassful of brandy.
mode.—make / pint of melted butter by recipe no. , omitting the
salt; then stir in the sugar and wine or spirit in the above proportion,
and bring the sauce to the point of boiling. serve in a boat or tureen
separately, and, if liked, pour a little of it over the pudding. to
convert this into punch sauce, add to the sherry and brandy a small
wineglassful of rum and the juice and grated rind of / lemon.
liqueurs, such as maraschino or curaçoa substituted for the brandy, make
excellent sauces.
time.—altogether,  minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.—/ pint of sherry, / pint of water, the yolks of
 eggs,  oz. of pounded sugar, / teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel, a
few pieces of candied citron cut thin.
mode.—separate the yolks from the whites of  eggs; beat them, and
put them into a very clean saucepan (if at hand, a lined one is best);
add all the other ingredients, place them over a sharp fire, and keep
stirring until the sauce begins to thicken; then take it off and serve.
if it is allowed to boil, it will be spoiled, as it will immediately
curdle.
time.—to be stirred over the fire  or  minutes; but it must not
boil.
average cost, s.
sufficient for a large pudding; allow half this quantity for a
moderate-sized one.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: open tart.]
[illustration: open-tart mould.]
. ingredients.—trimmings of puff-paste, any kind of jam.
mode.—butter a tart-pan of the shape shown in the engraving, roll out
the paste to the thickness of / an inch, and line the pan with it;
prick a few holes at the bottom with a fork, and bake the tart in a
brisk oven from  to  minutes. let the paste cool a little; then fill
it with preserve, place a few stars or leaves on it, which have been
previously cut out of the paste and baked, and the tart is ready for
table. by making it in this manner, both the flavour and colour of the
jam are preserved, which would otherwise be lost, were it baked in the
oven on the paste; and, besides, so much jam is not required.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient.— tart for  persons. seasonable at any time.
strawberry.—the name of this favourite fruit is said to be derived from
an ancient custom of putting straw beneath the fruit when it began to
ripen, which is very useful to keep it moist and clean. the strawberry
belongs to temperate and rather cold climates; and no fruit of these
latitudes, that ripens without the aid of artificial heat, is at all
comparable with it in point of flavour. the strawberry is widely
diffused, being found in most parts of the world, particularly in europe
and america.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter, / lb. of sifted sugar, / lb.
of flour,  pint of milk,  eggs, a little grated lemon-rind.
mode.—make the milk hot; stir in the butter, and let it cool before
the other ingredients are added to it; then stir in the sugar, flour,
and eggs, which should be well whisked, and omit the whites of ;
flavour with a little grated lemon-rind, and beat the mixture well.
butter some small cups, rather more than half fill them; bake from 
minutes to / hour, according to the size of the puddings, and serve
with fruit, custard, or wine sauce, a little of which may be poured over
them.
time.— minutes to / hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  puddings. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of milk,  tablespoonfuls of sago, the
rind of / lemon,  oz. of sugar,  eggs, -/ oz. of butter, grated
nutmeg, puff-paste.
mode.—put the milk and lemon-rind into a stewpan, place it by the
side of the fire, and let it remain until the milk is well flavoured
with the lemon; then strain it, mix with it the sago and sugar, and
simmer gently for about  minutes. let the mixture cool a little, and
stir to it the eggs, which should be well beaten, and the butter. line
the edges of a pie-dish with puff-paste, pour in the pudding, grate a
little nutmeg over the top, and bake from / to  hour.
time.—/ to  hour, or longer if the oven is very slow.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
note.—the above pudding may be boiled instead of baked; but then
allow  extra tablespoonfuls of sago, and boil the pudding in a buttered
basin from -/ to -/ hour.
 sago.—sago is the pith of a species of palm (cycas
 circinalis). its form is that of a small round grain. there are
 two sorts of sago,—the white and the yellow; but their
 properties are the same. sago absorbs the liquid in which it is
 cooked, becomes transparent and soft, and retains its original
 shape. its alimentary properties are the same as those of
 tapioca and arrowroot.
. ingredients.— tablespoonful of sago, / pint of water, / pint
of port or sherry, the rind and juice of  small lemon, sugar to taste;
when the flavour is liked, a little pounded cinnamon.
mode.—wash the sago in two or three waters; then put it into a
saucepan, with the water and lemon-peel; let it simmer gently by the
side of the fire for  minutes; then take out the lemon-peel, add the
remaining ingredients, give one boil, and serve. be particular to strain
the lemon-juice before adding it to the sauce. this, on trial, will be
found a delicious accompaniment to various boiled puddings, such as
those made of bread, raisins, rice, &c.
time.— minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
. ingredients.— oz. of semolina, -/ pint of milk, / lb. of
sugar,  bitter almonds,  oz. of butter,  eggs.
mode.—flavour the milk with the bitter almonds, by infusing them in
it by the side of the fire for about / hour; then strain it, and mix
with it the semolina, sugar, and butter. stir these ingredients over the
fire for a few minutes; then take them off, and gradually mix in the
eggs, which should be well beaten. butter a pie-dish, line the edges
with puff-paste, put in the pudding, and bake in rather a slow oven from
 to  minutes. serve with custard sauce or stewed fruit, a little of
which may be poured over the pudding.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 semolina.—after vermicelli, semolina is the most useful
 ingredient that can be used for thickening soups, meat or
 vegetable, of rich or simple quality. semolina is softening,
 light, wholesome, easy of digestion, and adapted to the infant,
 the aged, and the invalid. that of a clear yellow colour, well
 dried and newly made, is the fittest for use.
. ingredients.— oz. of tapioca,  quart of milk,  oz. of butter,
/ lb. of sugar,  eggs, flavouring of vanilla, grated lemon-rind, or
bitter almonds.
mode.—wash the tapioca, and let it stew gently in the milk by the
side of the fire for / hour, occasionally stirring it; then let it
cool a little; mix with it the butter, sugar, and eggs, which should be
well beaten, and flavour with either of the above ingredients, putting
in about  drops of the essence of almonds or vanilla, whichever is
preferred. butter a pie-dish, and line the edges with puff-paste; put in
the pudding, and bake in a moderate oven for an hour. if the pudding is
boiled, add a little more tapioca, and boil it in a buttered basin -/
hour.
time.— hour to bake, -/ hour to boil.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 tapioca.—tapioca is recommended to the convalescent, as being
 easy of digestion. it may be used in soup or broth, or mixed
 with milk or water, and butter. it is excellent food for either
 the healthy or sick, for the reason that it is so quickly
 digested without fatigue to the stomach.
. ingredients.—trimmings of puff-paste, any jam or marmalade that
may be preferred.
[illustration: dish of tartlets.]
mode.—roll out the paste to the thickness of about / inch; butter
some small round patty-pans, line them with it, and cut off the
superfluous paste close to the edge of the pan. put a small piece of
bread into each tartlet (this is to keep them in shape), and bake in a
brisk oven for about  minutes, or rather longer. when they are done,
and are of a nice colour, take the pieces of bread out carefully, and
replace them by a spoonful of jam or marmalade. dish them high on a
white d'oyley, piled high in the centre, and serve.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, d. each. sufficient.—
lb. of paste will make  dishes of tartlets. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of suet crust no. ,  lb. of treacle, /
teaspoonful of grated ginger.
mode.—make, with  lb. of flour, a suet crust by recipe no. ;
roll it out to the thickness of / inch, and spread the treacle equally
over it, leaving a small margin where the paste joins; close the ends
securely, tie the pudding in a floured cloth, plunge it into boiling
water, and boil for  hours. we have inserted this pudding, being
economical, and a favourite one with children; it is, of course, only
suitable for a nursery, or very plain family dinner. made with a lard
instead of a suet crust, it would be very nice baked, and would be
sufficiently done in from -/ to  hours.
time.—boiled pudding,  hours; baked pudding, -/ to  hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of puff-paste no. , sausage-meat no. ,
the yolk of  egg.
mode.—make  lb. of puff-paste by recipe no. ; roll it out to the
thickness of about / inch, or rather less, and divide it into , ,
or  squares, according to the size the rolls are intended to be. place
some sausage-meat on one-half of each square, wet the edges of the
paste, and fold it over the meat; slightly press the edges together, and
trim them neatly with a knife. brush the rolls over with the yolk of an
egg, and bake them in a well-heated oven for about / hour, or longer
should they be very large. the remains of cold chicken and ham, minced
and seasoned, as also cold veal or beef, make very good rolls.
time.—/ hour, or longer if the rolls are large.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient.— lb. of paste for  or  rolls.
seasonable, with sausage-meat, from september to march or april.
. ingredients.— eggs, their weight in flour, pounded sugar and
butter, flavouring of grated lemon-rind, bitter almonds, or essence of
vanilla.
mode.—carefully weigh the various ingredients, by placing on one side
of the scales the eggs, and on the other the flour; then the sugar, and
then the butter. warm the butter, and with the hands beat it to a cream;
gradually dredge in the flour and pounded sugar, and keep stirring and
beating the mixture without ceasing until it is perfectly smooth. then
add the eggs, which should be well whisked, and either of the above
flavourings that may be preferred; butter some small cups, rather more
than half-fill them, and bake in a brisk oven for about / hour. turn
them out, dish them on a napkin, and serve custard or wine-sauce with
them. a pretty little supper-dish may be made of these puddings cold, by
cutting out a portion of the inside with the point of a knife, and
putting into the cavity a little whipped cream or delicate preserve,
such as apricot, greengage, or very bright marmalade. the paste for
these puddings requires a great deal of mixing, as the more it is
beaten, the better will the puddings be. when served cold, they are
usually called gâteaux ŕ la madeleine.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  puddings. seasonable at any time.
suet pudding, to serve with roast meat.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour,  oz. of finely-chopped suet, /
saltspoonful of salt, / saltspoonful of pepper, / pint of milk or
water.
mode.—chop the suet very finely, after freeing it from skin, and mix
it well with the flour; add the salt and pepper (this latter ingredient
may be omitted if the flavour is not liked), and make the whole into a
smooth paste with the above proportion of milk or water. tie the pudding
in a floured cloth, or put it into a buttered basin, and boil from -/
to  hours. to enrich it, substitute  beaten eggs for some of the milk
or water, and increase the proportion of suet.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
note.—when there is a joint roasting or baking, this pudding may be
boiled in a long shape, and then cut into slices a few minutes before
dinner is served: these slices should be laid in the dripping-pan for a
minute or two, and then browned before the fire. most children like this
accompaniment to roast meat. where there is a large family of children,
and the means of keeping them are limited, it is a most economical plan
to serve up the pudding before the meat: as, in this case, the
consumption of the latter article will be much smaller than it otherwise
would be.
sussex, or hard dumplings.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / pint of water, / saltspoonful
of salt.
mode.—mix the flour and water together to a smooth paste, previously
adding a small quantity of salt. form this into small round dumplings;
drop them into boiling water, and boil from / to / hour. they may be
served with roast or boiled meat; in the latter case they may be cooked
with the meat, but should be dropped into the water when it is quite
boiling.
time.—/ to / hour.
sufficient for  or  dumplings. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of vermicelli, -/ pint of milk, / pint of
cream,  oz. of butter,  oz. of sugar,  eggs.
mode.—boil the vermicelli in the milk until it is tender; then stir
in the remaining ingredients, omitting the cream, if not obtainable.
flavour the mixture with grated lemon-rind, essence of bitter almonds,
or vanilla; butter a pie-dish; line the edges with puff-paste, put in
the pudding, and bake in a moderate oven for about / hour.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, s. d. without cream.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
vermicelli.—the finest vermicelli comes from marseilles, nimes, and
montpellier. it is a nourishing food, and owes its name to its peculiar
thread-like form. vermicelli means, little worms.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour, / lb. of chopped suet, / lb.
of currants, / lb. of raisins,  tablespoonful of moist sugar, /
teaspoonful of ground ginger, / saltspoonful of salt.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a basin, having previously stoned
the raisins, and washed, picked, and dried the currants; mix well with a
clean knife; dip the pudding-cloth into boiling water, wring it out, and
put in the mixture. have ready a saucepan of boiling water, plunge in
the pudding, and boil for  hours. turn it out on the dish, and serve
with sifted sugar.
time.— hours.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—suitable for a winter pudding.
vol-au-vent (an entree).
. ingredients.—/ to  lb. of puff-paste no. , fricasseed
chickens, rabbits, ragouts, or the remains of cold fish, flaked and
warmed in thick white sauce.
[illustration: vol-au-vent.]
mode.—make from / to  lb. of puff-paste, by recipe no. ,
taking care that it is very evenly rolled out each time, to insure its
rising properly; and if the paste is not extremely light, and put into a
good hot oven, this cannot be accomplished, and the vol-au-vent will
look very badly. roll out the paste to the thickness of about -/
inch, and, with a fluted cutter, stamp it out to the desired shape,
either round or oval, and, with the point of a small knife, make a
slight incision in the paste all round the top, about an inch from the
edge, which, when baked, forms the lid. put the vol-au-vent into a
good brisk oven, and keep the door shut for a few minutes after it is
put in. particular attention should he paid to the heating of the oven,
for the paste cannot rise without a tolerable degree of heat when of a
nice colour, without being scorched, withdraw it from the oven,
instantly remove the cover where it was marked, and detach all the soft
crumb from the centre: in doing this, be careful not to break the edges
of the vol-au-vent; but should they look thin in places, stop them
with small flakes of the inside paste, stuck on with the white of an
egg. this precaution is necessary to prevent the fricassee or ragoűt
from bursting the case, and so spoiling the appearance of the dish. fill
the vol-au-vent with a rich mince, or fricassee, or ragoűt, or the
remains of cold fish flaked and warmed in a good white sauce, and do not
make them very liquid, for fear of the gravy bursting the crust: replace
the lid, and serve. to improve the appearance of the crust, brush it
over with the yolk of an egg after it has risen properly.—see coloured
plate o.
time.—/ hour to bake the vol-au-vent.
average cost, exclusive of interior, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: small vol-au-vents.]
note.—small vol-au-vents may be made like those shown in the
engraving, and filled with minced veal, chicken, &c. they should be made
of the same paste as the larger ones, and stamped out with a small
fluted cutter.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of puff-paste no. , about  pint of
fruit compôte.
mode.—make / lb. of puff-paste by recipe no. , taking care to
bake it in a good brisk oven, to draw it up nicely and make it look
light. have ready sufficient stewed fruit, the syrup of which must be
boiled down until very thick; fill the vol-au-vent with this, and pile
it high in the centre; powder a little sugar over it, and put it back in
the oven to glaze, or use a salamander for the purpose: the
vol-au-vent is then ready to serve. they may be made with any fruit
that is in season, such as rhubarb, oranges, gooseberries, currants,
cherries, apples, &c.; but care must be taken not to have the syrup too
thin, for fear of its breaking through the crust.
time.—/ hour to  minutes to bake the vol-au-vent.
average cost, exclusive of the compôte, s. d.
sufficient for  entremets.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of puff-paste no. ,  pint of
freshly-gathered strawberries, sugar to taste, a plateful of whipped
cream.
mode.—make a vol-au-vent case by recipe no. , only not quite so
large nor so high as for a savoury one. when nearly done, brush the
paste over with the white of an egg, then sprinkle on it some pounded
sugar, and put it back in the oven to set the glaze. remove the
interior, or soft crumb, and, at the moment of serving, fill it with the
strawberries, which should be picked, and broken up with sufficient
sugar to sweeten them nicely. place a few spoonfuls of whipped cream on
the top, and serve.
time.—/ hour to  minutes to bake the vol-au-vent.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  vol-au-vent.
seasonable in june and july.
 strawberry.—among the greeks, the name of the strawberry
 indicated its tenuity, this fruit forming hardly a mouthful.
 with the latins, the name reminded one of the delicious perfume
 of this plant. both nations were equally fond of it, and applied
 the same care to its cultivation. virgil appears to place it in
 the same rank with flowers; and ovid gives it a tender epithet,
 which delicate palates would not disavow. neither does this
 luxurious poet forget the wild strawberry, which disappears
 beneath its modest foliage, but whose presence the scented air
 reveals.
. ingredients.— pint of cream, / lb. of loaf-sugar, / lb. of
savoy or sponge-cakes,  eggs,  oz. of preserved green ginger.
mode.—crumble down the cakes, put them into a basin, and pour over
them the cream, which should be previously sweetened and brought to the
boiling-point; cover the basin, well beat the eggs, and when the cream
is soaked up, stir them in. butter a mould, arrange the ginger round it,
pour in the pudding carefully, and tie it down with a cloth; steam or
boil it slowly for -/ hour, and serve with the syrup from the ginger,
which should be warmed, and poured over the pudding.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ quartern of dough, boiling water.
mode.—make a very light dough as for bread, using to mix it, milk,
instead of water; divide it into  or  dumplings; plunge them into
boiling water, and boil them for  minutes. serve the instant they are
taken up, as they spoil directly, by falling and becoming heavy; and in
eating them do not touch them with a knife, but tear them apart with two
forks. they may be eaten with meat gravy, or cold butter and sugar, and
if not convenient to make the dough at home, a little from the baker's
answers as well, only it must be placed for a few minutes near the fire,
in a basin with a cloth over it, to let it rise again before it is made
into dumplings.
time.— minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
 yeast consists principally of a substance very similar in
 composition, and in many of its sensible properties, to gluten;
 and, when new or fresh, it is inflated and rendered frothy by a
 large quantity of carbonic acid. when mixed with wort, this
 substance acts upon the saccharine matter; the temperature
 rises, carbonic acid is disengaged, and the result is ale,
 which always contains a considerable proportion of alcohol, or
 spirit. the quantity of yeast employed in brewing ale being
 small, the saccharine matter is but imperfectly decomposed:
 hence a considerable portion of it remains in the liquor, and
 gives it that viscid quality and body for which it is
 remarkable. the fermenting property of yeast is weakened by
 boiling for ten minutes, and is entirely destroyed by continuing
 the boiling. alcohol poured upon it likewise renders it inert;
 on which account its power lessens as the alcohol is formed
 during fermentation.
yorkshire pudding, to serve with hot roast beef.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of milk,  large tablespoonfuls of
flour,  eggs,  saltspoonful of salt.
[illustration: yorkshire pudding.]
mode.—put the flour into a basin with the salt, and stir gradually to
this enough milk to make it into a stiff batter. when this is perfectly
smooth, and all the lumps are well rubbed down, add the remainder of the
milk and the eggs, which should be well beaten. beat the mixture for a
few minutes, and pour it into a shallow tin, which has been previously
well rubbed with beef dripping. put the pudding into the oven, and bake
it for an hour; then, for another / hour, place it under the meat, to
catch a little of the gravy that flows from it. cut the pudding into
small square pieces, put them on a hot dish, and serve. if the meat is
baked, the pudding may at once be placed under it, resting the former on
a small three-cornered stand.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
[illustration]
[illustration]
. creams.—the yellowish-white, opaque fluid, smooth and unctuous to
the touch, which separates itself from new milk, and forms a layer on
its surface, when removed by skimming, is employed in a variety of
culinary preparations. the analyses of the contents of cream have been
decided to be, in  parts—butter, .; curd, or matter of cheese,
.; whey, .. that cream contains an oil, is evinced by its staining
clothes in the manner of oil; and when boiled for some time, a little
oil floats upon the surface. the thick animal oil which it contains, the
well-known butter, is separated only by agitation, as in the common
process of churning, and the cheesy matter remains blended with the
whey in the state of buttermilk. of the several kinds of cream, the
principal are the devonshire and dutch clotted creams, the costorphin
cream, and the scotch sour cream. the devonshire cream is produced by
nearly boiling the milk in shallow tin vessels over a charcoal fire, and
kept in that state until the whole of the cream is thrown up. it is used
for eating with fruits and tarts. the cream from costorphin, a village
of that name near edinburgh, is accelerated in its separation from three
or four days' old milk, by a certain degree of heat; and the dutch
clotted cream—a coagulated mass in which a spoon will stand upright—is
manufactured from fresh-drawn milk, which is put into a pan, and stirred
with a spoon two or three times a day, to prevent the cream from
separating from the milk. the scotch "sour cream" is a misnomer; for it
is a material produced without cream. a small tub filled with skimmed
milk is put into a larger one, containing hot water, and after remaining
there all night, the thin milk (called wigg) is drawn off, and the
remainder of the contents of the smaller vessel is "sour cream."
. jellies are not the nourishing food they were at one time
considered to be, and many eminent physicians are of opinion that they
are less digestible than the flesh, or muscular part of animals; still,
when acidulated with lemon-juice and flavoured with wine, they are very
suitable for some convalescents. vegetable jelly is a distinct
principle, existing in fruits, which possesses the property of
gelatinizing when boiled and cooled; but it is a principle entirely
different from the gelatine of animal bodies, although the name of
jelly, common to both, sometimes leads to an erroneous idea on that
subject. animal jelly, or gelatine, is glue, whereas vegetable jelly is
rather analogous to gum. liebig places gelatine very low indeed in the
scale of usefulness. he says, "gelatine, which by itself is tasteless,
and when eaten, excites nausea, possesses no nutritive value; that, even
when accompanied by the savoury constituents of flesh, it is not capable
of supporting the vital process, and when added to the usual diet as a
substitute for plastic matter, does not increase, but, on the contrary,
diminishes the nutritive value of the food, which it renders
insufficient in quantity and inferior in quality." it is this substance
which is most frequently employed in the manufacture of the jellies
supplied by the confectioner; but those prepared at home from calves'
feet do possess some nutrition, and are the only sort that should be
given to invalids. isinglass is the purest variety of gelatine, and is
prepared from the sounds or swimming-bladders of certain fish, chiefly
the sturgeon. from its whiteness it is mostly used for making
blanc-mange and similar dishes.
. the white of eggs is perhaps the best substance that can be
employed in clarifying jelly, as well as some other fluids, for the
reason that when albumen (and the white of eggs is nearly pure albumen)
is put into a liquid that is muddy, from substances suspended in it, on
boiling the liquid, the albumen coagulates in a flocculent manner, and,
entangling with it the impurities, rises with them to the surface as a
scum, or sinks to the bottom, according to their weight.
. souffles, omelets, and sweet dishes, in which eggs form the
principal ingredient, demand, for their successful manufacture, an
experienced cook. they are the prettiest, but most difficult of all
entremets. the most essential thing to insure success is to secure the
best ingredients from an honest tradesman. the entremets coming within
the above classification, are healthy, nourishing, and pleasant to the
taste, and may be eaten with safety by persons of the most delicate
stomachs.
. ingredients.— dozen large apples, moist sugar to taste,  small
teacupful of cold water, the grated rind of one lemon,  pint of milk, 
eggs,  oz. of loaf sugar.
mode.—peel, cut, and core the apples; put them into a lined saucepan
with the cold water, and as they heat, bruise them to a pulp; sweeten
with moist sugar, and add the grated lemon-rind. when cold, put the
fruit at the bottom of a pie-dish, and pour over it a custard, made with
the above proportion of milk, eggs, and sugar; grate a little nutmeg
over the top, place the dish in a moderate oven, and bake from  to 
minutes. the above proportions will make rather a large dish.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to march.
buttered apples (sweet entremets).
. ingredients.—apple marmalade no. ,  or  good boiling
apples, / pint of water,  oz. of sugar,  oz. of butter, a little
apricot jam.
mode.—pare the apples, and take out the cores without dividing them;
boil up the sugar and water for a few minutes; then lay in the apples,
and simmer them very gently until tender, taking care not to let them
break. have ready sufficient marmalade made by recipe no. , and
flavoured with lemon, to cover the bottom of the dish; arrange the
apples on this with a piece of butter placed in each, and in between
them a few spoonfuls of apricot jam or marmalade; place the dish in the
oven for  minutes, then sprinkle over the top sifted sugar; either
brown it before the fire or with a salamander, and serve hot.
time.—from  to  minutes to stew the apples very gently, 
minutes in the oven.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  entremets.
note.—the syrup that the apples were boiled in should be saved for
another occasion.
flanc of apples, or apples in a raised crust.
(sweet entremets.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of short crust no.  or , 
moderate-sized apples, the rind and juice of / lemon, / lb. of white
sugar, / pint of water, a few strips of candied citron.
mode.—make a short crust by either of the above recipes; roll it out
to the thickness of / inch, and butter an oval mould; line it with the
crust, and press it carefully all round the sides, to obtain the form of
the mould, but be particular not to break the paste. pinch the part that
just rises above the mould with the paste-pincers, and fill the case
with flour; bake it for about / hour; then take it out of the oven,
remove the flour, put the case back in the oven for another / hour,
and do not allow it to get scorched. it is now ready for the apples,
which should be prepared in the following manner: peel, and take out the
cores with a small knife, or a cutter for the purpose, without dividing
the apples; put them into a small lined saucepan, just capable of
holding them, with sugar, water, lemon juice and rind, in the above
proportion. let them simmer very gently until tender; then take out the
apples, let them cool, arrange them in the flanc or case, and boil down
the syrup until reduced to a thick jelly; pour it over the apples, and
garnish them with a few slices of candied citron.
. a more simple flanc may be made by rolling out the paste, cutting
the bottom of a round or oval shape, and then a narrow strip for the
sides: these should be stuck on with the white of an egg, to the bottom
piece, and the flanc then filled with raw fruit, with sufficient sugar
to sweeten it nicely. it will not require so long baking as in a mould;
but the crust must be made everywhere of an equal thickness, and so
perfectly joined, that the juice does not escape. this dish may also be
served hot, and should be garnished in the same manner, or a little
melted apricot jam may be poured over the apples, which very much
improves their flavour.
time.—altogether,  hour to bake the flanc from  to  minutes to
stew the apples very gently.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  entremets or side-dish.
seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.—for the batter, / lb. of flour, / oz. of butter,
/ saltspoonful of salt,  eggs, milk, apples, hot lard or clarified
beef-dripping.
mode.—break the eggs; separate the whites from the yolks, and beat
them separately. put the flour into a basin, stir in the butter, which
should be melted to a cream; add the salt, and moisten with sufficient
warm milk to make it of a proper consistency, that is to say, a batter
that will drop from the spoon. stir this well, rub down any lumps that
may be seen, and add the whites of the eggs, which have been previously
well whisked; beat up the batter for a few minutes, and it is ready for
use. now peel and cut the apples into rather thick whole slices, without
dividing them, and stamp out the middle of each slice, where the core
is, with a cutter. throw the slices into the batter; have ready a pan of
boiling lard or clarified dripping; take out the pieces of apple one by
one, put them into the hot lard, and fry a nice brown, turning
them—when required. when done, lay them on a piece of blotting-paper
before the fire, to absorb the greasy moisture; then dish on a white
d'oyley, piled one above the other; strew over them some pounded sugar,
and serve very hot. the flavour of the fritters would be very much
improved by soaking the pieces of apple in a little wine, mixed with
sugar and lemon-juice, for  or  hours before wanted for table; the
batter, also, is better for being mixed some hours before the fritters
are made.
time.—about  minutes to fry them;  minutes to drain them.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to march.
iced apples, or apple hedgehog.
. ingredients.—about  dozen good boiling apples, / lb. of sugar,
/ pint of water, the rind of / lemon minced very fine, the whites of
 eggs,  tablespoonfuls of pounded sugar, a few sweet almonds.
mode.—peel and core a dozen of the apples without dividing them, and
stew them very gently in a lined saucepan with / lb. of sugar and /
pint of water, and when tender, lift them carefully on to a dish. have
ready the remainder of the apples pared, cored, and cut into thin
slices; put them into the same syrup with the lemon-peel, and boil
gently until they are reduced to a marmalade: they must be kept stirred,
to prevent them from burning. cover the bottom of a dish with some of
the marmalade, and over that a layer of the stewed apples, in the
insides of which, and between each, place some of the marmalade; then
place another layer of apples, and fill up the cavities with marmalade
as before, forming the whole into a raised oval shape. whip the whites
of the eggs to a stiff froth, mix with them the pounded sugar, and cover
the apples very smoothly all over with the icing; blanch and cut each
almond into  or  strips; place these strips at equal distances over
the icing sticking up; strew over a little rough pounded sugar, and
place the dish in a very slow oven, to colour the almonds, and for the
apples to get warm through. this entremets may also be served cold, and
makes a pretty supper-dish.
time.—from  to  minutes to stew the apples.
average cost, s. d. to s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to march.
thick apple jelly or marmalade, for entremets or dessert dishes.
. ingredients.—apples; to every lb. of pulp allow / lb. of sugar,
/ teaspoonful of minced lemon-peel.
[illustration: apple jelly stuck with almonds.]
mode.—peel, core, and boil the apples with only sufficient water to
prevent them from burning; beat them to a pulp, and to every lb. of pulp
allow the above proportion of sugar in lumps. dip the lumps into water;
put these into a saucepan, and boil till the syrup is thick and can be
well skimmed; then add this syrup to the apple pulp, with the minced
lemon-peel, and stir it over a quick fire for about  minutes, or until
the apples cease to stick to the bottom of the pan. the jelly is then
done, and may be poured into moulds which have been previously dipped in
water, when it will turn out nicely for dessert or a side-dish; for the
latter a little custard should be poured round, and it should be
garnished with strips of citron or stuck with blanched almonds.
time.—from / to / hour to reduce the apples to a pulp;  minutes
to boil after the sugar is added.
sufficient.—-/ lb. of apples sufficient for a small mould.
seasonable from july to march; but is best in september, october or
november.
. ingredients.— dozen apples, -/ pint of spring-water; to every
pint of juice allow / lb. of loaf sugar, / oz. of isinglass, the
rind of / lemon.
mode.—pare, core, and cut the apples into quarters, and boil them,
with the lemon-peel, until tender; then strain off the apples, and run
the juice through a jelly-bag; put the strained juice, with the sugar
and isinglass, which has been previously boiled in / pint of water,
into a lined saucepan or preserving-pan; boil all together for about /
hour, and put the jelly into moulds. when this jelly is nice and clear,
and turned out well, it makes a pretty addition to the supper-table,
with a little custard or whipped cream round it: the addition of a
little lemon-juice improves the flavour, but it is apt to render the
jelly muddy and thick. if required to be kept any length of time, rather
a larger proportion of sugar must be used.
time.—from  to -/ hour to boil the apples; / hour the jelly.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for a -/-pint mould.
seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.— oz. of rice,  quart of milk, the rind of /
lemon, sugar to taste, / saltspoonful of salt,  apples, / lb. of
sugar, / pint of water, / pint of boiled custard no. .
mode.—flavour the milk with lemon-rind, by boiling them together for
a few minutes; then take out the peel, and put in the rice, with
sufficient sugar to sweeten it nicely, and boil gently until the rice is
quite soft; then let it cool. in the mean time pare, quarter, and core
the apples, and boil them until tender in a syrup made with sugar and
water in the above proportion; and, when soft, lift them out on a sieve
to drain. now put a middling-sized gallipot in the centre of a dish; lay
the rice all round till the top of the gallipot is reached; smooth the
rice with the back of a spoon, and stick the apples into it in rows, one
row sloping to the right and the next to the left. set it in the oven to
colour the apples; then, when required for table, remove the gallipot,
garnish the rice with preserved fruits, and pour in the middle
sufficient custard, made by recipe no. , to be level with the top of
the rice, and serve hot.
time.—from  to  minutes to stew the apples; / hour to simmer
the rice; / hour to bake.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.— good boiling apples, / pint of water,  oz. of
sugar, a layer of apple marmalade no. ,  preserved cherries,
garnishing of apricot jam.
mode.—peel the apples, and, with a vegetable-cutter, push out the
cores; boil them in the above proportion of sugar and water, without
being too much done, and take care they do not break. have ready a white
apple marmalade, made by recipe no. ; cover the bottom of the dish
with this, level it, and lay the apples in a sieve to drain, pile them
neatly on the marmalade, making them high in the centre, and place a
preserved cherry in the middle of each. garnish with strips of candied
citron or apricot jam, and the dish is ready for table.
time.—from  to so minutes to stew the apples.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  entremets.
seasonable from july to march.
(a pretty supper dish.)
. ingredients.— good-sized apples,  cloves, pounded sugar, 
lemon,  teacupfuls of water,  tablespoonful of gelatine, a few drops
of prepared cochineal.
mode.—choose rather large apples; peel them and take out the cores,
either with a scoop or a small silver knife, and put into each apple 
cloves and as much sifted sugar as they will hold. place them, without
touching each other, in a large pie-dish; add more white sugar, the
juice of  lemon, and  teacupfuls of water. bake in the oven, with a
dish over them, until they are done. look at them frequently, and, as
each apple is cooked, place it in a glass dish. they must not be left in
the oven after they are done, or they will break, and so would spoil the
appearance of the dish. when the apples are neatly arranged in the dish
without touching each other, strain the liquor in which they have been
stewing, into a lined saucepan; add to it the rind of the lemon, and a
tablespoonful of gelatine which has been previously dissolved in cold
water, and, if not sweet, a little more sugar, and  cloves. boil till
quite clear; colour with a few drops of prepared cochineal, and strain
the jelly through a double muslin into a jug; let it cool a little;
then pour it into the dish round the apples. when quite cold, garnish
the tops of the apples with a bright-coloured marmalade, a jelly, or the
white of an egg, beaten to a strong froth, with a little sifted sugar.
time.—from  to  minutes to bake the apples.
average cost, s., with the garnishing.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to march.
(a plain dish.)
. ingredients.— good sized apples,  oz. of butter, the rind of
/ lemon minced very fine,  oz. of rice, -/ pint of milk, sugar to
taste, / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg,  tablespoonfuls of apricot
jam.
mode.—peel the apples, halve them, and take out the cores; put them
into a stewpan with the butter, and strew sufficient sifted sugar over
to sweeten them nicely, and add the minced lemon-peel. stew the apples
very gently until tender, taking care they do not break. boil the rice,
with the milk, sugar, and nutmeg, until soft, and, when thoroughly done,
dish it, piled high in the centre; arrange the apples on it, warm the
apricot jam, pour it over the whole, and serve hot.
time.—about  minutes to stew the apples very gently; about / hour
to cook the rice.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to march.
(a pretty supper dish.)
. ingredients.— good-sized apples, the whites of  eggs, the
rind of  lemon, / lb. of pounded sugar.
mode.—peel, core, and cut the apples into quarters, and put them into
a saucepan with the lemon-peel and sufficient water to prevent them from
burning,—rather less than / pint. when they are tender, take out the
peel, beat them to a pulp, let them cool, and stir them to the whites of
the eggs, which should be previously beaten to a strong froth. add the
sifted sugar, and continue the whisking until the mixture becomes quite
stiff; and either heap it on a glass dish, or serve it in small glasses.
the dish may be garnished with preserved barberries, or strips of
bright-coloured jelly; and a dish of custards should be served with it,
or a jug of cream.
time.—from  to  minutes to stew the apples.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill a moderate-sized glass dish.
seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.— oz. of rice,  quart of milk, the rind of /
lemon, sugar to taste, the yolks of  eggs, the whites of , -/ oz.
of butter,  tablespoonfuls of apple marmalade no. .
mode.—boil the milk with the lemon-peel until the former is well
flavoured; then strain it, put in the rice, and let it gradually swell
over a slow fire, adding sufficient sugar to sweeten it nicely. then
crush the rice to a smooth pulp with the back of a wooden spoon; line
the bottom and sides of a round cake-tin with it, and put it into the
oven to set; turn it out of the tin carefully, and be careful that the
border of rice is firm in every part. mix with the marmalade the beaten
yolks of eggs and the butter, and stir these over the fire until the
mixture thickens. take it off the fire; to this add the whites of the
eggs, which should be previously beaten to a strong froth; stir all
together, and put it into the rice border. bake in a moderate oven for
about / hour, or until the soufflé rises very light. it should be
watched, and served instantly, or it will immediately fall after it is
taken from the oven.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from july to march.
(a pretty dish for a juvenile supper.)
. ingredients.— good-sized apples, the rind of / lemon or 
cloves, / lb. of sugar, / pint of water, / pint of custard no.
mode.—pare and take out the cores of the apples, without dividing
them, and, if possible, leave the stalks on; boil the sugar and water
together for  minutes; then put in the apples with the lemon-rind or
cloves, whichever flavour may be preferred, and simmer gently until they
are tender, taking care not to let them break. dish them neatly on a
glass dish, reduce the syrup by boiling it quickly for a few minutes,
let it cool a little; then pour it over the apples. have ready quite /
pint of custard made by recipe no. ; pour it round, but not over,
the apples when they are quite cold, and the dish is ready for table. a
few almonds blanched and cut into strips, and stuck in the apples, would
improve their appearance.—see coloured plate q.
time.—from  to  minutes to stew the apples.
average cost, s.
sufficient to fill a large glass dish.
seasonable from july to march.
(a supper dish.)
. ingredients.— good-sized apples, the rind of / lemon,  oz.
of pounded sugar, / pint of milk, / pint of cream,  eggs, whipped
cream.
mode.—peel, core, and cut the apples into thin slices, and put them
into a saucepan with  tablespoonfuls of water, the sugar, and minced
lemon-rind. boil all together until quite tender, and pulp the apples
through a sieve; if they should not be quite sweet enough, add a little
more sugar, and put them at the bottom of the dish to form a thick
layer. stir together the milk, cream, and eggs, with a little sugar,
over the fire, and let the mixture thicken, but do not allow it to reach
the boiling-point. when thick, take it off the fire; let it cool a
little, then pour it over the apples. whip some cream with sugar,
lemon-peel, &c., the same as for other trifles; heap it high over the
custard, and the dish is ready for table. it may be garnished as fancy
dictates, with strips of bright apple jelly, slices of citron, &c.
time.—from  to  minutes to stew the apples;  minutes to stir
the custard over the fire.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for a moderate-sized trifle.
seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.— to  ripe apricots, / lb. of sugar, -/ pint
of milk, the yolks of  eggs,  oz. of isinglass.
mode.—divide the apricots, take out the stones, and boil them in a
syrup made with / lb. of sugar and / pint of water, until they form
a thin marmalade, which rub through a sieve. boil the milk with the
other / lb. of sugar, let it cool a little, then mix with it the yolks
of eggs which have been previously well beaten; put this mixture into a
jug, place this jug in boiling water, and stir it one way over the fire
until it thickens; but on no account let it boil. strain through a
sieve, add the isinglass, previously boiled with a small quantity of
water, and keep stirring it till nearly cold; then mix the cream with
the apricots; stir well, put it into an oiled mould, and, if convenient,
set it on ice; at any rate, in a very cool place. it should turn out on
the dish without any difficulty.
time.—from  to  minutes to boil the apricots.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould.
seasonable in august, september, and october.
note.—in winter-time, when fresh apricots are not obtainable, a
little jam may be substituted for them.
flanc of apricots, or compote of apricots in a raised crust.
(sweet entremets.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of short crust no. , from  to 
good-sized apricots, / pint of water, / lb. of sugar.
mode.—make a short crust by recipe no. , and line a mould with it
as directed in recipe no. . boil the sugar and water together for 
minutes; halve the apricots, take out the stones, and simmer them in the
syrup until tender; watch them carefully, and take them up the moment
they are done, for fear they break. arrange them neatly in the flanc or
case; boil the syrup until reduced to a jelly, pour it over the fruit,
and serve either hot or cold. greengages, plums of all kinds, peaches,
&c., may be done in the same manner, as also currants, raspberries,
gooseberries, strawberries, &c.; but with the last-named fruits, a
little currant-juice added to them will be found an improvement.
time.—altogether,  hour to bake the flanc, about  minutes to
simmer the apricots.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  entremets or side-dish.
seasonable in july, august, and september.
(an inexpensive supper dish.)
. ingredients.— heaped tablespoonfuls of arrowroot, -/ pint of
milk,  laurel-leaves or the rind of / lemon, sugar to taste.
mode.—mix to a smooth batter the arrowroot with / pint of the milk;
put the other pint on the fire, with laurel-leaves or lemon-peel,
whichever may be preferred, and let the milk steep until it is well
flavoured. then strain the milk, and add it, boiling, to the mixed
arrowroot; sweeten it with sifted sugar, and let it boil, stirring it
all the time, till it thickens sufficiently to come from the saucepan.
grease a mould with pure salad-oil, pour in the blanc-mange, and when
quite set, turn it out on a dish, and pour round it a compôte of any
kind of fruit, or garnish it with jam. a tablespoonful of brandy,
stirred in just before the blanc-mange is moulded, very much improves
the flavour of this sweet dish.
time.—altogether, / hour.
average cost, d. without the garnishing.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
(a supper dish.)
. ingredients.— pint of new milk, -/ oz. of isinglass, the rind
of / lemon, / lb. of loaf sugar,  bitter almonds, / oz. of sweet
almonds,  pint of cream.
[illustration: blanc-mange mould.]
mode.—put the milk into a saucepan, with the isinglass, lemon-rind,
and sugar, and let these ingredients stand by the side of the fire until
the milk is well flavoured; add the almonds, which should be blanched
and pounded in a mortar to a paste, and let the milk just boil up;
strain it through a fine sieve or muslin into a jug, add the cream, and
stir the mixture occasionally until nearly cold. let it stand for a few
minutes, then pour it into the mould, which should be previously oiled
with the purest salad-oil, or dipped in cold water. there will be a
sediment at the bottom of the jug, which must not be poured into the
mould, as, when turned out, it would very much disfigure the appearance
of the blanc-mange. this blanc-mange may be made very much richer by
using -/ pint of cream, and melting the isinglass in / pint of
boiling water. the flavour may also be very much varied by adding
bay-leaves, laurel-leaves, or essence of vanilla, instead of the
lemon-rind and almonds. noyeau, maraschino, curaçoa, or any favourite
liqueur, added in small proportions, very much enhances the flavour of
this always favourite dish. in turning it out, just loosen the edges of
the blanc-mange from the mould, place a dish on it, and turn it quickly
over; it should come out easily, and the blanc-mange have a smooth
glossy appearance when the mould is oiled, which it frequently has not
when it is only dipped in water. it may be garnished as fancy dictates.
time.—about -/ hour to steep the lemon-rind and almonds in the
milk.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s. d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sugar,  quart of milk, -/ oz. of
isinglass, the rind of / lemon,  laurel-leaves.
[illustration: blanc-mange.]
mode.—put all the ingredients into a lined saucepan, and boil gently
until the isinglass is dissolved; taste it occasionally, to ascertain
when it is sufficiently flavoured with the laurel-leaves; then take them
out, and keep stirring the mixture over the fire for about  minutes.
strain it through a fine sieve into a jug, and, when nearly cold, pour
it into a well-oiled mould, omitting the sediment at the bottom. turn it
out carefully on a dish, and garnish with preserves, bright jelly, or a
compote of fruit.
time.—altogether, / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—batter,  slices of bread and butter,  or 
tablespoonfuls of jam.
mode.—make a batter, the same as for apple fritters no. ; cut
some slices of bread and butter, not very thick; spread half of them
with any jam that may he preferred, and cover with the other slices;
slightly press them together, and cut them out in square, long, or round
pieces. dip them in the batter, and fry in boiling lard for about 
minutes; drain them before the fire on a piece of blotting-paper or
cloth. dish them, sprinkle over sifted sugar, and serve.
time.—about  minutes.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— calf's feet,  pints of water.
[illustration: jelly-mould.]
[illustration: jelly-bag.]
mode.—the stock for jellies should always be made the day before it
is required for use, as the liquor has time to cool, and the fat can be
so much more easily and effectually removed when thoroughly set. procure
from the butcher's  nice calf's feet: scald them, to take off the hair;
slit them in two, remove the fat from between the claws, and wash the
feet well in warm water; put them into a stewpan, with the above
proportion of cold water, bring it gradually to boil, and remove every
particle of scum as it rises. when it is well skimmed, boil it very
gently for  or  hours, or until the liquor is reduced rather more than
half; then strain it through a sieve into a basin, and put it in a cool
place to set. as the liquor is strained, measure it, to ascertain the
proportion for the jelly, allowing something for the sediment and fat at
the top. to clarify it, carefully remove all the fat from the top, pour
over a little warm water, to wash away any that may remain, and wipe the
jelly with a clean cloth; remove the jelly from the sediment, put it
into a saucepan, and, supposing the quantity to be a quart, add to it 
oz. of loaf sugar, the shells and well-whisked whites of  eggs, and
stir these ingredients together cold; set the saucepan on the fire, but
do not stir the jelly after it begins to warm. let it boil about 
minutes after it rises to a head, then throw in a teacupful of cold
water; let it boil  minutes longer, then take the saucepan off, cover
it closely, and let it remain / hour near the fire. dip the jelly-bag
into hot water, wring it out quite dry, and fasten it on to a stand or
the back of a chair, which must be placed near the fire, to prevent the
jelly from setting before it has run through the bag. place a basin
underneath to receive the jelly; then pour it into the bag, and should
it not be clear the first time, run it through the bag again. this stock
is the foundation of all really good jellies, which may be varied in
innumerable ways, by colouring and flavouring with liqueurs, and by
moulding it with fresh and preserved fruits. to insure the jelly being
firm when turned out, / oz. of isinglass clarified might be added to
the above proportion of stock. substitutes for calf's feet are now
frequently used in making jellies, which lessen the expense and trouble
in preparing this favourite dish; isinglass and gelatine being two of
the principal materials employed; but, although they may look as
nicely as jellies made from good stock, they are never so delicate,
having very often an unpleasant flavour, somewhat resembling glue,
particularly when made with gelatine.
time.—about  hours to boil the feet for the stock; to clarify
it,—/ hour to boil, / hour to stand in the saucepan covered.
average cost.—calf's feet may be purchased for d. each when veal is
in full season, but more expensive when it is scarce.
sufficient.— calf's feet should make  quart of stock.
seasonable from march to october, but may be had all the year.
 how to make a jelly-bag.—the very stout flannel called
 double-mill, used for ironing-blankets, is the best material for
 a jelly-bag: those of home manufacture are the only ones to be
 relied on for thoroughly clearing the jelly. care should be
 taken that the seam of the bag be stitched twice, to secure it
 against unequal filtration. the most convenient mode of using
 the big is to tie it upon a hoop the exact size of the outside
 of its mouth; and, to do this, strings should be sewn round it
 at equal distances. the jelly-bag may, of coarse, be made any
 size; but one of twelve or fourteen inches deep, and seven or
 eight across the mouth, will be sufficient for ordinary use. the
 form of a jelly-bag is the fool's cap.
(more economical than calf's feet.)
. ingredients.— cow-heels,  quarts of water.
mode.—procure  heels that have only been scalded, and not boiled;
split them in two, and remove the fat between the claws; wash them well
in warm water, and put them into a saucepan with the above proportion of
cold water; bring it gradually to boil, remove all the scum as it rises,
and simmer the heels gently from  to  hours, or until the liquor is
reduced one-half; then strain it into a basin, measuring the quantity,
and put it in a cool place. clarify it in the same manner as calf's-feet
stock no. , using, with the other ingredients, about / oz. of
isinglass to each quart. this stock should be made the day before it is
required for use. two dozen shank-bones of mutton, boiled for  or 
hours, yield a quart of strong firm stock. they should be put on in 
quarts of water, which should be reduced one-half. make this also the
day before it is required.
time.— to  hours to boil the cow-heels,  to  hours to boil the
shank-bones.
average cost, from d. to d. each.
sufficient.— cow-heels should make  pints of stock.
seasonable at any time.
(substitutes for calf's feet.)
. ingredients.— oz. of isinglass or gelatine,  quarts of water.
mode.—put the isinglass or gelatine into a saucepan with the above
proportion of cold water; bring it quickly to boil, and let it boil very
fast, until the liquor is reduced one-half. carefully remove the scum as
it rises, then strain it through a jelly-bag, and it will be ready for
use. if not required very clear, it may be merely strained through a
fine sieve, instead of being run through a bag. rather more than / oz.
of isinglass is about the proper quantity to use for a quart of strong
calf's-feet stock, and rather more than  oz. for the same quantity of
fruit juice. as isinglass varies so much in quality and strength, it is
difficult to give the exact proportions. the larger the mould, the
stiffer should be the jelly; and where there is no ice, more isinglass
must be used than if the mixture were frozen. this forms a stock for all
kinds of jellies, which may be flavoured in many ways.
time.—-/ hour.
sufficient, with wine, syrup, fruit, &c., to fill two moderate-sized
moulds.
seasonable at any time.
note.—the above, when boiled, should be perfectly clear, and may be
mixed warm with wine, flavourings, fruits, &c., and then run through the
bag.
 isinglass.—the best isinglass is brought from russia; some of
 an inferior kind is brought from north and south america and the
 east indies: the several varieties may be had from the wholesale
 dealers in isinglass in london. in choosing isinglass for
 domestic use, select that which is whitest, has no unpleasant
 odour, and which dissolves most readily in water. the inferior
 kinds are used for fining beer, and similar purposes. isinglass
 is much adulterated: to test its purity, take a few threads of
 the substance, drop some into boiling water, some into cold
 water, and some into vinegar. in the boiling water the isinglass
 will dissolve, in cold water it will become white and "cloudy,"
 and in vinegar it will swell and become jelly-like. if the
 isinglass is adulterated with gelatine (that is to say, the
 commoner sorts of gelatine,—for isinglass is classed amongst
 gelatines, of all which varieties it is the very purest and
 best), in boiling water the gelatine will not so completely
 dissolve as the isinglass; in cold water it becomes clear and
 jelly-like; and in vinegar it will harden.
. uncork the bottle; place it in a saucepan of hot water until the
jelly is reduced to a liquid state; taste it, to ascertain whether it is
sufficiently flavoured, and if not, add a little wine. pour the jelly
into moulds which have been soaked in water; let it set, and turn it out
by placing the mould in hot water for a minute; then wipe the outside,
put a dish on the top, and turn it over quickly. the jelly should then
slip easily away from the mould, and be quite firm. it may be garnished
as taste dictates.
. ingredients.—to every quart of water allow  lbs. of loaf sugar;
the white of  egg.
mode.—put the sugar and water into a stewpan; set it on the fire,
and, when the sugar is dissolved, add the white of the egg, whipped up
with a little water. whisk the whole well together, and simmer very
gently until it has thrown up all the scum. take this off as it rises,
strain the syrup through a fine sieve or cloth into a basin, and keep it
for use.
. ingredients.— quart of calf's-feet stock no. , / lb. of
sugar, / pint of sherry,  glass of brandy, the shells and whites of 
eggs, the rind and juice of  lemons, / oz. of isinglass.
mode.—prepare the stock as directed in recipe no. , taking care
to leave the sediment, and to remove all the fat from the surface. put
it into a saucepan, cold, without clarifying it; add the remaining
ingredients, and stir them well together before the saucepan is placed
on the fire. then simmer the mixture gently for / hour, but do not
stir it after it begins to warm. throw in a teacupful of cold water,
boil for another  minutes, and keep the saucepan covered by the side of
the fire for about / hour, but do not let it boil again. in simmering,
the head or scum may be carefully removed as it rises; but particular
attention must be given to the jelly, that it be not stirred in the
slightest degree after it is heated. the isinglass should be added when
the jelly begins to boil: this assists to clear it, and makes it firmer
for turning out. wring out a jelly-bag in hot water; fasten it on to a
stand, or the back of a chair; place it near the fire with a basin
underneath it, and run the jelly through it. should it not be perfectly
clear the first time, repeat the process until the desired brilliancy is
obtained. soak the moulds in water, drain them for half a second, pour
in the jelly, and put it in a cool place to set. if ice is at hand,
surround the moulds with it, and the jelly will set sooner, and be
firmer when turned out. in summer it is necessary to have ice in which
to put the moulds, or the cook will be, very likely, disappointed, by
her jellies being in too liquid a state to turn out properly, unless a
great deal of isinglass is used. when wanted for table, dip the moulds
in hot water for a minute, wipe the outside with a cloth, lay a dish on
the top of the mould, turn it quickly over, and the jelly should slip
out easily. it is sometimes served broken into square lumps, and piled
high in glasses. earthenware moulds are preferable to those of pewter or
tin, for red jellies, the colour and transparency of the composition
being often spoiled by using the latter.
[illustration: jelly-mould.]
to make this jelly more economically, raisin wine may be substituted for
the sherry and brandy, and the stock made from cow-heels, instead of
calf's feet.
time.— minutes to simmer the jelly, / hour to stand covered.
average cost, reckoning the feet at d. each, s. d.
sufficient to fill two -/-pint moulds. seasonable at any time.
note.—as lemon-juice, unless carefully strained, is liable to make
the jelly muddy, see that it is clear before it is added to the other
ingredients. omit the brandy when the flavour is objected to.
sherry.—there are several kinds of sherry, as pale and brown, and there
are various degrees of each. sherry is, in general, of an amber-colour,
and, when good, has a fine aromatic odour, with something of the
agreeable bitterness of the peach kernel. when new, it is harsh and
fiery, and requires to be mellowed in the wood for four or five years.
sherry has of late got much into fashion in england, from the idea that
it is more free from acid than other wines; but some careful experiments
on wines do not fully confirm this opinion.
cannelons, or fried puffs.
(sweet entremets.)
. ingredients.—/ lb. of puff-paste no. ; apricot, or any kind
of preserve that may be preferred; hot lard.
mode.—cannelons which are made of puff-paste rolled very thin, with
jam inclosed, and cut out in long narrow rolls or puffs, make a very
pretty and elegant dish. make some good puff-paste, by recipe no. ;
roll it out very thin, and cut it into pieces of an equal size, about 
inches wide and  inches long; place upon each piece a spoonful of jam,
wet the edges with the white of egg, and fold the paste over twice;
slightly press the edges together, that the jam may not escape in the
frying; and when all are prepared, fry them in boiling lard until of a
nice brown, letting them remain by the side of the fire after they are
coloured, that the paste may be thoroughly done. drain them before the
fire, dish on a d'oyley, sprinkle over them sifted sugar, and serve.
these cannelons are very delicious made with fresh instead of preserved
fruit, such as strawberries, raspberries, or currants: it should be laid
in the paste, plenty of pounded sugar sprinkled over, and folded and
fried in the same manner as stated above.
time.—about  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient,—/ lb. of paste for a moderate-sized dish of cannelons.
seasonable, with jam, at any time.
. ingredients.—a few slices of rather stale bread / inch thick,
clarified butter, apple marmalade made by recipe no. , with about 
dozen apples, / glass of sherry.
[illustration: charlotte-aux-pommes.]
mode.—cut a slice of bread the same shape as the bottom of a plain
round mould, which has been well buttered, and a few strips the height
of the mould, and about -/ inch wide; dip the bread in clarified
butter (or spread it with cold butter, if not wanted quite so rich);
place the round piece at the bottom of the mould, and set the narrow
strips up the sides of it, overlapping each other a little, that no
juice from the apples may escape, and that they may hold firmly to the
mould. brush the interior over with white of egg (this will assist to
make the case firmer); fill it with apple marmalade made by recipe no.
, with the addition of a little sherry, and cover them with a round
piece of bread, also brushed over with egg, the same as the bottom;
slightly press the bread down, to make it adhere to the other pieces;
put a plate on the top, and bake the charlotte in a brisk oven, of a
light colour. turn it out on the dish, strew sifted sugar over the top,
and pour round it a little melted apricot jam.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour, / lb. of butter, / lb. of
powdered sugar, / teaspoonful of baking-powder,  egg, milk,  glass
of raisin-wine, apple marmalade no. , / pint of cream, 
dessertspoonfuls of pounded sugar,  tablespoonfuls of lemon-juice.
mode.—make a cake with the flour, butter, sugar, and baking-powder;
moisten with the egg and sufficient milk to make it the proper
consistency, and bake it in a round tin. when cold, scoop out the
middle, leaving a good thickness all round the sides, to prevent them
breaking; take some of the scooped-out pieces, which should be trimmed
into neat slices; lay them in the cake, and pour over sufficient
raisin-wine, with the addition of a little brandy, if approved, to soak
them well. have ready some apple marmalade, made by recipe no. ;
place a layer of this over the soaked cake, then a layer of cake and a
layer of apples; whip the cream to a froth, mixing with it the sugar and
lemon-juice; pile it on the top of the charlotte, and garnish it with
pieces of clear apple jelly. this dish is served cold, but may be eaten
hot, by omitting the cream, and merely garnishing the top with bright
jelly just before it is sent to table.
time.— hour to bake the cake. average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.— slices of bread and butter, about  good-sized
apples,  tablespoonful of minced lemon-peel,  tablespoonfuls of juice,
moist sugar to taste.
mode.—butter a pie-dish; place a layer of bread and butter, without
the crust, at the bottom; then a layer of apples, pared, cored, and cut
into thin slices; sprinkle over these a portion of the lemon-peel and
juice, and sweeten with moist sugar. place another layer of bread and
butter, and then one of apples, proceeding in this manner until the dish
is full; then cover it up with the peel of the apples, to preserve the
top from browning or burning; bake in a brisk oven for rather more than
/ hour; torn the charlotte on a dish, sprinkle sifted sugar over, and
serve.
time.—/ hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from july to march.
(an elegant sweet entremets.)
. ingredients.—about  savoy biscuits, / pint of cream,
flavouring of vanilla, liqueurs, or wine,  tablespoonful of pounded
sugar, / oz. of isinglass.
mode.—procure about  savoy biscuits, or ladies'-fingers, as they
are sometimes called; brush the edges of them with the white of an egg,
and line the bottom of a plain round mould, placing them like a star or
rosette. stand them upright all round the edge; carefully put them so
closely together that the white of the egg connects them firmly, and
place this case in the oven for about  minutes, just to dry the egg.
whisk the cream to a stiff froth, with the sugar, flavouring, and melted
isinglass; fill the charlotte with it, cover with a slice of sponge-cake
cut in the shape of the mould; place it in ice, where let it remain till
ready for table; then turn it on a dish, remove the mould, and serve. 
tablespoonful of liqueur of any kind, or  tablespoonfuls of wine, would
nicely flavour the above proportion of cream. for arranging the biscuits
in the mould, cut them to the shape required, so that they fit in
nicely, and level them with the mould at the top, that, when turned out,
there may be something firm to rest upon. great care and attention is
required in the turning out of this dish, that the cream does not burst
the case; and the edges of the biscuits must have the smallest quantity
of egg brushed over them, or it would stick to the mould, and so prevent
the charlotte from coming away properly.
time.— minutes in the oven.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s.
sufficient for  charlotte. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— sponge-cakes, jam, / pint of cream, sugar to
taste, the juice of / lemon, / glass of sherry, -/ oz. of
isinglass.
mode.—cut the sponge-cakes into thin slices; place two together, with
preserve between them, and pour over them a small quantity of sherry
mixed with a little brandy. sweeten and flavour the cream with the
lemon-juice and sherry; add the isinglass, which should be dissolved in
a little water, and beat up the cream well. place a little in an oiled
mould; arrange the pieces of cake in the cream; then fill the mould with
the remainder; let it cool, and turn it out on a dish. by oiling the
mould, the cream will have a much smoother appearance, and will turn out
more easily than when merely dipped in cold water.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill a -/ pint mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pint of milk,  eggs,  oz. of loaf sugar, 
laurel-leaves, or the rind of  lemon, or a few drops of essence of
vanilla,  tablespoonful of brandy.
[illustration: custards in glasses.]
mode.—put the milk into a lined saucepan, with the sugar, and
whichever of the above flavourings may be preferred (the lemon-rind
flavours custards most deliciously), and let the milk steep by the side
of the fire until it is well flavoured. bring it to the point of
boiling, then strain it into a basin; whisk the eggs well, and, when the
milk has cooled a little, stir in the eggs, and strain this mixture
into a jug. place this jug in a saucepan of boiling water over the fire;
keep stirring the custard one way until it thickens; but on no account
allow it to reach the boiling-point, as it will instantly curdle and be
full of lumps. take it off the fire, stir in the brandy, and, when this
is well mixed with the custard, pour it into glasses, which should be
rather more than three-parts full; grate a little nutmeg over the top,
and the dish is ready for table. to make custards look and eat better,
ducks' eggs should be used, when obtainable; they add very much to the
flavour and richness, and so many are not required as of the ordinary
eggs,  ducks' eggs to the pint of milk making a delicious custard. when
desired extremely rich and good, cream should be substituted for the
milk, and double the quantity of eggs used, to those mentioned, omitting
the whites.
time. / hour to infuse the lemon-rind, about  minutes to stir the
custard. average cost, d.
sufficient to fill  custard-glasses. seasonable at any time.
(a pretty supper or dessert dish.)
. ingredients.—-/ oz. of whole ginger, / pint of whiskey, 
lbs. of apples,  lbs. of white sugar, the juice of  lemons.
mode.—bruise the ginger, put it into a small jar, pour over
sufficient whiskey to cover it, and let it remain for  days; then cut
the apples into thin slices, after paring and coring them; add the sugar
and the lemon-juice, which should he strained; and simmer all together
very gently until the apples are transparent, but not broken. serve
cold, and garnish the dish with slices of candied lemon-peel or
preserved ginger.
time.— days to soak the ginger; about / hour to simmer the apples
very gently.
average cost, s, d.
sufficient for  dishes. seasonable from july to march.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of butter,  oz. of sifted sugar, 
oz. of flour, / pint of new milk.
mode.—beat the eggs thoroughly, and put them into a basin with the
butter, which should be beaten to a cream; stir in the sugar and flour,
and when these ingredients are well mixed, add the milk; keep stirring
and beating the mixture for a few minutes; put it on buttered plates,
and bake in a quick oven for  minutes. serve with a cut lemon and
sifted sugar, or pile the pancakes high on a dish, with a layer of
preserve or marmalade between each.
time.— minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ oz. of isinglass, the rind and juice of 
lemon,  pint of water,  eggs,  pint of sherry, madeira, or
raisin-wine; sifted sugar to taste.
mode.—put the water, isinglass, and lemon-rind into a lined saucepan,
and simmer gently until the isinglass is dissolved; strain this into a
basin, stir in the eggs, which should be well beaten, the lemon-juice,
which should be strained, and the wine; sweeten to taste with pounded
sugar, mix all well together, pour it into a jug, set this jug in a
saucepan of boiling water over the fire, and keep stirring it one way
until it thickens; but take care that it does not boil. strain it into
a mould that has been oiled or laid in water for a short time, and put
it in a cool place to set. a tablespoonful of brandy stirred in just
before it is poured into the mould, improves the flavour of this dish:
it is better if made the day before it is required for table.
time.—/ hour to simmer the isinglass; about / hour to stir the
mixture over the fire.
average cost, s. d., if made with sherry; less with raisin-wine.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
 pale sherries are made from the same grapes as brown. the latter
 are coloured by an addition of some cheap must, or wine which
 has been boiled till it has acquired a deep-brown tint. pale
 sherries were, some time ago, preferred in england, being
 supposed most pure; but the brown are preferred by many people.
 the inferior sherries exported to england are often mixed with a
 cheap and light wine called moguer, and are strengthened in the
 making by brandy; but too frequently they are adulterated by the
 london dealers.
. ingredients.— eggs,  teaspoonfuls of pounded sugar, 
teaspoonful of flour,  oz. of the best chocolate.
mode.—break the eggs, separating the whites from the yolks, and put
them into different basins; add to the yolks the sugar, flour, and
chocolate, which should be very finely grated, and stir these
ingredients for  minutes. then well whisk the whites of the eggs in the
other basin, until they are stiff, and, when firm, mix lightly with the
yolks, till the whole forms a smooth and light substance; butter a round
cake-tin, put in the mixture, and bake in a moderate oven from  to 
minutes. pin a white napkin round the tin, strew sifted sugar over the
top of the soufflé, and send it immediately to table. the proper
appearance of this dish depends entirely on the expedition with which it
is served, and some cooks, to preserve its lightness, hold a salamander
over the soufflé until it is placed on the table. if allowed to stand
after it comes from the oven, it will be entirely spoiled, as it falls
almost immediately.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for a moderate-sized soufflé. seasonable at any time.
(sweet entremets.)
. ingredients.—/ pint of milk, / pint of cream,  oz. of flour,
 oz. of pounded sugar,  eggs,  oz. of butter, puff-paste, flavouring
of essence of vanilla.
mode.—mix the flour to a smooth batter, with the milk; stir in the
cream, sugar, the eggs, which should be well whisked, and the butter,
which should be beaten to a cream. put in some essence of vanilla, drop
by drop, until the mixture is well flavoured; line some dariole-moulds
with puff-paste, three-parts fill them with the batter, and bake in a
good oven from  to  minutes. turn them out of the moulds on a dish,
without breaking them; strew over sifted sugar, and serve. the
flavouring of the darioles may be varied by substituting lemon,
cinnamon, or almonds, for the vanilla.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill  or  dariole-moulds. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ pint of milk,  tablespoonfuls of flour,  eggs,
 tablespoonfuls of boiled rice,  tablespoonfuls of currants, sugar to
taste, a very little grated nutmeg, hot lard or clarified dripping.
mode.—put the milk into a basin with the flour, which should
previously be rubbed to a smooth batter with a little cold milk; stir
these ingredients together; add the well-whisked eggs, the rice,
currants, sugar, and nutmeg. beat the mixture for a few minutes, and, if
not sufficiently thick, add a little more boiled rice; drop it, in small
quantities, into a pan of boiling lard or clarified dripping; fry the
fritters a nice brown, and, when done, drain them on a piece of
blotting-paper, before the fire. pile them on a white d'oyley, strew
over sifted sugar, and serve them very hot. send a cut lemon to table
with them.
time.—from  to  minutes to fry the fritters.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of grated chocolate, / lb. of sugar, -/
pint of cream, / oz. of clarified isinglass, the yolks of  eggs.
[illustration: cream-mould.]
mode.—beat the yolks of the eggs well; put them into a basin with the
grated chocolate, the sugar, and  pint of the cream; stir these
ingredients well together, pour them into a jug, and set this jug in a
saucepan of boiling water; stir it one way until the mixture thickens,
but do not allow it to boil, or it will curdle. strain the cream
through a sieve into a basin; stir in the isinglass and the other /
pint of cream, which should be well whipped; mix all well together, and
pour it into a mould which has been previously oiled with the purest
salad-oil, and, if at hand, set it in ice until wanted for table.
time.—about  minutes to stir the mixture over the fire.
average cost, s. d, with cream at s. per pint.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of butter,  oz. of flour,  oz. of
pounded sugar.
mode.—well whisk the eggs; put them into a basin, and stir to them
the butter, which should be beaten to a cream; add the flour and sifted
sugar gradually, and then mix all well together. butter a baking-sheet,
and drop on it a teaspoonful of the mixture at a time, leaving a space
between each. bake in a cool oven; watch the pieces of paste, and, when
half done, roll them up like wafers, and put in a small wedge of bread
or piece of wood, to keep them in shape. return them to the oven until
crisp. before serving, remove the bread, put a spoonful of preserve in
the widest end, and fill up with whipped cream. this is a very pretty
and ornamental dish for the supper-table, and is very nice and very
easily made.
time.—altogether  to  minutes.
average cost, exclusive of the preserve and cream, d.
sufficient for a nice-sized dish. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—the yolks of  eggs,  pint of cream,  oz. of
preserved ginger,  dessertspoonfuls of syrup, sifted sugar to taste, 
oz. of isinglass.
mode.—slice the ginger finely; put it into a basin with the syrup,
the well-beaten yolks of eggs, and the cream; mix these ingredients well
together, and stir them over the fire for about  minutes, or until the
mixture thickens; then take it off the fire, whisk till nearly cold,
sweeten to taste, add the isinglass, which should be melted and
strained, and serve the cream in a glass dish. it may be garnished with
slices of preserved ginger or candied citron.
time.—about  minutes to stir the cream over the fire.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s. d.
sufficient for a good-sized dish. seasonable at any time.
 preserved ginger comes to us from the west indies. it is made by
 scalding the roots when they are green and full of sap, then
 peeling them in cold water, and putting them into jars, with a
 rich syrup; in which state we receive them. it should be chosen
 of a bright-yellow colour, with a little transparency: what is
 dark-coloured, fibrous, and stringy, is not good. ginger roots,
 fit for preserving, and in size equal to west indian, have been
 produced in the royal agricultural garden in edinburgh.
. ingredients.—green gooseberries; to every pint of pulp add  pint
of milk, or / pint of cream and / pint of milk; sugar to taste.
mode.—cut the tops and tails off the gooseberries; put them into a
jar, with  tablespoonfuls of water and a little good moist sugar; set
this jar in a saucepan of boiling water, and let it boil until the fruit
is soft enough to mash. when done enough, beat it to a pulp, work this
pulp through a colander, and stir to every pint the above proportion of
milk, or equal quantities of milk and cream. ascertain if the mixture is
sweet enough, and put in plenty of sugar, or it will not be eatable; and
in mixing the milk and gooseberries, add the former very gradually to
these: serve in a glass dish, or in small glasses. this, although a very
old-fashioned and homely dish, is, when well made, very delicious, and,
if properly sweetened, a very suitable preparation for children.
time.—from / to  hour. average cost, d. per pint, with milk.
sufficient.—a pint of milk and a pint of gooseberry pulp for  or 
children.
seasonable in may and june.
. ingredients.— quart of gooseberries, sugar to taste,  pint of
custard no. , a plateful of whipped cream.
mode.—put the gooseberries into a jar, with sufficient moist sugar to
sweeten them, and boil them until reduced to a pulp. put this pulp at
the bottom of a trifle-dish; pour over it a pint of custard made by
recipe no. , and, when cold, cover with whipped cream. the cream
should be whipped the day before it is wanted for table, as it will then
be so much firmer and more solid. the dish may be garnished as fancy
dictates.
time.—about / hour to boil the gooseberries.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  trifle. seasonable in may and june.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of flour, boiling water, the yolks
of  eggs, the whites of , hot lard or clarified dripping, jam.
mode.—put the flour into a basin, and pour over it sufficient
boiling water to make it into a stiff paste, taking care to stir and
beat it well, to prevent it getting lumpy. leave it a little time to
cool, and then break into it (without beating them at first) the yolks
of  eggs and the whites of , and stir and beat all well together. have
ready some boiling lard or butter; drop a dessertspoonful of batter in
at a time, and fry the fritters of a light brown. they should rise so
much as to be almost like balls. serve on a dish, with a spoonful of
preserve or marmalade dropped in between each fritter. this is an
excellent dish for a hasty addition to dinner, if a guest unexpectedly
arrives, it being so easily and quickly made, and it is always a great
favourite.
time.—from  to  minutes to fry the fritters.
average cost, exclusive of the jam, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— quart of milk, the rind of / large lemon, sugar
to taste,  heaped tablespoonfuls of rice-flour,  oz. of sweet almonds,
/ pint of custard.
mode.—boil the milk and lemon-rind together until the former is well
flavoured; take out the lemon-rind and stir in the rice-flour, which
should first be moistened with cold milk, and add sufficient loaf sugar
to sweeten it nicely. boil gently for about  minutes, and keep the
mixture stirred; take it off the fire, let it cool a little, and pour
it into a glass dish. when cold, cut the rice out in the form of a star,
or any other shape that may be preferred; take out the spare rice, and
fill the space with boiled custard. blanch and cut the almonds into
strips; stick them over the trifle, and garnish it with pieces of
brightly-coloured jelly, or preserved fruits, or candied citron.
time.—/ hour to simmer the milk,  minutes after the rice is added.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  trifle.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: the citron.]
 the citron.—the citron belongs to the same species as the
 lemon, being considered only as a variety, the distinction
 between them not being very great. it is larger, and is less
 succulent, but more acid: with a little artificial heat, the
 citron comes to as great perfection in england as in spain and
 italy. the fruit is oblong and about five or six inches in
 length. the tree is thorny. the juice forms an excellent
 lemonade with sugar and water; its uses in punch, negus, and in
 medicine, are well known. the rind is very thick, and, when
 candied with sugar, forms an excellent sweetmeat. there are
 several varieties cultivated in england, one of which is termed
 the forbidden fruit.
. ingredients.— pint of milk,  pint of cream, sugar to taste, 
oz. of isinglass,  lemon, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—put the cream and milk into a saucepan, with sugar to sweeten,
and the lemon-rind. boil until the milk is well flavoured then strain it
into a basin, and add the beaten yolks of eggs. put this mixture into a
jug; place the jug in a saucepan of boiling water over the fire, and
stir the contents until they thicken, but do not allow them to boil.
take the cream off the fire, stir in the lemon-juice and isinglass,
which should be melted, and whip well; fill a mould, place it in ice if
at hand, and, when set, turn it out on a dish, and garnish as taste may
dictate. the mixture may be whipped and drained, and then put into small
glasses, when this mode of serving is preferred.
time.—from  to  minutes to stir the mixture in the jug.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s. d.
sufficient to fill -/-pint mould. seasonable at any time.
(a pretty supper dish.)
. ingredients.— eggs, a few slices of citron, sugar to taste, /
pint of cream, a layer of any kind of jam.
mode.—beat the whites and yolks of the eggs separately; then mix them
and beat well again, adding a few thin slices of citron, the cream, and
sufficient pounded sugar to sweeten it nicely. when the mixture is well
beaten, put it into a buttered pan, and fry the same as a pancake; but
it should be three times the thickness of an ordinary pancake. cover it
with jam, and garnish with slices of citron and holly-leaves. this dish
is served cold.
time.—about  minutes to fry the mixture.
average cost, with the jam, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of isinglass,  pint of water, / pint of
white wine, the rind and juice of  large lemon, sugar to taste, the
yolks of  eggs.
mode.—put the isinglass, water, and lemon-rind into a saucepan, and
boil gently until the former is dissolved; then add the strained
lemon-juice, the wine, and sufficient white sugar to sweeten the whole
nicely. boil for  or  minutes, strain the mixture into a jug, and add
the yolks of the eggs, which should be well beaten; place the jug in a
saucepan of boiling water; keep stirring the mixture one way until it
thickens, but do not allow it to boil; then take it off the fire, and
keep stirring until nearly cold. pour it into a mould, omitting the
sediment at the bottom of the jug, and let it remain until quite firm.
time.—/ hour to boil the isinglass and water; about  minutes to
stir the mixture in the jug.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s. d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
jelly moulded with fresh fruit, or macedoine de fruits.
. ingredients.—rather more than -/ pint of jelly, a few nice
strawberries, or red or white currants, or raspberries, or any fresh
fruit that may be in season.
mode.—have ready the above proportion of jelly, which must be very
clear and rather sweet, the raw fruit requiring an additional quantity
of sugar. select ripe, nice-looking fruit; pick off the stalks, unless
currants are used, when they are laid in the jelly as they come from the
tree. begin by putting a little jelly at the bottom of the mould, which
must harden; then arrange the fruit round the sides of the mould,
recollecting; that it will be reversed when turned out; then pour in
some more jelly to make the fruit adhere, and, when that layer is set,
put another row of fruit and jelly until the mould is full. if
convenient, put it in ice until required for table, then wring a cloth
in boiling water, wrap it round the mould for a minute, and turn the
jelly carefully out. peaches, apricots, plums, apples, &c., are better
for being boiled in a little clear syrup before they are laid in the
jelly; strawberries, raspberries, grapes, cherries, and currants are put
in raw. in winter, when fresh fruits are not obtainable, a very pretty
jelly may be made with preserved fruits or brandy cherries: these, in a
bright and clear jelly, have a very pretty effect; of course, unless the
jelly be very clear, the beauty of the dish will be spoiled. it may be
garnished with the same fruit as is laid in the jelly; for instance, an
open jelly with strawberries might have, piled in the centre, a few of
the same fruit prettily arranged, or a little whipped cream might be
substituted for the fruit.
[illustration: jelly moulded with cherries.]
time.—one layer of jelly should remain  hours in a very cool place,
before another layer is added. average cost, s. d.
sufficient, with fruit, to fill a quart mould.
seasonable, with fresh fruit, from june to october; with dried, at any
time.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of calf's-feet jelly no. , a few
drops of prepared cochineal.
[illustration: jelly of two colours.]
mode.—make -/ pint of jelly by recipe no. , or, if wished more
economical, of clarified syrup and gelatine, flavouring it in any way
that may be preferred. colour one-half of the jelly with a few drops of
prepared cochineal, and the other half leave as pale as possible. have
ready a mould well wetted in every part; pour in a small quantity of the
red jelly, and let this set; when quite firm, pour on it the same
quantity of the pale jelly, and let this set; then proceed in this
manner until the mould is full, always taking care to let one jelly set
before the other is poured in, or the colours would run one into the
other. when turned out, the jelly should have a striped appearance. for
variety, half the mould may be filled at once with one of the jellies,
and, when firm, filled up with the other: this, also, has a very pretty
effect, and is more expeditiously prepared than when the jelly is poured
in small quantities into the mould. blancmange and red jelly, or
blancmange and raspberry cream, moulded in the above manner, look very
well. the layers of blancmange and jelly should be about an inch in
depth, and each layer should be perfectly hardened before another is
added. half a mould of blancmange and half a mould of jelly are
frequently served in the same manner. a few pretty dishes may be made,
in this way, of jellies or blancmanges left from the preceding day, by
melting them separately in a jug placed in a saucepan of boiling water,
and then moulding them by the foregoing directions. (see coloured plate
time.—/ hour to make the jelly.
average cost, with calf's-feet jelly, s.; with gelatine and syrup,
more economical.
sufficient to fill -/ pint mould. seasonable at any time.
note.—in making the jelly, use for flavouring a very pale sherry, or
the colour will be too dark to contrast nicely with the red jelly.
. ingredients.— quart of milk, the yolks of  eggs,  oz. of
ground rice,  oz. of pounded sugar, -/ oz. of fresh butter, the rind
of  lemon, the juice of , / oz. of gelatine.
[illustration: blancmange mould.]
mode.—make a custard with the yolks of the eggs and / pint of the
milk, and, when done, put it into a basin: put half the remainder of the
milk into a saucepan with the ground rice, fresh butter, lemon-rind, and
 oz. of the sugar, and let these ingredients boil until the mixture is
stiff, stirring them continually; when done, pour it into the bowl where
the custard is, mixing both well together. put the gelatine with the
rest of the milk into a saucepan, and let it stand by the side of the
fire to dissolve; boil for a minute or two, stir carefully into the
basin, adding  oz. more of pounded sugar. when cold, stir in the
lemon-juice, which should be carefully strained, and pour the mixture
into a well-oiled mould, leaving out the lemon-peel, and set the mould
in a pan of cold water until wanted for table. use eggs that have
rich-looking yolks; and, should the weather be very warm, rather a
larger proportion of gelatine must be allowed.
time.—altogether,  hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill  small moulds. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pint of cream, the yolks of  eggs, / lb. of
white sugar,  large lemon,  oz. of isinglass.
[illustration: lemon-cream mould.]
mode.—put the cream into a lined saucepan with the sugar,
lemon-peel, and isinglass, and simmer these over a gentle fire for about
 minutes, stirring them all the time. strain the cream into a jug, add
the yolks of eggs, which should be well beaten, and put the jug into a
saucepan of boiling water; stir the mixture one way until it thickens,
but do not allow it to boil; take it off the fire, and keep stirring
it until nearly cold. strain the lemon-juice into a basin, gradually
pour on it the cream, and stir it well until the juice is well mixed
with it. have ready a well-oiled mould, pour the cream into it, and let
it remain until perfectly set. when required for table, loosen the edges
with a small blunt knife, put a dish on the top of the mould, turn it
over quickly, and the cream should easily slip away.
time.— minutes to boil the cream; about  minutes to stir it over
the fire in the jug.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, and the best isinglass, s.
d.
sufficient to fill -/-pint mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— quart of milk,  bitter almonds,  oz. of
gelatine,  large lemons, / lb. of lump sugar, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—put the milk into a lined saucepan with the almonds, which
should be well pounded in a mortar, the gelatine, lemon-rind, and lump
sugar, and boil these ingredients for about  minutes. beat up the yolks
of the eggs, strain the milk into a jug, add the eggs, and pour the
mixture backwards and forwards a few times, until nearly cold; then stir
briskly to it the lemon-juice, which should be strained, and keep
stirring until the cream is almost cold: put it into an oiled mould, and
let it remain until perfectly set. the lemon-juice must not be added to
the cream when it is warm, and should be well stirred after it is put
in.
time.— minutes to boil the milk. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill two -/-pint moulds. seasonable at any time.
(very good.)
. ingredients.— pint of cream,  dozen sweet almonds,  glasses of
sherry, the rind and juice of  lemons, sugar to taste.
mode.—blanch and chop the almonds, and put them into a jug with the
cream; in another jug put the sherry, lemon-rind, strained juice, and
sufficient pounded sugar to sweeten the whole nicely. pour rapidly from
one jug to the other till the mixture is well frothed; then, pour it
into jelly-glasses, omitting the lemon-rind. this is a very cool and
delicious sweet for summer, and may be made less rich by omitting the
almonds and substituting orange or raisin wine for the sherry.
time.—altogether, / hour.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s.
sufficient to fill  glasses. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of loaf sugar,  pints of boiling water, the
rind of  lemon and the juice of , the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—make a quart of lemonade in the following manner:—dissolve the
sugar in the boiling water, having previously, with part of the sugar,
rubbed off the lemon-rind, and add the strained juice. strain the
lemonade into a saucepan, and add the yolks of the eggs, which should be
well beaten; stir this one way over the fire until the mixture
thickens, but do not allow it to boil, and serve in custard-glasses, or
on a glass dish. after the boiling water is poured on the sugar and
lemon, it should stand covered for about / hour before the eggs are
added to it, that the flavour of the rind may be extracted.
time.—/ hour to make the lemonade; about  minutes to stir the
custard over the fire.
average cost, s.
sufficient to fill  to  custard-glasses. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lemons, / lb. of lump sugar,  pint of water,
-/ oz. of isinglass, / pint of sherry.
mode.—peel  of the lemons, pour / pint of boiling water on the
rind, and let it infuse for / hour; put the sugar, isinglass, and /
pint of water into a lined saucepan, and boil these ingredients for 
minutes; then put in the strained lemon-juice, the strained infusion of
the rind, and bring the whole to the point of boiling; skim well, add
the wine, and run the jelly through a bag; pour it into a mould that has
been wetted or soaked in water; put it in ice, if convenient, where let
it remain until required for table. previously to adding the lemon-juice
to the other ingredients, ascertain that it is very nicely strained, as,
if this is not properly attended to, it is liable to make the jelly
thick and muddy. as this jelly is very pale, and almost colourless, it
answers very well for moulding with a jelly of any bright hue; for
instance, half a jelly bright red, and the other half made of the above,
would have a very good effect. lemon jelly may also be made with
calf's-feet stock, allowing the juice of  lemons to every pint of
stock.
time.—altogether,  hour.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s. d.
sufficient to fill -/-pint mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of isinglass, -/ pint of water, / lb. of
pounded sugar, the juice of  lemons, the rind of , the whites of 
eggs.
mode.—dissolve the isinglass in the water, strain it into a saucepan,
and add the sugar, lemon-rind, and juice. boil the whole from  to 
minutes; strain it again, and let it stand till it is cold and begins to
stiffen. beat the whites of the eggs, put them to it, and whisk the
mixture till it is quite white; put it into a mould which has been
previously wetted, and let it remain until perfectly set; then turn it
out, and garnish it according to taste.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, with the best isinglass, s.
d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of lump sugar,  oz. of isinglass, -/ pint
of water, the juice of  lemons, / pint of liqueur.
[illustration: oval jelly-mould.]
mode.—put the sugar, with  pint of the water, into a stewpan, and
boil them gently by the side of the fire until there is no scum
remaining, which must be carefully removed as fast as it rises. boil the
isinglass with the other / pint of water, and skim it carefully in the
same manner. strain the lemon-juice, and add it, with the clarified
isinglass, to the syrup; put in the liqueur, and bring the whole to the
boiling-point. let the saucepan remain covered by the side of the fire
for a few minutes; then pour the jelly through a bag, put it into a
mould, and set the mould in ice until required for table. dip the mould
in hot water, wipe the outside, loosen the jelly by passing a knife
round the edges, and turn it out carefully on a dish. noyeau,
maraschino, curaçoa, brandy, or any kind of liqueur, answers for this
jelly; and, when made with isinglass, liqueur jellies are usually
prepared as directed above.
time.— minutes to boil the sugar and water.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s. d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of macaroni, -/ pint of milk, the rind of
/ lemon,  oz. of lump sugar, / pint of custard no. .
mode.—put the milk into a saucepan, with the lemon-peel and sugar;
bring it to the boiling-point, drop in the macaroni, and let it
gradually swell over a gentle fire, but do not allow the pipes to break.
the form should be entirely preserved; and, though tender, should be
firm, and not soft, with no part beginning to melt. should the milk dry
away before the macaroni is sufficiently swelled, add a little more.
make a custard by recipe no. ; place the macaroni on a dish, and
pour the custard over the hot macaroni; grate over it a little nutmeg,
and, when cold, garnish the dish with slices of candied citron.
time.—from  to  minutes to swell the macaroni.
average cost, with the custard, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of pounded sugar, the whites of  eggs.
[illustration: meringues.]
mode.—whisk the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, and, with a
wooden spoon, stir in quickly the pounded sugar; and have some boards
thick enough to put in the oven to prevent the bottom of the meringues
from acquiring too much colour. cut some strips of paper about  inches
wide; place this paper on the board, and drop a tablespoonful at a time
of the mixture on the paper, taking care to let all the meringues be the
same size. in dropping it from the spoon, give the mixture the form of
an egg, and keep the meringues about  inches apart from each other on
the paper. strew over them some sifted sugar, and bake in a moderate
oven for / hour. as soon as they begin to colour, remove them from the
oven; take each slip of paper by the two ends, and turn it gently on the
table, and, with a small spoon, take out the soft part of each meringue.
spread some clean paper on the board, turn the meringues upside down,
and put them into the oven to harden and brown on the other side. when
required for table, fill them with whipped cream, flavoured with liqueur
or vanilla, and sweetened with pounded sugar. join two of the meringues
together, and pile them high in the dish, as shown in the annexed
drawing. to vary their appearance, finely-chopped almonds or currants
may be strewn over them before the sugar is sprinkled over; and they may
be garnished with any bright-coloured preserve. great expedition is
necessary in making this sweet dish; as, if the meringues are not put
into the oven as soon as the sugar and eggs are mixed, the former melts,
and the mixture would run on the paper, instead of keeping its
egg-shape. the sweeter the meringues are made, the crisper will they be;
but, if there is not sufficient sugar mixed with them, they will most
likely be tough. they are sometimes coloured with cochineal; and, if
kept well covered in a dry place, will remain good for a month or six
weeks.
time.—altogether, about / hour.
average cost, with the cream and flavouring, s.
sufficient to make  dozen meringues. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ oz. of isinglass, the juice of  lemons,
noyeau and pounded sugar to taste, -/ pint of cream.
mode.—dissolve the isinglass in a little boiling water, add the
lemon-juice, and strain this to the cream, putting in sufficient noyeau
and sugar to flavour and sweeten the mixture nicely; whisk the cream
well, put it into an oiled mould, and set the mould in ice or in a cool
place; turn it out, and garnish the dish to taste.
time.—altogether, / hour.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint and the best isinglass, s.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
(a very pretty dish.)
. ingredients.—-/ pint of jelly, / pint of cream,  glass of
sherry, sugar to taste.
[illustration: open jelly with whipped cream.]
mode.—make the above proportion of calf's-feet or isinglass jelly,
colouring and flavouring it in any way that may be preferred; soak a
mould, open in the centre, for about / hour in cold water; fill it
with the jelly, and let it remain in a cool place until perfectly set;
then turn it out on a dish; fill the centre with whipped cream,
flavoured with sherry and sweetened with pounded sugar; pile this cream
high in the centre, and serve. the jelly should be made of rather a dark
colour, to contrast nicely with the cream.
time.—/ hour. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill -/-pint mould. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pint of water, -/ to  oz. of isinglass, /
lb. of loaf sugar,  seville orange,  lemon, about  china oranges.
[illustration: open mould.]
mode.—put the water into a saucepan, with the isinglass, sugar, and
the rind of  orange, and the same of / lemon, and stir these over the
fire until the isinglass is dissolved, and remove the scum; then add to
this the juice of the seville orange, the juice of the lemon, and
sufficient juice of china oranges to make in all  pint; from  to 
oranges will yield the desired quantity. stir all together over the fire
until it is just on the point of boiling; skim well; then strain the
jelly through a very fine sieve or jelly-bag, and when nearly cold, put
it into a mould previously wetted, and, when quite set, turn it out on a
dish, and garnish it to taste. to insure this jelly being clear, the
orange-and lemon-juice should be well strained, and the isinglass
clarified, before they are added to the other ingredients, and, to
heighten the colour, a few drops of prepared cochineal may be added.
time.— minutes to boil without the juice;  minute after it is
added.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s. d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable from november to may.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of orange jelly no. ,  oranges, 
pint of clarified syrup.
mode.—boil / lb. of loaf sugar with / pint of water until there
is no scum left (which must be carefully removed as fast as it rises),
and carefully peel the oranges; divide them into thin slices, without
breaking the thin skin, and put these pieces of orange into the syrup,
where let them remain for about  minutes; then take them out, and use
the syrup for the jelly, which should be made by recipe no. . when
the oranges are well drained, and the jelly is nearly cold, pour a
little of the latter into the bottom of the mould; then lay in a few
pieces of orange; over these pour a little jelly, and when this is set,
place another layer of oranges, proceeding in this manner until the
mould is full. put it in ice, or in a cool place, and, before turning it
out, wrap a cloth round the mould for a minute or two, which has been
wrung out in boiling water.
time.— minutes to simmer the oranges. average cost, s. d.
sufficient, with the slices of orange, to fill a quart mould.
seasonable from november to may.
. ingredients.— eggs,  saltspoonful of salt, / saltspoonful of
pepper, / lb. of butter.
[illustration: omelet.]
mode.—break the eggs into a basin, omitting the whites of , and beat
them up with the salt and pepper until extremely light; then add  oz.
of the butter broken into small pieces, and stir this into the mixture.
put the other  oz. of butter into a frying-pan, make it quite hot, and,
as soon as it begins to bubble, whisk the eggs, &c. very briskly for a
minute or two, and pour them into the pan; stir the omelet with a spoon
one way until the mixture thickens and becomes firm, and when the whole
is set, fold the edges over, so that the omelet assumes an oval form;
and when it is nicely brown on one side, and quite firm, it is done. to
take off the rawness on the upper side, hold the pan before the fire for
a minute or two, and brown it with a salamander or hot shovel. serve
very expeditiously on a very hot dish, and never cook it until it is
just wanted. the flavour of this omelet may be very much enhanced by
adding minced parsley, minced onion or eschalot, or grated cheese,
allowing  tablespoonful of the former, and half the quantity of the
latter, to the above proportion of eggs. shrimps or oysters may also be
added: the latter should be scalded in their liquor, and then bearded
and cut into small pieces. in making an omelet, be particularly careful
that it is not too thin, and, to avoid this, do not make it in too large
a frying-pan, as the mixture would then spread too much, and taste of
the outside. it should also not be greasy, burnt, or too much done, and
should be cooked over a gentle fire, that the whole of the substance may
be heated without drying up the outside. omelets are sometimes served
with gravy; but this should never be poured over them, but served in a
tureen, as the liquid causes the omelet to become heavy and flat,
instead of eating light and soft. in making the gravy, the flavour
should not overpower that of the omelet, and should be thickened with
arrowroot or rice flour.
time.—with  eggs, in a frying-pan  or  inches round,  to 
minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
ham omelet (a delicious breakfast dish.)
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of butter, / saltspoonful of pepper,
 tablespoonfuls of minced ham.
mode.—mince the ham very finely, without any fat, and fry it for 
minutes in a little butter; then make the batter for the omelet, stir in
the ham, and proceed as directed in recipe no. . do not add any salt
to the batter, as the ham is usually sufficiently salt to impart a
flavour to the omelet. good lean bacon, or tongue, answers equally well
for this dish; but they must also be slightly cooked previously to
mixing them with the batter. serve very hot and quickly, without gravy.
time.—from  to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
kidney omelet (a favourite french dish.)
. ingredients.— eggs,  saltspoonful of salt, / saltspoonful of
pepper,  sheep's kidneys, or  tablespoonfuls of minced veal kidney, 
oz. of butter.
mode.—skin the kidneys, cut them into small dice, and toss them in a
frying-pan, in  oz. of butter, over the fire for  or  minutes. mix
the ingredients for the omelet the same as in recipe no. , and when
the eggs are well whisked, stir in the pieces of kidney. make the butter
hot in the frying-pan, and when it bubbles, pour in the omelet, and fry
it over a gentle fire from  to  minutes. when the eggs are set, fold
the edges over, so that the omelet assumes an oval form, and be careful
that it is not too much done: to brown the top, hold the pan before the
fire for a minute or two, or use a salamander until the desired colour
is obtained, but never turn an omelet in the pan. slip it carefully on
to a very hot dish, or, what is a much safer method, put a dish on the
omelet, and turn the pan quickly over. it should be served the instant
it comes from the fire.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of butter,  oz. of sifted sugar.
mode.—break the eggs into a basin, omitting the whites of ; whisk
them well, adding the sugar and  oz. of the butter, which should be
broken into small pieces, and stir all these ingredients well together.
make the remainder of the butter quite hot in a small frying-pan, and
when it commences to bubble, pour in the eggs, &c. keep stirring them
until they begin to set; then turn the edges of the omelet over, to make
it an oval shape, and finish cooking it. to brown the top, hold the pan
before the fire, or use a salamander, and turn it carefully on to a
very hot dish: sprinkle sifted sugar over, and serve.
time.—from  to  minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
omelette aux confitures, or jam omelet.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of butter,  tablespoonfuls of
apricot, strawberry, or any jam that may be preferred.
mode.—make the omelet by recipe no. , only instead of doubling it
over, leave it flat in the pan. when quite firm, and nicely brown on one
side, turn it carefully on to a hot dish, spread over the middle of it
the jam, and fold the omelet over on each side; sprinkle sifted sugar
over, and serve very quickly. a pretty dish of small omelets may be made
by dividing the batter into  or  portions, and frying them separately;
they should then be spread each one with a different kind of preserve,
and the omelets rolled over. always sprinkle sweet omelets with sifted
sugar before being sent to table.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of pounded sugar, flavouring of
vanilla, orange-flower water, or lemon-rind,  oz. of butter, 
dessert-spoonful of rice-flour.
mode.—separate the yolks from the whites of the eggs, add to the
former the sugar, the rice-flour, and either of the above flavourings
that may be preferred, and stir these ingredients well together. whip
the whites of the eggs, mix them lightly with the batter, and put the
butter into a small frying-pan. as soon as it begins to bubble, pour the
batter into it, and set the pan over a bright but gentle fire; and when
the omelet is set, turn the edges over to make it an oval shape, and
slip it on to a silver dish, which has been previously well buttered.
put it in the oven, and bake from  to  minutes; sprinkle
finely-powdered sugar over the soufflé, and serve it immediately.
time.—about  minutes in the pan; to bake, from  to  minutes.
average cost. s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— or  eggs,  oz. of butter,  teaspoonful of
flour, / teacupful of milk.
mode.—make a thin cream of the flour and milk; then beat up the eggs,
mix all together, and add a pinch of salt and a few grains of cayenne.
melt the butter in a small frying-pan, and, when very hot, pour in the
batter. let the pan remain for a few minutes over a clear fire; then
sprinkle upon the omelet some chopped herbs and a few shreds of onion;
double the omelet dexterously, and shake it out of the pan on to a hot
dish. a simple sweet omelet can be made by the same process,
substituting sugar or preserve for the chopped herbs.
time.— minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of isinglass,  large oranges,  lemon, sugar
to taste, water, / pint of good cream.
[illustration: open mould.]
mode.—squeeze the juice from the oranges and lemon; strain it, and
put it into a saucepan with the isinglass, and sufficient water to make
in all -/ pint. rub the sugar on the orange and lemon-rind, add it to
the other ingredients, and boil all together for about  minutes.
strain through a muslin bag, and, when cold, beat up with it / pint of
thick cream. wet a mould, or soak it in cold water; pour in the cream,
and put it in a cool place to set. if the weather is very cold,  oz. of
isinglass will be found sufficient for the above proportion of
ingredients.
time.— minutes to boil the juice and water.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s.
sufficient to fill a quart mould.
seasonable from november to may.
. ingredients.— seville orange,  tablespoonful of brandy, / lb.
of loaf sugar, the yolks of  eggs,  pint of cream.
mode.—boil the rind of the seville orange until tender, and beat it
in a mortar to a pulp; add to it the brandy, the strained juice of the
orange, and the sugar, and beat all together for about  minutes,
adding the well-beaten yolks of eggs. bring the cream to the
boiling-point, and pour it very gradually to the other ingredients, and
beat the mixture till nearly cold; put it into custard-cups, place the
cups in a deep dish of boiling water, where let them remain till quite
cold. take the cups out of the water, wipe them, and garnish the tops of
the creams with candied orange-peel or preserved chips.
time.—altogether, / hour.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s. d.
sufficient to make  or  creams.
seasonable from november to may.
note.—to render this dish more economical, substitute milk for the
cream, but add a small pinch of isinglass to make the creams firm.
 seville orange (citrus vulgaris).—this variety, called also
 bitter orange, is of the same species as the sweet orange, and
 grows in great abundance on the banks of the guadalquiver, in
 andalusia, whence this fruit is chiefly obtained. in that part
 of spain there are very extensive orchards of these oranges,
 which form the chief wealth of the monasteries. the pulp of the
 bitter orange is not eaten raw. in the yellow rind, separated
 from the white spongy substance immediately below it, is
 contained an essential oil, which is an agreeable warm aromatic,
 much superior for many purposes to that of the common orange.
 the best marmalade and the richest wine are made from this
 orange; and from its flowers the best orange-flower water is
 distilled. seville oranges are also preserved whole as a
 sweetmeat.
. ingredients.—for the batter, / lb. of flour, / oz. of butter,
/ saltspoonful of salt,  eggs, milk, oranges, hot lard or clarified
dripping.
mode.—make a nice light batter with the above proportion of flour,
butter, salt, eggs, and sufficient milk to make it the proper
consistency; peel the oranges, remove as much of the white skin as
possible, and divide each orange into eight pieces, without breaking the
thin skin, unless it be to remove the pips; dip each piece of orange in
the batter. have ready a pan of boiling lard or clarified dripping; drop
in the oranges, and fry them a delicate brown from  to  minutes. when
done, lay them on a piece of blotting-paper before the fire, to drain
away the greasy moisture, and dish them on a white d'oyley; sprinkle
over them plenty of pounded sugar, and serve quickly.
time.— to  minutes to fry the fritters;  minutes to drain them.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to may.
. ingredients.— large oranges, / lb. of loaf sugar, / pint of
water, / pint of cream,  tablespoonfuls of any kind of liqueur, sugar
to taste.
mode.—put the sugar and water into a saucepan, and boil them until
the sugar becomes brittle, which may be ascertained by taking up a small
quantity in a spoon, and dipping it in cold water; if the sugar is
sufficiently boiled, it will easily snap. peel the oranges, remove as
much of the white pith as possible, and divide them into nice-sized
slices, without breaking the thin white skin which surrounds the juicy
pulp. place the pieces of orange on small skewers, dip them into the hot
sugar, and arrange them in layers round a plain mould, which should be
well oiled with the purest salad-oil. the sides of the mould only should
be lined with the oranges, and the centre left open for the cream. let
the sugar become firm by cooling; turn the oranges carefully out on a
dish, and fill the centre with whipped cream, flavoured with any kind of
liqueur, and sweetened with pounded sugar. this is an exceedingly
ornamental and nice dish for the supper-table.
time.— minutes to boil the sugar. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  mould. seasonable from november to may.
. ingredients.—eggs, flour, milk; to every egg allow  oz. of
flour, about  gill of milk, / saltspoonful of salt.
[illustration: pancakes.]
mode.—ascertain that the eggs are fresh; break each one separately in
a cup; whisk them well, put them into a basin, with the flour, salt, and
a few drops of milk, and beat the whole to a perfectly smooth batter;
then add by degrees the remainder of the milk. the proportion of this
latter ingredient must be regulated by the size of the eggs, &c. &c.;
but the batter, when ready for frying, should be of the consistency of
thick cream. place a small frying-pan on the fire to get hot; let it be
delicately clean, or the pancakes will stick, and, when quite hot, put
into it a small piece of butter, allowing about / oz. to each pancake.
when it is melted, pour in the batter, about / teacupful to a pan 
inches in diameter, and fry it for about  minutes, or until it is
nicely brown on one side. by only pouring in a small quantity of batter,
and so making the pancakes thin, the necessity of turning them (an
operation rather difficult to unskilful cooks) is obviated. when the
pancake is done, sprinkle over it some pounded sugar, roll it up in the
pan, and take it out with a large slice, and place it on a dish before
the fire. proceed in this manner until sufficient are cooked for a dish;
then send them quickly to table, and continue to send in a further
quantity, as pancakes are never good unless eaten almost immediately
they come from the frying-pan. the batter may be flavoured with a little
grated lemon-rind, or the pancakes may have preserve rolled in them
instead of sugar. send sifted sugar and a cut lemon to table with them.
to render the pancakes very light, the yolks and whites of the eggs
should be beaten separately, and the whites added the last thing to the
batter before frying.
time.—from  to  minutes for a pancake that does not require
turning; from  to  minutes for a thicker one.
average cost, for  persons, d.
sufficient.—allow  eggs, with the other ingredients in proportion,
for  persons.
seasonable at any time, but specially served on shrove tuesday.
. ingredients.— eggs,  pint of cream, / lb. of loaf sugar, 
glass of sherry, / teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, flour.
mode.—ascertain that the eggs are extremely fresh, beat them well,
strain and mix with them the cream, pounded sugar, wine, nutmeg, and as
much flour as will make the batter nearly as thick as that for ordinary
pancakes. make the frying-pan hot, wipe it with a clean cloth, pour in
sufficient batter to make a thin pancake, and fry it for about 
minutes. dish the pancakes piled one above the other, strew sifted sugar
between each, and serve.
time.—about  minutes.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s. d.
sufficient to make  pancakes.
seasonable at any time, but specially served on shrove tuesday.
. ingredients.—for the batter: / lb. of flour, / oz. of butter,
/ saltspoonful of salt,  eggs, milk;—peaches, hot lard or clarified
dripping.
mode.—make a nice smooth, batter in the same manner as directed in
recipe no. , and skin, halve, and stone the peaches, which should be
quite ripe; dip them in the batter, and fry the pieces in hot lard or
clarified dripping, which should be brought to the boiling-point before
the peaches are put in. from  to  minutes will be required to fry
them, and, when done, drain them before the fire, and dish them on a
white d'oyley. strew over plenty of pounded sugar, and serve.
time.—from  to  minutes to fry the fritters,  minutes to drain
them.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in july, august, and september.
[illustration: peach.]
 peach.—the peach and nectarine are amongst the most delicious
 of our fruits, and are considered as varieties of the same
 species produced by cultivation. the former is characterized by
 a very delicate down, while the latter is smooth; but, as a
 proof of their identity as to species, trees have borne peaches
 in one part and nectarines in another; and even a single fruit
 has had down on one side and the other smooth. the trees are
 almost exactly alike, as well as the blossoms. pliny states that
 the peach was originally brought from persia, where it grows
 naturally, from which the name of persica was bestowed upon it
 by the romans; and some modern botanists apply this as the
 generic name, separating them from amygdalus, or almond, to
 which linnaeus had united them. although they are not tropical,
 they require a great deal of warmth to bring them to perfection:
 hence they seldom ripen in this country, in ordinary seasons,
 without the use of walls or glass; consequently, they bear a
 high price. in a good peach, the flesh is firm, the skin thin,
 of a deep bright colour next the sun and of a yellowish green
 next to the wall; the pulp is yellowish, full of
 highly-flavoured juice, the fleshy part thick, and the stone
 small. too much down is a sign of inferior quality. this fruit
 is much used at the dessert, and makes a delicious preserve.
. ingredients.— to  pears, water, sugar,  oz. of butter, the
yolk of an egg, / oz. of gelatine.
mode.—peel and cut the pears into any form that may be preferred, and
steep them in cold water to prevent them turning black; put them into a
saucepan with sufficient cold water to cover them, and boil them with
the butter and enough sugar to sweeten them nicely, until tender; then
brush the pears over with the yolk of an egg, sprinkle them with sifted
sugar, and arrange them on a dish. add the gelatine to the syrup, boil
it up quickly for about  minutes, strain it over the pears, and let it
remain until set. the syrup may be coloured with a little prepared
cochineal, which would very much improve the appearance of the dish.
time.—from  minutes to / hour to stew the pears;  minutes to
boil the syrup.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for a large dish.
seasonable from august to february.
. ingredients.— large pears or  small ones,  cloves, sugar to
taste, water, a small piece of cinnamon, / pint of raisin wine, a
strip of lemon-peel, the juice of / lemon, / oz. of gelatine.
mode.—peel and cut the pears into quarters; put them into a jar with
/ pint of water, cloves, cinnamon, and sufficient sugar to sweeten the
whole nicely; cover down the top of the jar, and bake the pears in a
gentle oven until perfectly tender, but do not allow them to break. when
done, lay the pears in a plain mould, which should be well wetted, and
boil / pint of the liquor the pears were baked in with the wine,
lemon-peel, strained juice, and gelatine. let these ingredients boil
quickly for  minutes, then strain the liquid warm over the pears; put
the mould in a cool place, and when the jelly is firm, turn it out on a
glass dish.
time.— hours to bake the pears in a cool oven.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for a quart mould.
seasonable from august to february
(an elegant dish.)
. ingredients.—a small pineapple, a small wineglassful of brandy or
liqueur,  oz. of sifted sugar; batter as for apple fritters no. .
mode.—this elegant dish, although it may appear extravagant, is
really not so if made when pineapples are plentiful. we receive them now
in such large quantities from the west indies, that at times they may be
purchased at an exceedingly low rate: it would not, of course, be
economical to use the pines which are grown in our english pineries for
the purposes of fritters. pare the pine with as little waste as
possible, cut it into rather thin slices, and soak these slices in the
above proportion of brandy or liqueur and pounded sugar for  hours;
then make a batter the same as for apple fritters, substituting cream
for the milk, and using a smaller quantity of flour; and, when this is
ready, dip in the pieces of pine, and fry them in boiling lard from  to
 minutes; turn them when sufficiently brown on one side, and, when
done, drain them from the lard before the fire, dish them on a white
d'oyley, strew over them sifted sugar, and serve quickly.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, when cheap and plentiful, s. d. for the pine.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in july and august.
 pineapple.—the pineapple has not been known in europe above two
 hundred years, and has not been cultivated in england much above
 a century. it is stated that the first pineapples raised in
 europe were by m. la cour, of leyden, about the middle of the
 th century; and it is said to have been first cultivated in
 england by sir matthew decker, of richmond. in kensington
 palace, there is a picture in which charles ii. is represented
 as receiving a pineapple from his gardener rose, who is
 presenting it on his knees.
. ingredients.— oz. of flour,  eggs, / pint of milk.
[illustration: star fritter-mould.]
mode.—mix the flour to a smooth batter with a small quantity of the
milk; stir in the eggs, which should be well whisked, and then the
remainder of the milk; boat the whole to a perfectly smooth batter, and
should it be found not quite thin enough, add two or three
tablespoonfuls more milk. have ready a frying-pan, with plenty of
boiling lard in it; drop in rather more than a tablespoonful at a time
of the batter, and fry the fritters a nice brown, turning them when
sufficiently cooked on one side. drain them well from the greasy
moisture by placing them upon a piece of blotting-paper before the
fire; dish them on a white d'oyley, sprinkle over them sifted sugar, and
send to table with them a cut lemon and plenty of pounded sugar.
time.—from  to  minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— large potatoes,  eggs,  tablespoonfuls of cream,
 ditto of raisin or sweet wine,  dessertspoonful of lemon-juice, 
teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, hot lard.
[illustration: scroll fritter-mould.]
mode.—boil the potatoes, and beat them up lightly with a fork, but do
not use a spoon, as that would make them heavy. beat the eggs well,
leaving out one of the whites; add the other ingredients, and beat all
together for at least  minutes, or until the batter is extremely
light. put plenty of good lard into a frying-pan, and drop a
tablespoonful of the batter at a time into it, and fry the fritters a
nice brown. serve them with the following sauce:—a glass of sherry
mixed with the strained juice of a lemon, and sufficient white sugar to
sweeten the whole nicely. warm these ingredients, and serve the sauce
separately in a tureen. the fritters should be neatly dished on a white
d'oyley, and pounded sugar sprinkled over them; and they should be well
drained on a piece of blotting-paper before the fire previously to being
dished.
time.—from  to  minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ pint of milk, / pint of cream, -/ oz. of
isinglass, raspberry jelly, sugar to taste,  tablespoonfuls of brandy.
[illustration: raspberry cream mould.]
mode.—boil the milk, cream, and isinglass together for / hour, or
until the latter is melted, and strain it through a hair sieve into a
basin. let it cool a little; then add to it sufficient raspberry jelly,
which, when melted, would make / pint, and stir well till the
ingredients are thoroughly mixed. if not sufficiently sweet, add a
little pounded sugar with the brandy; whisk the mixture well until
nearly cold, put it into a well-oiled mould, and set it in a cool place
till perfectly set. raspberry jam may be substituted for the jelly, but
must be melted, and rubbed through a sieve, to free it from seeds: in
summer, the juice of the fresh fruit may be used, by slightly mashing it
with a wooden spoon, and sprinkling sugar over it; the juice that flows
from the fruit should then be used for mixing with the cream. if the
colour should not be very good, a few drops of prepared cochineal may be
added to improve its appearance. (see coloured plate t.)
time.—/ hour to boil the cream and isinglass.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, and the best isinglass, s.
sufficient to fill a quart mould.
seasonable, with jelly, at any time.
note.—strawberry cream may be made in precisely the same manner,
substituting strawberry jam or jelly for the raspberry.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of ground rice,  oz. of loaf sugar,  oz.
of fresh butter,  quart of milk, flavouring of lemon-peel, essence of
almonds or vanilla, or laurel-leaves.
mode.—mix the rice to a smooth batter with about / pint of the
milk, and the remainder put into a saucepan, with the sugar, butter, and
whichever of the above flavourings may be preferred; bring the milk to
the boiling-point, quickly stir in the rice, and let it boil for about
 minutes, or until it comes easily away from the saucepan, keeping it
well stirred the whole time. grease a mould with pure salad-oil; pour in
the rice, and let it get perfectly set, when it should turn out quite
easily; garnish it with jam, or pour round a compôte of any kind of
fruit, just before it is sent to table. this blancmange is better for
being made the day before it is wanted, as it then has time to become
firm. if laurel-leaves are used for flavouring, steep  of them in the
milk, and take them out before the rice is added: about  drops of
essence of almonds, or from  to  drops of essence of vanilla, would
be required to flavour the above proportion of milk.
time.—from  to  minutes to boil the rice.
average cost, d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of rice,  quart of milk,  oz. of pounded
sugar, flavouring of vanilla, lemon-peel, or bitter almonds, egg and
bread crumbs, hot lard.
mode.—put the rice, milk, and sugar into a saucepan, and let the
former gradually swell over a gentle fire until all the milk is dried
up; and just before the rice is done, stir in a few drops of essence of
any of the above flavourings. let the rice get cold; then form it into
small round balls, dip them into yolk of egg, sprinkle them with bread
crumbs, and fry them in boiling lard for about  minutes, turning them
about, that they may get equally browned. drain the greasy moisture from
them, by placing them on a cloth in front of the fire for a minute or
two; pile them on a white d'oyley, and send them quickly to table. a
small piece of jam is sometimes introduced into the middle of each
croquette, which adds very much to the flavour of this favourite dish.
time.—from / to  hour to swell the rice; about  minutes to fry
the croquettes.
average cost, d.
sufficient to make  or  croquettes.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— oz. of rice,  quart of milk,  oz. of sugar, 
oz. of fresh butter  oz. of orange marmalade,  eggs.
mode.—swell the rice in the milk, with the sugar and butter, over a
slow fire until it is perfectly tender, which will be in about / hour.
when the rice is done, strain away the milk, should there be any left,
and mix with it the marmalade and well-beaten eggs; stir the whole over
the fire until the eggs are set; then spread the mixture on a dish to
the thickness of about / inch, or rather thicker. when it is perfectly
cold, cut it into long strips, dip them in a batter the same as for
apple fritters, and fry them a nice brown. dish them on a white d'oyley,
strew sifted sugar over, and serve quickly.
time.—about / hour to swell the rice; from  to  minutes to fry
the fritters.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make  or  fritters.
seasonable at any time.
rice snowballs. (a pretty dish for juvenile suppers.)
. ingredients.— oz. of rice,  quart of milk, flavouring of
essence of almonds, sugar to taste,  pint of custard made by recipe no.
mode.—boil the rice in the milk, with sugar and a flavouring of
essence of almonds, until the former is tender, adding, if necessary, a
little more milk, should it dry away too much. when the rice is quite
soft, put it into teacups, or small round jars, and let it remain
until cold; then turn the rice out on a deep glass dish, pour over a
custard made by recipe no. , and, on the top of each ball place a
small piece of bright-coloured preserve or jelly. lemon-peel or vanilla
may be boiled with the rice instead of the essence of almonds, when
either of these is preferred; but the flavouring of the custard must
correspond with that of the rice.
time.—about / hour to swell the rice in the milk.
average cost, with the custard, s. d.
sufficient for  or  children.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of ground rice,  pint of milk, 
eggs, pounded sugar to taste, flavouring of lemon-rind, vanilla, coffee,
chocolate, or anything that may be preferred, a piece of butter the size
of a walnut.
mode.—mix the ground rice with  tablespoonfuls of the milk quite
smoothly, and put it into a saucepan with the remainder of the milk and
butter, and keep stirring it over the fire for about / hour, or until
the mixture thickens. separate the yolks from the whites of the eggs,
beat the former in a basin, and stir to them the rice and sufficient
pounded sugar to sweeten the soufflé; but add this latter ingredient as
sparingly as possible, as, the less sugar there is used, the lighter
will be the soufflé. now whisk the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth
or snow; mix them with the other preparation, and pour the whole into a
soufflé-dish, and put it instantly into the oven; bake it about / hour
in a moderate oven; take it out, hold a salamander or hot shovel over
the top, sprinkle sifted sugar over it, and send the soufflé to table in
the dish it was baked in, either with a napkin pinned round, or inclosed
in a more ornamental dish. the excellence of this fashionable dish
entirely depends on the proper whisking of the whites of the eggs, the
manner of baking, and the expedition with which it is sent to table.
soufflés should be served instantly from the oven, or they will sink,
and be nothing more than an ordinary pudding.
time.—about / hour.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— heaped tablespoonfuls of potato-flour, rice-flour,
arrowroot, or tapioca,  pint of milk,  eggs, a piece of butter
the size of a walnut, sifted sugar to taste, / saltspoonful of salt
flavouring.
mode.—mix the potato-flour, or whichever one of the above ingredients
is used, with a little of the milk; put it into a saucepan, with the
remainder of the milk, the butter, salt, and sufficient pounded sugar to
sweeten the whole nicely. stir these ingredients over the fire until the
mixture thickens; then take it off the fire, and let it cool a little.
separate the whites from the yolks of the eggs, beat the latter, and
stir them into the soufflé batter. now whisk the whites of the eggs to
the firmest possible froth, for on this depends the excellence of the
dish; stir them to the other ingredients, and add a few drops of essence
of any flavouring that may be preferred; such as vanilla, lemon, orange,
ginger, &c. &c. pour the batter into a soufflé-dish, put it immediately
into the oven, and bake for about / hour; then take it out, put the
dish into another more ornamental one, such as is made for the purpose;
hold a salamander or hot shovel over the soufflé, strew it with sifted
sugar, and send it instantly to table. the secret of making a soufflé
well, is to have the eggs well whisked, but particularly the whites, the
oven not too hot, and to send it to table the moment it comes from the
oven. if the soufflé be ever so well made, and it is allowed to stand
before being sent to table, its appearance and goodness will be entirely
spoiled. soufflés may be flavoured in various ways, but must be named
accordingly. vanilla is one of the most delicate and recherché
flavourings that can be used for this very fashionable dish.
time.—about / hour in the oven;  or  minutes to hold the
salamander over.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
snow eggs, or oeufs a la neige.
(a very pretty supper dish.)
. ingredients.— eggs, / pint of milk, pounded sugar to taste,
flavouring of vanilla, lemon-rind, or orange-flower water.
mode.—put the milk into a saucepan with sufficient sugar to sweeten
it nicely, and the rind of / lemon. let this steep by the side of the
fire for / hour, when take out the peel; separate the whites from the
yolks of the eggs, and whisk the former to a perfectly stiff froth, or
until there is no liquid remaining; bring the milk to the boiling-point,
and drop in the snow a tablespoonful at a time, and keep turning the
eggs until sufficiently cooked. then place them on a glass dish, beat up
the yolks of the eggs, stir to them the milk, add a little more sugar,
and strain this mixture into a jug; place the jug in a saucepan of
boiling water, and stir it one way until the mixture thickens, but do
not allow it to boil, or it will curdle. pour this custard over the
eggs, when they should rise to the surface. they make an exceedingly
pretty addition to a supper, and should be put in a cold place after
being made. when they are flavoured with vanilla or orange-flower water,
it is not necessary to steep the milk. a few drops of the essence of
either may be poured in the milk just before the whites are poached. in
making the custard, a little more flavouring and sugar should always be
added.
time.—about  minutes to poach the whites;  minutes to stir the
custard.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of preserve,  pint of milk,  oz. of lump
sugar,  heaped tablespoonful of tous les mois,  drops of essence of
cloves,  drops of almond-flavouring.
mode.—place the preserve at the bottom of a glass dish; put the milk
into a lined saucepan, with the sugar, and make it boil. mix to a smooth
batter the tous les mois, with a very little cold milk; stir it briskly
into the boiling milk, add the flavouring, and simmer for  minutes.
when rather cool, but before turning solid, pour the cream over the jam,
and ornament it with strips of red-currant jelly or preserved fruit.
time.— minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—strawberries, pounded sugar; to every pint of juice
allow -/ oz. of isinglass.
mode.—pick the strawberries, put them into a pan, squeeze them well
with a wooden spoon, add sufficient pounded sugar to sweeten them
nicely, and let them remain for  hour, that the juice may be extracted;
then add / pint of water to every pint of juice. strain the
strawberry-juice and water through a bag; measure it, and to every pint
allow -/ oz. of isinglass, melted and clarified in / pint of water.
mix this with the juice; put the jelly into a mould, and set the mould
in ice. a little lemon-juice added to the strawberry-juice improves the
flavour of the jelly, if the fruit is very ripe; but it must be well
strained before it is put to the other ingredients, or it will make the
jelly muddy.
time.— hour to draw the juice.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s.
sufficient.—allow -/ pint of jelly for  or  persons.
seasonable in june, july, and august.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of macaroons or  small sponge-cakes,
sherry,  pint of cream,  oz. of lump sugar,  large tablespoonfuls of
arrowroot, the rind of  lemon, the juice of / lemon,  tablespoonfuls
of milk.
mode.—lay the macaroons or sponge-cakes in a glass dish, and pour
over them as much sherry as will cover them, or sufficient to soak them
well. put the cream into a lined saucepan, with the sugar and
lemon-rind, and let it remain by the side of the fire until the cream is
well flavoured, when take out the lemon-rind. mix the arrowroot smoothly
with the cold milk; add this to the cream, and let it boil gently for
about  minutes, keeping it well stirred. take it off the fire, stir
till nearly cold, when add the lemon-juice, and pour the whole over the
cakes. garnish the cream with strips of angelica, or candied citron cut
thin, or bright-coloured jelly or preserve. this cream is exceedingly
delicious, flavoured with vanilla instead of lemon: when this flavouring
is used, the sherry may be omitted, and the mixture poured over the
dry cakes.
time.—about / hour to infuse the lemon-rind;  minutes to boil the
cream.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pint of sherry or white wine, / grated nutmeg,
sugar to taste, -/ pint of milk.
mode.—put the wine into a bowl, with the grated nutmeg and plenty of
pounded sugar, and milk into it the above proportion of milk frothed up.
clouted cream may be laid on the top, with pounded cinnamon or nutmeg
and sugar; and a little brandy may be added to the wine before the milk
is put in. in some counties, cider is substituted for the wine: when
this is used, brandy must always be added. warm milk may be poured on
from a spouted jug or teapot; but it must be held very high.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— moulded sponge-or savoy-cake, sufficient sweet
wine or sherry to soak it,  tablespoonfuls of brandy,  oz. of sweet
almonds,  pint of rich custard.
[illustration: tipsy cake.]
mode.—procure a cake that is three or four days old,—either sponge,
savoy, or rice answering for the purpose of a tipsy cake. cut the bottom
of the cake level, to make it stand firm in the dish; make a small hole
in the centre, and pour in and over the cake sufficient sweet wine or
sherry, mixed with the above proportion of brandy, to soak it nicely.
when the cake is well soaked, blanch and cut the almonds into strips,
stick them all over the cake, and pour round it a good custard, made by
recipe no. , allowing  eggs instead of  to the pint of milk. the
cakes are sometimes crumbled and soaked, and a whipped cream heaped over
them, the same as for trifles.
time.—about  hours to soak the cake. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  dish. seasonable at any time.
 almond.—the almond-tree is a native of warmer climates than
 britain, and is indigenous to the northern parts of africa and
 asia; but it is now commonly cultivated in italy, spain, and the
 south of france. it is not usually grown in britain, and the
 fruit seldom ripens in this country: it is much admired for the
 beauty of its blossoms. in the form of its leaves and blossoms
 it strongly resembles the peach-tree, and is included in the
 same genus by botanists; but the fruit, instead of presenting a
 delicious pulp like the peach, shrivels up as it ripens, and
 becomes only a tough coriaceous covering to the stone inclosing
 the eatable kernel, which is surrounded by a thin bitter skin.
 it flowers early in the spring, and produces fruit in august.
 there are two sorts of almonds,—sweet and bitter; but they are
 considered to be only varieties of the species; and though the
 qualities of the kernels are very different, they are not
 distinguishable by their appearance.
. ingredients.— stale small sponge-cakes, raisin wine, / lb. of
jam,  pint of custard no. .
mode.—soak the sponge-cakes, which should be stale (on this account
they should be cheaper), in a little raisin wine; arrange them on a deep
glass dish in four layers, putting a layer of jam between each, and pour
round them a pint of custard, made by recipe no. , decorating the
top with cut preserved fruit.
time.— hours to soak the cakes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  dish. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—for the whip,  pint of cream,  oz. of pounded
sugar, the whites of  eggs, a small glass of sherry or raisin wine. for
the trifle,  pint of custard, made with  eggs to a pint of milk; 
small sponge-cakes, or  slices of sponge-cake;  macaroons,  dozen
ratafias,  oz. of sweet almonds, the grated rind of  lemon, a layer of
raspberry or strawberry jam, / pint of sherry or sweet wine, 
tablespoonfuls of brandy.
[illustration: trifle.]
mode.—the whip to lay over the top of the trifle should be made the
day before it is required for table, as the flavour is better, and it is
much more solid than when prepared the same day. put into a large bowl
the pounded sugar, the whites of the eggs, which should be beaten to a
stiff froth, a glass of sherry or sweet wine, and the cream. whisk these
ingredients well in a cool place, and take off the froth with a skimmer
as fast as it rises, and put it on a sieve to drain; continue the
whisking till there is sufficient of the whip, which must be put away in
a cool place to drain. the next day, place the sponge-cakes, macaroons,
and ratafias at the bottom of a trifle-dish; pour over them / pint of
sherry or sweet wine, mixed with  tablespoonfuls of brandy, and, should
this proportion of wine not be found quite sufficient, add a little
more, as the cakes should be well soaked. over the cakes put the grated
lemon-rind, the sweet almonds, blanched and cut into strips, and a layer
of raspberry or strawberry jam. make a good custard by recipe no. ,
using  instead of  eggs to the pint of milk, and let this cool a
little; then pour it over the cakes, &c. the whip being made the day
previously, and the trifle prepared, there remains nothing to do now but
heap the whip lightly over the top: this should stand as high as
possible, and it may be garnished with strips of bright currant jelly,
crystallized sweetmeats, or flowers; the small coloured comfits are
sometimes used for the purpose of garnishing a trifle, but they are now
considered rather old-fashioned. (see coloured plate, v.)
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s. d.
sufficient for  trifle. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— pint of milk, the yolks of  eggs,  oz. of sugar,
 oz. of isinglass, flavouring to taste of essence of vanilla.
[illustration: vanilla-cream mould.]
mode.—put the milk and sugar into a saucepan, and let it get hot over
a slow fire; beat up the yolks of the eggs, to which add gradually the
sweetened milk; flavour the whole with essence of vanilla, put the
mixture into a jug, and place this jug in a saucepan of boiling water.
stir the contents with a wooden spoon one way until the mixture
thickens, but do not allow it to boil, or it will be full of lumps. take
it off the fire; stir in the isinglass, which should be previously
dissolved in about / pint of water, and boiled for  or  minutes;
pour the cream into an oiled mould, put it in a cool place to set, and
turn it out carefully on a dish. instead of using the essence of
vanilla, a pod may be boiled in the milk instead, until the flavour is
well extracted. a pod, or a pod and a half, will be found sufficient for
the above proportion of ingredients.
time.—about  minutes to stir the mixture.
average cost, with the best isinglass, s. d.
sufficient to fill a quart mould. seasonable at any time.
 vanille or vanilla, is the fruit of the vanillier, a parasitical
 herbaceous plant, which flourishes in brazil, mexico, and peru.
 the fruit is a long capsule, thick and fleshy. certain species
 of this fruit contain a pulp with a delicious perfume and
 flavour. vanilla is principally imported from mexico. the
 capsules for export are always picked at perfect maturity. the
 essence is the form in which it is used generally and most
 conveniently. its properties are stimulating and exciting. it is
 in daily use for ices, chocolates, and flavouring confections
 generally.
. ingredients.— eggs; their weight in pounded sugar, butter, and
flour; / saltspoonful of salt, a layer of any kind of jam or
marmalade.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream; dredge in the flour and pounded
sugar; stir these ingredients well together, and add the eggs, which
should be previously thoroughly whisked. when the mixture has been well
beaten for about  minutes, butter a yorkshire-pudding tin, pour in the
batter, and bake it in a moderate oven for  minutes. let it cool,
spread one half of the cake with a layer of nice preserve, place over it
the other half of the cake, press the pieces slightly together, and then
cut it into long finger-pieces; pile them in crossbars on a glass dish,
and serve.
time.— minutes.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
whipped cream, for putting on trifles, serving in glasses, &c.
. ingredients.—to every pint of cream allow  oz. of pounded sugar,
 glass of sherry or any kind of sweet white wine, the rind of /
lemon, the white of  egg.
[illustration: pastry leaf.]
mode.—rub the sugar on the lemon-rind, and pound it in a mortar until
quite fine, and beat up the white of the egg until quite stiff; put the
cream into a large bowl, with the sugar, wine, and beaten egg, and whip
it to a froth; as fast as the froth rises, take it off with a skimmer,
and put it on a sieve to drain, in a cool place. this should be made the
day before it is wanted, as the whip is then so much firmer. the cream
should be whipped in a cool place, and in summer, over ice, if it is
obtainable. a plain whipped cream may be served on a glass dish, and
garnished with strips of angelica, or pastry leaves, or pieces of
bright-coloured jelly: it makes a very pretty addition to the
supper-table.
time.—about  hour to whip the cream.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, s. d.
sufficient for  dish or  trifle.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ pint of cream, / pint of sherry, half that
quantity of brandy, the juice of / lemon, a little grated nutmeg, 
oz. of pounded sugar, whipped cream the same as for trifle no. .
mode.—mix all the ingredients together, put the syllabub into
glasses, and over the top of them heap a little whipped cream, made in
the same manner as for trifle no. . solid syllabub is made by
whisking or milling the mixture to a stiff froth, and putting it in the
glasses, without the whipped cream at the top.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to fill  or  glasses.
seasonable at any time.
"every one knows," says brillat savarin, in his "physiology of taste,"
"that for twenty years madame récamier was the most beautiful woman in
paris. it is also well known that she was exceedingly charitable, and
took a great interest in every benevolent work. wishing to consult the
curé of —— respecting the working of an institution, she went to his
house at five o'clock in the afternoon, and was much astonished at
finding him already at his dinner-table.
"madame récamier wished to retire, but the curé would not hear of it. a
neat white cloth covered the table; some good old wine sparkled in a
crystal decanter; the porcelain was of the best; the plates had heaters
of boiling water beneath them; a neatly-costumed maid-servant was in
attendance. the repast was a compromise between frugality and luxury.
the crawfish-soup had just been removed, and there was on the table a
salmon-trout, an omelet, and a salad.
"'my dinner will tell you,' said the worthy curé, with a smile, 'that it
is fast-day, according to our church's regulations.' madame récamier and
her host attacked the trout, the sauce served with which betrayed a
skilful hand, the countenance of the curé the while showing
satisfaction.
"and now they fell upon the omelet, which was round, sufficiently thick,
and cooked, so to speak, to a hair's-breadth.
"as the spoon entered the omelet, a thick rich juice issued from it,
pleasant to the eye as well as to the smell; the dish became full of it;
and our fair friend owns that, between the perfume and the sight, it
made her mouth water.
"'it is an omelette au thon' (that is to say, a tunny omelet), said
the curé, noticing, with the greatest delight, the emotion of madame
récamier, 'and few people taste it without lavishing praises on it.'
"'it surprises me not at all,' returned the beauty; 'never has so
enticing an omelet met my gaze at any of our lay tables.'
"'my cook understands them well, i think.'
"'yes,' added madame, 'i never ate anything so delightful.'"
then came the salad, which savarin recommends to all who place
confidence in him. it refreshes without exciting; and he has a theory
that it makes people younger.
amidst pleasant converse the dessert arrived. it consisted of three
apples, cheese, and a plate of preserves; and then upon a little round
table was served the mocha coffee, for which france has been, and is, so
justly famous.
"'i never,' said the curé, 'take spirits; i always offer liqueurs to my
guests but reserve the use of them, myself, to my old age, if it should
please providence to grant me that.'
"finally, the charming madame récamier took her leave, and told all her
friends of the delicious omelet which she had seen and partaken of."
and brillat savarin, in his capacity as the layard of the concealed
treasures of gastronomia, has succeeded in withdrawing from obscurity
the details of the preparation of which so much had been said, and which
he imagines to be as wholesome as it was agreeable.
here follows the recipe:—
. take, for  persons, the roes of  carp; [footnote: an american
writer says he has followed this recipe, substituting pike, shad, &c.,
in the place of carp, and can recommend all these also, with a quiet
conscience. any fish, indeed, may be used with success.] bleach them, by
putting them, for  minutes, in boiling water slightly salted. take a
piece of fresh tunny about the size of a hen's egg, to which add a small
shalot already chopped; hash up together the roe and the tunny, so as to
mix them well, and throw the whole into a saucepan, with a sufficient
quantity of very good butter: whip it up until the butter is melted!
this constitutes the specialty of the omelet. take a second piece of
butter, ŕ discrétion, mix it with parsley and herbs, place it in a
long-shaped dish destined to receive the omelet; squeeze the juice of a
lemon over it, and place it on hot embers. beat up  eggs (the fresher
the better); throw up the sauté of roe and tunny, stirring it so as to
mix all well together; then make your omelet in the usual manner,
endeavouring to turn it out long, thick, and soft. spread it carefully
on the dish prepared for it, and serve at once. this dish ought to be
reserved for recherché déjeűners, or for assemblies where amateurs meet
who know how to eat well; washed down with a good old wine, it will work
wonders.
note.—the roe and the tunny must be beaten up (sauté) without
allowing them to boil, to prevent their hardening, which would prevent
them mixing well with the eggs. your dish should be hollowed towards the
centre, to allow the gravy to concentrate, that it may be helped with a
spoon. the dish ought to be slightly heated, otherwise the cold china
will extract all the heat from the omelet.
[illustration]
[illustration]
. from the nature of vegetable substances, and chiefly from their
not passing so rapidly into the putrescent state as animal bodies, the
mode of preserving them is somewhat different, although the general
principles are the same. all the means of preservation are put in
practice occasionally for fruits and the various parts of vegetables,
according to the nature of the species, the climate, the uses to which
they are applied, &c. some are dried, as nuts, raisins, sweet herbs,
&c.; others are preserved by means of sugar, such as many fruits whose
delicate juices would be lost by drying; some are preserved by means of
vinegar, and chiefly used as condiments or pickles; a few also by
salting, as french beans; while others are preserved in spirits. we
have, however, in this place to treat of the best methods of preserving
fruits. fruit is a most important item in the economy of health; the
epicurean can scarcely be said to have any luxuries without it;
therefore, as it is so invaluable, when we cannot have it fresh, we must
have it preserved. it has long been a desideratum to preserve fruits by
some cheap method, yet by such as would keep them fit for the various
culinary purposes, as making tarts and other similar dishes. the expense
of preserving them with sugar is a serious objection; for, except the
sugar is used in considerable quantities, the success is very uncertain.
sugar also overpowers and destroys the sub-acid taste so desirable in
many fruits: these which are preserved in this manner are chiefly
intended for the dessert. fruits intended for preservation should be
gathered in the morning, in dry weather, with the morning sun upon them,
if possible; they will then have their fullest flavour, and keep in good
condition longer than when gathered at any other time. until fruit can
be used, it should be placed in the dairy, an ice-house, or a
refrigerator. in an icehouse it will remain fresh and plump for several
days. fruit gathered in wet or foggy weather will soon be mildewed, and
be of no service for preserves.
. having secured the first and most important contribution to the
manufacture of preserves,—the fruit, the next consideration is the
preparation of the syrup in which the fruit is to be suspended; and this
requires much care. in the confectioner's art there is a great nicety in
proportioning the degree of concentration of the syrup very exactly to
each particular case; and they know this by signs, and express it by
certain technical terms. but to distinguish these properly requires very
great attention and considerable experience. the principal thing to be
acquainted with is the fact, that, in proportion as the syrup is longer
boiled, its water will become evaporated, and its consistency will be
thicker. great care must be taken in the management of the fire, that
the syrup does not boil over, and that the boiling is not carried to
such an extent as to burn the sugar.
. the first degree of consistency is called the thread, which is
subdivided into the little and great thread. if you dip the finger into
the syrup and apply it to the thumb, the tenacity of the syrup will, on
separating the finger and thumb, afford a thread, which shortly breaks:
this is the little thread. if the thread, from the greater tenacity,
and, consequently, greater strength of the syrup, admits of a greater
extension of the finger and thumb, it is called the great thread. there
are half a dozen other terms and experiments for testing the various
thickness of the boiling sugar towards the consistency called caramel;
but that degree of sugar-boiling belongs to the confectioner. a solution
of sugar prepared by dissolving two parts of double-refined sugar (the
best sugar is the most economical for preserves) in one of water, and
boiling this a little, affords a syrup of the right degree of strength,
and which neither ferments nor crystallizes. this appears to be the
degree called smooth by the confectioners, and is proper to be used
for the purposes of preserves. the syrup employed should sometimes be
clarified, which is done in the following manner:—dissolve  lbs. of
loaf sugar in a pint of water; add to this solution the white of an egg,
and beat it well. put the preserving-pan upon the fire with the
solution; stir it with a wooden spatula, and, when it begins to swell
and boil up, throw in some cold water or a little oil, to damp the
boiling; for, as it rises suddenly, if it should boil over, it would
take fire, being of a very inflammable nature. let it boil up again;
then take it off, and remove carefully the scum that has risen. boil the
solution again, throw in a little more cold water, remove the scum, and
so on for three or four times successively; then strain it. it is
considered to be sufficiently boiled when some taken up in a spoon pours
out like oil.
. although sugar passes so easily into the state of fermentation,
and is, in fact, the only substance capable of undergoing the vinous
stage of that process, yet it will not ferment at all if the quantity be
sufficient to constitute a very strong syrup: hence, syrups are used to
preserve fruits and other vegetable substances from the changes they
would undergo if left to themselves. before sugar was in use, honey was
employed to preserve many vegetable productions, though this substance
has now given way to the juice of the sugar-cane.
. the fruits that are the most fit for preservation in syrup are,
apricots, peaches, nectarines, apples, greengages, plums of all kinds,
and pears. as an example, take some apricots not too ripe, make a small
slit at the stem end, and push out the stone; simmer them in water till
they are softened and about half done, and afterwards throw them into
cold water. when they have cooled, take them out and drain them. put the
apricots into the pie-serving-pan with sufficient syrup to cover them;
let them boil up three or four times, and then skim them; remove them
from the fire, pour them into an earthen pan, and let them cool till
next day. boil them up three days successively, skimming each time, and
they will then be finished and in a state fit to be put into pots for
use. after each bailing, it is proper to examine into the state of the
syrup when cold; if too thin, it will bear additional boiling; if too
thick, it may be lowered with more syrup of the usual standard. the
reason why the fruit is emptied out of the preserving-pan into an
earthen pan is, that the acid of the fruit acts upon the copper, of
which the preserving-pans are usually made. from this example the
process of preserving fruits by syrup will be easily comprehended. the
first object is to soften the fruit by blanching or boiling it in water,
in order that the syrup by which it is preserved may penetrate through
its substance.
. many fruits, when preserved by boiling, lose much of their
peculiar and delicate flavour, as, for instance, pine-apples; and this
inconvenience may, in some instances, be remedied by preserving them
without heat. cut the fruit in slices about one fifth of an inch thick,
strew powdered loaf sugar an eighth of an inch thick on the bottom of a
jar, and put the slices on it. put more sugar on this, and then another
layer of the slices, and so on till the jar is full. place the jar with
the fruit up to the neck in boiling water, and keep it there till the
sugar is completely dissolved, which may take half an hour, removing the
scum as it rises. lastly, tie a wet bladder over the mouth of the jar,
or cork and wax it.
. any of the fruits that have been preserved in syrup may be
converted into dry preserves, by first draining them from the syrup, and
then drying them in a stove or very moderate oven, adding to them a
quantity of powdered loaf sugar, which will gradually penetrate the
fruit, while the fluid parts of the syrup gently evaporate. they should
be dried in the stove or oven on a sieve, and turned every six or eight
hours, fresh powdered sugar being sifted over them every time they are
turned. afterwards, they are to be kept in a dry situation, in drawers
or boxes. currants and cherries preserved whole in this manner, in
bunches, are extremely elegant, and have a fine flavour. in this way it
is, also, that orange and lemon chips are preserved.
. marmalades, jams, and fruit pastes are of the same nature, and are
now in very general request. they are prepared without difficulty, by
attending to a very few directions; they are somewhat expensive, but may
be kept without spoiling for a considerable time. marmalades and jams
differ little from each other: they are preserves of a half-liquid
consistency, made by boiling the pulp of fruits, and sometimes part of
the rinds, with sugar. the appellation of marmalade is applied to those
confitures which are composed of the firmer fruits, as pineapples or the
rinds of oranges; whereas jams are made of the more juicy berries, such
as strawberries, raspberries, currants, mulberries, &c. fruit pastes are
a kind of marmalades, consisting of the pulp of fruits, first evaporated
to a proper consistency, and afterwards boiled with sugar. the mixture
is then poured into a mould, or spread on sheets of tin, and
subsequently dried in the oven or stove till it has acquired the state
of a paste. from a sheet of this paste, strips may be cut and formed
into any shape that may be desired, as knots, rings, &c. jams require
the same care and attention in the boiling as marmalade; the slightest
degree of burning communicates a disagreeable empyreumatic taste, and if
they are not boiled sufficiently, they will not keep. that they may
keep, it is necessary not to be sparing of sugar.
. in all the operations for preserve-making, when the preserving-pan
is used, it should not be placed on the fire, but on a trivet, unless
the jam is made on a hot plate, when this is not necessary. if the pan
is placed close on to the fire, the preserve is very liable to burn, and
the colour and flavour be consequently spoiled.
. fruit jellies are compounds of the juices of fruits combined with
sugar, concentrated, by boiling, to such a consistency that the liquid,
upon cooling, assumes the form of a tremulous jelly.
. before fruits are candied, they must first be boiled in syrup,
after which they are taken out and dried on a stove, or before the fire;
the syrup is then to be concentrated, or boiled to a candy height, and
the fruit dipped in it, and again laid on the stove to dry and candy:
they are then to be put into boxes, and kept dry.
. conserves consist of fresh vegetable matters beat into a uniform
mass with refined sugar, and they are intended to preserve the virtues
and properties of recent flowers, leaves, roots, peels, or fruits,
unaltered, and as near as possible to what they were when fresh
gathered, and to give them an agreeable taste.
. the last-mentioned, but not the least-important preparation of
fruit, is the compôte, a confiture made at the moment of need, and
with much less sugar than would be ordinarily put to preserves. they are
most wholesome things, suitable to most stomachs which cannot
accommodate themselves to raw fruit or a large portion of sugar: they
are the happy medium, and far better than ordinary stewed fruit.
. in speaking of confectionary, it should be remarked that all the
various preparations above named come, strictly speaking, under that
head; for the various fruits, flowers, herbs, roots, and juices, which,
when boiled with sugar, were formerly employed in pharmacy as well as
for sweetmeats, were called confections, from the latin word
conficere, 'to make up;' but the term confectionary embraces a very
large class indeed of sweet food, many kinds of which should not be
attempted in the ordinary cuisine. the thousand and one ornamental
dishes that adorn the tables of the wealthy should be purchased from the
confectioner: they cannot profitably be made at home. apart from these,
cakes, biscuits, and tarts, &c., the class of sweetmeats called
confections may be thus classified:—. liquid confects, or fruits
either whole or in pieces, preserved by being immersed in a fluid
transparent syrup; as the liquid confects of apricots, green citrons,
and many foreign fruits. . dry confects are those which, after having
been boiled in the syrup, are taken out and put to dry in an oven, as
citron and orange-peel, &c. . marmalade, jams, and pastes, a kind of
soft compounds made of the pulp of fruits or other vegetable substances,
beat up with sugar or honey; such as oranges, apricots, pears, &c. .
jellies are the juices of fruits boiled with sugar to a pretty thick
consistency, so as, upon cooling, to form a trembling jelly; as currant,
gooseberry, apple jelly, &c. . conserves are a kind of dry confects,
made by beating up flowers, fruits, &c., with sugar, not dissolved. .
candies are fruits candied over with sugar after having been boiled in
the syrup.
. with moderns the dessert is not so profuse, nor does it hold the
same relationship to the dinner that it held with the ancients,—the
romans more especially. on ivory tables they would spread hundreds of
different kinds of raw, cooked, and preserved fruits, tarts and cakes,
as substitutes for the more substantial comestibles with which the
guests were satiated. however, as late as the reigns of our two last
georges, fabulous sums were often expended upon fanciful desserts. the
dessert certainly repays, in its general effect, the expenditure upon it
of much pains; and it may be said, that if there be any poetry at all in
meals, or the process of feeding, there is poetry in the dessert, the
materials for which should be selected with taste, and, of course, must
depend, in a great measure, upon the season. pines, melons, grapes,
peaches, nectarines, plums, strawberries, apples, pears, oranges,
almonds, raisins, figs, walnuts, filberts, medlars, cherries, &c. &c.,
all kinds of dried fruits, and choice and delicately-flavoured cakes and
biscuits, make up the dessert, together with the most costly and
recherché wines. the shape of the dishes varies at different periods,
the prevailing fashion at present being oval and circular dishes on
stems. the patterns and colours are also subject to changes of fashion;
some persons selecting china, chaste in pattern and colour; others,
elegantly-shaped glass dishes on stems, with gilt edges. the beauty of
the dessert services at the tables of the wealthy tends to enhance the
splendour of the plate. the general mode of putting a dessert on table,
now the elegant tazzas are fashionable, is, to place them down the
middle of the table, a tall and short dish alternately; the fresh fruits
being arranged on the tall dishes, and dried fruits, bon-bons, &c., on
small round or oval glass plates. the garnishing needs especial
attention, as the contrast of the brilliant-coloured fruits with
nicely-arranged foliage is very charming. the garnish par excellence
for dessert is the ice-plant; its crystallized dewdrops producing a
marvellous effect in the height of summer, giving a most inviting sense
of coolness to the fruit it encircles. the double-edged mallow,
strawberry, and vine leaves have a pleasing effect; and for winter
desserts, the bay, cuba, and laurel are sometimes used. in town, the
expense and difficulty of obtaining natural foliage is great, but paper
and composite leaves are to be purchased at an almost nominal price.
mixed fruits of the larger sort are now frequently served on one dish.
this mode admits of the display of much taste in the arrangement of the
fruit: for instance, a pine in the centre of the dish, surrounded with
large plums of various sorts and colours, mixed with pears, rosy-cheeked
apples, all arranged with a due regard to colour, have a very good
effect. again, apples and pears look well mingled with plums and grapes,
hanging from the border of the dish in a négligé sort of manner, with
a large bunch of the same fruit lying on the top of the apples. a
dessert would not now be considered complete without candied and
preserved fruits and confections. the candied fruits may be purchased at
a less cost than they can be manufactured at home. they are preserved
abroad in most ornamental and elegant forms. and since, from the
facilities of travel, we have become so familiar with the tables of the
french, chocolate in different forms is indispensable to our desserts.
. ices are composed, it is scarcely necessary to say, of congealed
cream or water, combined sometimes with liqueurs or other flavouring
ingredients, or more generally with the juices of fruits. at desserts,
or at some evening parties, ices are scarcely to be dispensed with. the
principal utensils required for making ice-creams are ice-tubs,
freezing-pots, spaddles, and a cellaret. the tub must be large enough to
contain about a bushel of ice, pounded small, when brought out of the
ice-house, and mixed very carefully with either salt, nitre, or
soda. the freezing-pot is best made of pewter. if it be of tin, as is
sometimes the case, the congelation goes on too rapidly in it for the
thorough intermingling of its contents, on which the excellence of the
ice greatly depends. the spaddle is generally made of copper, kept
bright and clean. the cellaret is a tin vessel, in which ices are kept
for a short time from dissolving. the method to be pursued in the
freezing process must be attended to. when the ice-tub is prepared with
fresh-pounded ice and salt, the freezing-pot is put into it up to its
cover. the articles to be congealed are then poured into it and covered
over; but to prevent the ingredients from separating and the heaviest of
them from falling to the bottom of the mould, it is requisite to turn
the freezing-pot round and round by the handle, so as to keep its
contents moving until the congelation commences. as soon as this is
perceived (the cover of the pot being occasionally taken off for the
purpose of noticing when freezing takes place), the cover is immediately
closed over it, ice is put upon it, and it is left in this state till it
is served. the use of the spaddle is to stir up and remove from the
sides of the freezing pot the cream, which in the shaking may have
washed against it, and by stirring it in with the rest, to prevent waste
of it occurring. any negligence in stirring the contents of the
freezing-pot before congelation takes place, will destroy the whole:
either the sugar sinks to the bottom and leaves the ice insufficiently
sweetened, or lumps are formed, which disfigure and discolour it.
. the aged, the delicate, and children should abstain from ices or
iced beverages; even the strong and healthy should partake of them in
moderation. they should be taken immediately after the repast, or some
hours after, because the taking these substances during the process of
digestion is apt to provoke indisposition. it is necessary, then, that
this function should have scarcely commenced, or that it should be
completely finished, before partaking of ices. it is also necessary to
abstain from them when persons are very warm, or immediately after
taking violent exercise, as in some cases they have produced illnesses
which have ended fatally.
[do ladies know to whom they are indebted for the introduction of ices,
which all the fair sex are passionately fond of?—to catherine de'
medici. will not this fact cover a multitude of sins committed by the
instigator of st. bartholomew ?]
to make syrup for compotes, &c.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of sugar allow -/ pint of water.
mode.—boil the sugar and water together for / hour, carefully
removing the scum as it rises: the syrup is then ready for the fruit.
the articles boiled in this syrup will not keep for any length of time,
it being suitable only for dishes intended to be eaten immediately. a
larger proportion of sugar must be added for a syrup intended to keep.
time.—/ hour.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of sugar allow / pint of water and
/ the white of an egg.
mode.—put the sugar, water, and the white of the egg, which should,
be well beaten, into a preserving-pan or lined saucepan; and do not put
it on the fire till the sugar is dissolved. then place it on the fire,
and when it boils, throw in a teacupful of cold water, and do not stir
the sugar after this is added. bring it to the boiling-point again, and
then place the pan by the side of the fire, for the preparation to
settle. remove all the scum, and the sugar will be ready for use. the
scum should be placed on a sieve, so that what syrup runs from it may be
boiled up again: this must also be well skimmed.
time.— minutes for the sugar to dissolve;  minutes to boil.
note.—the above two recipes are those used in the preparation of
dishes usually made at home. there are many degrees of boiling sugar,
which process requires great care, attention, and experience. caramel
sugar, which makes an elegant cover for sweetmeats, is difficult to
prepare, and is best left to an experienced confectioner. we give the
recipe, for those of our readers who care to attempt the operation.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of lump sugar allow  gill of spring
water.
mode.—boil the sugar and water together very quickly over a clear
fire, skimming it very carefully as soon as it boils. keep it boiling
until the sugar snaps when a little of it is dropped in a pan of cold
water. if it remains hard, the sugar has attained the right degree; then
squeeze in a little lemon-juice, and let it remain an instant on the
fire. set the pan into another of cold water, and the caramel is then
ready for use. the insides of well-oiled moulds are often ornamented
with this sugar, which with a fork should be spread over them in fine
threads or network. a dish of light pastry, tastefully arranged, looks
very prettily with this sugar spun lightly over it. the sugar must be
carefully watched, and taken up the instant it is done. unless the cook
is very experienced and thoroughly understands her business, it is
scarcely worth while to attempt to make this elaborate ornament, as it
may be purchased quite as economically at a confectioner's, if the
failures in the preparation are taken into consideration.
(soyer's recipe,—a dessert dish.)
. ingredients.— ripe apples,  lemon, / lb. of lump sugar, /
pint of water.
[illustration: compôte of apples.]
mode.—select the apples of a moderate size, peel them, cut them in
halves, remove the cores, and rub each piece over with a little lemon.
put the sugar and water together into a lined saucepan, and let them
boil until forming a thickish syrup, when lay in the apples with the
rind of the lemon cut thin, and the juice of the same. let the apples
simmer till tender; then take them out very carefully, drain them on a
sieve, and reduce the syrup by boiling it quickly for a few minutes.
when both are cold, arrange the apples neatly on a glass dish, pour over
the syrup, and garnish with strips of green angelica or candied citron.
smaller apples may be dressed in the same manner: they should not be
divided in half, but peeled and the cores pushed out with a
vegetable-cutter.
time.— minutes to boil the sugar and water together; from  to 
minutes to simmer the apples.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from july to march.
(a dessert dish.)
 ingredients.— lbs. of any kind of hard apples,  lbs. of loaf
sugar, -/ pint of water,  oz. of tincture of ginger.
mode.—boil the sugar and water until they form a rich syrup, adding
the ginger when it boils up. pare, core, and cut the apples into pieces;
dip them in cold water to preserve the colour, and boil them in the
syrup until transparent; but be careful not to let them break. put the
pieces of apple into jars, pour over the syrup, and carefully exclude
the air, by well covering them. it will remain good some time, if kept
in a dry place.
time.—from  to  minutes to boil the syrup; about / hour to
simmer the apples.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable.—make this in september, october, or november.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit weighed after being pared,
cored, and sliced, allow / lb. of preserving-sugar, the grated rind of
 lemon, the juice of / lemon.
mode.—peel the apples, core and slice them very thin, and be
particular that they are all the same sort. put them into a jar, stand
this in a saucepan of boiling water, and let the apples stew until quite
tender. previously to putting the fruit into the jar, weigh it, to
ascertain the proportion of sugar that may be required. put the apples
into a preserving-pan, crush the sugar to small lumps, and add it, with
the grated lemon-rind and juice, to the apples. simmer these over the
fire for / hour, reckoning from the time the jam begins to simmer
properly; remove the scum as it rises, and when the jam is done, put it
into pots for use. place a piece of oiled paper over the jam, and to
exclude the air, cover the pots with tissue-paper dipped in the white of
an egg, and stretched over the top. this jam will keep good for a long
time.
time.—about  hours to stew in the jar; / hour to boil after the
jam begins to simmer.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
sufficient.— or  lbs. of apples for  pots of jam.
seasonable.—make this in september, october, or november.
. ingredients.—to  lbs. of apples allow  pints of water; to every
quart of juice allow  lbs. of loaf sugar;—the juice of / lemon.
mode.—pare, core, and cut the apples into slices, and put them into a
jar, with water in the above proportion. place them in a cool oven, with
the jar well covered, and when the juice is thoroughly drawn and the
apples are quite soft, strain them through a jelly-bag. to every quart
of juice allow  lbs. of loaf sugar, which should be crushed to small
lumps, and put into a preserving-pan with the juice. boil these together
for rather more than / hour, remove the scum as it rises, add the
lemon-juice just before it is done, and put the jelly into pots for use.
this preparation is useful for garnishing sweet dishes, and may be
turned out for dessert.
time.—the apples to be put in the oven over-night, and left till
morning; rather more than / hour to boil the jelly.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
sufficient for  small pots of jelly.
seasonable,—this should be made in september, october, or november.
. ingredients.—apples, water: to every pint of syrup allow / lb.
of loaf sugar.
mode.—pare and cut the apples into pieces, remove the cores, and put
them in a preserving-pan with sufficient cold water to cover them. let
them boil for an hour; then drain the syrup from them through a hair
sieve or jelly-bag, and measure the juice; to every pint allow / lb.
of loaf sugar, and boil these together for / hour, removing every
particle of scum as it rises, and keeping the jelly well stirred, that
it may not burn. a little lemon-rind may be boiled with the apples, and
a small quantity of strained lemon-juice may be put in the jelly just
before it is done, when the flavour is liked. this jelly may be
ornamented with preserved greengages, or any other preserved fruit, and
will turn out very prettily for dessert. it should be stored away in
small pots.
time.— hour to boil the fruit and water; / hour to boil the juice
with the sugar.
average cost, for  lbs. of apples, with the other ingredients in
proportion, s.
sufficient for  small pots of jelly.
seasonable.—make this in september, october, or november.
to preserve apples in quarters, in imitation of ginger.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of apples allow / lb. of sugar, -/
oz. of the best white ginger;  oz. of ginger to every / pint of
water.
mode.—peel, core, and quarter the apples, and put the fruit, sugar,
and ginger in layers into a wide-mouthed jar, and let them remain for 
days; then infuse  oz. of ginger in / pint of boiling water, and
cover it closely, and let it remain for  day: this quantity of ginger
and water is for  lbs. of apples, with the other ingredients in
proportion. put the apples, &c., into a preserving-pan with the water
strained from the ginger, and boil till the apples look clear and the
syrup is rich, which will be in about an hour. the rind of a lemon may
be added just before the apples have finished boiling; and great care
must be taken not to break the pieces of apple in putting them into the
jars. serve on glass dishes for dessert.
time.— days for the apples to remain in the jar with sugar, &c.; 
day to infuse the ginger; about  hour to boil the apples.
average cost, for  lbs. of apples, with the other ingredients in
proportion, s. d.
sufficient.— lbs. should fill  moderate-sized jars.
seasonable.—this should be made in september, october, or november.
(an elegant dish.)
. ingredients.—/ pint of syrup no. ,  green apricots.
mode.—make the syrup by recipe no. , and when it is ready, put in
the apricots whilst the syrup is boiling. simmer them very gently until
tender, taking care not to let them break; take them out carefully,
arrange them on a glass dish, let the syrup cool a little, pour it over
the apricots, and, when cold, serve.
time.—from  to  minutes to simmer the apricots.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in june and july, with green apricots.
apricot jam or marmalade.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of ripe apricots, weighed after being
skinned and stoned, allow  lb. of sugar.
mode.—pare the apricots, which should be ripe, as thinly as possible,
break them in half, and remove the stones. weigh the fruit, and to every
lb. allow the same proportion of loaf sugar. pound the sugar very finely
in a mortar, strew it over the apricots, which should be placed on
dishes, and let them remain for  hours. break the stones, blanch the
kernels, and put them with the sugar and fruit into a preserving-pan.
let these simmer very gently until clear; take out the pieces of apricot
singly as they become so, and, as fast as the scum rises, carefully
remove it. put the apricots into small jars, pour over them the syrup
and kernels, cover the jam with pieces of paper dipped in the purest
salad-oil, and stretch over the top of the jars tissue-paper, cut about
 inches larger and brushed over with the white of an egg: when dry, it
will be perfectly hard and air-tight.
time.— hours sprinkled with sugar; about / hour to boil the jam.
average cost.—when cheap, apricots may be purchased for preserving at
about s. d. per gallon.
sufficient,— lbs. of fruit for  pots of jam.
seasonable.—make this in august or september.
. ingredients.— pint of syrup no. , barberries.
mode.—prepare some small pieces of clean white wood,  inches long
and / inch wide, and tie the fruit on to these in nice bunches. have
ready some clear syrup, made by recipe no. ; put in the barberries,
and simmer them in it for  successive days, boiling them for nearly /
hour each day, and covering them each time with the syrup when cold.
when the fruit looks perfectly clear, it is sufficiently done, and
should be stored away in pots, with the syrup poured over, or the fruit
may be candied.
time.—/ hour to simmer each day.
seasonable in autumn.
note.—the berries in their natural state make a very pretty
garnishing for dishes, and may even be used for the same purpose,
preserved as above, and look exceedingly nice on sweet dishes.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of sugar allow / pint of water, /
the white of an egg.
mode.—put the sugar into a well-tinned saucepan, with the water, and,
when the former is dissolved, set it over a moderate fire, adding the
well-beaten egg before the mixture gets warm, and stir it well together.
when it boils, remove the scum as it rises, and keep it boiling until no
more appears, and the syrup looks perfectly clear; then strain it
through a fine sieve or muslin bag, and put it back into the saucepan.
boil it again like caramel, until it is brittle, when a little is
dropped in a basin of cold water: it is then sufficiently boiled. add a
little lemon-juice and a few drops of essence of lemon, and let it stand
for a minute or two. have ready a marble slab or large dish, rubbed over
with salad-oil; pour on it the sugar, and cut it into strips with a pair
of scissors: these strips should then be twisted, and the barley-sugar
stored away in a very dry place. it may be formed into lozenges or
drops, by dropping the sugar in a very small quantity at a time on to
the oiled slab or dish.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  sticks.
. ingredients.—carrots; to every lb. of carrot pulp allow  lb. of
pounded sugar, the grated rind of  lemon, the strained juice of , 
chopped bitter almonds,  tablespoonfuls of brandy.
mode.—select young carrots; wash and scrape them clean, cut them into
round pieces, put them into a saucepan with sufficient water to cover
them, and let them simmer until perfectly soft; then beat them through a
sieve. weigh the pulp, and to every lb. allow the above ingredients. put
the pulp into a preserving-pan with the sugar, and let this boil for 
minutes, stirring and skimming all the time. when cold, add the
lemon-rind and juice, almonds and brandy; mix these well with the jam;
then put it into pots, which must be well covered and kept in a dry
place. the brandy may be omitted, but the preserve will then not keep:
with the brandy it will remain good for months.
time.—about / hour to boil the carrots;  minutes to simmer the
pulp.
average cost, s. d. for  lb. of pulp, with the other ingredients in
proportion.
sufficient to fill  pots.
seasonable from july to december.
. ingredients.—morella cherries, good brandy; to every lb. of
cherries allow  oz. of pounded sugar.
mode.—have ready some glass bottles, which must be perfectly dry.
ascertain that the cherries are not too ripe and are freshly gathered,
and cut off about half of the stalks. put them into the bottles, with
the above proportion of sugar to every lb. of fruit; strew this in
between the cherries, and, when the bottles are nearly full, pour in
sufficient brandy to reach just below the cork. a few peach or apricot
kernels will add much to their flavour, or a few blanched bitter
almonds. put corks or bungs into the bottles, tie over them a piece of
bladder, and store away in a dry place. the cherries will be fit to eat
in  or  months, and will remain good for years. they are liable to
shrivel and become tough if too much sugar be added to them.
average cost, s. to s. d. per lb.
sufficient.— lb. of cherries and about / pint of brandy for a
quart bottle. seasonable in august and september.
. cherries may be put in a slow oven and thoroughly dried before
they begin to change colour. they should then be taken out of the oven,
tied in bunches, and stored away in a dry place. in the winter, they may
be cooked with sugar for dessert, the same as normandy pippins.
particular care must be taken that the oven be not too hot. another
method of drying cherries is to stone them, and to put them into a
preserving-pan, with plenty of loaf sugar strewed amongst them. they
should be simmered till the fruit shrivels, when they should be strained
from the juice. the cherries should then be placed in an oven, cool
enough to dry without baking them. about  oz. of sugar would be
required for  lb. of cherries, and the same syrup may be used again to
do another quantity of fruit.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit, weighed before stoning, allow
/ lb. of sugar; to every  lbs. of fruit allow  pint of red-currant
juice, and to every pint of juice  lb. of sugar.
mode.—weigh the fruit before stoning, and allow half the weight of
sugar; stone the cherries, and boil them in a preserving-pan until
nearly all the juice is dried up; then add the sugar, which should be
crushed to powder, and the currant-juice, allowing  pint to every 
lbs. of cherries (original weight), and  lb. of sugar to every pint of
juice. boil all together until it jellies, which will be in from 
minutes to / hour; skim the jam well, keep it well stirred, and, a few
minutes before it is done, crack some of the stones, and add the
kernels: these impart a very delicious flavour to the jam.
time.—according to the quality of the cherries, from / to  hour to
boil them;  minutes to / hour with the sugar.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.— pint of fruit for a lb. pot of jam.
seasonable.—make this in july or august.
(very delicious.)
. ingredients.— lbs. of cherries,  lbs. of sugar,  pint of
white-currant juice.
mode.—let the cherries be as clear and as transparent as possible,
and perfectly ripe; pick off the stalks, and remove the stones, damaging
the fruit as little as you can. make a syrup with the above proportion
of sugar, by recipe no. ; mix the cherries with it, and boil them
for about  minutes, carefully skimming them; turn them gently into a
pan, and let them remain till the next day; then drain the cherries on a
sieve, and put the syrup and white-currant juice into the preserving-pan
again. boil these together until the syrup is somewhat reduced and
rather thick; then put in the cherries, and let them boil for about 
minutes; take them off the fire, skim the syrup, put the cherries into
small pots or wide-mouthed bottles; pour the syrup over, and when quite
cold, tie them down carefully, so that the air is quite excluded.
time.— minutes to boil the cherries in the syrup;  minutes to
boil the syrup and currant-juice;  minutes to boil the cherries the
second time.
average cost for this quantity, s. d.
seasonable.—make this in july or august.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit, weighed before being stripped
from the stalks, allow / lb. of loaf sugar,  gill of water.
mode.—let the fruit be very ripe, and gathered on a dry day. strip it
from the stalks, and put it into a preserving-pan, with a gill of water
to each lb. of fruit; boil these together for  minutes; then add the
sugar, and boil the jam again for  minutes, reckoning from the time
when the jam simmers equally all over, or longer, should it not appear
to set nicely when a little is poured on to a plate. keep stirring it to
prevent it from burning, carefully remove all the scum, and when done,
pour it into pots. let it cool, cover the top of the jam with oiled
paper, and the top of the jars with a piece of tissue-paper brushed over
on both sides with the white of an egg: this, when cold, forms a hard
stiff cover, and perfectly excludes the air. great attention must be
paid to the stirring of this jam, as it is very liable to burn, on
account of the thickness of the juice.
time.— minutes to boil the fruit and water;  minutes with the
sugar, or longer.
average cost, from d. to d. for a pot capable of holding  lb.
sufficient.—allow from  to  quarts of currants to make  dozen pots
of jam, each pot to hold  lb.
seasonable.—make this in july.
. ingredients.—black currants; to every pint of juice allow /
pint of water,  lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—strip the currants from the stalks, which may be done in an
expeditious manner, by holding the bunch in one hand, and passing a
small silver fork down the currants: they will then readily fall from
the stalks. put them into a jar, place this jar in a saucepan of boiling
water, and simmer them until their juice is extracted; then strain them,
and to every pint of juice allow the above proportion of sugar and
water; stir these ingredients together cold until the sugar is
dissolved; place the preserving-pan on the fire, and boil the jelly for
about / hour, reckoning from the time it commences to boil all over,
and carefully remove the scum as it rises. if the jelly becomes firm
when a little is put on a plate, it is done; it should then be put into
small pots, and covered the same as the jam in the preceding recipe.
if the jelly is wanted very clear, the fruit should not be squeezed dry;
but, of course, so much juice will not be obtained. if the fruit is not
much squeezed, it may be converted into a jam for immediate eating, by
boiling it with a little common sugar: this answers very well for a
nursery preserve.
time.—about / hour to extract the juice; / hour to boil the
jelly.
average cost, from d. to d. per /-lb. pot.
sufficient.—from  pints to  quarts of fruit should yield a pint of
juice.
seasonable.—make this in july.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit allow / lb. of loaf sugar.
[illustration: jam-pot.]
mode.—let the fruit be gathered on a fine day; weigh it, and then
strip the currants from the stalks; put them into a preserving-pan with
sugar in the above proportion; stir them, and boil them for about /
hour. carefully remove the scum as it rises. put the jam into pots, and,
when cold, cover with oiled papers; over these put a piece of
tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with the white of an egg; press
the paper round the top of the pot, and, when dry, the covering will be
quite hard and air-tight.
time.—/ to / hour, reckoning from the time the jam boils all
over.
average cost, for a lb. pot, from d. to d.
sufficient.—allow from  to  quarts of currants to make  -lb,
pots of jam.
seasonable.—make this in july.
. ingredients.—red currants; to every pint of juice allow / lb.
of loaf sugar.
mode.—have the fruit gathered in fine weather; pick it from the
stalks, put it into a jar, and place this jar in a saucepan of boiling
water over the fire, and let it simmer gently until the juice is well
drawn from the currants; then strain them through a jelly-bag or fine
cloth, and, if the jelly is wished very clear, do not squeeze them too
much, as the skin and pulp from the fruit will be pressed through with
the juice, and so make the jelly muddy. measure the juice, and to each
pint allow / lb. of loaf sugar; put these into a preserving-pan, set
it over the fire, and keep stirring the jelly until it is done,
carefully removing every particle of scum as it rises, using a wooden or
silver spoon for the purpose, as metal or iron ones would spoil the
colour of the jelly when it has boiled from  minutes to / hour, put
a little of the jelly on a plate, and if firm when cool, it is done.
take it off the fire, pour it into small gallipots, cover each of the
pots with an oiled paper, and then with a piece of tissue-paper brushed
over on both sides with the white of an egg. label the pots, adding the
year when the jelly was made, and store it away in a dry place. a jam
may be made with the currants, if they are not squeezed too dry, by
adding a few fresh raspberries, and boiling all together, with
sufficient sugar to sweeten it nicely. as this preserve is not worth
storing away, but is only for immediate eating, a smaller proportion of
sugar than usual will be found enough: it answers very well for
children's puddings, or for a nursery preserve.
time.—from / to  hour to extract the juice;  minutes to / hour
to boil the jelly.
average cost, from d. to d. per /-lb. pot. sufficient.—
quarts of currants will make from  to  pots of jelly.
seasonable.—make this in july. note.—should the above proportion
of sugar not be found sufficient for some tastes, add an extra / lb.
to every pint of juice, making altogether  lb.
. ingredients.—white currants; to every pint of juice allow / lb.
of good loaf sugar.
mode.—pick the currants from the stalks, and put them into a jar;
place this jar in a saucepan of boiling water, and simmer until the
juice is well drawn from the fruit, which will be in from / to  hour.
then strain the currants through a fine cloth or jelly-bag; do not
squeeze them too much, or the jelly will not be clear, and put the juice
into a very clean preserving-pan, with the sugar. let this simmer gently
over a clear fire until it is firm, and keep stirring and skimming until
it is done; then pour it into small pots, cover them, and store away in
a dry place.
time.—/ hour to draw the juice; / hour to boil the jelly.
average cost, from d. to d. per /-lb. pot.
sufficient.—from  pints to  quarts of fruit should yield  pint of
juice.
seasonable in july and august.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit allow  oz. of pounded sugar;
melted mutton suet.
mode.—choose sound fruit, not too ripe; pick off the stalks, weigh
it, and to every lb. allow the above proportion of pounded sugar. put
the fruit into large dry stone jars, sprinkling the sugar amongst it;
cover the jars with saucers, place them in a rather cool oven, and bake
the fruit until it is quite tender. when cold, cover the top of the
fruit with a piece of white paper cut to the size of the jar; pour over
this melted mutton suet about an inch thick, and cover the tops of the
jars with thick brown paper, well tied down. keep the jars in a cool dry
place, and the fruit will remain good till the following christmas, but
not much longer.
time.—from  to  hours to bake the damsons, in a very cool oven.
seasonable in september and october.
. ingredients.—damsons; to every lb. of fruit pulp allow / lb. of
loaf sugar.
mode.—pick the stalks from the damsons, and put them into a
preserving-pan; simmer them over the fire until they are soft,
occasionally stirring them; then beat them through a coarse sieve, and
put the pulp and juice into the preserving-pan, with sugar in the above
proportion, having previously carefully weighed them. stir the sugar
well in, and simmer the damsons slowly for  hours. skim well; then boil
the preserve quickly for / hour, or until it looks firm and hard in
the spoon; put it quickly into shallow pots, or very tiny earthenware
moulds, and, when cold, cover it with oiled papers, and the jars with
tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with the white of an egg. a few
of the stones may be cracked, and the kernels boiled with the damsons,
which very much improves the flavour of the cheese.
time.— hour to boil the damsons without the sugar;  hours to simmer
them slowly, / hour quickly.
average cost, from d. to d. per / lb. pot.
sufficient.— pint of damsons to make a very small pot of cheese.
seasonable.—make this in september or october.
. ingredients.— quart of damsons,  pint of syrup no. .
mode.—procure sound ripe damsons; pick the stalks from them, and put
them into boiling syrup, made by recipe no. . simmer them gently
until the fruit is tender, but not sufficiently soft to break; take them
up, boil the syrup for  minutes; pour it over the damsons, and serve.
this should be sent to table in a glass dish.
time.—about / hour to simmer the damsons;  minutes to boil the
syrup.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable in september and october.
. ingredients.—damsons; to every lb. of fruit allow / lb. of loaf
sugar.
mode.—have the fruit gathered in dry weather; pick it over, and
reject any that is at all blemished. stone the damsons, weigh them, and
to every lb. allow / lb. of loaf sugar. put the fruit and sugar into a
preserving-pan; keep stirring them gently until the sugar is dissolved,
and carefully remove the scum as it rises. boil the jam for about an
hour, reckoning from the time it commences to simmer all over alike: it
must be well stirred all the time, or it will be liable to burn and
stick to the pan, which will cause the jam to have a very disagreeable
flavour. when the jam looks firm, and the juice appears to set, it is
done. then take it off the fire, put into pots, cover it down, when
quite cold, with oiled and egged papers, the same as in recipe no. ,
and store it away in a dry place.
time.— hour after the jam simmers all over.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—-/ pint of damsons for a lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in september or october.
. ingredients.—to every quart of damsons allow / lb. of loaf
sugar.
mode.—put the damsons (which should be picked from the stalks and
quite free from blemishes) into a jar, with pounded sugar sprinkled
amongst them in the above proportion; tie the jar closely down, set it
in a saucepan of cold water; bring it gradually to boil, and simmer
gently until the damsons are soft, without being broken. let them stand
till cold; then strain the juice from them, boil it up well, strain it
through a jelly-bag, and pour it over the fruit. let it cool, cover with
oiled papers, and the jars with tissue-paper brushed over on both sides
with the white of an egg, and store away in a dry cool place.
time.—about / hour to simmer the fruit after the water boils; /
hour to boil the juice.
seasonable.—make this in september or october.
(useful in winter.)
. ingredients.—damsons or plums; boiling water.
mode.—pick the fruit into clean dry stone jars, taking care to leave
out all that are broken or blemished. when full, pour boiling water on
the plums, until it stands one inch above the fruit; cut a piece of
paper to fit the inside of the jar, over which pour melted mutton-suet;
cover down with brown paper, and keep the jars in a dry cool place. when
used, the suet should be removed, the water poured off, and the jelly at
the bottom of the jar used and mixed with the fruit.
seasonable in september and october.
[illustration: compôte of figs.]
. ingredients.— pint of syrup no. , -/ pint of green figs,
the rind of / lemon.
mode.—make a syrup by recipe no. , boiling with it the
lemon-rind, and carefully remove all the scum as it rises. put in the
figs, and simmer them very slowly until tender; dish them on a glass
dish; reduce the syrup by boiling it quickly for  minutes; take out the
lemon-peel, pour the syrup over the figs, and the compote, when cold,
will be ready for table. a little port wine, or lemon-juice, added just
before the figs are done, will be found an improvement.
time.— to  hours to stew the figs.
average cost, figs, s. to s. per dozen.
seasonable in august and september.
(very useful in winter.)
. ingredients.—fresh fruits, such as currants, raspberries,
cherries, gooseberries, plums of all kinds, damsons, &c.; wide-mouthed
glass bottles, new corks to fit them tightly.
mode.—let the fruit be full grown, but not too ripe, and gathered in
dry weather. pick it off the stalks without bruising or breaking the
skin, and reject any that is at all blemished: if gathered in the damp,
or if the skins are cut at all, the fruit will mould. have ready some
perfectly dry glass bottles, and some nice new soft corks or bungs;
burn a match in each bottle, to exhaust the air, and quickly place the
fruit in to be preserved; gently cork the bottles, and put them into a
very cool oven, where let them remain until the fruit has shrunk away a
fourth part. then take the bottles out; do not open them, but
immediately beat the corks in tight, cut off the tops, and cover them
with melted resin. if kept in a dry place, the fruit will remain good
for months; and on this principally depends the success of the
preparation; for if stored away in a place that is in the least damp,
the fruit will soon spoil.
time.—from  to  hours in a very slow oven.
. ingredients.—any kind of fresh fruit, such as currants, cherries,
gooseberries, all kinds of plums, &c.; wide-mouthed glass bottles, new
corks to fit them tightly.
mode.—the fruit must be full-grown, not too ripe, and gathered on a
fine day. let it be carefully picked and put into the bottles, which
must be clean and perfectly dry. tie over the tops of the bottles pieces
of bladder; stand the bottles in a large pot, copper, or boiler, with
cold water to reach to their necks; kindle a fire under, let the water
boil, and as the bladders begin to rise and puff, prick them. as soon as
the water boils, extinguish the fire, and let the bottles remain where
they are, to become cold. the next day remove the bladders, and strew
over the fruit a thick layer of pounded sugar; fit the bottles with
corks, and let each cork lie close at hand to its own bottle. hold for a
few moments, in the neck of the bottle, two or three lighted matches,
and when they have filled the bottle neck with gas, and before they go
out, remove them very quickly; instantly cork the bottle closely, and
dip it in bottle cement.
time.—altogether about  hours.
(very useful in winter.)
. ingredients.—any kind of fresh fruit; to each quart bottle allow
/ lb. of pounded sugar.
mode.—let the fruit be gathered in dry weather. pick it carefully,
and drop it into clean and very dry quart glass bottles, sprinkling
over it the above proportion of pounded sugar to each quart. put the
corks in the bottles, and place them in a copper of cold water up to
their necks, with small hay-wisps round them, to prevent the bottles
from knocking together. light the fire under, bring the water gradually
to boil, and let it simmer gently until the fruit in the bottles is
reduced nearly one third. extinguish the fire, and let the bottles
remain in the water until it is perfectly cold; then take them out,
make the corks secure, and cover them with melted resin or wax.
time.—about  hour from the time the water commences to boil.
to frost holly-leaves, for garnishing and decorating dessert and supper
dishes.
.—ingredients.—sprigs of holly, oiled butter, coarsely-powdered
sugar.
mode.—procure some nice sprigs of holly; pick the leaves from the
stalks, and wipe them with a clean cloth free from all moisture; then
place them on a dish near the fire, to get thoroughly dry, but not too
near to shrivel the leaves; dip them into oiled butter, sprinkle over
them some coarsely-powdered sugar, and dry them before the fire. they
should be kept in a dry place, as the least damp would spoil their
appearance.
time.—about  minutes to dry before the fire.
seasonable.—these may be made at any time; but are more suitable for
winter garnishes, when fresh flowers are not easily obtained.
. ingredients.—syrup made by recipe no. ; to  pint of syrup
allow nearly a quart of gooseberries.
mode.—top and tail the gooseberries, which should not be very ripe,
and pour over them some boiling water; then take them out, and plunge
them into cold water, with which has been mixed a tablespoonful of
vinegar, which will assist to keep the fruit a good colour. make a pint
of syrup by recipe no. , and when it boils, drain the gooseberries
and put them in; simmer them gently until the fruit is nicely pulped and
tender, without being broken; then dish the gooseberries on a glass
dish, boil the syrup for  or  minutes, pour over the gooseberries, and
serve cold.
time.—about  minutes to boil the gooseberries in the syrup; 
minutes to reduce the syrup.
average cost, d.
sufficient,—a quart of gooseberries for  or  persons.
seasonable in june.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit allow / lb. of loaf sugar;
currant-juice.
mode.—select red hairy gooseberries; have them gathered in dry
weather, when quite ripe, without being too soft. weigh them; with a
pair of scissors, cut off the tops and tails, and to every  lbs. of
fruit have ready / pint of red-currant juice, drawn as for jelly. put
the gooseberries and currant-juice into a preserving-pan; let them boil
tolerably quickly, keeping them well stirred; when they begin to break,
add to them the sugar, and keep simmering until the jam becomes firm,
carefully skimming: and stirring it, that it does not burn at the
bottom. it should be boiled rather a long time, or it will not keep. put
it into pots (not too large); let it get perfectly cold; then cover the
pots down with oiled and egged papers, as directed for red-currant jelly
no. .
time.—about  hour to boil the gooseberries in the currant-juice;
from / to / hour with the sugar.
average cost, per lb. pot, from d. to d.
sufficient.—allow -/ pint of fruit for a lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in june or july.
. ingredients.—to every  lbs. of red, rough, ripe gooseberries
allow  quart of red-currant juice,  lbs. of loaf sugar.
mode.—have the fruit gathered in dry weather, and cut off the tops
and tails. prepare  quart of red-currant juice, the same as for
red-currant jelly no. ; put it into a preserving-pan with the sugar,
and keep stirring until the latter is dissolved. keep it boiling for
about  minutes; skim well; then put in the gooseberries, and let them
boil from / to / hour; then turn the whole into an earthen pan, and
let it remain for  days. boil the jam up again until it looks clear;
put it into pots, and when cold, cover with oiled paper, and over the
jars put tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with the white of an
egg, and store away in a dry place. care must be taken, in making this,
to keep the jam well stirred and well skimmed, to prevent it burning at
the bottom of the pan, and to have it very clear.
time.— minutes to boil the currant-juice and sugar after the latter
is dissolved; from / to / hour to simmer the gooseberries the first
time, / hour the second time of boiling.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—allow -/ pint of fruit for a lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in june or july.
. ingredients.—equal weight of fruit and sugar.
mode.—select the gooseberries not very ripe, either white or green,
and top and tail them. boil the sugar with water (allowing / pint to
every lb.) for about / hour, carefully removing the scum as it rises;
then put in the gooseberries, and simmer gently till clear and firm: try
a little of the jam on a plate; if it jellies when cold, it is done, and
should then be poured into pots. when cold, cover with oiled paper, and
tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with the unbeaten white of an
egg, and store away in a dry place.
time.—/ hour to boil the sugar and water, / hour the jam.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—allow -/ pint of fruit for a lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in june.
. ingredients.—gooseberries; to every pint of juice allow / lb.
of loaf sugar.
mode.—put the gooseberries, after cutting off the tops and tails,
into a preserving-pan, and stir them over the fire until they are quite
soft; then strain them through a sieve, and to every pint of juice allow
/ lb. of sugar. boil the juice and sugar together for nearly / hour,
stirring and skimming all the time; and if the jelly appears firm when a
little of it is poured on to a plate, it is done, and should then be
taken up and put into small pots. cover the pots with oiled and egged
papers, the same as for currant jelly no. , and store away in a dry
place.
time.—/ hour to simmer the gooseberries without the sugar; / hour
to boil the juice.
average cost, from d. to d. per /-lb. pot.
seasonable in july.
. ingredients.— pint of syrup made by recipe no. ,  quart of
greengages.
mode.—make a syrup by recipe no. , skim it well, and put in the
greengages when the syrup is boiling, having previously removed the
stalks and stones from the fruit. boil gently for / hour, or until the
fruit is tender; but take care not to let it break, as the appearance of
the dish would be spoiled were the fruit reduced to a pulp. take the
greengages carefully out, place them on a glass dish, boil the syrup for
another  minutes, let it cool a little, pour over the fruit, and, when
cold, it will be ready for use.
time.—/ hour to simmer the fruit,  minutes the syrup.
average cost, in full season, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in july, august, and september.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit, weighed before being stoned,
allow / lb. of lump sugar.
mode.—divide the greengages, take out the stones, and put them into a
preserving-pan. bring the fruit to a boil, then add the sugar, and keep
stirring it over a gentle fire until it is melted. remove all the scum
as it rises, and, just before the jam is done, boil it rapidly for 
minutes. to ascertain when it is sufficiently boiled, pour a little on a
plate, and if the syrup thickens and appears firm, it is done. have
ready half the kernels blanched; put them into the jam, give them one
boil, and pour the preserve into pots. when cold, cover down with oiled
papers, and, over these, tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with
the white of an egg.
time.—/ hour after the sugar is added.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—allow about -/ pint of fruit for every lb. pot of jam.
seasonable.—make this in august or september.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of sugar allow  lb. of fruit, / pint
of water.
mode.—for this purpose, the fruit must be used before it is quite
ripe, and part of the stalk must be left on. weigh the fruit, rejecting
all that is in the least degree blemished, and put it into a lined
saucepan with the sugar and water, which should have been previously
boiled together to a rich syrup. boil the fruit in this for  minutes,
remove it from the fire, and drain the greengages. the next day, boil up
the syrup and put in the fruit again, and let it simmer for  minutes,
and drain the syrup away. continue this process for  or  days, and the
last time place the greengages, when drained, on a hair sieve, and put
them in an oven or warm spot to dry; keep them in a box, with paper
between each layer, in a place free from damp.
time.— minutes the first time of boiling.
seasonable.—make this in august or september.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit allow  lb. of loaf sugar /
pint of water.
mode.—boil the sugar and water together for about  minutes; divide
the greengages, take out the stones, put the fruit into the syrup, and
let it simmer gently until nearly tender. take it off the fire, put it
into a large pan, and, the next day, boil it up again for about 
minutes with the kernels from the stones, which should be blanched. put
the fruit carefully into jars, pour over it the syrup, and, when cold,
cover down, so that the air is quite excluded. let the syrup be well
skimmed both the first and second day of boiling, otherwise it will not
be clear.
time.— minutes to boil the syrup; / hour to simmer the fruit the
first day,  minutes the second day.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—allow about  pint of fruit to fill a -lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in august or september.
. ingredients.—to every pint of fruit-juice allow  pint of cream;
sugar to taste.
mode.—let the fruit be well ripened; pick it off the stalks, and put
it into a large earthen pan. stir it about with a wooden spoon, breaking
it until it is well mashed; then, with the back of the spoon, rub it
through a hair sieve. sweeten it nicely with pounded sugar; whip the
cream for a few minutes, add it to the fruit, and whisk the whole again
for another  minutes. put the mixture into the freezing-pot, and freeze
in the same manner as directed for ice pudding, no. , taking care to
stir the cream, &c., two or three times, and to remove it from the sides
of the vessel, that the mixture may be equally frozen and smooth. ices
are usually served in glasses, but if moulded, as they sometimes are for
dessert, must have a small quantity of melted isinglass added to them,
to enable them to keep their shape. raspberry, strawberry, currant, and
all fruit ice-creams, are made in the same manner. a little pounded
sugar sprinkled over the fruit before it is mashed assists to extract
the juice. in winter, when fresh fruit is not obtainable, a little jam
may be substituted for it: it should be melted and worked through a
sieve before being added to the whipped cream; and if the colour should
not be good, a little prepared cochineal or beetroot may be put in to
improve its appearance.
time.—/ hour to freeze the mixture.
average cost, with cream at s. per pint, d. each ice.
seasonable, with fresh fruit, in june, july, and august.
. ingredients.—to every pint of fruit-juice allow  pint of syrup
made by recipe no. .
[illustration: dish of ices.]
mode.—select nice ripe fruit; pick off the stalks, and put it into a
large earthen pan, with a little pounded sugar strewed over; stir it
about with a wooden spoon until it is well broken, then rub it through a
hair sieve. make the syrup by recipe no. , omitting the white of the
egg; let it cool, add the fruit-juice, mix well together, and put the
mixture into the freezing-pot. proceed as directed for ice puddings, no.
, and when the mixture is equally frozen, put it into small glasses.
raspberry, strawberry, currant, and other fresh-fruit-water ices, are
made in the same manner.
time.—/ hour to freeze the mixture.
average cost, d. to d. each.
seasonable, with fresh fruit, in june, july, and august.
. ingredients.—to every pint of syrup, made by recipe no. ,
allow / pint of lemon-juice; the rind of  lemons.
mode.—rub the sugar on the rinds of the lemons, and with it make the
syrup by recipe no. , omitting the white of egg. strain the
lemon-juice, add it to the other ingredients, stir well, and put the
mixture into a freezing-pot. freeze as directed for ice pudding, no.
, and, when the mixture is thoroughly and equally frozen, put it
into ice-glasses.
time.—/ hour to freeze the mixture. average cost, d. to d.
each.
seasonable at any time.
iced currants, for dessert.
. ingredients.—/ pint of water, the whites of  eggs, currants,
pounded sugar.
mode.—select very fine bunches of red or white currants, and well
beat the whites of the eggs. mix these with the water; then take the
currants, a bunch at a time, and dip them in; let them drain for a
minute or two, and roll them in very fine pounded sugar. lay them to dry
on paper, when the sugar will crystallize round each currant, and have a
very pretty effect. all fresh fruit may be prepared in the same manner;
and a mixture of various fruits iced in this manner, and arranged on one
dish, looks very well for a summer dessert.
time.—/ day to dry the fruit.
average cost, d. for a pint of iced currants. seasonable in summer.
.—this fruit is rarely preserved or cooked in any way, and should
be sent to table on a dish garnished with leaves or flowers, as fancy
dictates. a border of any other kind of small fruit, arranged round the
melon, has a pretty effect, the colour the former contrasting nicely
with the melon. plenty of pounded sugar should be served with it; and
the fruit should be cut lengthwise, in moderate-sized slices. in
america, it is frequently eaten with pepper and salt.
average cost,—english, in full season, s. d. to s. each; when
scarce, s. to s.; seasonable, june to august. french, s. to s.
d. each; seasonable, june and july. dutch, d. to s. each;
seasonable, july and august.
 melon.—the melon is a most delicious fruit, succulent, cool,
 and high-flavoured. with us, it is used only at the dessert, and
 is generally eaten with sugar, ginger, or pepper; but, in
 france, it is likewise served up at dinner as a sauce for boiled
 meats. it grows wild in tartary, and has been lately found in
 abundance on the sandy plains of jeypoor. it was brought
 originally from asia by the romans, and is said to have been
 common in england in the time of edward iii., though it is
 supposed that it was lost again, as well as the cucumber, during
 the wars of york and lancaster. the best kind, called the
 cantaloupe, from the name of a place near rome where it was
 first cultivated in europe, is a native of armenia, where it
 grows so plentifully that a horse-load may be bought for a
 crown.
. ingredients.—to  lbs. of fruit and  pint of juice allow -/
lbs. of loaf sugar.
mode.—put some of the fruit into a preserving-pan, and simmer it
gently until the juice is well drawn. strain it through a bag, measure
it, and to every pint allow the above proportion of sugar and fruit. put
the sugar into the preserving-pan, moisten it with the juice, boil it
up, skim well, and then add the mulberries, which should be ripe, but
not soft enough to break to a pulp. let them stand in the syrup till
warm through, then set them on the fire to boil gently; when half done,
turn them carefully into an earthen pan, and let them remain till the
next day; then boil them as before, and when the syrup is thick, and
becomes firm when cold, put the preserve into pots. in making this, care
should be taken not to break the mulberries: this may be avoided by very
gentle stirring, and by simmering the fruit very slowly.
time.—/ hour to extract the juice;
/ hour to boil the mulberries the first time, / hour the second
time.
seasonable in august and september.
[illustration: mulberry.]
mulberry.—mulberries are esteemed for their highly aromatic flavour,
and their sub-acid nature. they are considered as cooling, laxative, and
generally wholesome. this fruit was very highly esteemed by the romans,
who appear to have preferred it to every other. the mulberry-tree is
stated to have been introduced into this country in , being first
planted at sion house, where the original trees still thrive. the
planting of them was much encouraged by king james i. about ; and
considerable attempts were made at that time to rear silkworms on a
large scale for the purpose of making silk; but these endeavours have
always failed, the climate being scarcely warm enough.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of cherries allow -/ lb. of sugar, 
gill of water.
mode.—select ripe cherries; pick off the stalks, and reject all that
have any blemishes. boil the sugar and water together for  minutes; put
in the cherries, and boil them for  minutes, removing the scum as it
rises. then turn the fruit, &c. into a pan, and let it remain until the
next day, when boil it all again for another  minutes, and, if
necessary, skim well. put the cherries into small pots; pour over them
the syrup, and, when cold, cover down with oiled papers, and the tops of
the jars with tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with the white of
an egg, and keep in a dry place.
time.—altogether,  minutes to boil.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in july or august.
the cherry-tree in rome.—the cherry-tree was introduced into rome by
lucullus about seventy years before the christian era; but the capital
of the world knew not at first how to appreciate this present as it
deserved; for the cherry-tree was propagated so slowly in italy, that
more than a century after its introduction it was far from being
generally cultivated. the romans distinguished three principal species
of cherries—the apronian, of a bright red, with a firm and delicate
pulp; the lutatian, very black and sweet; the caecilian, round and
stubby, and much esteemed. the cherry embellished the third course in
rome and the second at athens.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of sugar allow / pint of water;
nectarines.
mode.—divide the nectarines in two, take out the stones, and make a
strong syrup with sugar and water in the above proportion. put in the
nectarines, and boil them until they have thoroughly imbibed the sugar.
keep the fruit as whole as possible, and turn it carefully into a pan.
the next day boil it again for a few minutes, take out the nectarines,
put them into jars, boil the syrup quickly for  minutes, pour it over
the fruit, and, when cold, cover the preserve down. the syrup and
preserve must be carefully skimmed, or it will not be clear.
time.— minutes to boil the sugar and water;  minutes to boil the
fruit the first time,  minutes the second time;  minutes to boil the
syrup.
seasonable in august and september, but cheapest in september.
. ingredients.— lb. of normandy pippins,  quart of water, /
teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon, / teaspoonful of ground ginger, 
lb. of moist sugar,  lemon.
mode.—well wash the pippins, and put them into  quart of water with
the above proportion of cinnamon and ginger, and let them stand 
hours; then put these all together into a stewpan, with the lemon sliced
thinly, and half the moist sugar. let them boil slowly until the pippins
are half done; then add the remainder of the sugar, and simmer until
they are quite tender. serve on glass dishes for dessert.
time.— to  hours. average cost, s. d. seasonable.—suitable
for a winter dish.
. ingredients.—oranges; to every lb. of pounded loaf sugar allow
the whites of  eggs.
mode.—whisk the whites of the eggs well, stir in the sugar, and beat
this mixture for / hour. skin the oranges, remove as much of the white
pith as possible without injuring the pulp of the fruit; pass a thread
through the centre of each orange, dip them into the sugar, and tie them
to a stick. place this stick across the oven, and let the oranges remain
until dry, when they will have the appearance of balls of ice. they make
a pretty dessert or supper dish. care must be taken not to have the oven
too fierce, or the oranges would scorch and acquire a brown colour,
which would entirely spoil their appearance.
time.—from / to  hour to dry in a moderate oven.
average cost, -/d. each.
sufficient.—/ lb. of sugar to ice  oranges.
seasonable from november to may.
the first orange-tree in france.—the first orange-tree cultivated in
the centre of france was to be seen a few years ago at fontainebleau. it
was called le connétable (the constable), because it had belonged to
the connétable de bourbon, and had been confiscated, together with all
property belonging to that prince, after his revolt against his
sovereign.
. ingredients.— pint of syrup no. ,  oranges. mode.—peel
the oranges, remove as much of the white pith as possible, and divide
them into small pieces without breaking the thin skin with which they
are surrounded. make the syrup by recipe no. , adding the rind of
the orange cut into thin narrow strips. when the syrup has been well
skimmed, and is quite clear, put in the pieces of orange, and simmer
them for  minutes. take them out carefully with a spoon without
breaking them, and arrange them on a glass dish. reduce the syrup by
boiling it quickly until thick; let it cool a little, pour it over the
oranges, and, when cold, they will be ready for table.
[illustration: compôte of oranges.]
time.— minutes to boil the syrup;  minutes to simmer the oranges;
 minutes to reduce the syrup.
average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to may.
the orange in portugal.—the orange known under the name of "portugal
orange" comes originally from china. not more than two centuries ago,
the portuguese brought thence the first scion, which has multiplied so
prodigiously that we now see entire forests of orange-trees in portugal.
orange and cloves.—it appears to have been the custom formerly, in
england, to make new year's presents with oranges stuck full with
cloves. we read in one of ben jonson's pieces,—the "christmas
masque,"—"he has an orange and rosemary, but not a clove to stick in
it."
. ingredients.—equal weight of fine loaf sugar and seville oranges;
to  oranges allow  pint of water.
mode.—let there be an equal weight of loaf sugar and seville oranges,
and allow the above proportion of water to every dozen oranges. peel
them carefully, remove a little of the white pith, and boil the rinds in
water  hours, changing the water three times to take off a little of
the bitter taste. break the pulp into small pieces, take out all the
pips, and cut the boiled rind into chips. make a syrup with the sugar
and water; boil this well, skim it, and, when clear, put in the pulp and
chips. boil all together from  minutes to / hour; pour it into pots,
and, when cold, cover down with bladders or tissue-paper brushed over on
both sides with the white of an egg. the juice and grated rind of 
lemons to every dozen of oranges, added with the pulp and chips to the
syrup, are a very great improvement to this marmalade.
time.— hours to boil the orange-rinds;  minutes to boil the syrup;
 minutes to / hour to boil the marmalade.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable.—this should be made in march or april, as seville oranges
are then in perfection.
. ingredients.—equal weight of seville oranges and sugar; to every
lb. of sugar allow / pint of water.
mode.—weigh the sugar and oranges, score the skin across, and take it
off in quarters. boil these quarters in a muslin bag in water until they
are quite soft, and they can be pierced easily with the head of a pin;
then cut them into chips about  inch long, and as thin as possible.
should there be a great deal of white stringy pulp, remove it before
cutting the rind into chips. split open the oranges, scrape out the best
part of the pulp, with the juice, rejecting the white pith and pips.
make a syrup with the sugar and water; boil it until clear; then put in
the chips, pulp, and juice, and boil the marmalade from  minutes to
/ hour, removing all the scum as it rises. in boiling the syrup, clear
it carefully from scum before the oranges are added to it.
time.— hours to boil the rinds,  minutes the syrup,  minutes to
/ hour the marmalade.
average cost, d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in march or april, when seville oranges are in
perfection.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of pulp allow -/ lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—choose some fine seville oranges; put them whole into a stewpan
with sufficient water to cover them, and stew them until they become
perfectly tender, changing the water  or  times; drain them, take off
the rind, remove the pips from the pulp, weigh it, and to every lb.
allow -/ of loaf sugar and / pint of the water the oranges were
last boiled in. boil the sugar and water together for  minutes; put in
the pulp, boil for another  minutes; then add the peel cut into
strips, and boil the marmalade for another  minutes, which completes
the process. pour it into jars; let it cool; then cover down with
bladders, or tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with the white of
an egg.
time.— hours to boil the oranges; altogether / hour to boil the
marmalade.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable—make this in march or april.
. ingredients.—to  quart of the juice and pulp of seville oranges
allow  lbs. of honey,  lb. of the rind.
mode.—peel the oranges and boil the rind in water until tender, and
cut it into strips. take away the pips from the juice and pulp, and put
it with the honey and chips into a preserving-pan; boil all together for
about / hour, or until the marmalade is of the proper consistency; put
it into pots, and, when cold, cover down with bladders.
time.— hours to boil the rind, / hour the marmalade.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable.—make this in march or april.
. ingredients.—oranges; to every lb. of juice and pulp allow  lbs.
of loaf sugar; to every pint of water / lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—wholly grate or peel the oranges, taking off only the thin
outside portion of the rind. make a small incision where the stalk is
taken out, squeeze out as much of the juice as can be obtained, and
preserve it in a basin with the pulp that accompanies it. put the
oranges into cold water; let them stand for  days, changing the water
twice; then boil them in fresh water till they are very tender, and put
them to drain. make a syrup with the above proportion of sugar and
water, sufficient to cover the oranges; let them stand in it for  or 
days; then drain them well. weigh the juice and pulp, allow double their
weight of sugar, and boil them together until the scum ceases to rise,
which must all be carefully removed; put in the oranges, boil them for
 minutes, place them in jars, pour over them the syrup, and, when
cold, cover down. they will be fit for use in a week.
time.— days for the oranges to remain in water,  days in the syrup;
/ hour to boil the pulp,  minutes the oranges.
seasonable.—this preserve should be made in february or march, when
oranges are plentiful.
. ingredients.— oranges, / lb. of muscatel raisins,  oz. of
pounded sugar,  tablespoonfuls of brandy.
mode.—peel  of the oranges; divide them into slices without breaking
the pulp, and arrange them on a glass dish. stone the raisins, mix them
with the sugar and brandy, and mingle them with the oranges. squeeze the
juice of the other orange over the whole, and the dish is ready for
table. a little pounded spice may be put in when the flavour is liked;
but this ingredient must be added very sparingly.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from november to may.
. ingredients.— pint of syrup no. , about  small peaches.
mode.—peaches that are not very large, and that would not look well
for dessert, answer very nicely for a compôte. divide the peaches, take
out the stones, and pare the fruit; make a syrup by recipe no. , put
in the peaches, and stew them gently for about  minutes. take them out
without breaking, arrange them on a glass dish, boil the syrup for  or
 minutes, let it cool, pour it over the fruit, and, when cold, it will
be ready for table.
time.— minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable in august and september.
 peach and nectarine.—the peach and nectarine, which are among
 the most delicious of our fruits, are considered as varieties of
 the same species, produced by cultivation. the former is
 characterized by a very delicate down, while the latter is
 smooth; but, as a proof of their identity as to species, trees
 have borne peaches on one part and nectarines on another; and
 even a single fruit has had down on one side, and on the other
 none; the trees are almost exactly alike, as well as the
 blossoms. pliny states that the peach was originally brought
 from persia, where it grows naturally. at montreuil, a village
 near paris, almost the whole population is employed in the
 cultivation of peaches; and this occupation has maintained the
 inhabitants for ages, and, in consequence, they raise better
 peaches than anywhere else in france. in maryland and virginia,
 peaches grow nearly wild in orchards resembling forests; but the
 fruit is of little value for the table, being employed only in
 fattening hogs and for the distillation of peach brandy. on the
 east side of the andes, peaches grow wild among the cornfields
 and in the mountains, and are dried as an article of food. the
 young leaves of the peach are sometimes used in cookery, from
 their agreeable flavour; and a liqueur resembling the fine
 noyeau of martinique may be made by steeping them in brandy
 sweetened with sugar and fined with milk: gin may also be
 flavoured in the same manner. the kernels of the fruit have the
 same flavour. the nectarine is said to have received its name
 from nectar, the particular drink of the gods. though it is
 considered as the same species as the peach, it is not known
 which of the varieties come from the other; the nectarine, is by
 some considered as the superior fruit.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit weighed before being stoned,
allow / lb. of finely-pounded loaf sugar; brandy.
mode.—let the fruit be gathered in dry weather; wipe and weigh it,
and remove the stones as carefully as possible, without injuring the
peaches much. put them into a jar, sprinkle amongst them pounded loaf
sugar in the above proportion, and pour brandy over the fruit. cover the
jar down closely, place it in a saucepan of boiling water over the fire,
and bring the brandy to the simmering-point, but do not allow it to
boil. take the fruit out carefully, without breaking it; put it into
small jars, pour over it the brandy, and, when cold, exclude the air by
covering the jars with bladders, or tissue-paper brushed over on both
sides with the white of an egg. apricots may be done in the same manner,
and, if properly prepared, will be found delicious.
time.—from  to  minutes to bring the brandy to the
simmering-point.
seasonable in august and september.
. ingredients.— pears, the rind of  lemon,  cloves,  whole
allspice; to every pint of water allow / lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—pare and cut the pears into halves, and, should they be very
large, into quarters; leave the stalks on, and carefully remove the
cores. place them in a clean baking-jar, with a closely-fitting lid; add
to them the lemon-rind cut in strips, the juice of / lemon, the
cloves, pounded allspice, and sufficient water just to cover the whole,
with sugar in the above proportion. cover the jar down closely, put it
into a very cool oven, and bake the pears from  to  hours, but be very
careful that the oven is not too hot. to improve the colour of the
fruit, a few drops of prepared cochineal may be added; but this will not
be found necessary if the pears are very gently baked.
time.—large pears,  to  hours, in a very slow oven.
average cost, d. to d. each.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable from september to january.
 pear.—the pear, like the apple, is indigenous to this country;
 but the wild pear is a very unsatisfactory fruit. the best
 varieties were brought from the east by the romans, who
 cultivated them with care, and probably introduced some of their
 best sorts into this island, to which others were added by the
 inhabitants of the monasteries. the dutch and flemings, as well
 as the french, have excelled in the cultivation of the pear, and
 most of the late varieties introduced are from france and
 flanders. the pear is a hardy tree, and a longer liver than the
 apple: it has been known to exist for centuries. there are now
 about  varieties of this fruit. though perfectly wholesome
 when ripe, the pear is not so when green; but in this state it
 is fit for stewing. an agreeable beverage, called perry, is made
 from pears, and the varieties which are least fit for eating
 make the best perry.
. ingredients.—jargonelle pears; to every lb. of sugar allow /
pint of water.
mode.—procure some jargonelle pears, not too ripe; put them into a
stewpan with sufficient water to cover them, and simmer them till rather
tender, but do not allow them to break; then put them into cold water.
boil the sugar and water together for  minutes, skim well, put in the
pears, and simmer them gently for  minutes. repeat the simmering for 
successive days, taking care not to let the fruit break. the last time
of boiling, the syrup should be made rather richer, and the fruit boiled
for  minutes. when the pears are done, drain them from the syrup, and
dry them in the sun, or in a cool oven; or they may be kept in the
syrup, and dried as they are wanted.
time.—/ hour to simmer the pears in water,  minutes in the syrup.
average cost, d. to d. each.
seasonable.—most plentiful in september and october.
[illustration: stewed pears.]
. ingredients.— large pears,  oz. of loaf sugar,  cloves, 
whole allspice, / pint of water, / pint of port wine, a few drops of
prepared cochineal.
mode.—pare the pears, halve them, remove the cores, and leave the
stalks on; put them into a lined saucepan with the above ingredients,
and let them simmer very gently until tender, which will be in from  to
 hours, according to the quality of the pears. they should be watched,
and, when done, carefully lifted out on to a glass dish without breaking
them. boil up the syrup quickly for  or  minutes; allow it to cool a
little, pour it over the pears, and let them get perfectly cold. to
improve the colour of the fruit, a few drops of prepared cochineal may
be added, which rather enhances the beauty of this dish. the fruit must
not be boiled fast, but only simmered, and watched that it be not too
much done.
time.— to  hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable from september to january.
 the bon chretien pear.—the valuable variety of pear called bon
 chrétien, which comes to our tables in winter, either raw or
 cooked, received its name through the following incident:—louis
 xi., king of france, had sent for saint francois de paule from
 the lower part of calabria, in the hopes of recovering his
 health through his intercession. the saint brought with him the
 seeds of this pear; and, as he was called at court le bon
 chrétien, this fruit obtained the name of him to whom france
 owed its introduction.
. ingredients.—pineapples; sugar to taste.
mode.—pare and slice the fruit thinly, put it on dishes, and strew
over it plenty of pounded sugar. keep it in a hot closet, or very slow
oven,  or  days, and turn the fruit every day until dry; then put the
pieces of pine on tins, and place them in a quick oven for  minutes.
let them cool, and store them away in dry boxes, with paper between each
layer.
time.— to  days.
seasonable.—foreign pines, in july and august.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit, weighed after being pared,
allow  lb. of loaf sugar; / pint of water.
mode.—the pines for making this preserve should be perfectly sound
but ripe. cut them into rather thick slices, as the fruit shrinks very
much in the boiling. pare off the rind carefully, that none of the pine
be wasted; and, in doing so, notch it in and out, as the edge cannot be
smoothly cut without great waste. dissolve a portion of the sugar in a
preserving-pan with / pint of water; when this is melted, gradually
add the remainder of the sugar, and boil it until it forms a clear
syrup, skimming well. as soon as this is the case, put in the pieces of
pine, and boil well for at least / hour, or until it looks nearly
transparent. put it into pots, cover down when cold, and store away in a
dry place.
time.—/ hour to boil the fruit. average cost, d. to s. per lb.
pot.
seasonable.—foreign pines, in july and august.
 the pineapple in heathendom.—heathen nations invented
 protective divinities for their orchards (such as pomona,
 vertumnus, priapus, &c.), and benevolent patrons for their
 fruits: thus, the olive-tree grew under the auspices of minerva;
 the muses cherished the palm-tree, bacchus the fig and grape,
 and the pine and its cone were consecrated to the great cyble.
preserved pineapple, for present use.
. ingredients.—pineapple, sugar, water.
mode.—cut the pine into slices / inch in thickness; peel them, and
remove the hard part from the middle. put the parings and hard pieces
into a stewpan with sufficient water to cover them, and boil for /
hour. strain the liquor, and put in the slices of pine. stew them for 
minutes, add sufficient sugar to sweeten the whole nicely, and boil
again for another / hour; skim well, and the preserve will be ready
for use. it must be eaten soon, as it will keep but a very short time.
time.—/ hour to boil the parings in water;  minutes to boil the
pine without sugar, / hour with sugar.
average cost.—foreign pines, s. to s. each; english, from s. to
s. per lb.
seasonable.—foreign, in july and august; english, all the year.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of plums, weighed before being stoned,
allow / lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—in making plum jam, the quantity of sugar for each lb. of fruit
must be regulated by the quality and size of the fruit, some plums
requiring much more sugar than others. divide the plums, take out the
stones, and put them on to large dishes, with roughly-pounded sugar
sprinkled over them in the above proportion, and let them remain for one
day; then put them into a preserving-pan, stand them by the side of the
fire to simmer gently for about / hour, and then boil them rapidly for
another  minutes. the scum must be carefully removed as it rises, and
the jam must be well stirred all the time, or it will burn at the bottom
of the pan, and so spoil the colour and flavour of the preserve. some of
the stones may be cracked, and a few kernels added to the jam just
before it is done: these impart a very delicious flavour to the plums.
the above proportion of sugar would answer for orleans plums; the
impératrice magnum-bonum, and winesour would not require quite so much.
time.—/ hour to simmer gently, / hour to boil rapidly.
best plums for preserving.—violets, mussels, orleans, impératrice
magnum-bonum, and winesour.
seasonable from the end of july to the beginning of october.
 plums.—the damson, or damascene plum, takes its name from
 damascus, where it grows in great quantities, and whence it was
 brought into italy about  b.c. the orleans plum is from
 france. the greengage is called after the gage family, who first
 brought it into england from the monastery of the chartreuse, at
 paris, where it still bears the name of reine claude. the
 magnum-bonum is our largest plum, and greatly esteemed for
 preserves and culinary purposes. the best sorts of plums are
 agreeable at the dessert, and, when perfectly ripe, are
 wholesome; but some are too astringent. they lose much of their
 bad qualities by baking, and are extensively used, from their
 cheapness, when in full season, in tarts and preserves; but they
 are not a very wholesome fruit, and should be eaten in
 moderation.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit allow / lb. of loaf sugar;
for the thin syrup, / lb. of sugar to each pint of water.
mode.—select large ripe plums; slightly prick them, to prevent them
from bursting, and simmer them very gently in a syrup made with the
above proportion of sugar and water. put them carefully into a pan, let
the syrup cool, pour it over the plums, and allow them to remain for two
days. having previously weighed the other sugar, dip the lumps quickly
into water, and put them into a preserving-pan with no more water than
hangs about them; and boil the sugar to a syrup, carefully skimming it.
drain the plums from the first syrup; put them into the fresh syrup, and
simmer them very gently until they are clear; lift them out singly into
pots, pour the syrup over, and when cold, cover down to exclude the air.
this preserve will remain good some time, if kept in a dry place, and
makes a very nice addition to a dessert. the magnum-bonum plums answer
for this preserve better than any other kind of plum. greengages are
also very delicious done in this manner.
time.—/ hour to  minutes to simmer the plums in the first syrup;
 minutes to / hour very gentle simmering in the second.
seasonable from august to october.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of sugar allow / pint of water.
mode.—gather the plums when they are full-grown and just turning
colour; prick them, put them into a saucepan of cold water, and set them
on the fire until the water is on the point of boiling. then take them
out, drain them, and boil them gently in syrup made with the above
proportion of sugar and water; and if the plums shrink, and will not
take the sugar, prick them as they lie in the pan; give them another
boil, skim, and set them by. the next day add some more sugar, boiled
almost to candy, to the fruit and syrup; put all together into a
wide-mouthed jar, and place them in a cool oven for  nights; then drain
the plums from the syrup, sprinkle a little powdered sugar over, and dry
them in a cool oven.
time.— to  minutes to boil the plums in the syrup. seasonable
from august to october.
 plums.—the wild sloe is the parent of the plum, but the
 acclimated kinds come from the east. the cultivation of this
 fruit was probably attended to very early in england, as gerrard
 informs us that, in , he had in his garden, in holborn,
 threescore sorts. the sloe is a shrub common in our hedgerows,
 and belongs to the natural order amygdaleae; the fruit is
 about the size of a large pea, of a black colour, and covered
 with a bloom of a bright blue. it is one of the few indigenous
 to our island. the juice is extremely sharp and astringent, and
 was formerly employed as a medicine, where astringents were
 necessary. it now assists in the manufacture of a red wine made
 to imitate port, and also for adulteration. the leaves have been
 used to adulterate tea; the fruit, when ripe, makes a good
 preserve.
(a dessert dish.)
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of french plums, / pint of syrup no.
,  glass of port wine, the rind and juice of  lemon.
mode.—stew the plums gently in water for  hour; strain the water,
and with it make the syrup. when it is clear, put in the plums with the
port wine, lemon-juice, and rind, and simmer very gently for -/ hour.
arrange the plums on a glass dish, take out the lemon-rind, pour the
syrup over the plums, and, when cold, they will be ready for table. a
little allspice stewed with the fruit is by many persons considered an
improvement.
time.— hour to stew the plums in water, -/ hour in the syrup.
average cost,—plums sufficiently good for stewing, s. per lb.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable in winter.
. ingredients.—to each lb. of pumpkin allow  lb. of roughly
pounded loaf sugar,  gill of lemon-juice.
mode.—obtain a good sweet pumpkin; halve it, take out the seeds, and
pare off the rind; cut it into neat slices, or into pieces about the
size of a five-shilling piece. weigh the pumpkin, put the slices in a
pan or deep dish in layers, with the sugar sprinkled between them; pour
the lemon-juice over the top, and let the whole remain for  or  days.
boil altogether, adding / pint of water to every  lbs. of sugar used
until the pumpkin becomes tender; then turn the whole into a pan, where
let it remain for a week; then drain off the syrup, boil it until it is
quite thick; skim, and pour it, boiling, over the pumpkin. a little
bruised ginger and lemon-rind, thinly pared, may be boiled in the syrup
to flavour the pumpkin.
time.—from / to / hour to boil the pumpkin tender.
average cost, d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable in september and october; but better when made in the
latter month, as the pumpkin is then quite ripe.
note.—vegetable marrows are very good prepared in the same manner,
but are not quite so rich.
. ingredients.—to every pint of juice allow  lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—pare and slice the quinces, and put them into a preserving-pan
with sufficient water to float them. boil them until tender, and the
fruit is reduced to a pulp; strain off the clear juice, and to each pint
allow the above proportion of loaf sugar. boil the juice and sugar
together for about / hour; remove all the scum as it rises, and, when
the jelly appears firm when a little is poured on a plate, it is done.
the residue left on the sieve will answer to make a common marmalade,
for immediate use, by boiling it with / lb. of common sugar to every
lb. of pulp.
time.— hours to boil the quinces in water; / hour to boil the
jelly.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable from august to october.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of quince pulp allow / lb. of loaf
sugar.
mode.—slice the quinces into a preserving-pan, adding sufficient
water for them to float; place them on the fire to stew, until reduced
to a pulp, keeping them stirred occasionally from the bottom, to prevent
their burning; then pass the pulp through a hair sieve, to keep back the
skin and seeds. weigh the pulp, and to each lb. add lump sugar in the
above proportion, broken very small. place the whole on the fire, and
keep it well stirred from the bottom of the pan with a wooden spoon,
until reduced to a marmalade, which may be known by dropping a little on
a cold plate, when, if it jellies, it is done. put it into jars whilst
hot; let it cool, and cover with pieces of oiled paper cut to the size
of the mouths of the jars. the tops of them may be afterwards covered
with pieces of bladder, or tissue-paper brushed over on both sides with
the white of an egg.
time.— hours to boil the quinces without the sugar; / hour to boil
the pulp with the sugar.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—allow  pint of sliced quinces for a lb. pot.
seasonable in august, september, and october.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of raisins allow a lb. of loaf sugar;
pounded cinnamon and cloves to taste.
mode.—stone the raisins; put them into a stewpan with the sugar,
cinnamon, and cloves, and let them boil for -/ hour, stirring all the
time. let the preparation cool a little, pour it into a glass dish, and
garnish with strips of candied lemon-peel and citron. this will remain
good some time, if kept in a dry place.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, d. sufficient.— lb. for  or 
persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of raspberries allow  lb. of sugar,
/ pint of red-currant juice.
mode.—let the fruit for this preserve be gathered in fine weather,
and used as soon after it is picked as possible. take off the stalks,
put the raspberries into a preserving-pan, break them well with a wooden
spoon, and let them boil for / hour, keeping them well stirred. then
add the currant-juice and sugar, and boil again for / hour. skim the
jam well after the sugar is added, or the preserve will not be clear.
the addition of the currant juice is a very great improvement to this
preserve, as it gives it a piquant taste, which the flavour of the
raspberries seems to require.
time.—/ hour to simmer the fruit without the sugar; / hour after
it is added.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—allow about  pint of fruit to fill a -lb. pot.
seasonable in july and august.
. ingredients.—to each pint of juice allow / lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—let the raspberries be freshly gathered, quite ripe, and picked
from the stalks; put them into a large jar, after breaking the fruit a
little with a wooden spoon, and place this jar, covered, in a saucepan
of boiling water. when the juice is well drawn, which will be in from
/ to  hour, strain the fruit through a fine hair sieve or cloth;
measure the juice, and to every pint allow the above proportion of loaf
sugar. put the juice and sugar into a preserving-pan, place it over the
fire, and boil gently until the jelly thickens when a little is poured
on a plate; carefully remove all the scum as it rises, pour the jelly
into small pots, cover down, and keep in a dry place. this jelly answers
for making raspberry cream, and for flavouring various sweet dishes,
when, in winter, the fresh fruit is not obtainable.
time.—/ to  hour to draw the juice.
average cost, from d. to s. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—from  pints to  quarts of fruit should yield  pint of
juice.
seasonable.—this should be made in july or august.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of rhubarb allow  lb. of loaf sugar,
the rind of / lemon.
mode.—wipe the rhubarb perfectly dry, take off the string or peel,
and weigh it; put it into a preserving-pan, with sugar in the above
proportion; mince the lemon-rind very finely, add it to the other
ingredients, and place the preserving-pan by the side of the fire; keep
stirring to prevent the rhubarb from burning, and when the sugar is well
dissolved, put the pan more over the fire, and let the jam boil until it
is done, taking care to keep it well skimmed and stirred with a wooden
or silver spoon. pour it into pots, and cover down with oiled and egged
papers.
time.—if the rhubarb is young and tender, / hour, reckoning from
the time it simmers equally; old rhubarb, -/ to -/ hour.
average cost, d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.—about  pint of sliced rhubarb to fill a lb. pot.
seasonable from february to april.
rhubarb and orange jam, to resemble scotch marmalade.
. ingredients.— quart of finely-cut rhubarb,  oranges, -/ lb.
of loaf sugar.
mode.—peel the oranges; remove as much of the white pith as possible,
divide them, and take out the pips; slice the pulp into a
preserving-pan, add the rind of half the oranges cut into thin strips,
and the loaf sugar, which should be broken small. peel the rhubarb, cut
it into thin pieces, put it to the oranges, and stir altogether over a
gentle fire until the jam is done. remove all the scum as it rises, put
the preserve into pots, and, when cold, cover down. should the rhubarb
be very old, stew it alone for / hour before the other ingredients are
added.
time.—/ to  hour. average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
seasonable from february to april.
raspberry and currant, or any fresh fruit salad.
(a dessert dish.)
. mode.—fruit salads are made by stripping the fruit from the
stalks, piling it on a dish, and sprinkling over it finely-pounded
sugar. they may be made of strawberries, raspberries, currants, or any
of these fruits mixed; peaches also make a very good salad. after the
sugar is sprinkled over, about  large tablespoonfuls of wine or brandy,
or  tablespoonfuls of liqueur, should be poured in the middle of the
fruit; and, when the flavour is liked, a little pounded cinnamon may be
added. in helping the fruit, it should be lightly stirred, that the wine
and sugar may be equally distributed.
sufficient.—-/ pint of fruit, with  oz. of pounded sugar, for 
or  persons.
seasonable in summer.
. ingredients.—to every pint of picked strawberries allow / pint
of cream,  oz. of finely-pounded sugar.
mode.—pick the stalks from the fruit, place it on a glass dish,
sprinkle over it pounded sugar, and slightly stir the strawberries, that
they may all be equally sweetened; pour the cream over the top, and
serve. devonshire cream, when it can be obtained, is exceedingly
delicious for this dish; and, if very thick indeed, may be diluted with
a little thin cream or milk.
average cost for this quantity, with cream at s. per pint, s.
sufficient for  persons.
seasonable in june and july.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit allow / pint of red-currant
juice, -/ lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—strip the currants from the stalks, put them into a jar; place
this jar in a saucepan of boiling water, and simmer until the juice is
well drawn from the fruit; strain the currants, measure the juice, put
it into a preserving-pan, and add the sugar. select well-ripened but
sound strawberries; pick them from the stalks, and when the sugar is
dissolved in the currant juice, put in the fruit. simmer the whole over
a moderate fire, from / to / hour, carefully removing the scum as it
rises. stir the jam only enough to prevent it from burning at the bottom
of the pan, as the fruit should be preserved as whole as possible. put
the jam into jars, and when cold, cover down.
time.—/ to / hour, reckoning from the time the jam simmers all
over.
average cost, from d. to d. per lb. pot.
sufficient.— pints of strawberries will make  lb. pots of jam.
seasonable in june and july.
. ingredients.—to every quart bottle allow / lb. of
finely-pounded loaf sugar; sherry or madeira.
mode.—let the fruit be gathered in fine weather, and used as soon as
picked. have ready some perfectly dry glass bottles, and some nice soft
corks or bungs. pick the stalks from the strawberries, drop them into
the bottles, sprinkling amongst them pounded sugar in the above
proportion, and when the fruit reaches to the neck of the bottle, fill
up with sherry or madeira. cork the bottles down with new corks, and dip
them into melted resin.
seasonable.—make this in june or july.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of fruit allow -/ lb. of good loaf
sugar,  pint of red-currant juice.
mode.—choose the strawberries not too ripe, of a fine large sort and
of a good colour. pick off the stalks, lay the strawberries in a dish,
and sprinkle over them half the quantity of sugar, which must be finely
pounded. shake the dish gently, that the sugar may be equally
distributed and touch the under-side of the fruit, and let it remain for
 day. then have ready the currant-juice, drawn as for red-currant jelly
no. ; boil it with the remainder of the sugar until it forms a thin
syrup, and in this simmer the strawberries and sugar, until the whole is
sufficiently jellied. great care must be taken not to stir the fruit
roughly, as it should be preserved as whole as possible. strawberries
prepared in this manner are very good served in glasses and mixed with
thin cream.
time.—/ hour to  minutes to simmer the strawberries in the syrup.
seasonable in june and july.
. ingredients.— lb. of powdered loaf sugar,  teacupful of water,
/ lb. of butter,  drops of essence of lemon.
mode.—put the water and sugar into a brass pan, and beat the butter
to a cream. when the sugar is dissolved, add the butter, and keep
stirring the mixture over the fire until it sets, when a little is
poured on to a buttered dish; and just before the toffee is done, add
the essence of lemon. butter a dish or tin, pour on it the mixture, and
when cool, it will easily separate from the dish. butter-scotch, an
excellent thing for coughs, is made with brown, instead of white sugar,
omitting the water, and flavoured with / oz. of powdered ginger. it is
made in the same manner as toffee.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, d.
sufficient to make a lb. of toffee.
[illustration: dish of nuts.]
[illustration: box of french plums.]
[illustration: dish of mixed fruit.]
. the tazza, or dish with stem, the same as that shown in our
illustrations, is now the favourite shape for dessert-dishes. the fruit
can be arranged and shown to better advantage on these tall high dishes
than on the short flat ones. all the dishes are now usually placed down
the centre of the table, dried and fresh fruit alternately, the former
being arranged on small round or oval glass plates, and the latter on
the dishes with stems. the fruit should always be gathered on the same
day that it is required for table, and should be tastefully arranged on
the dishes, with leaves between and round it. by purchasing fruits that
are in season, a dessert can be supplied at a very moderate cost. these,
with a few fancy biscuits, crystallized fruit, bon-bons, &c., are
sufficient for an ordinary dessert. when fresh fruit cannot be obtained,
dried and foreign fruits, compotes, baked pears, stewed normandy
pippins, &c. &c., must supply its place, with the addition of preserves,
bon-bons, cakes, biscuits, &c. at fashionable tables, forced fruit is
served growing in pots, these pots being hidden in more ornamental ones,
and arranged with the other dishes.—(see coloured plate w.) a few
vases of fresh flowers, tastefully arranged, add very much to the
appearance of the dessert; and, when these are not obtainable, a few
paper ones, mixed with green leaves, answer very well as a substitute.
in decorating a table, whether for luncheon, dessert, or supper, a vase
or two of flowers should never be forgotten, as they add so much to the
elegance of the tout ensemble. in summer and autumn, ladies residing
in the country can always manage to have a few freshly-gathered flowers
on their tables, and should never be without this inexpensive luxury. on
the continent, vases or epergnes filled with flowers are invariably
placed down the centre of the dinner-table at regular distances. ices
for dessert are usually moulded: when this is not the case, they are
handed round in glasses with wafers to accompany them. preserved ginger
is frequently handed round after ices, to prepare the palate for the
delicious dessert wines. a basin or glass of finely-pounded lump sugar
must never be omitted at a dessert, as also a glass jug of fresh cold
water (iced, if possible), and two goblets by its side. grape-scissors,
a melon-knife and fork, and nutcrackers, should always be put on table,
if there are dishes of fruit requiring them. zests are sometimes served
at the close of the dessert; such as anchovy toasts or biscuits. the
french often serve plain or grated cheese with a dessert of fresh or
dried fruit. at some tables, finger-glasses are placed at the right of
each person, nearly half filled with cold spring water, and in winter
with tepid water. these precede the dessert. at other tables, a glass or
vase is simply handed round, filled with perfumed water, into which each
guest dips the corner of his napkin, and, when needful, refreshes his
lips and the tips of his fingers.
[illustration: box of chocolate.]
[illustration: dish of apples.]
[illustration: almonds and raisins.]
[illustration: dish of strawberries.]
after the dishes are placed, and every one is provided with plates,
glasses, spoons, &c., the wine should be put at each end of the table,
cooled or otherwise, according to the season. if the party be small, the
wine may be placed only at the top of the table, near the host.
. these are merely arranged piled high in the centre of the dish, as
shown in the engraving, with or without leaves round the edge. filberts
should always be served with the outer skin or husk on them; and walnuts
should be well wiped with a damp cloth, and then—with a dry one, to
remove the unpleasant sticky feeling the shells frequently have.
seasonable.—filberts from september to march, good; may be had after
that time, but are generally shrivelled and dry. walnuts from september
to january.
 hazel nut and filbert.—the common hazel is the wild, and the
 filbert the cultivated state of the same tree. the hazel is
 found wild, not only in forests and hedges, in dingles and
 ravines, but occurs in extensive tracts in the more northern and
 mountainous parts of the country. it was formerly one of the
 most abundant of those trees which are indigenous in this
 island. it is seldom cultivated as a fruit-tree, though perhaps
 its nuts are superior in flavour to the others. the spanish nuts
 imported are a superior kind, but they are somewhat oily and
 rather indigestible. filberts, both the red and the white, and
 the cob-nut, are supposed to be merely varieties of the common
 hazel, which have been produced, partly by the superiority of
 soil and climate, and partly by culture. they were originally
 brought out of greece to italy, whence they have found their way
 to holland, and from that country to england. it is supposed
 that, within a few miles of maidstone, in kent, there are more
 filberts grown than in all england besides; and it is from that
 place that the london market is supplied. the filbert is longer
 than the common nut, though of the same thickness, and has a
 larger kernel. the cob-nut is a still larger variety, and is
 roundish. filberts are more esteemed at the dessert than common
 nuts, and are generally eaten with salt. they are very free from
 oil, and disagree with few persons.
 walnuts.—the walnut is a native of persia, the caucasus, and
 china, but was introduced to this kingdom from france. the ripe
 kernel is brought to the dessert on account of its agreeable
 flavour; and the fruit is also much used in the green state, but
 before the stone hardens, as a pickle. in spain, grated walnuts
 are employed in tarts and other dishes. the walnut abounds in
 oil which is expressed and which, being of a highly drying
 nature, and very limpid, is much employed for delicate painting.
 this, on the continent, is sometimes used as a substitute for
 olive-oil in cooking, but is very apt to turn rancid. it is also
 manufactured into a kind of soap. the mare, or refuse matter
 after the oil is extracted, proves very nutritious for poultry
 or other domestic animals. in switzerland, this is eaten by poor
 people under the name of pain amer.
. if the box which contains them is exceedingly ornamental, it may
be placed on the table; if small, on a glass dish; if large, without
one, french plums may also be arranged on a glass plate, and garnished
with bright-coloured sweetmeats, which make a very good effect. all
fancy boxes of preserved and crystallized fruit may be put on the table
or not, at pleasure. these little matters of detail must, of course, be
left to individual taste.
seasonable.—may be purchased all the year; but are in greater
perfection in the winter, and are more suitable for that season, as
fresh fruit cannot be obtained.
. for a centre dish, a mixture of various fresh fruits has a
remarkably good effect, particularly if a pine be added to the list. a
high raised appearance should be given to the fruit, which is done in
the following manner. place a tumbler in the centre of the dish, and, in
this tumbler, the pine, crown uppermost; round the tumbler put a thick
layer of moss, and, over this, apples, pears, plums, peaches, and such
fruit as is simultaneously in season. by putting a layer of moss
underneath, so much fruit is not required, besides giving a better shape
to the dish. grapes should be placed on the top of the fruit, a portion
of some of the bunches hanging over the sides of the dish in a négligé
kind of manner, which takes off the formal look of the dish. in
arranging the plums, apples, &c., let the colours contrast well.
seasonable.—suitable for a dessert in september or october.
 grapes.—france produces about a thousand varieties of the
 grape, which is cultivated more extensively in that country than
 in any other. hygienists agree in pronouncing grapes as among
 the best of fruits. the grape possesses several rare qualities:
 it is nourishing and fattening, and its prolonged use has often
 overcome the most obstinate cases of constipation. the skins and
 pips of grapes should not be eaten.
. this is served in an ornamental box, placed on a glass plate or
dish.
seasonable.—may be purchased at any time.
. the apples should be nicely wiped with a dry cloth, and arranged
on a dish, piled high in the centre, with evergreen leaves between each
layer. the inferior apples should form the bottom layer, with the
bright-coloured large ones at the top. the leaves of the laurel, bay,
holly, or any shrub green in winter, are suitable for garnishing dessert
dishes. oranges may be arranged in the same manner; they should also be
wiped with a dry cloth before being sent to table.
. this dish consists of cherries, raspberries, currants, and
strawberries, piled in different layers, with plenty of leaves between
each layer; so that each fruit is well separated. the fruit should be
arranged with a due regard to colour, so that they contrast nicely one
with the other. our engraving shows a layer of white cherries at the
bottom, then one of red raspberries; over that a layer of white
currants, and at the top some fine scarlet strawberries.
seasonable in june, july, and august.
. these are usually served on glass dishes, the fruit piled high in
the centre, and the almonds blanched, and strewn over. to blanch the
almonds, put them into a small mug or teacup, pour over them boiling
water, let them remain for  or  minutes, and the skins may then be
easily removed. figs, dates, french plums, &c., are all served on small
glass plates or oval dishes, but without the almonds.
seasonable at any time, but more suitable in winter, when fresh fruit
is not obtainable.
 dates.—dates are imported into britain, in a dried state, from
 barbary and egypt, and, when in good condition, they are much
 esteemed. an inferior kind has lately become common, which are
 dried hard, and have little or no flavour. they should be chosen
 large, softish, not much wrinkled, of a reddish-yellow colour on
 the outside, with a whitish membrane between the fruit and the
 stone.
. fine strawberries, arranged in the manner shown in the engraving,
look exceedingly well. the inferior ones should be placed at the bottom
of the dish, and the others put in rows pyramidically, with the stalks
downwards; so that when the whole is completed, nothing but the red part
of the fruit is visible. the fruit should be gathered with rather long
stalks, as there is then something to support it, and it can be placed
more upright in each layer. a few of the finest should be reserved to
crown the top.
. ingredients.—to every pint of water allow  teaspoonful of salt.
mode.—place the walnuts in the salt and water for  hours at least;
then take them out, and rub them dry. old nuts may be freshened in this
manner; or walnuts, when first picked, may be put into an earthen pan
with salt sprinkled amongst them, and with damped hay placed on the top
of them, and then covered down with a lid. they must be well wiped
before they are put on table.
seasonable.—should be stored away in september or october.
[illustration]
[illustration]
. milk is obtained only from the class of animals called mammalia,
and is intended by nature for the nourishment of their young. the milk
of each animal is distinguished by some peculiarities; but as that of
the cow is by far the most useful to us in this part of the world, our
observations will be confined to that variety.
. milk, when drawn from the cow, is of a yellowish-white colour, and
is the most yellow at the beginning of the period of lactation. its
taste is agreeable, and rather saccharine. the viscidity and specific
gravity of milk are somewhat greater than that of water; but these
properties vary somewhat in the milk procured from different
individuals. on an average, the specific gravity of milk is ., water
being . the small cows of the alderney breed afford the richest milk.
. milk which is carried to a considerable distance, so as to be much
agitated, and cooled before it is put into pans to settle for cream,
never throws up so much, nor such rich cream, as if the same milk had
been put into pans directly after it was milked.
. milk, considered as an aliment, is of such importance in domestic
economy as to render all the improvements in its production extremely
valuable. to enlarge upon the antiquity of its use is unnecessary; it
has always been a favourite food in britain. "lacte et carno vivunt,"
says caesar, in his commentaries; the english of which is, "the
inhabitants subsist upon flesh and milk." the breed of the cow has
received great improvement in modern times, as regards the quantity and
quality of the milk which she affords; the form of milch-cows, their
mode of nourishment, and progress, are also manifest in the management
of the dairy.
. although milk in its natural state be a fluid, yet, considered as
an aliment, it is both solid and fluid: for no sooner does it enter the
stomach, than it is coagulated by the gastric juice, and separated into
curd and whey, the first of these being extremely nutritive.
. milk of the human subject is much thinner than cow's milk;
ass's milk comes the nearest to human milk of any other; goat's milk
is something thicker and richer than cow's milk; ewe's milk has the
appearance of cow's milk, and affords a larger quantity of cream;
mare's milk contains more sugar than that of the ewe; camel's milk
is used only in africa; buffalo's milk is employed in india.
. from no other substance, solid or fluid, can so great a number of
distinct kinds of aliment be prepared as from milk; some forming food,
others drink; some of them delicious, and deserving the name of
luxuries; all of them wholesome, and some medicinal: indeed, the variety
of aliments that seems capable of being produced from milk, appears to
be quite endless. in every age this must have been a subject for
experiment, and every nation has added to the number by the invention of
some peculiarity of its own.
. beckman, in his "history of inventions," states that butter was
not used either by the greeks or romans in cooking, nor was it brought
upon their tables at certain meals, as is the custom at present. in
england it has been made from time immemorial, though the art of making
cheese is said not to have been known to the ancient britons, and to
have been learned from their conquerors.
. the taste of butter is peculiar, and very unlike any other fatty
substance. it is extremely agreeable when of the best quality; but its
flavour depends much upon the food given to the cows: to be good, it
should not adhere to the knife.
. butter, with regard to its dietetic properties, may be regarded
nearly in the light of vegetable oils and animal fats; but it becomes
sooner rancid than most other fat oils. when fresh, it cannot but be
considered as very wholesome; but it should be quite free from
rancidity. if slightly salted when it is fresh, its wholesomeness is
probably not at all impaired; but should it begin to turn rancid,
salting will not correct its unwholesomeness. when salt butter is put
into casks, the upper part next the air is very apt to become rancid,
and this rancidity is also liable to affect the whole cask.
. epping butter is the kind most esteemed in london. fresh
butter comes to london from buckinghamshire, suffolk, oxfordshire,
yorkshire, devonshire, &c. cambridge butter is esteemed next to fresh;
devonshire butter is nearly similar in quality to the latter; irish
butter sold in london is all salted, but is generally good. the number
of firkins exported annually from ireland amounts to ,, equal to a
million of money. dutch butter is in good repute all over europe,
america, and even india; and no country in the world is so successful in
the manufacture of this article, holland supplying more butter to the
rest of the world than any country whatever.
. there are two methods pursued in the manufacture of butter. in
one, the cream is separated from the milk, and in that state it is
converted into butter by churning, as is the practice about epping; in
the other, milk is subjected to the same process, which is the method
usually followed in cheshire. the first method is generally said to give
the richest butter, and the latter the largest quantity, though some are
of opinion that there is little difference either in quality or
quantity.
. cheese is the curd formed from milk by artificial coagulation,
pressed and dried for use. curd, called also casein and caseous matter,
or the basis of cheese, exists in the milk, and not in the cream, and
requires only to be separated by coagulation. the coagulation, however,
supposes some alteration of the curd. by means of the substance employed
to coagulate it, it is rendered insoluble in water. when the curd is
freed from the whey, kneaded and pressed to expel it entirely, it
becomes cheese. this assumes a degree of transparency, and possesses
many of the properties of coagulated albumen. if it be well dried, it
does not change by exposure to the air; but if it contain moisture, it
soon putrefies. it therefore requires some salt to preserve it, and this
acts likewise as a kind of seasoning. all our cheese is coloured more or
less, except that made from skim milk. the colouring substances employed
are arnatto, turmeric, or marigold, all perfectly harmless unless they
are adulterated; and it is said that arnatto sometimes contains red
lead.
. cheese varies in quality and richness according to the materials
of which it is composed. it is made—. of entire milk, as in cheshire;
. of milk and cream, as at stilton; . of new milk mixed with skimmed
milk, as in gloucestershire; . of skimmed milk only, as in suffolk,
holland, and italy.
. the principal varieties of cheese used in england are the
following:—cheshire cheese, famed all over europe for its rich
quality and fine piquant flavour. it is made of entire new milk, the
cream not being taken off. gloucester cheese is much milder in its
taste than the cheshire. there are two kinds of gloucester
cheese,—single and double. single gloucester is made of skimmed milk,
or of the milk deprived of half the cream; double gloucester is a
cheese that pleases almost every palate: it is made of the whole milk
and cream. stilton cheese is made by adding the cream of one day to
the entire milk of the next: it was first made at stilton, in
leicestershire. sage cheese is so called from the practice of
colouring some curd with bruised sage, marigold-leaves, and parsley, and
mixing this with some uncoloured curd. with the romans, and during the
middle ages, this practice was extensively adopted. cheddar cheese
much resembles parmesan. it has a very agreeable taste and flavour, and
has a spongy appearance. brickbat cheese has nothing remarkable except
its form. it is made by turning with rennet a mixture of cream and new
milk. the curd is put into a wooden vessel the shape of a brick, and is
then pressed and dried in the usual way. dunlop cheese has a
peculiarly mild and rich taste: the best is made entirely from new milk.
new cheese (as it is called in london) is made chiefly in
lincolnshire, and is either made of all cream, or, like stilton. by
adding the cream of one day's milking to the milk that comes immediately
from the cow: they are extremely thin, and are compressed gently two or
three times, turned for a few days, and then eaten new with radishes,
salad, &c. skimmed milk cheese is made for sea voyages principally.
parmesan cheese is made in parma and piacenza. it is the most
celebrated of all cheese: it is made entirely of skimmed cow's milk. the
high flavour which it has, is supposed to be owing to the rich herbage
of the meadows of the po, where the cows are pastured. the best parmesan
is kept for three or four years, and none is carried to market till it
is at least six months old. dutch cheese derives its peculiar pungent
taste from the practice adopted in holland of coagulating the milk with
muriatic acid instead of rennet. swiss cheeses in their several
varieties are all remarkable for their fine flavour. that from
gruyčre, a bailiwick in the canton of fribourg, is best known in
england. it is flavoured by the dried herb of melilotos officinalis in
powder. cheese from milk and potatoes is manufactured in thuringia and
saxony. cream cheese, although so called, is not properly cheese, but
is nothing more than cream dried sufficiently to be cut with a knife.
. there is only one opinion as to the nutritive properties of eggs,
although the qualities of those belonging to different birds vary
somewhat. those of the common hen are most esteemed as delicate food,
particularly when "new-laid." the quality of eggs depends much upon the
food given to the hen. eggs in general are considered most easily
digestible when little subjected to the art of cookery. the lightest way
of dressing them is by poaching, which is effected by putting them for a
minute or two into brisk boiling water: this coagulates the external
white, without doing the inner part too much. eggs are much better when
new-laid than a day or two afterwards. the usual time allotted for
boiling eggs in the shell is  to -/ minutes: less time than that in
boiling water will not be sufficient to solidify the white, and more
will make the yolk hard and less digestible: it is very difficult to
guess accurately as to the time. great care should be employed in
putting them into the water, to prevent cracking the shell, which
inevitably causes a portion of the white to exude, and lets water into
the egg. eggs are often beaten up raw in nutritive beverages.
. eggs are employed in a very great many articles of cookery,
entrées, and entremets, and they form an essential ingredient in pastry,
creams, flip, &c. it is particularly necessary that they should be quite
fresh, as nothing is worse than stale eggs. cobbett justly says, stale,
or even preserved eggs, are things to be run from, not after.
. the metropolis is supplied with eggs from all parts of the
kingdom, and they are likewise largely imported from various places on
the continent; as france, holland, belgium, guernsey, and jersey. it
appears from official statements mentioned in mcculloch's "commercial
dictionary," that the number imported from france alone amounts to about
,, a year; and supposing them on an average to cost fourpence a
dozen, it follows that we pay our continental neighbours above ł, a
year for eggs.
. the eggs of different birds vary much in size and colour. those of
the ostrich are the largest: one laid in the menagerie in paris weighed
 lbs.  oz., held a pint, and was six inches deep: this is about the
usual size of those brought from africa. travellers describe ostrich
eggs as of an agreeable taste: they keep longer than hen's eggs.
drinking-cups are often made of the shell, which is very strong. the
eggs of the turkey are almost as mild as those of the hen; the egg of
the goose is large, but well-tasted. duck's eggs have a rich
flavour; the albumen is slightly transparent, or bluish, when set or
coagulated by boiling, which requires less time than hen's eggs.
guinea-fowl eggs are smaller and more delicate than those of the hen.
eggs of wild fowl are generally coloured, often spotted; and the taste
generally partakes somewhat of the flavour of the bird they belong to.
those of land birds that are eaten, as the plover, lapwing, ruff, &c.,
are in general much esteemed; but those of sea-fowl have, more or
less, a strong fishy taste. the eggs of the turtle are very numerous:
they consist of yolk only, without shell, and are delicious.
. if it be desired that the milk should be freed entirely from
cream, it should be poured into a very shallow broad pan or dish, not
more than -/ inch deep, as cream cannot rise through a great depth of
milk. in cold and wet weather, milk is not so rich as it is in summer
and warm weather, and the morning's milk is always richer than the
evening's. the last-drawn milk of each milking, at all times and
seasons, is richer than the first-drawn, and on that account should be
set apart for cream. milk should be shaken as little as possible when
carried from the cow to the dairy, and should be poured into the pans
very gently. persons not keeping cows, may always have a little cream,
provided the milk they purchase be pure and unadulterated. as soon as it
comes in, it should be poured into very shallow open pie-dishes, and set
by in a very cool place, and in  or  hours a nice cream should have
risen to the surface.
 milk is one of the most complete of all articles of food: that
 is to say, it contains a very large number of the elements which
 enter into the composition of the human body. it "disagrees"
 with fat, heavy, languid people, of slow circulation; and, at
 first, with many people of sedentary habits, and stomachs
 weakened by stimulants of different kinds. but, if exercise can
 be taken and a little patience shown, while the system
 accommodates itself to a new regimen, this bland and soothing
 article of diet is excellent for the majority of thin, nervous
 people; especially for those who have suffered much from
 emotional disturbances, or have relaxed their stomachs by too
 much tea or coffee, taken too hot. milk is, in fact, a nutrient
 and a sedative at once. stomachs, however, have their
 idiosyncrasies, and it sometimes proves an unwelcome and
 ill-digested article of food. as milk, when good, contains a
 good deal of respiratory material (fat),—material which must
 either be burnt off, or derange the liver, and be rejected in
 other ways, it may disagree because the lungs are not
 sufficiently used in the open air. but it is very probable that
 there are really "constitutions" which cannot take to it; and
 they should not be forced.
. when the weather is very warm, and it is very difficult to prevent
milk from turning sour and spoiling the cream, it should be scalded, and
it will then remain good for a few hours. it must on no account be
allowed to boil, or there will be a skin instead of a cream upon the
milk; and the slower the process, the safer will it be. a very good plan
to scald milk, is to put the pan that contains it into a saucepan or
wide kettle of boiling water. when the surface looks thick, the milk is
sufficiently scalded, and it should then be put away in a cool place in
the same vessel that it was scalded in. cream may be kept for  hours,
if scalded without sugar; and by the addition of the latter ingredient,
it will remain good double the time, if kept in a cool place. all pans,
jugs, and vessels intended for milk, should be kept beautifully clean,
and well scalded before the milk is put in, as any negligence in this
respect may cause large quantities of it to be spoiled; and milk should
never be kept in vessels of zinc or copper. milk may be preserved good
in hot weather, for a few hours, by placing the jug which contains it in
ice, or very cold water; or a pinch of bicarbonate of soda may be
introduced into the liquid.
 milk, when of good quality, is of an opaque white colour: the
 cream always comes to the top; the well-known milky odour is
 strong; it will boil without altering its appearance, in these
 respects; the little bladders which arise on the surface will
 renew themselves if broken by the spoon. to boil milk is, in
 fact, the simplest way of testing its quality. the commonest
 adulterations of milk are not of a hurtful character. it is a
 good deal thinned with water, and sometimes thickened with a
 little starch, or colored with yolk of egg, or even saffron; but
 these processes have nothing murderous in them.
. ingredients.—a very small piece of rennet, / gallon of milk.
mode.—procure from the butcher's a small piece of rennet, which is
the stomach of the calf, taken as soon as it is killed, scoured, and
well rubbed with salt, and stretched on sticks to dry. pour some boiling
water on the rennet, and let it remain for  hours; then use the liquor
to turn the milk. the milk should be warm and fresh from the cow: if
allowed to cool, it must be heated till it is of a degree quite equal to
new milk; but do not let it be too hot. about a tablespoonful or rather
more, would be sufficient to turn the above proportion of milk into
curds and whey; and whilst the milk is turning, let it be kept in rather
a warm place.
time.—from  to  hours to turn the milk.
seasonable at any time.
. the milk should stand  hours in the winter, half that time when
the weather is very warm. the milkpan is then set on a stove, and should
there remain until the milk is quite hot; but it must not boil, or there
will be a thick skin on the surface. when it is sufficiently done, the
undulations on the surface look thick, and small rings appear. the time
required for scalding cream depends on the size of the pan and the heat
of the fire; but the slower it is done, the better. the pan should be
placed in the dairy when the cream is sufficiently scalded, and skimmed
the following day. this cream is so much esteemed that it is sent to the
london markets in small square tins, and is exceedingly delicious eaten
with fresh fruit. in devonshire, butter is made from this cream, and is
usually very firm.
. ingredients.—to every pint of new milk allow  dessertspoonfuls
of brandy,  dessertspoonful of sugar, and -/ dessertspoonful of
prepared rennet; thick cream, pounded cinnamon, or grated nutmeg.
mode.—make the milk blood-warm; put it into a deep dish with the
brandy, sugar, and rennet; stir it altogether, and cover it over until
it is set. then spread some thick or clotted cream over the top, grate
some nutmeg, and strew some sugar over, and the dish will be ready to
serve.
time.—about  hours to set the milk. seasonable at any time.
. fresh butter should be kept in a dark, cool place, and in as large
a mass as possible. mould as much only as is required, as the more
surface is exposed, the more liability there will be to spoil; and the
outside very soon becomes rancid. fresh butter should be kept covered
with white paper. for small larders, butter-coolers of red brick are now
very much used for keeping fresh butter in warm weather. these coolers
are made with a large bell-shaped cover, into the top of which a little
cold water should be poured, and in summer time very frequently changed;
and the butter must be kept covered. these coolers keep butter
remarkably firm in hot weather, and are extremely convenient for those
whose larder accommodation is limited.
[illustration: butter-dish.]
in choosing fresh butter, remember it should smell deliciously, and be
of an equal colour all through: if it smells sour, it has not been
sufficiently washed from the buttermilk; and if veiny and open, it has
probably been worked with a staler or an inferior sort.
. in large families, where salt butter is purchased a tub at a time,
the first thing to be done is to turn the whole of the butter out, and,
with a clean knife, to scrape the outside; the tub should then be wiped
with a clean cloth, and sprinkled all round with salt, the butter
replaced, and the lid kept on to exclude the air. it is necessary to
take these precautions, as sometimes a want of proper cleanliness in the
dairymaid causes the outside of the butter to become rancid, and if the
scraping be neglected, the whole mass would soon become spoiled. to
choose salt butter, plunge a knife into it, and if, when drawn out, the
blade smells rancid or unpleasant, the butter is bad. the layers in tubs
will vary greatly, the butter being made at different times; so, to try
if the whole tub be good, the cask should be unhooped, and the butter
tried between the staves.
it is not necessary to state that butter is extracted from cream, or
from unskimmed milk, by the churn. of course it partakes of the
qualities of the milk, and winter butter is said not to be so good as
spring butter.
a word of caution is necessary about rancid butter. nobody eats it on
bread, but it is sometimes used in cooking, in forms in which the
acidity can be more or less disguised. so much the worse; it is almost
poisonous, disguise it as you may. never, under any exigency whatever,
be tempted into allowing butter with even a soupçon of "turning" to
enter into the composition of any dish that appears on your table. and,
in general, the more you can do without the employment of butter that
has been subjected to the influence of heat, the better. the woman of
modern times is not a "leech;" but she might often keep the "leech" from
the door, if she would give herself the trouble to invent innocent
sauces.
butter-moulds, for moulding fresh butter.
[illustration: dish of rolled butter.]
. butter-moulds, or wooden stamps for moulding fresh butter, are
much used, and are made in a variety of forms and shapes. in using them,
let them be kept scrupulously clean, and before the butter is pressed
in, the interior should be well wetted with cold water; the butter must
then be pressed in, the mould opened, and the perfect shape taken out.
the butter may be then dished, and garnished with a wreath of parsley,
if for a cheese course; if for breakfast, put it into an ornamental
butter-dish, with a little water at the bottom, should the weather be
very warm.
. tie a strong cloth by two of the corners to an iron hook in the
wall; make a knot with the other two ends, so that a stick might pass
through. put the butter into the cloth; twist it tightly over a dish,
into which the butter will fall through the knot, so forming small and
pretty little strings. the butter may then be garnished with parsley, if
to serve with a cheese course; or it may be sent to table plain for
breakfast, in an ornamental dish. squirted butter for garnishing hams,
salads, eggs, &c., is made by forming a piece of stiff paper in the
shape of a cornet, and squeezing the butter in fine strings from the
hole at the bottom. scooped butter is made by dipping a teaspoon or
scooper in warm water, and then scooping the butter quickly and thin. in
warm weather, it would not be necessary to heat the spoon.
 butter may be kept fresh for ten or twelve days by a very simple
 process. knead it well in cold water till the buttermilk is
 extracted; then put it in a glazed jar, which invert in another,
 putting into the latter a sufficient quantity of water to
 exclude the air. renew the water every day.
. ingredients.—the yolks of  hard-boiled eggs,  tablespoonful of
orange-flower water,  tablespoonfuls of pounded sugar, / lb. of good
fresh butter.
mode.—beat the yolks of the eggs smoothly in a mortar, with the
orange-flower water and the sugar, until the whole is reduced to a fine
paste; add the butter, and force all through an old but clean cloth by
wringing the cloth and squeezing the butter very hard. the butter will
then drop on the plate in large and small pieces, according to the holes
in the cloth. plain butter may be done in the same manner, and is very
quickly prepared, besides having a very good effect.
 butter.—white-coloured butter is said not to be so good as the
 yellow; but the yellow colour is often artificially produced, by
 the introduction of colouring matter into the churn.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of butter allow  anchovies,  small
bunch of parsley.
mode.—wash, bone, and pound the anchovies well in a mortar; scald the
parsley, chop it, and rub through a sieve; then pound all the
ingredients together, mix well, and make the butter into pats
immediately. this makes a pretty dish, if fancifully moulded, for
breakfast or supper, and should be garnished with parsley.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make  dishes, with  pats each.
seasonable at any time.
. in families where much cheese is consumed, and it is bought in
large quantities, a piece from the whole cheese should be cut, the
larger quantity spread with a thickly-buttered sheet of white paper, and
the outside occasionally wiped. to keep cheeses moist that are in daily
use, when they come from table a damp cloth should be wrapped round
them, and the cheese put into a pan with a cover to it, in a cool but
not very dry place. to ripen cheeses, and bring them forward, put them
into a damp cellar; and, to check too large a production of mites,
spirits may be poured into the parts affected. pieces of cheese which
are too near the rind, or too dry to put on table, may be made into
welsh rare-bits, or grated down and mixed with macaroni. cheeses may be
preserved in a perfect state for years, by covering them with parchment
made pliable by soaking in water, or by rubbing them over with a coating
of melted fat. the cheeses selected should be free from cracks or
bruises of any kind.
 cheese.—it is well known that some persons like cheese in a
 state of decay, and even "alive." there is no accounting for
 tastes, and it maybe hard to show why mould, which is
 vegetation, should not be eaten as well as salad, or maggots as
 well as eels. but, generally speaking, decomposing bodies are
 not wholesome eating, and the line must be drawn somewhere.
[illustration: stilton cheese.]
. stilton cheese, or british parmesan, as it is sometimes called, is
generally preferred to all other cheeses by those whose authority few
will dispute. those made in may or june are usually served at christmas;
or, to be in prime order, should be kept from  to  months, or even
longer. an artificial ripeness in stilton cheese is sometimes produced
by inserting a small piece of decayed cheshire into an aperture at the
top. from  weeks to a month is sufficient time to ripen the cheese. an
additional flavour may also be obtained by scooping out a piece from the
top, and pouring therein port, sherry, madeira, or old ale, and letting
the cheese absorb these for  or  weeks. but that cheese is the finest
which is ripened without any artificial aid, is the opinion of those who
are judges in these matters. in serving a stilton cheese, the top of it
should be cut off to form a lid, and a napkin or piece of white paper,
with a frill at the top, pinned round. when the cheese goes from table,
the lid should be replaced.
[illustration: cheese-glass.]
. the usual mode of serving cheese at good tables is to cut a small
quantity of it into neat square pieces, and to put them into a glass
cheese-dish, this dish being handed round. should the cheese crumble
much, of course this method is rather wasteful, and it may then be put
on the table in the piece, and the host may cut from it. when served
thus, the cheese must always be carefully scraped, and laid on a white
d'oyley or napkin, neatly folded. cream cheese is often served in a
cheese course, and, sometimes, grated parmesan: the latter should he put
into a covered glass dish. rusks, cheese-biscuits, pats or slices of
butter, and salad, cucumber, or water-cresses, should always form part
of a cheese course.
 smoking cheeses.—the romans smoked their cheeses, to give them
 a sharp taste. they possessed public places expressly for this
 use, and subject to police regulations which no one could evade.
 a celebrated gourmand remarked that a dinner without cheese is
 like a woman with one eye.
. ingredients.—slices of brown bread-and-butter, thin slices of
cheese.
mode.—cut from a nice fat cheshire, or any good rich cheese, some
slices about / inch thick, and place them between some slices of brown
bread-and-butter, like sandwiches. place them on a plate in the oven,
and, when the bread is toasted, serve on a napkin very hot and very
quickly.
time.— minutes in a brisk oven.
average cost, -/d. each sandwich.
sufficient.—allow a sandwich for each person.
seasonable at any time.
 cheese.—one of the most important products of coagulated milk
 is cheese. unfermented, or cream-cheese, when quite fresh, is
 good for subjects with whom milk does not disagree; but cheese,
 in its commonest shape, is only fit for sedentary people as an
 after-dinner stimulant, and in very small quantity. bread and
 cheese, as a meal, is only fit for soldiers on march or
 labourers in the open air, who like it because it "holds the
 stomach a long time."
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter, / lb. of flour, / lb. of
grated cheese, / teaspoonful of cayenne, / teaspoonful of salt;
water.
mode.—rub the butter in the flour; add the grated cheese, cayenne.
and salt; and mix these ingredients well together. moisten with
sufficient water to make the whole into a paste; roll out, and cut into
fingers about  inches in length. bake them in a moderate oven a very
light colour, and serve very hot.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs, the weight of  in parmesan or good cheshire
cheese, the weight of  in butter; pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—separate the yolks from the whites of the eggs; beat the former
in a basin, and grate the cheese, or cut it into very thin flakes.
parmesan or cheshire cheese may be used, whichever is the most
convenient, although the former is considered more suitable for this
dish; or an equal quantity of each may be used. break the butter into
small pieces, add it to the other ingredients, with sufficient pepper
and salt to season nicely, and beat the mixture thoroughly. well whisk
the whites of the eggs, stir them lightly in, and either bake the fondue
in a soufflé-dish or small round cake-tin. fill the dish only half full,
as the fondue should rise very much. pin a napkin round the tin or dish,
and serve very hot and very quickly. if allowed to stand after it is
withdrawn from the oven, the beauty and lightness of this preparation
will be entirely spoiled.
time.—from  to  minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
(an excellent recipe.)
. ingredients.—eggs, cheese, butter, pepper and salt.
mode.—take the same number of eggs as there are guests; weigh the
eggs in the shell, allow a third of their weight in gruyčre cheese, and
a piece of butter one-sixth of the weight of the cheese. break the eggs
into a basin, beat them well; add the cheese, which should be grated,
and the butter, which should be broken into small pieces. stir these
ingredients together with a wooden spoon; put the mixture into a lined
saucepan, place it over the fire, and stir until the substance is thick
and soft. put in a little salt, according to the age of the cheese, and
a good sprinkling of pepper, and serve the fondue on a very hot silver
or metal plate. do not allow the fondue to remain on the fire after the
mixture is set, as, if it boils, it will be entirely spoiled. brillat
savarin recommends that some choice burgundy should he handed round with
this dish. we have given this recipe exactly as he recommends it to be
made; but we have tried it with good cheshire cheese, and found it
answer remarkably well.
time.—about  minutes to set the mixture.
average cost for  persons, d.
sufficient.—allow  egg, with the other ingredients in proportion,
for one person.
seasonable at any time.
macaroni, as usually served with the cheese course.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of pipe macaroni, / lb. of butter,  oz.
of parmesan or cheshire cheese, pepper and salt to taste,  pint of
milk,  pints of water, bread crumbs.
mode.—put the milk and water into a saucepan with sufficient salt to
flavour it; place it on the fire, and, when it boils quickly, drop in
the macaroni. keep the water boiling until it is quite tender; drain the
macaroni, and put it into a deep dish. have ready the grated cheese,
either parmesan or cheshire; sprinkle it amongst the macaroni and some
of the butter cut into small pieces, reserving some of the cheese for
the top layer. season with a little pepper, and cover the top layer of
cheese with some very fine bread crumbs. warm, without oiling, the
remainder of the butter, and pour it gently over the bread crumbs. place
the dish before a bright fire to brown the crumbs; turn it once or
twice, that it may be equally coloured, and serve very hot. the top of
the macaroni may be browned with a salamander, which is even better than
placing it before the fire, as the process is more expeditious; but it
should never be browned in the oven, as the butter would oil, and so
impart a very disagreeable flavour to the dish. in boiling the macaroni,
let it be perfectly tender but firm, no part beginning to melt, and the
form entirely preserved. it may be boiled in plain water, with a little
salt instead of using milk, but should then have a small piece of butter
mixed with it.
time.—-/ to -/ hour to boil the macaroni,  minutes to brown it
before the fire.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
note.—riband macaroni may be dressed in the same manner, but does not
require boiling so long a time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of pipe or riband macaroni, / pint of
milk, / pint of veal or beef gravy, the yolks of  eggs, 
tablespoonfuls of cream,  oz. of grated parmesan or cheshire cheese, 
oz. of butter.
mode.—wash the macaroni, and boil it in the gravy and milk until
quite tender, without being broken. drain it, and put it into rather a
deep dish. beat the yolks of the eggs with the cream and 
tablespoonfuls of the liquor the macaroni was boiled in; make this
sufficiently hot to thicken, but do not allow it to boil; pour it over
the macaroni, over which sprinkle the grated cheese and the butter
broken into small pieces; brown with a salamander, or before the fire,
and serve.
time.—-/ to -/ hour to boil the macaroni,  minutes to thicken
the eggs and cream,  minutes to brown.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of pipe macaroni, / pint of brown gravy
no. ,  oz. of grated parmesan cheese.
mode.—wash the macaroni, and boil it in salt and water until quite
tender; drain it, and put it into rather a deep dish. have ready a pint
of good brown gravy, pour it hot over the macaroni, and send it to table
with grated parmesan served on a separate dish. when the flavour is
liked, a little pounded mace may be added to the water in which the
macaroni is boiled; but this must always be sparingly added, as it will
impart a very strong flavour.
time.—-/ to -/ hour to boil the macaroni.
average cost, with the gravy and cheese, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of cheese allow  oz. of fresh butter.
mode.—to pound cheese is an economical way of using it, if it has
become dry; it is exceedingly good spread on bread, and is the best way
of eating it for those whose digestion is weak. cut up the cheese into
small pieces, and pound it smoothly in a mortar, adding butter in the
above proportion. press it down into a jar, cover with clarified butter,
and it will keep for several days. the flavour may be very much
increased by adding mixed mustard (about a teaspoonful to every lb.), or
cayenne, or pounded mace. curry-powder is also not unfrequently mixed
with it.
ramakins, to serve with the cheese course.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of cheshire cheese, / lb. of parmesan
cheese, / lb. of fresh butter,  eggs, the crumb of a small roll;
pepper, salt, and pounded mace to taste.
mode.—boil the crumb of the roll in milk for  minutes; strain, and
put it into a mortar; add the cheese, which should be finely scraped,
the butter, the yolks of the eggs, and seasoning, and pound these
ingredients well together. whisk the whites of the eggs, mix them with
the paste, and put it into small pans or saucers, which should not be
more than half filled. bake them from  to  minutes, and serve them
very hot and very quickly. this batter answers equally well for macaroni
after it is boiled tender.
time— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
pastry ramakins, to serve with the cheese course.
. ingredients.—any pieces of very good light puff-paste cheshire,
parmesan, or stilton cheese.
mode.—the remains or odd pieces of paste left from large tarts, &c.
answer for making these little dishes. gather up the pieces of paste,
roll it out evenly, and sprinkle it with grated cheese of a nice
flavour. fold the paste in three, roll it out again, and sprinkle more
cheese over; fold the paste, roll it out, and with a paste-cutter shape
it in any way that may be desired. bake the ramakins in a brisk oven
from  to  minutes, dish them on a hot napkin, and serve quickly. the
appearance of this dish may be very much improved by brushing the
ramakins over with yolk of egg before they are placed in the oven. where
expense is not objected to, parmesan is the best kind of cheese to use
for making this dish.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, with / lb. of paste, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
toasted cheese, or scotch rare-bit.
. ingredients.—a few slices of rich cheese, toast, mustard, and
pepper.
[illustration: hot-water cheese-dish.]
mode.—cut some nice rich sound cheese into rather thin slices; melt
it in a cheese-toaster on a hot plate, or over steam, and, when melted,
add a small quantity of mixed mustard and a seasoning of pepper; stir
the cheese until it is completely dissolved, then brown it before the
fire, or with a salamander. fill the bottom of the cheese-toaster with
hot water, and serve with dry or buttered toasts, whichever may be
preferred. our engraving illustrates a cheese-toaster with hot-water
reservoir: the cheese is melted in the upper tin, which is placed in
another vessel of boiling water, so keeping the preparation beautifully
hot. a small quantity of porter, or port wine, is sometimes mixed with
the cheese; and, if it be not very rich, a few pieces of butter may be
mixed with it to great advantage. sometimes the melted cheese is spread
on the toasts, and then laid in the cheese-dish at the top of the hot
water. whichever way it is served, it is highly necessary that the
mixture be very hot, and very quickly sent to table, or it will be
worthless.
time.—about  minutes to melt the cheese.
average cost, -/d. per slice.
sufficient.—allow a slice to each person. seasonable at any time.
toasted cheese, or welsh rare-bit.
. ingredients.—slices of bread, butter, cheshire or gloucester
cheese, mustard, and pepper.
mode.—cut the bread into slices about / inch in thickness; pare off
the crust, toast the bread slightly without hardening or burning it, and
spread it with butter. cut some slices, not quite so large as the bread,
from a good rich fat cheese; lay them on the toasted bread in a
cheese-toaster; be careful that the cheese does not burn, and let it be
equally melted. spread over the top a little made mustard and a
seasoning of pepper, and serve very hot, with very hot plates. to
facilitate the melting of the cheese, it may be cut into thin flakes or
toasted on one side before it is laid on the bread. as it is so
essential to send this dish hot to table, it is a good plan to melt the
cheese in small round silver or metal pans, and to send these pans to
table, allowing one for each guest. slices of dry or buttered toast
should always accompany them, with mustard, pepper, and salt.
time.—about  minutes to melt the cheese.
average cost, -/d. each slice.
sufficient.—allow a slice to each person. seasonable at any time.
note.—should the cheese be dry, a little butter mixed with it will be
an improvement.
 "cow cheese."—it was only fifty years after aristotle—the
 fourth century before christ—that butter began to be noticed as
 an aliment. the greeks, in imitation of the parthians and
 scythians, who used to send it to them, had it served upon their
 tables, and called it at first "oil of milk," and later,
 bouturos, "cow cheese."
. ingredients.—a few slices of hot buttered toast; allow  anchovy
to each slice. for the sauce,—/ pint of cream, the yolks of  eggs.
mode.—separate the yolks from the whites of the eggs; beat the
former, stir to them the cream, and bring the sauce to the
boiling-point, but do not allow it to boil, or it will curdle. have
ready some hot buttered toast, spread with anchovies pounded to a paste;
pour a little of the hot sauce on the top, and serve very hot and very
quickly.
time.— minutes to make the sauce hot.
sufficient.—allow / slice to each person. seasonable at any time.
. in choosing eggs, apply the tongue to the large end of the egg,
and, if it feels warm, it is new, and may be relied on as a fresh egg.
another mode of ascertaining their freshness is to hold them before a
lighted candle, or to the light, and if the egg looks clear, it will be
tolerably good; if thick, it is stale; and if there is a black spot
attached to the shell, it is worthless. no egg should be used for
culinary purposes with the slightest taint in it, as it will render
perfectly useless those with which it has been mixed. eggs that are
purchased, and that cannot be relied on, should always be broken in a
cup, and then put into a basin: by this means stale or bad eggs may be
easily rejected, without wasting the others.
 eggs contain, for their volume, a greater quantity of nutriment
 than any other article of food. but it does not follow that they
 are always good for weak stomachs; quite the contrary; for it is
 often a great object to give the stomach a large surface to work
 upon, a considerable volume of ingesta, over which the
 nutritive matter is diffused, and so exposed to the action of
 the gastric juice at many points. there are many persons who
 cannot digest eggs, however cooked. it is said, however, that
 their digestibility decreases in proportion to the degree in
 which they are hardened by boiling.
. have ready a large saucepan, capable of holding  or  quarts,
full of boiling water. put the eggs into a cabbage-net, say  at a
time, and hold them in the water (which must be kept boiling) for 
seconds. proceed in this manner till you have done as many eggs as you
wish to preserve; then pack them away in sawdust. we have tried this
method of preserving eggs, and can vouch for its excellence: they will
be found, at the end of  or  months, quite good enough for culinary
purposes; and although the white may be a little tougher than that of a
new-laid egg, the yolk will be nearly the same. many persons keep eggs
for a long time by smearing the shells with butter or sweet oil: they
should then be packed in plenty of bran or sawdust, and the eggs not
allowed to touch each other. eggs for storing should be collected in
fine weather, and should not be more than  hours old when they are
packed away, or their flavour, when used, cannot be relied on. another
simple way of preserving eggs is to immerse them in lime-water soon
after they have been laid, and then to put the vessel containing the
lime-water in a cellar or cool outhouse.
seasonable.—the best time for preserving eggs is from july to
september.
 eggs.—the quality of eggs is said to be very much affected by
 the food of the fowls who lay them. herbs and grain together
 make a better food than grain only. when the hens eat too many
 insects, the eggs have a disagreeable flavour.
to boil eggs for breakfast, salads, &c.
[illustration: egg-stand for the breakfast-table.]
. eggs for boiling cannot be too fresh, or boiled too soon after
they are laid; but rather a longer time should be allowed for boiling a
new-laid egg than for one that is three or four days old. have ready a
saucepan of boiling water; put the eggs into it gently with a spoon,
letting the spoon touch the bottom of the saucepan before it is
withdrawn, that the egg may not fall, and consequently crack. for those
who like eggs lightly boiled,  minutes will be found sufficient; -/
to  minutes will be ample time to set the white nicely; and, if liked
hard,  to  minutes will not be found too long. should the eggs be
unusually large, as those of black spanish fowls sometimes are, allow an
extra / minute for them. eggs for salads should be boiled from 
minutes to / hour, and should be placed in a basin of cold water for a
few minutes; they should then be rolled on the table with the hand, and
the shell will peel off easily.
time.—to boil eggs lightly, for invalids or children,  minutes; to
boil eggs to suit the generality of tastes, -/ to  minutes; to boil
eggs hard,  to  minutes; for salads,  to  minutes.
note.—silver or plated egg-dishes, like that shown in our engraving,
are now very much used. the price of the one illustrated is ł. s., and
may be purchased of messrs. r. & j. slack, , strand.
 eggs.—when fresh eggs are dropped into a vessel full of
 boiling water, they crack, because the eggs being well filled,
 the shells give way to the efforts of the interior fluids,
 dilated by heat. if the volume of hot water be small, the shells
 do not crack, because its temperature is reduced by the eggs
 before the interior dilation can take place. stale eggs, again,
 do not crack, because the air inside is easily compressed.
. ingredients.— new-laid eggs,  oz. of butter.
mode.—procure the eggs new-laid if possible; break them into a basin,
and beat them well; put the butter into another basin, which place in
boiling water, and stir till the butter is melted. pour that and the
eggs into a lined saucepan; hold it over a gentle fire, and, as the
mixture begins to warm, pour it two or three times into the basin, and
back again, that the two ingredients may be well incorporated. keep
stirring the eggs and butter one way until they are hot, without
boiling, and serve on hot buttered toast. if the mixture is allowed to
boil, it will curdle, and so be entirely spoiled.
time.—about  minutes to make the eggs hot. average cost, d.
sufficient.—allow a slice to each person. seasonable at any time.
. ducks' eggs are usually so strongly flavoured that, plainly
boiled, they are not good for eating; they answer, however, very well
for various culinary preparations where eggs are required; such as
custards, &c. &c. being so large and highly-flavoured,  duck's egg will
go as far as  small hen's eggs; besides making whatever they are mixed
with exceedingly rich. they also are admirable when used in puddings.
 primitive method of cooking eggs.—the shepherds of egypt had a
 singular manner of cooking eggs without the aid of fire. they
 placed them in a sling, which they turned so rapidly that the
 friction of the air heated them to the exact point required for
 use.
. ingredients.— eggs, / lb. of lard, butter or clarified
dripping.
[illustration: fried eggs on bacon.]
mode.—place a delicately-clean frying-pan over a gentle fire; put in
the fat, and allow it to come to the boiling-point. break the eggs into
cups, slip them into the boiling fat, and let them remain until the
whites are delicately set; and, whilst they are frying, ladle a little
of the fat over them. take them up with a slice, drain them for a minute
from their greasy moisture, trim them neatly, and serve on slices of
fried bacon or ham; or the eggs may be placed in the middle of the dish,
with the bacon put round as a garnish.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, d. each; d. when scarce.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
 veneration for eggs.—many of the most learned philosophers held
 eggs in a kind of respect, approaching to veneration, because
 they saw in them the emblem of the world and the four elements.
 the shell, they said, represented the earth; the white, water;
 the yolk, fire; and air was found under the shell at one end of
 the egg.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of fresh butter,  tablespoonful of flour,
/ pint of milk, pepper and salt to taste,  tablespoonful of minced
parsley, the juice of / lemon,  eggs.
mode.—put the flour and half the butter into a stewpan; stir them
over the fire until the mixture thickens; pour in the milk, which should
be boiling; add a seasoning of pepper and salt, and simmer the whole for
 minutes. put the remainder of the butter into the sauce, and add the
minced parsley; then boil the eggs hard, strip off the shells, cut the
eggs into quarters, and put them on a dish. bring the sauce to the
boiling-point, add the lemon-juice, pour over the eggs, and serve.
time.— minutes to boil the sauce; the eggs,  to  minutes.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
oeufs au plat, or au miroir, served on the dish in which they are
cooked.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of butter, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—butter a dish rather thickly with good fresh butter; melt it,
break the eggs into it the same as for poaching, sprinkle them with
white pepper and fine salt, and put the remainder of the butter, cut
into very small pieces, on the top of them. put the dish on a hot plate,
or in the oven, or before the fire, and let it remain until the whites
become set, but not hard, when serve immediately, placing the dish they
were cooked in on another. to hasten the cooking of the eggs, a
salamander may be held over them for a minute; but great care must be
taken that they are not too much done. this is an exceedingly nice dish,
and one very easily prepared for breakfast.
time.— minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
. plovers' eggs are usually served boiled hard, and sent to table in
a napkin, either hot or cold. they may also be shelled, and served the
same as eggs ŕ la tripe, with a good béchamel sauce, or brown gravy,
poured over them. they are also used for decorating salads, the
beautiful colour of the white being generally so much admired.
[illustration: eggs poached on toast.]
[illustration: tin egg-poacher.]
. ingredients.—eggs, water. to every pint of water allow 
tablespoonful of vinegar.
mode.—eggs for poaching should be perfectly fresh, but not quite
new-laid; those that are about  hours old are the best for the
purpose. if quite new-laid, the white is so milky it is almost
impossible to set it; and, on the other hand, if the egg be at all
stale, it is equally difficult to poach it nicely. strain some boiling
water into a deep clean frying-pan; break the egg into a cup without
damaging the yolk, and, when the water boils, remove the pan to the side
of the fire, and gently slip the egg into it. place the pan over a
gentle fire, and keep the water simmering until the white looks nicely
set, when the egg is ready. take it up gently with a slice, cut away the
ragged edges of the white, and serve either on toasted bread or on
slices of ham or bacon, or on spinach, &c. a poached egg should not be
overdone, as its appearance and taste will be quite spoiled if the yolk
be allowed to harden. when the egg is slipped into the water, the white
should be gathered together, to keep it a little in form, or the cup
should be turned over it for  minute. to poach an egg to perfection is
rather a difficult operation; so, for inexperienced cooks, a tin
egg-poacher may be purchased, which greatly facilitates this manner of
dressing ecgs. our illustration clearly shows what it is: it consists of
a tin plate with a handle, with a space for three perforated cups. an
egg should be broken into each cup, and the machine then placed in a
stewpan of boiling water, which has been previously strained. when the
whites of the eggs appear set, they are done, and should then be
carefully slipped on to the toast or spinach, or with whatever they are
served. in poaching eggs in a frying-pan, never do more than four at a
time; and, when a little vinegar is liked mixed with the water in which
the eggs are done, use the above proportion.
time.—-/ to -/ minutes, according to the size of the egg.
sufficient.—allow  eggs to each person.
seasonable at any time, but less plentiful in winter.
. ingredients.— pint of water,  teaspoonful of salt, 
teaspoonfuls of vinegar,  fresh eggs, / gill of cream, salt, pepper,
and pounded sugar to taste,  oz. of butter.
mode.—put the water, vinegar, and salt into a frying-pan, and break
each egg into a separate cup; bring the water, &c. to boil, and slip the
eggs gently into it without breaking the yolks. simmer them from  to 
minutes, but not longer, and, with a slice, lift them out on to a hot
dish, and trim the edges. empty the pan of its contents, put in the
cream, add a seasoning to taste of pepper, salt, and pounded sugar;
bring the whole to the boiling-point; then add the butter, broken into
small pieces; toss the pan round and round till the butter is melted;
pour it over the eggs, and serve. to insure the eggs not being spoiled
whilst the cream, &c., is preparing, it is a good plan to warm the cream
with the butter, &c., before the eggs are poached, so that it may be
poured over them immediately after they are dished.
time.— to  minutes to poach the eggs,  minutes to warm the cream.
average cost for the above quantity, d.
sufficient for  persons. seasonable at any time.
[illustration:  swan's egg.  turkey's egg.  duck's egg.  plover's
. ingredients.— eggs,  tablespoonfuls of forcemeat no. , hot
lard, / pint of good brown gravy.
mode.—boil the eggs for  minutes; strip them from the shells, and
cover them with forcemeat made by recipe no. ; or substitute pounded
anchovies for the ham. fry the eggs a nice brown in boiling lard, drain
them before the fire from their greasy moisture, dish them, and pour
round from / to / pint of good brown gravy. to enhance the
appearance of the eggs, they may be rolled in beaten egg and sprinkled
with bread crumbs; but this is scarcely necessary if they are carefully
fried. the flavour of the ham or anchovy in the forcemeat must
preponderate, as it should be very relishing.
time.— minutes to boil the eggs,  to  minutes to fry them.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs, / pint of béchamel sauce no. ,
dessertspoonful of finely-minced parsley.
mode.—boil the eggs hard; put them into cold water, peel them, take
out the yolks whole, and shred the whites. make / pint of béchamel
sauce by recipe no. ; add the parsley, and, when the sauce is quite
hot, put the yolks of the eggs into the middle of the dish, and the
shred whites round them; pour over the sauce, and garnish with leaves of
puff-paste or fried croűtons. there is no necessity for putting the eggs
into the saucepan with the béchamel; the sauce, being quite hot, will
warm the eggs sufficiently.
time.— minutes to boil the eggs.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  or  persons.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration]
[illustration]
. among the numerous vegetable products yielding articles of food
for man, the cereals hold the first place. by means of skilful
cultivation, mankind have transformed the original forms of these
growths, poor and ill-flavoured as they perhaps were, into various
fruitful and agreeable species, which yield an abundant and pleasant
supply. classified according to their respective richness in alimentary
elements, the cereals stand thus:—wheat, and its varieties, rye,
barley, oats, rice, indian corn. everybody knows it is wheat flour which
yields the best bread. rye-bread is viscous, hard, less easily soluble
by the gastric juice, and not so rich in nutritive power. flour produced
from barley, indian corn, or rice, is not so readily made into bread;
and the article, when made, is heavy and indigestible.
. on examining a grain of corn from any of the numerous cereals
[footnote: cereal, a corn-producing plant; from ceres, the goddess of
agriculture.] used in the preparation of flour, such as wheat, maize,
rye, barley, &c., it will be found to consist of two parts,—the husk,
or exterior covering, which is generally of a dark colour, and the
inner, or albuminous part, which is more or less white. in grinding,
these two portions are separated, and the husk being blown away in the
process of winnowing, the flour remains in the form of a light brown
powder, consisting principally of starch and gluten. in order to render
it white, it undergoes a process called "bolting." it is passed through
a series of fine sieves, which separate the coarser parts, leaving
behind fine white flour,—the "fine firsts" of the corn-dealer. the
process of bolting, as just described, tends to deprive flour of its
gluten, the coarser and darker portion containing much of that
substance; while the lighter part is peculiarly rich in starch. bran
contains a large proportion of gluten; hence it will be seen why brown
broad is so much more nutritious than white; in fact, we may lay it down
as a general rule, that the whiter the bread the less nourishment it
contains. majendie proved this by feeding a dog for forty days with
white wheaten bread, at the end of which time he died; while another
dog, fed on brown bread made with flour mixed with bran, lived without
any disturbance of his health. the "bolting" process, then, is rather
injurious than beneficial in its result; and is one of the numerous
instances where fashion has chosen a wrong standard to go by. in ancient
times, down to the emperors, no bolted flour was known. in many parts of
germany the entire meal is used; and in no part of the world are the
digestive organs of the people in a better condition. in years of
famine, when corn is scarce, the use of bolted flour is most culpable,
for from  to  per cent, is lost in bran. brown bread has, of late
years, become very popular; and many physicians have recommended it to
invalids with weak digestions with great success. this rage for white
bread has introduced adulterations of a very serious character,
affecting the health of the whole community. potatoes are added for this
purpose; but this is a comparatively harmless cheat, only reducing the
nutritive property of the bread; but bone-dust and alum are also put in,
which are far from harmless.
. bread-making is a very ancient art indeed. the assyrians,
egyptians, and greeks, used to make bread, in which oil, with aniseed
and other spices, was an element; but this was unleavened. every family
used to prepare the bread for its own consumption, the trade of baking
not having yet taken shape. it is said, that somewhere about the
beginning of the thirtieth olympiad, the slave of an archon, at athens,
made leavened bread by accident. he had left some wheaten dough in an
earthen pan, and forgotten it; some days afterwards, he lighted upon it
again, and found it turning sour. his first thought was to throw it
away; but, his master coming up, he mixed this now acescent dough with
some fresh dough, which he was working at. the bread thus produced, by
the introduction of dough in which alcoholic fermentation had begun, was
found delicious by the archon and his friends; and the slave, being
summoned and catechised, told the secret. it spread all over athens; and
everybody wanting leavened bread at once, certain persons set up as
bread-makers, or bakers. in a short time bread-baking became quite an
art, and "athenian bread" was quoted all over greece as the best bread,
just as the honey of hyamettus was celebrated as the best honey.
. in our own times, and among civilized peoples, bread has become an
article of food of the first necessity; and properly so, for it
constitutes of itself a complete life-sustainer, the gluten, starch, and
sugar, which it contains, representing azotized and hydro-carbonated
nutrients, and combining the sustaining powers of the animal and
vegetable kingdoms in one product.
. wheaten bread.—the finest, wholesomest, and most savoury bread is
made from wheaten flour. there are, of wheat, three leading qualities,—
the soft, the medium, and the hard wheat; the last of which yields a
kind of bread that is not so white as that made from soft wheat, but is
richer in gluten, and, consequently, more nutritive.
. rye bread.—this comes next to wheaten bread: it is not so rich in
gluten, but is said to keep fresh longer, and to have some laxative
qualities.
. barley bread, indian-corn bread, &c.—bread made from barley,
maize, oats, rice, potatoes, &c. "rises" badly, because the grains in
question contain but little gluten, which makes the bread heavy, close
in texture, and difficult of digestion; in fact, corn-flour has to be
added before panification can take place. in countries where wheat is
scarce and maize abundant, the people make the latter a chief article of
sustenance, when prepared in different forms.
. panification, or bread-making, consists of the following
processes, in the case of wheaten flour. fifty or sixty per cent. of
water is added to the flour, with the addition of some leavening matter,
and, preferably, of yeast from malt and hops. all kinds of leavening
matter have, however, been, and are still used in different parts of the
world: in the east indies, "toddy," which is a liquor that flows from
the wounded cocoa-nut tree; and, in the west indies, "dunder," or the
refuse of the distillation of rum. the dough then undergoes the
well-known process called kneading. the yeast produces fermentation, a
process which may be thus described:—the dough reacting upon the
leavening matter introduced, the starch of the flour is transformed into
saccharine matter, the saccharine matter being afterwards changed into
alcohol and carbonic acid. the dough must be well "bound," and yet allow
the escape of the little bubbles of carbonic acid which accompany the
fermentation, and which, in their passage, cause the numerous little
holes which are seen in light bread.
. the yeast must be good and fresh, if the bread is to be digestible
and nice. stale yeast produces, instead of vinous fermentation, an
acetous fermentation, which flavours the bread and makes it
disagreeable. a poor thin yeast produces an imperfect fermentation, the
result being a heavy unwholesome loaf.
. when the dough is well kneaded, it is left to stand for some time,
and then, as soon as it begins to swell, it is divided into loaves;
after which it is again left to stand, when it once more swells up, and
manifests, for the last time, the symptoms of fermentation. it is then
put into the oven, where the water contained in the dough is partly
evaporated, and the loaves swell up again, while a yellow crust begins
to form upon the surface. when the bread is sufficiently baked, the
bottom crust is hard and resonant if struck with the finger, while the
crumb is elastic, and rises again after being pressed down with the
finger. the bread is, in all probability, baked sufficiently if, on
opening the door of the oven, you are met by a cloud of steam which
quickly passes away.
. one word as to the unwholesomeness of new bread and hot rolls.
when bread is taken out of the oven, it is full of moisture; the starch
is held together in masses, and the bread, instead of being crusted so
as to expose each grain of starch to the saliva, actually prevents their
digestion by being formed by the teeth into leathery poreless masses,
which lie on the stomach like so many bullets. bread should always be at
least a day old before it is eaten; and, if properly made, and kept in a
cool dry place, ought to be perfectly soft and palatable at the end of
three or four days. hot rolls, swimming in melted butter, and new bread,
ought to be carefully shunned by everybody who has the slightest respect
for that much-injured individual—the stomach.
. aerated bread.—it is not unknown to some of our readers that dr.
dauglish, of malvern, has recently patented a process for making bread
"light" without the use of leaven. the ordinary process of bread-making
by fermentation is tedious, and much labour of human hands is requisite
in the kneading, in order that the dough may be thoroughly
interpenetrated with the leaven. the new process impregnates the bread,
by the application of machinery, with carbonic acid gas, or fixed air.
different opinions are expressed about the bread; but it is curious to
note, that, as corn is now reaped by machinery, and dough is baked by
machinery, the whole process of bread-making is probably in course of
undergoing changes which will emancipate both the housewife and the
professional baker from a large amount of labour.
. in the production of aërated bread, wheaten flour, water, salt,
and carbonic acid gas (generated by proper machinery), are the only
materials employed. we need not inform our readers that carbonic acid
gas is the source of the effervescence, whether in common water coming
from a depth, or in lemonade, or any aërated drink. its action, in the
new bread, takes the place of fermentation in the old.
. in the patent process, the dough is mixed in a great iron ball,
inside which is a system of paddles, perpetually turning, and doing the
kneading part of the business. into this globe the flour is dropped till
it is full, and then the common atmospheric air is pumped out, and the
pure gas turned on. the gas is followed by the water, which has been
aërated for the purpose, and then begins the churning or kneading part
of the business.
. of course, it is not long before we have the dough, and very
"light" and nice it looks. this is caught in tins, and passed on to the
floor of the oven, which is an endless floor, moving slowly through the
fire. done to a turn, the loaves emerge at the other end of the
apartment,—and the aërated bread is made.
. it may be added, that it is a good plan to change one's baker from
time to time, and so secure a change in the quality of the bread that is
eaten.
. mixed breads.—rye bread is hard of digestion, and requires longer
and slower baking than wheaten bread. it is better when made with leaven
of wheaten flour rather than yeast, and turns out lighter. it should not
be eaten till two days old. it will keep a long time.
. a good bread may be made by mixing rye-flour, wheat-flour, and
rice-paste in equal proportions; also by mixing rye, wheat, and barley.
in norway, it is said that they only bake their barley broad once a
year, such is its "keeping" quality.
. indian-corn flour mixed with wheat-flour (half with half) makes a
nice bread; but it is not considered very digestible, though it keeps
well.
. rice cannot be made into bread, nor can potatoes; but one-third
potato flour to three-fourths wheaten flour makes a tolerably good loaf.
. a very good bread, better than the ordinary sort, and of a
delicious flavour, is said to be produced by adopting the following
recipe:—take ten parts of wheat-flour, five parts of potato-flour, one
part of rice-paste; knead together, add the yeast, and bake as usual.
this is, of course, cheaper than wheaten bread.
. flour, when freshly ground, is too glutinous to make good bread,
and should therefore not be used immediately, but should be kept dry for
a few weeks, and stirred occasionally, until it becomes dry, and
crumbles easily between the fingers.
. flour should be perfectly dry before being used for bread or
cakes; if at all damp, the preparation is sure to be heavy. before
mixing it with the other ingredients, it is a good plan to place it for
an hour or two before the fire, until it feels warm and dry.
. yeast from home-brewed beer is generally preferred to any other:
it is very bitter, and, on that account, should be well washed, and put
away until the thick mass settles. if it still continues bitter, the
process should be repeated; and, before being used, all the water
floating at the top must be poured off. german yeast is now very much
used, and should be moistened, and thoroughly mixed with the milk or
water with which the bread is to be made.
. the following observations are extracted from a valuable work on
bread-making, [footnote: "the english bread-book." by eliza acton.
london: longman.] and will be found very useful to our readers:—
. the first thing required for making wholesome bread is the utmost
cleanliness; the next is the soundness and sweetness of all the
ingredients used for it; and, in addition to these, there must be
attention and care through the whole process.
. an almost certain way of spoiling dough is to leave it half-made,
and to allow it to become cold before it is finished. the other most
common causes of failure are using yeast which is no longer sweet, or
which has been frozen, or has had hot liquid poured over it.
. too small a proportion of yeast, or insufficient time allowed for
the dough to rise, will cause the bread to be heavy.
. heavy bread will also most likely be the result of making the
dough very hard, and letting it become quite, cold, particularly in
winter.
. if either the sponge or the dough be permitted to overwork itself,
that is to say, if the mixing and kneading be neglected when it has
reached the proper point for either, sour bread will probably be the
consequence in warm weather, and bad bread in any. the goodness will
also be endangered by placing it so near a fire as to make any part of
it hot, instead of maintaining the gentle and equal degree of heat
required for its due fermentation.
. milk or butter.—milk which is not perfectly sweet will not only
injure the flavour of the bread, but, in sultry weather, will often
cause it to be quite uneatable; yet either of them, if fresh and good,
will materially improve its quality.
. to keep bread sweet and fresh, as soon as it is cold it should be
put into a clean earthen pan, with a cover to it: this pan should be
placed at a little distance from the ground, to allow a current of air
to pass underneath. some persons prefer keeping bread on clean wooden
shelves, without being covered, that the crust may not soften. stale
bread may be freshened by warming it through in a gentle oven. stale
pastry, cakes, &c., may also be improved by this method.
. the utensils required for making bread, on a moderate scale, are a
kneading-trough or pan, sufficiently large that the dough may be kneaded
freely without throwing the flour over the edges, and also to allow for
its rising; a hair sieve for straining yeast, and one or two strong
spoons.
. yeast must always be good of its kind, and in a fitting state to
produce ready and proper fermentation. yeast of strong beer or ale
produces more effect than that of milder kinds; and the fresher the
yeast, the smaller the quantity will be required to raise the dough.
. as a general rule, the oven for baking bread should be rather
quick, and the heat so regulated as to penetrate the dough without
hardening the outside. the oven door should not be opened after the
bread is put in until the dough is set, or has become firm, as the cool
air admitted will have an unfavourable effect on it.
. brick ovens are generally considered the best adapted for baking
bread: these should be heated with wood faggots, and then swept and
mopped out, to cleanse them for the reception of the bread. iron ovens
are more difficult to manage, being apt to burn the surface of the bread
before the middle is baked. to remedy this, a few clean bricks should be
set at the bottom of the oven, close together, to receive the tins of
bread. in many modern stoves the ovens are so much improved that they
bake admirably; and they can always be brought to the required
temperature, when it is higher than is needed, by leaving the door open
for a time.
a few hints respecting the making and baking of cakes.
. eggs should always be broken into a cup, the whites and yolks
separated, and they should always be strained. breaking the eggs thus,
the bad ones may be easily rejected without spoiling the others, and so
cause no waste. as eggs are used instead of yeast, they should be very
thoroughly whisked; they are generally sufficiently beaten when thick
enough to carry the drop that falls from the whisk.
. loaf sugar should be well pounded, and then sifted through a
fine sieve.
. currants should be nicely washed, picked, dried in a cloth, and
then carefully examined, that no pieces of grit or stone may be left
amongst them. they should then be laid on a dish before the fire, to
become thoroughly dry; as, if added damp to the other ingredients, cakes
will be liable to be heavy.
. good butter should always be used in the manufacture of cakes;
and if beaten to a cream, it saves much time and labour to warm, but not
melt, it before beating.
. less butter and eggs are required for cakes when yeast is mixed
with the other ingredients.
. the heat of the oven is of great importance, especially for large
cakes. if the heat be not tolerably fierce, the batter will not rise. if
the oven is too quick, and there is any danger of the cake burning or
catching, put a sheet of clean paper over the top. newspaper, or paper
that has been printed on, should never be used for this purpose.
. to know when a cake is sufficiently baked, plunge a clean knife
into the middle of it; draw it quickly out, and if it looks in the least
sticky, put the cake back, and close the oven door until the cake is
done.
. cakes should be kept in closed tin canisters or jars, and in a dry
place. those made with yeast do not keep so long as those made without
it.
. since the establishment of the large modern biscuit manufactories,
biscuits have been produced both cheap and wholesome, in, comparatively
speaking, endless variety. their actual component parts are, perhaps,
known only to the various makers; but there are several kinds of
biscuits which have long been in use, that may here be advantageously
described.
. biscuits belong to the class of unfermented bread, and are,
perhaps, the most wholesome of that class. in cases where fermented
bread does not agree with the human stomach, they may be recommended: in
many instances they are considered lighter, and less liable to create
acidity and flatulence. the name is derived from the french bis cuit,
"twice-baked," because, originally, that was the mode of entirely
depriving them of all moisture, to insure their keeping; but, although
that process is no longer employed, the name is retained. the use of
this kind of bread on land is pretty general, and some varieties are
luxuries; but, at sea, biscuits are articles of the first necessity.
. sea, or ship biscuits, are made of wheat-flour from which only the
coarsest bran has been separated. the dough is made up as stiff as it
can be worked, and is then formed into shapes, and baked in an oven;
after which, the biscuits are exposed in lofts over the oven until
perfectly dry, to prevent them from becoming mouldy when stored.
. captains' biscuits are made in a similar manner, only of fine
flour.
. ingredients.—-/ oz. of hops,  quarts of water,  lb. of
bruised malt, / pint of yeast.
mode.—boil the hops in the water for  minutes; let it stand for
about  minutes, then add it to  lb. of bruised malt prepared as for
brewing. let the mixture stand covered till about lukewarm; then put in
not quite / pint of yeast; keep it warm, and let it work  or  hours;
then put it into small /-pint bottles (ginger-beer bottles are the
best for the purpose), cork them well, and tie them down. the yeast is
now ready for use; it will keep good for a few weeks, and  bottle will
be found sufficient for  lbs. of flour. when required for use, boil 
lbs. of potatoes without salt, mash them in the same water in which they
were boiled, and rub them through a colander. stir in about / lb. of
flour; then put in the yeast, pour it in the middle of the flour, and
let it stand warm on the hearth all night, and in the morning let it be
quite warm when it is kneaded. the bottles of yeast require very careful
opening, as it is generally exceedingly ripe.
time.— minutes to boil the hops and water, the yeast to work  or 
hours.
sufficient.—/ pint sufficient for  lbs. of flour.
. ingredients.— oz. of hops,  quarts of water, / lb. of flour,
/ pint of yeast.
mode.—boil the hops and water for  minutes; strain, and mix with
the liquid / lb. of flour and not quite / pint of yeast. bottle it
up, and tie the corks down. when wanted for use, boil potatoes according
to the quantity of bread to be made (about  lbs. are sufficient for
about a peck of flour); mash them, add to them / lb. of flour, and mix
about / pint of the yeast with them; let this mixture stand all day,
and lay the bread to rise the night before it is wanted.
time.— minutes to boil the hops and water.
sufficient.—/ pint of this yeast sufficient for a peck of flour, or
rather more.
(miss acton's recipe.)
. ingredients.— quartern of flour,  large tablespoonful of solid
brewer's yeast, or nearly  oz. of fresh german yeast, -/ to -/
pint of warm milk-and-water.
[illustration: cottage loaf.]
[illustration: tin bread.]
mode.—put the flour into a large earthenware bowl or deep pan; then,
with a strong metal or wooden spoon, hollow out the middle; but do not
clear it entirely away from the bottom of the pan, as, in that case, the
sponge (or leaven, as it was formerly termed) would stick to it, which
it ought not to do. next take either a large tablespoonful of brewer's
yeast which has been rendered solid by mixing it with plenty of cold
water, and letting it afterwards stand to settle for a day and night; or
nearly an ounce of german yeast; put it into a large basin, and proceed
to mix it, so that it shall be as smooth as cream, with / pint of warm
milk-and-water, or with water only; though even a very little milk will
much improve the bread. pour the yeast into the hole made in the flour,
and stir into it as much of that which lies round it as will make a
thick batter, in which there must be no lumps. strew plenty of flour on
the top; throw a thick clean cloth over, and set it where the air is
warm; but do not place it upon the kitchen fender, for it will become
too much heated there. look at it from time to time: when it has been
laid for nearly an hour, and when the yeast has risen and broken through
the flour, so that bubbles appear in it, you will know that it is ready
to be made up into dough. then place the pan on a strong chair, or
dresser, or table, of convenient height; pour into the sponge the
remainder of the warm milk-and-water; stir into it as much of the flour
as you can with the spoon; then wipe it out clean with your fingers, and
lay it aside. next take plenty of the remaining flour, throw it on the
top of the leaven, and begin, with the knuckles of both hands, to knead
it well. when the flour is nearly all kneaded in, begin to draw the
edges of the dough towards the middle, in order to mix the whole
thoroughly; and when it is free from flour and lumps and crumbs, and
does not stick to the hands when touched, it will be done, and may again
be covered with the cloth, and left to rise a second time. in / hour
look at it, and should it have swollen very much, and begin to crack, it
will be light enough to bake. turn it then on to a paste-board or very
clean dresser, and with a large sharp knife divide it in two; make it up
quickly into loaves, and dispatch it to the oven: make one or two
incisions across the tops of the loaves, as they will rise more easily
if this be done. if baked in tins or pans, rub them with a tiny piece of
butter laid on a piece of clean paper, to prevent the dough from
sticking to them. all bread should be turned upside down, or on its
side, as soon as it is drawn from the oven: if this be neglected, the
under part of the loaves will become wet and blistered from the steam,
which cannot then escape from them. to make the dough without setting a
sponge, merely mix the yeast with the greater part of the warm
milk-and-water, and wet up the whole of the flour at once after a little
salt has been stirred in, proceeding exactly, in every other respect, as
in the directions just given. as the dough will soften in the rising,
it should be made quite firm at first, or it will be too lithe by the
time it is ready for the oven.
[illustration: italian millet.]
time.—to be left to rise an hour the first time, / hour the second
time; to be baked from  to -/ hour, or baked in one loaf from -/
to  hours.
 italian millet, or great indian millet, is cultivated in egypt
 and nubia, where it is called dhourra, and is used as human
 food, as well as for the fermentation of beer. it will grow on
 poor soils, and is extremely productive. it has been introduced
 into italy, where they make a coarse bread from it; and it is
 also employed in pastry and puddings: they also use it for
 feeding horses and domestic fowls. it is the largest variety,
 growing to the height of six feet; but it requires a warm
 climate, and will not ripen in this country. a yellow variety,
 called golden millet, is sold in the grocers' shops, for making
 puddings, and is very delicate and wholesome.
. ingredients.— lbs. of potatoes,  pints of cold water, / pint
of good yeast, a peck of flour,  oz. of salt.
mode.—peel and boil the potatoes; beat them to a cream while warm;
then add  pint of cold water, strain through a colander, and add to it
/ pint of good yeast, which should have been put in water over-night,
to take off its bitterness. stir all well together with a wooden spoon,
and pour the mixture into the centre of the flour; mix it to the
substance of cream, cover it over closely, and let it remain near the
fire for an hour; then add the  pints of water, milk-warm, with  oz.
of salt; pour this in, and mix the whole to a nice light dough. let it
remain for about  hours; then make it into  loaves, and bake for about
-/ hour in a good oven. when baked, the bread should weigh nearly 
lbs.
time.—about -/ hour.
 the red varieties of wheat are generally hardier and more easily
 grown than the white sorts, and, although of less value to the
 miller, they are fully more profitable to the grower, in
 consequence of the better crops which they produce. another
 advantage the red wheats possess is their comparative immunity
 from the attacks of mildew and fly. the best english wheat comes
 from the counties of kent and essex; the qualities under these
 heads always bearing a higher price than others, as will be seen
 by the periodical lists in the journals.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of rice allow  lbs. of wheat flour,
nearly  tablespoonfuls of yeast, / oz. of salt. mode.—boil the
rice in water until it is quite tender; pour off the water, and put the
rice, before it is cold, to the flour. mix these well together with the
yeast, salt, and sufficient warm water to make the whole into a smooth
dough; let it rise by the side of the fire, then form it into loaves,
and bake them from -/ to  hours, according to their size. if the
rice is boiled in milk instead of water, it makes very delicious bread
or cakes. when boiled in this manner, it may be mixed with the flour
without straining the liquid from it. time.—-/ to  hours.
. ingredients.—to  lbs. of flour allow  lbs. of indian-corn
flour,  tablespoonfuls of yeast,  pints of warm water, / oz. of
salt. mode.—mix the two flours well together, with the salt; make a
hole in the centre, and stir the yeast up well with / pint of the warm
water; put this into the middle of the flour, and mix enough of it with
the yeast to make a thin batter; throw a little flour over the surface
of this batter, cover the whole with a thick cloth, and set it to rise
in a warm place. when the batter has nicely risen, work the whole to a
nice smooth dough, adding the water as required; knead it well, and
mould the dough into loaves; let them rise for nearly / hour, then put
them into a well-heated oven. if made into  loaves, they will require
from -/ to  hours baking.
time.—-/ to  hours.
[illustration: maize plant.]
[illustration: ear of maize.]
 maize.—next to wheat and rice, maize is the grain most used in
 the nourishment of man. in asia, africa, and america, it is the
 principal daily food of a large portion of the population,
 especially of the colonists. in some of the provinces of france,
 too, it is consumed in large quantities. there are eight
 varieties of the maize; the most productive is the maize of
 cusco. the flour of maize is yellow, and it contains an oily
 matter, which, when fresh, gives it an agreeable flavour and
 odour; but the action of the air on it soon develops rancidity.
 if carried any distance, it should be stored away in air-tight
 vessels. an excellent soup is prepared with meat and
 maize-flour. the inhabitants of some countries, where wheat is
 scarce, make, with maize and water, or milk and salt, a kind of
 biscuit, which is pleasant in taste, but indigestible. some of
 the preparations of maize-flour are very good, and, when
 partaken in moderation, suitable food for almost everybody.
. ingredients.—to every  lbs. of flour allow  teaspoonful of
tartaric acid,  teaspoonful of salt,  teaspoonful of carbonate of
soda,  breakfast-cupfuls of cold milk.
mode.—let the tartaric acid and salt be reduced to the finest
possible powder; then mix them well with the flour. dissolve the soda in
the milk, and pour it several times from one basin to another, before
adding it to the flour. work the whole quickly into a light dough,
divide it into  loaves, and put them into a well-heated oven
immediately, and bake for an hour. sour milk or buttermilk may be used,
but then a little less acid will be needed.
time.— hour.
 polish and pomeranian wheat are accounted by authorities most
 excellent. large raft-like barges convey this grain down the
 rivers, from the interior of the country to the seaports. this
 corn is described as being white, hard, and thin-skinned; and it
 yields a large quantity of flour, having a small proportion of
 bran.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  oz. of butter, /
pint of milk,  large teaspoonful of yeast, a little salt.
[illustration: rolls.]
mode.—warm the butter in the milk, add to it the yeast and salt, and
mix these ingredients well together. put the flour into a pan, stir in
the above ingredients, and let the dough rise, covered in a warm place.
knead it well, make it into rolls, let them rise again for a few
minutes, and bake in a quick oven. richer rolls may be made by adding 
or  eggs and a larger proportion of butter, and their appearance
improved by brushing the tops over with yolk of egg or a little milk.
time— lb. of flour, divided into  rolls, from  to  minutes.
. this dish, although very unwholesome and indigestible, is
nevertheless a great favourite, and eaten by many persons. as soon as
the rolls come from the baker's, they should be put into the oven,
which, in the early part of the morning, is sure not to be very hot; and
the rolls must not be buttered until wanted. when they are quite hot,
divide them lengthwise into three; put some thin flakes of good butter
between the slices, press the rolls together, and put them in the oven
for a minute or two, but not longer, or the butter would oil; take them
out of the oven, spread the butter equally over, divide the rolls in
half, and put them on to a very hot clean dish, and send them instantly
to table.
. to make dry toast properly, a great deal of attention is required;
much more, indeed, than people generally suppose. never use new bread
for making any kind of toast, as it eats heavy, and, besides, is very
extravagant. procure a loaf of household bread about two days old; cut
off as many slices as may be required, not quite / inch in thickness;
trim off the crusts and ragged edges, put the bread on a toasting-fork,
and hold it before a very clear fire. move it backwards and forwards
until the bread is nicely coloured; then turn it and toast the other
side, and do not place it so near the fire that it blackens. dry toast
should be more gradually made than buttered toast, as its great beauty
consists in its crispness, and this cannot be attained unless the
process is slow and the bread is allowed gradually to colour. it should
never be made long before it is wanted, as it soon becomes tough, unless
placed on the fender in front of the fire. as soon as each piece is
ready, it should be put into a rack, or stood upon its edges, and sent
quickly to table.
. a loaf of household bread about two days old answers for making
toast better than cottage bread, the latter not being a good shape, and
too crusty for the purpose. cut as many nice even slices as may be
required, rather more than / inch in thickness, and toast them before
a very bright fire, without allowing the bread to blacken, which spoils
the appearance and flavour of all toast. when of a nice colour on both
sides, put it on a hot plate; divide some good butter into small pieces,
place them on the toast, set this before the fire, and when the butter
is just beginning to melt, spread it lightly over the toast. trim off
the crust and ragged edges, divide each round into  pieces, and send
the toast quickly to table. some persons cut the slices of toast across
from corner to corner, so making the pieces of a three-cornered shape.
soyer recommends that each slice should be cut into pieces as soon as it
is buttered, and when all are ready, that they should be piled lightly
on the dish they are intended to be served on. he says that by cutting
through  or  slices at a time, all the butter is squeezed out of the
upper ones, while the bottom one is swimming in fat liquid. it is highly
essential to use good butter for making this dish.
. ingredients.—to every quart of milk allow -/ oz. of german
yeast, a little salt; flour.
[illustration: muffins.]
mode.—warm the milk, add to it the yeast, and mix these well
together; put them into a pan, and stir in sufficient flour to make the
whole into a dough of rather a soft consistence; cover it over with a
cloth, and place it in a warm place to rise, and, when light and nicely
risen, divide the dough into pieces, and round them to the proper shape
with the hands; place them, in a layer of flour about two inches thick,
on wooden trays, and let them rise again; when this is effected, they
each will exhibit a semi-globular shape. then place them carefully on a
hot-plate or stove, and bake them until they are slightly browned,
turning them when they are done on one side. muffins are not easily
made, and are more generally purchased than manufactured at home. to
toast them, divide the edge of the muffin all round, by pulling it
open, to the depth of about an inch, with the fingers. put it on a
toasting-fork, and hold it before a very clear fire until one side is
nicely browned, but not burnt; turn, and toast it on the other. do not
toast them too quickly, as, if this is done, the middle of the muffin
will not be warmed through. when done, divide them by pulling them open;
butter them slightly on both sides, put them together again, and cut
them into halves: when sufficient are toasted and buttered, pile them on
a very hot dish, and send them very quickly to table.
time.—from  minutes to / hour to bake them.
sufficient.—allow  muffin to each person.
[illustration: crumpets.]
. these are made in the same manner as muffins; only, in making the
mixture, let it be more like batter than dough. let it rise for about
/ hour; pour it into iron rings, which should be ready on a hot-plate;
bake them, and when one side appears done, turn them quickly on the
other. to toast them, have ready a very bright clear fire; put the
crumpet on a toasting-fork, and hold it before the fire, not too
close, until it is nicely brown on one side, but do not allow it to
blacken. turn it, and brown the other side; then spread it with good
butter, cut it in half, and, when all are done, pile them on a hot dish,
and send them quickly to table. muffins and crumpets should always be
served on separate dishes, and both toasted and served as expeditiously
as possible.
time.—from  to  minutes to bake them.
sufficient.—allow  crumpets to each person.
. ingredients.—to every  lbs. of flour allow  oz. of moist sugar,
/ gill of yeast, / pint of milk, / lb. of butter, warm milk.
mode.—put the flour into a basin, mix the sugar well with it, make a
hole in the centre, and stir in the yeast and milk (which should be
lukewarm), with enough of the flour to make it the thickness of cream.
cover the basin over with a cloth, and let the sponge rise in a warm
place, which will be accomplished in about -/ hour. melt the butter,
but do not allow it to oil; stir it into the other ingredients, with
enough warm milk to make the whole into a soft dough; then mould it into
buns about the size of an egg; lay them in rows quite  inches apart;
set them again in a warm place, until they have risen to double their
size; then put them into a good brisk oven, and just before they are
done, wash them over with a little milk. from  to  minutes will be
required to bake them nicely. these buns may be varied by adding a few
currants, candied peel, or caraway seeds to the other ingredients; and
the above mixture answers for hot cross buns, by putting in a little
ground allspice; and by pressing a tin mould in the form of a cross in
the centre of the bun.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, d. each.
sufficient to make  buns.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour,  oz. of good butter, / lb. of
sugar,  egg, nearly / pint of milk,  small teaspoonfuls of
baking-powder, a few drops of essence of lemon.
mode.—warm the butter, without oiling it; beat it with a wooden
spoon; stir the flour in gradually with the sugar, and mix these
ingredients well together. make the milk lukewarm, beat up with it the
yolk of the egg and the essence of lemon, and stir these to the flour,
&c. add the baking-powder, beat the dough well for about  minutes,
divide it into  pieces, put them into buttered tins or cups, and bake
in a brisk oven from  to  minutes.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient to make  buns. seasonable at any time.
[illustration: buns.]
. ingredients.—/ teaspoonful of tartaric acid, / teaspoonful of
bicarbonate of soda,  lb. of flour,  oz. of butter,  oz. of loaf
sugar, / lb. of currants or raisins,—when liked, a few caraway seeds,
/ pint of cold new milk,  egg.
mode.—rub the tartaric acid, soda, and flour all together through a
hair sieve; work the butter into the flour; add the sugar, currants, and
caraway seeds, when the flavour of them latter is liked. mix all these
ingredients well together; make a hole in the middle of the flour, and
pour in the milk, mixed with the egg, which should be well beaten; mix
quickly, and set the dough, with a fork, on baking-tins, and bake the
buns for about  minutes. this mixture makes a very good cake, and if
put into a tin, should be baked -/ hour. the same quantity of flour,
soda, and tartaric acid, with / pint of milk and a little salt, will
make either bread or teacakes, if wanted quickly.
time.— minutes for the buns; if made into a cake, -/ hour.
sufficient to make about  buns.
. ingredients.— oz. of pounded loaf sugar,  egg, -/ oz. of
ground rice,  oz. of butter, -/ oz. of currants, a few thin slices
of candied peel; flour.
mode.—whisk the egg, stir in the sugar, and beat these ingredients
well together; beat the butter to a cream, stir in the ground rice,
currants, and candied peel, and as much flour as will make it of such a
consistency that it may be rolled into  or  balls. put these on to a
buttered tin, and bake them from / to / hour. they should be put
into the oven immediately, or they will become heavy; and the oven
should be tolerably brisk.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient to make  or  buns. seasonable at any time.
. a stale savoy or lemon cake may be converted into very good rusks
in the following manner. cut the cake into slices, divide each slice in
two; put them on a baking-sheet, in a slow oven, and when they are of a
nice brown and quite hard, they are done. they should be kept in a
closed tin canister in a dry place, to preserve their crispness.
[illustration: pannicled millet.]
 pannicled millet.—this is the smallest-seeded of the
 corn-plants, being a true grass; but the number of the seeds in
 each ear makes up for their size. it grows in sandy soils that
 will not do for the cultivation of many other kinds of grain,
 and forms the chief sustenance in the arid districts of arabia,
 syria, nubia, and parts of india. it is not cultivated in
 england, being principally confined to the east. the nations who
 make use of it grind it, in the primitive manner, between two
 stones, and make it into a diet which, cannot be properly called
 bread, but rather a kind of soft thin cake half-baked. when we
 take into account that the arabians are fond of lizards and
 locusts as articles of food, their cuisine, altogether, is
 scarcely a tempting one.
(suffolk recipe.)
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  oz. of butter, /
pint of milk,  oz. of loaf sugar,  eggs,  tablespoonful of yeast.
[illustration: rusks.]
mode.—put the milk and butter into a saucepan, and keep shaking it
round until the latter is melted. put the flour into a basin with the
sugar, mix these well together, and beat the eggs. stir them with the
yeast to the milk and butter, and with this liquid work the flour into a
smooth dough. cover a cloth over the basin, and leave the dough to rise
by the side of the fire; then knead it, and divide it into  pieces;
place them in a brisk oven, and bake for about  minutes. take the
rusks out, break them in half, and then set them in the oven to get
crisp on the other side. when cold, they should be put into tin
canisters to keep them dry; and, if intended for the cheese course, the
sifted sugar should be omitted.
time.— minutes to bake the rusks;  minutes to render them crisp
after being divided.
average cost, d.
sufficient to make  dozen rusks. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of finely-pounded loaf sugar allow 
lb. of sweet almonds, the whites of  eggs, a little rose-water.
mode.—blanch the almonds, and pound them (a few at a time) in a
mortar to a paste, adding a little rose-water to facilitate the
operation. whisk the whites of the eggs to a strong froth; mix them with
the pounded almonds, stir in the sugar, and beat altogether. when the
cake is sufficiently baked, lay on the almond icing, and put it into the
oven to dry. before laying this preparation on the cake, great care must
be taken that it is nice and smooth, which is easily accomplished by
well beating the mixture.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of loaf sugar allow the whites of 
eggs,  oz. of fine starch.
mode.—beat the eggs to a strong froth, and gradually sift in the
sugar, which should be reduced to the finest possible powder, and
gradually add the starch, also finely powdered. beat the mixture well
until the sugar is smooth; then with a spoon or broad knife lay the
icing equally over the cakes. these should then be placed in a very cool
oven, and the icing allowed to dry and harden, but not to colour. the
icing may be coloured with strawberry or currant-juice, or with prepared
cochineal. if it be put on the cakes as soon as they are withdrawn from
the oven, it will become firm and hard by the time the cakes are cold.
on very rich cakes, such as wedding, christening cakes, &c., a layer of
almond icing, no. , is usually spread over the top, and over that
the white icing as described. all iced cakes should be kept in a very
dry place.
biscuit powder, generally used for infants' food.
. this powder may be purchased in tin canisters, and may also be
prepared at home. dry the biscuits well in a slow oven; roll them and
grind them with a rolling-pin on a clean board, until they are reduced
to powder; sift it through a close hair sieve, and it is fit for use. it
should be kept in well-covered tins, and in a dry place.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter,  eggs, / lb. of flour,  oz.
of arrowroot, / lb. of pounded loaf sugar.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream; whisk the eggs to a strong froth,
add them to the butter, stir in the flour a little at a time, and beat
the mixture well. break down all the lumps from the arrowroot, and add
that with the sugar to the other ingredients. mix all well together,
drop the dough on a buttered tin, in pieces the size of a shilling, and
bake the biscuits about / hour in a slow oven.
time.—/ hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make from  to  dozen biscuits.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / teaspoonful of tartaric acid,
/ teaspoonful of salt, / teaspoonful of carbonate of soda, -/
breakfast-cupful of milk,  oz. of sifted loaf sugar,  eggs.
mode.—these cakes are made in the same manner as the soda bread no.
, with the addition of eggs and sugar. mix the flour, tartaric acid,
and salt well together, taking care that the two latter ingredients are
reduced to the finest powder, and stir in the sifted sugar, which should
also be very fine. dissolve the soda in the milk, add the eggs, which
should be well whisked, and with this liquid work the flour, &c. into a
light dough. divide it into small cakes, put them into the oven
immediately, and bake for about  minutes.
time.— minutes.
. ingredients.— oz. of sifted sugar,  eggs,  oz. of grated
cocoa-nut.
mode.—whisk the eggs until they are very light; add the sugar
gradually; then stir in the cocoa-nut. roll a tablespoonful of the paste
at a time in your hands in the form of a pyramid; place the pyramids on
paper, put the paper on tins, and bake the biscuits in rather a cool
oven until they are just coloured a light brown.
time.—about / hour. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, the yolk of  egg, milk.
mode.—mix the flour and the yolk of the egg with sufficient milk to
make the whole into a very stiff paste; beat it well, and knead it until
it is perfectly smooth. roll the paste out very thin; with a round
cutter shape it into small biscuits, and bake them a nice brown in a
slow oven from  to  minutes.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, d.
seasonable at any time.
dessert biscuits, which may be flavoured with ground ginger, cinnamon,
&c. &c.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of butter, / lb. of sifted
sugar, the yolks of  eggs, flavouring to taste.
mode.—put the butter into a basin; warm it, but do not allow it to
oil; then with the hand beat it to a cream. add the flour by degrees,
then the sugar and flavouring, and moisten the whole with the yolks of
the eggs, which should previously be well beaten. when all the
ingredients are thoroughly incorporated, drop the mixture from a spoon
on to a buttered paper, leaving a distance between each cake, as they
spread as soon as they begin to get warm. bake in rather a slow oven
from  to  minutes, and do not let the biscuits acquire too much
colour. in making the above quantity, half may be flavoured with ground
ginger and the other half with essence of lemon or currants, to make a
variety. with whatever the preparation is flavoured, so are the biscuits
called; and an endless variety may be made in this manner.
time.— to  minutes, or rather longer, in a very slow oven.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make from  to  dozen cakes.
seasonable at any time.
—ingredients.—-/ lb. of flour, / lb. of loaf sugar,  oz. of
fresh butter,  eggs,  oz. of lemon-peel,  dessertspoonfuls of
lemon-juice.
mode.—rub the flour into the butter; stir in the pounded sugar and
very finely-minced lemon-peel, and when these ingredients are thoroughly
mixed, add the eggs, which should be previously well whisked, and the
lemon-juice. beat the mixture well for a minute or two, then drop it
from a spoon on to a buttered tin, about  inches apart, as the cakes
will spread when they get warm; place the tin in the oven, and bake the
cakes of a pale brown from  to  minutes.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sweet almonds, / lb. of sifted loaf
sugar, the whites of  eggs, wafer-paper.
[illustration: macaroons.]
mode.—blanch, skin, and dry the almonds, and pound them well with a
little orange-flower water or plain water; then add to them the sifted
sugar and the whites of the eggs, which should be beaten to a stiff
froth, and mix all the ingredients well together. when the paste looks
soft, drop it at equal distances from a biscuit-syringe on to sheets of
wafer-paper; put a strip of almond on the top of each; strew some sugar
over, and bake the macaroons in rather a slow oven, of a light brown
colour when hard and set, they are done, and must not be allowed to get
very brown, as that would spoil their appearance. if the cakes, when
baked, appear heavy, add a little more white of egg, but let this always
be well whisked before it is added to the other ingredients. we have
given a recipe for making these cakes, but we think it almost or quite
as economical to purchase such articles as these at a good
confectioner's.
time.—from  to  minutes, in a slow oven.
average cost, s. d. per lb.
[illustration: ratafias.]
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sweet almonds, / lb. of bitter ones,
/ lb. of sifted loaf sugar, the whites of  eggs.
mode.—blanch, skin, and dry the almonds, and pound them in a mortar
with the white of an egg; stir in the sugar, and gradually add the
remaining whites of eggs, taking care that they are very thoroughly
whisked. drop the mixture through a small biscuit-syringe on to
cartridge paper, and bake the cakes from  to  minutes in rather a
quicker oven than for macaroons. a very small quantity should be dropped
on the paper to form one cake, as, when baked, the ratafias should be
about the size of a large button.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d. per lb.
. ingredients.—to every / lb. of rice-flour allow / lb. of
pounded lump sugar, / lb. of butter,  eggs.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream, stir in the rice-flour and pounded
sugar, and moisten the whole with the eggs, which should be previously
well beaten. roll out the paste, shape it with a round paste-cutter into
small cakes, and bake them from  to  minutes in a very slow oven.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, d.
sufficient to make about  cakes. seasonable at any time.
 ground rice, or rice-flour, is used for making several kinds of
 cakes, also for thickening soups, and for mixing with wheaten
 flour in producing manna kroup. the americans make rice-bread,
 and prepare the flour for it in the following manner:—when the
 rice is thoroughly cleansed, the water is drawn off, and the
 rice, while damp, bruised in a mortar: it is then dried, and
 passed through a hair sieve.
. ingredients.— eggs,  lb. of sifted sugar, / lb. of flour, a
few currants.
mode.—break the eggs into a basin, beat them well until very light,
add the pounded sugar, and when this is well mixed with the eggs, dredge
in the flour gradually, and add the currants. mix all well together, and
put the dough, with a fork, on the tins, making it look as rough as
possible. bake the cakes in a moderate oven from  minutes to / hour;
when they are done, allow them to get cool, and store them away in a tin
canister, in a dry place.
time.— minutes to / hour. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs,  oz. of pounded sugar, the rind of  lemon,
 oz. of flour.
mode.—break the eggs into a basin, separating the whites from the
yolks; beat the yolks well, mix with them the pounded sugar and grated
lemon-rind, and beat these ingredients together for / hour. then
dredge in the flour gradually, and when the whites of the eggs have been
whisked to a solid froth, stir them to the flour, &c.; beat the mixture
well for another  minutes, then draw it along in strips upon thick
cartridge paper to the proper size of the biscuit, and bake them in
rather a hot oven; but let them be carefully watched, as they are soon
done, and a few seconds over the proper time will scorch and spoil them.
these biscuits, or ladies'-fingers, as they are called, are used for
making charlotte russes, and for a variety of fancy sweet dishes.
time.— to  minutes, in a quick oven.
average cost, s. d. per lb., or /d. each.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of sifted sugar, / lb. of
butter, / oz. of caraway seeds,  eggs.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream; stir in the flour, sugar, and
caraway seeds; and when these ingredients are well mixed, add the eggs,
which should be well whisked. roll out the paste, with a round cutter
shape out the biscuits, and bake them in a moderate oven from  to 
minutes. the tops of the biscuits may be brushed over with a little milk
or the white of an egg, and then a little sugar strewn over.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient to make  dozen biscuits. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—to every lb. of flour allow  oz. of butter, about
/ pint of skimmed milk.
mode.—warm the butter in the milk until the former is dissolved, and
then mix it with the flour into a very stiff paste; beat it with a
rolling-pin until the dough looks perfectly smooth. roll it out thin;
cut it with the top of a glass into round biscuits; prick them well, and
bake them from  to  minutes. the above is the proportion of milk
which we think would convert the flour into a stiff paste; but should it
be found too much, an extra spoonful or two of flour must be put in.
these biscuits are very nice for the cheese course.
time.— to  minutes.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of pounded loaf sugar, /
lb. of fresh butter,  eggs,  small teaspoonful of carbonate of soda.
mode.—put the flour (which should be perfectly dry) into a basin; rub
in the butter, add the sugar, and mix these ingredients well together.
whisk the eggs, stir them into the mixture, and beat it well, until
everything is well incorporated. quickly stir in the soda, roll the
paste out until it is about / inch thick, cut it into small round
cakes with a tin cutter, and bake them from  to  minutes in rather a
brisk oven. after the soda is added, great expedition is necessary in
rolling and cutting out the paste, and in putting the biscuits
immediately into the oven, or they will be heavy.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s.
sufficient to make about  dozen cakes. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of sweet almonds,  oz. of bitter almonds, 
eggs,  tablespoonfuls of sifted sugar,  tablespoonfuls of fine flour,
the grated rind of  lemon,  oz. of butter.
mode.—blanch and pound the almonds to a paste; separate the whites
from the yolks of the eggs; beat the latter, and add them to the
almonds. stir in the sugar, flour, and lemon-rind; add the butter, which
should be beaten to a cream; and when all these ingredients are well
mixed, put in the whites of the eggs, which should be whisked to a stiff
froth. butter a cake-mould, put in the mixture, and bake in a good oven
from -/ to -/ hour.
time.—-/ to -/ hour. average cost, s.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lbs. of the finest flour,  lbs. of fresh butter,
 lbs. of currants,  lbs. of sifted loaf sugar,  nutmegs, / oz. of
mace, half / oz. of cloves,  eggs,  lb. of sweet almonds, / lb.
of candied citron, / lb. each of candied orange and lemon peel,  gill
of wine,  gill of brandy.
mode.—let the flour be as fine as possible, and well dried and
sifted; the currants washed, picked, and dried before the fire; the
sugar well pounded and sifted; the nutmegs grated, the spices pounded;
the eggs thoroughly whisked, whites and yolks separately; the almonds
pounded with a little orange-flower water, and the candied peel cut in
neat slices. when all these ingredients are prepared, mix them in the
following manner. begin working the butter with the hand till it becomes
of a cream-like consistency; stir in the sugar, and when the whites of
the eggs are whisked to a solid froth, mix them with the butter and
sugar; next, well beat up the yolks for  minutes, and, adding them to
the flour, nutmegs, mace, and cloves, continue beating the whole
together for / hour or longer, till wanted for the oven. then mix in
lightly the currants, almonds, and candied peel with the wine and
brandy; and having lined a hoop with buttered paper, fill it with the
mixture, and bake the cake in a tolerably quick oven, taking care,
however, not to burn it: to prevent this, the top of it may be covered
with a sheet of paper. to ascertain whether the cake is done, plunge a
clean knife into the middle of it, withdraw it directly, and if the
blade is not sticky, and looks bright, the cake is sufficiently baked.
these cakes are usually spread with a thick layer of almond icing, and
over that another layer of sugar icing, and afterwards ornamented. in
baking a large cake like this, great attention must be paid to the heat
of the oven; it should not be too fierce, but have a good soaking heat.
time.— to  hours. average cost, s. per lb.
. ingredients.— teacupfuls of flour,  teacupful of melted butter,
 teacupful of cream,  teacupful of treacle,  teacupful of moist
sugar,  eggs, / oz. of powdered ginger, / lb. of raisins, 
teaspoonful of carbonate of soda,  tablespoonful of vinegar.
mode.—make the butter sufficiently warm to melt it, but do not allow
it to oil; put the flour into a basin; add to it the sugar, ginger, and
raisins, which should be stoned and cut into small pieces. when these
dry ingredients are thoroughly mixed, stir in the butter, cream,
treacle, and well-whisked eggs, and beat the mixture for a few minutes.
dissolve the soda in the vinegar, add it to the dough, and be particular
that these latter ingredients are well incorporated with the others; put
the cake into a buttered mould or tin, place it in a moderate oven
immediately, and bake it from -/ to -/ hours.
time.—-/ to -/ hours. average cost, s. d.
common cake, suitable for sending to children at school.
. ingredients.— lbs. of flour,  oz. of butter or clarified
dripping, / oz. of caraway seeds, / oz. of allspice, / lb. of
pounded sugar,  lb. of currants,  pint of milk,  tablespoonfuls of
fresh yeast.
mode.—rub the butter lightly into the flour; add all the dry
ingredients, and mix these well together. make the milk warm, but not
hot; stir in the yeast, and with this liquid make the whole into a light
dough; knead it well, and line the cake-tins with strips of buttered
paper; this paper should be about  inches higher than the top of the
tin. put in the dough; stand it in a warm place to rise for more than an
hour; then bake the cakes in a well-heated oven. if this quantity be
divided in two, they will take from -/ to  hours' baking.
time.—-/ to -/ hours. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make  moderate-sized cakes.
[illustration: cake-mould.]
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of sugar, / lb. of butter
or lard, / lb. of currants,  teaspoonful of carbonate of soda, the
whites of  eggs, / pint of milk.
mode,—in making many sweet dishes, the whites of eggs are not
required, and if well beaten and added to the above ingredients, make an
excellent cake, with or without currants. beat the butter to a cream,
well whisk the whites of the eggs, and stir all the ingredients together
but the soda, which must not be added until all is well mixed, and the
cake is ready to be put into the oven. when the mixture has been well
beaten, stir in the soda, put the cake into a buttered mould, and bake
it in a moderate oven for -/ hour.
time.—-/ hour. average cost, s. d.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter,  oz. of currants, / lb. of
sugar  lb. of dried flour,  teaspoonfuls of baking-powder,  eggs, 
teacupful of milk,  oz. of sweet almonds,  oz. of candied peel.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream; wash, pick, and dry the currants;
whisk the eggs; blanch and chop the almonds, and cut the peel into neat
slices. when all these are ready, mix the dry ingredients together; then
add the butter, milk, and eggs, and beat the mixture well for a few
minutes. put the cake into a buttered mould or tin, and bake it for
rather more than -/ hour. the currants and candied peel may be
omitted, and a little lemon or almond flavouring substituted for them:
made in this manner, the cake will be found very good.
time.—rather more than -/ hour. average cost, s. d.
. ingredients.—/ breakfast-cupful of sugar,  breakfast-cupful of
rich sour cream,  breakfast-cupfuls of flour, / teaspoonful of
carbonate of soda, honey to taste.
mode.—mix the sugar and cream together; dredge in the flour, with as
much honey as will flavour the mixture nicely; stir it well, that all
the ingredients may be thoroughly mixed; add the carbonate of soda, and
beat the cake well for another  minutes; put it into a buttered tin,
bake it from / to / hour, and let it be eaten warm.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, d.
sufficient for  or  persons. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of treacle, / lb. of clarified butter,  lb.
of coarse brown sugar,  oz. of ground ginger,  oz. of candied
orange-peel,  oz. of candied angelica, / oz. of candied lemon-peel,
/ oz. of coriander seeds, / oz. of caraway seeds,  egg; flour.
mode.—put the treacle into a basin, and pour over it the butter,
melted so as not to oil, the sugar, and ginger. stir these ingredients
well together, and whilst mixing, add the candied peel, which should be
cut into very small pieces, but not bruised, and the caraway and
coriander seeds, which should be pounded. having mixed all thoroughly
together, break in an egg, and work the whole up with as much fine flour
as may be necessary to form a paste. make this into nuts of any size,
put them on a tin plate, and bake in a slow oven from / to / hour.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, from s. to s. d. per lb.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of treacle, / lb. of butter, / lb. of
coarse brown sugar, -/ lb. of flour,  oz. of ginger, / oz. of
ground allspice,  teaspoonful of carbonate of soda, / pint of warm
milk,  eggs.
[illustration: gingerbread.]
mode.—put the flour into a basin, with the sugar, ginger, and
allspice; mix these together; warm the butter, and add it, with the
treacle, to the other ingredients. stir well; make the milk just warm,
dissolve the carbonate of soda in it, and mix the whole into a nice
smooth dough with the eggs, which should be previously well whisked;
pour the mixture into a buttered tin, and bake it from / to  hour, or
longer, should the gingerbread be very thick. just before it is done,
brush the top over with the yolk of an egg beaten up with a little milk,
and put it back in the oven to finish baking.
time.—/ to  hour. average cost, s. per square.
seasonable at any time.
(an excellent recipe.)
. ingredients.—-/ lb. treacle,  lb. of moist sugar,  lb. of
butter, -/ lbs. of flour, -/ oz. of ground ginger, -/ oz. of
allspice, -/ oz. of coriander seeds.
mode.—let the allspice, coriander seeds, and ginger be freshly
ground; put them into a basin, with the flour and sugar, and mix these
ingredients well together; warm the treacle and butter together; then
with a spoon work it into the flour, &c., until the whole forms a nice
smooth paste. drop the mixture from the spoon on to a piece of buttered
paper, and bake in rather a slow oven from  minutes to / hour. a
little candied lemon-peel mixed with the above is an improvement, and a
great authority in culinary matters suggests the addition of a little
cayenne pepper in gingerbread. whether it be advisable to use this
latter ingredient or not, we leave our readers to decide.
time.— minutes to / hour. average cost, s. to s. d. per lb.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of butter, / lb. of loaf
sugar, the rind of  lemon,  oz. of ground ginger,  nutmeg grated, /
teaspoonful of carbonate of soda,  gill of milk.
mode.—rub the butter into the flour; add the sugar, which should be
finely pounded and sifted, and the minced lemon-rind, ginger, and
nutmeg. mix these well together; make the milk just warm, stir in the
soda, and work the whole into a nice smooth paste; roll it out, cut it
into cakes, and bake in a moderate oven from  to  minutes.
time.— to  minutes. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/d. worth of borwick's german baking-powder, 
lbs. of flour,  oz. of butter, / lb. of lard,  lb. of currants, /
lb. of stoned and cut raisins, / lb. of mixed candied peel, / lb. of
moist sugar,  eggs, / pint of cold milk.
mode.—mix the baking-powder with the flour; then rub in the butter
and lard; have ready the currants, washed, picked, and dried the raisins
stoned and cut into small pieces (not chopped), and the peel cut into
neat slices. add these with the sugar to the flour, &c., and mix all the
dry ingredients well together. whisk the eggs, stir to them the milk,
and with this liquid moisten the cake; beat it up well, that all may be
very thoroughly mixed; line a cake-tin with buttered paper, put in the
cake, and bake it from -/ to -/ hours in a good oven. to ascertain
when it is done, plunge a clean knife into the middle of it, and if, on
withdrawing it, the knife looks clean, and not sticky, the cake is done.
to prevent its burning at the top, a piece of clean paper may be put
over whilst the cake is soaking, or being thoroughly cooked in the
middle. a steamer, such as is used for steaming potatoes, makes a very
good cake-tin, if it be lined at the bottom and sides with buttered
paper.
time.—-/ to -/ hours. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— eggs,  tablespoonfuls of orange-flower water,
/ lb. of pounded loaf sugar,  lemon, / lb. of flour.
[illustration: cake-mould.]
mode.—separate the whites from the yolks of the eggs whisk the former
to a stiff froth; add the orange-flower water, the sugar, grated
lemon-rind, and mix these ingredients well together. then beat the yolks
of the eggs, and add them, with the lemon-juice, to the whites, &c.;
dredge in the flour gradually; keep beating the mixture well; put it
into a buttered mould, and bake the cake about an hour, or rather
longer. the addition of a little butter, beaten to a cream, we think,
would improve this cake.
time.—about  hour. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter,  lb. of flour, / oz. of
caraway seeds, / lb. of currants,  oz. of moist sugar,  oz. of
candied peel,  eggs, / pint of milk,  small teaspoonful of carbonate
of soda.
mode.—rub the butter into the flour until it is quite fine; add the
caraway seeds, currants (which should be nicely washed, picked, and
dried), sugar, and candied peel cut into thin slices; mix these well
together, and moisten with the eggs, which should be well whisked. boil
the milk, and add to it, whilst boiling, the carbonate of soda, which
must be well stirred into it, and, with the milk, mix the other
ingredients. butter a tin, pour the cake into it, and bake it in a
moderate oven from / to  hour.
time.— to  hour. average cost, s. d. seasonable at any time.
 carbonate of soda—soda was called the mineral alkali, because
 it was originally dug up out of the ground in africa and other
 countries: this state of carbonate of soda is called natron.
 but carbonate of soda is likewise procured from the combustion
 of marine plants, or such as grow on the sea-shore. pure
 carbonate of soda is employed for making effervescing draughts,
 with lemon-juice, citric acid, or tartaric acid. the chief
 constituent of soda, the alkali, has been used in france from
 time immemorial in the manufacture of soap and glass, two
 chemical productions which employ and keep in circulation an
 immense amount of capital. a small pinch of carbonate of soda
 will give an extraordinary lightness to puff pastes; and,
 introduced into the teapot, will extract the full strength of
 the tea. but its qualities have a powerful effect upon delicate
 constitutions, and it is not to be used incautiously in any
 preparation.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour,  teaspoonful of borwick's
baking-powder, / lb. of good dripping,  teacupful of moist sugar, 
eggs,  breakfast-cupful of milk,  oz. of caraway seeds, / lb. of
currants.
mode.—put the flour and baking-powder into a basin; stir those
together; then rub in the dripping, add the sugar, caraway seeds, and
currants; whisk the eggs with the milk, and beat all together very
thoroughly until the ingredients are well mixed. butter a tin, put in
the cake, and bake it from / to  hours. let the dripping be quite
clean before using: to insure this, it is a good plan to clarify it.
beef dripping is better than any other for cakes, &c., as mutton
dripping frequently has a very unpleasant flavour, which would be
imparted to the preparation.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, s.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— quartern of dough, / lb. of moist sugar, / lb.
of butter or good beef dripping, / pint of warm milk, / grated
nutmeg or / oz. of caraway seeds.
mode.—if you are not in the habit of making bread at home, procure
the dough from the baker's, and, as soon as it comes in, put it into a
basin near the fire; cover the basin with a thick cloth, and let the
dough remain a little while to rise. in the mean time, beat the butter
to a cream, and make the milk warm; and when the dough has risen, mix
with it thoroughly all the above ingredients, and knead the cake well
for a few minutes. butter some cake-tins, half fill them, and stand them
in a warm place, to allow the dough to rise again. when the tins are
three parts full, put the cakes into a good oven, and bake them from
/ to  hours. a few currants might be substituted for the caraway
seeds when the flavour of the latter is disliked.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lbs. of flour,  oz. of butter or good dripping, 
oz. of moist sugar,  oz. of currants,  oz. of pounded allspice, 
tablespoonfuls of fresh yeast,  pint of new milk.
mode.—rub the butter into the flour; add the sugar, currants, and
allspice; warm the milk, stir to it the yeast, and mix the whole into a
dough; knead it well, and put it into  buttered tins; place them near
the fire for nearly an hour for the dough to rise, then bake the cakes
in a good oven from  to / hour. to ascertain when they are done,
plunge a clean knife into the middle, and if on withdrawal it comes out
clean, the cakes are done.
time.— to -/ hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make  small cakes.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of butter, / lb. of sugar,
/ lb. of currants,  oz. of candied lemon-peel, / pint of milk, 
teaspoonful of ammonia or carbonate of soda.
mode.—put the flour into a basin with the sugar, currants, and sliced
candied peel; beat the butter to a cream, and mix all these ingredients
together with the milk. stir the ammonia into  tablespoonfuls of milk
and add it to the dough, and beat the whole well, until everything is
thoroughly mixed. put the dough into a buttered tin, and bake the cake
from -/ to  hours.
time.—-/ to  hours.
average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: pound cake.]
. ingredients.— lb. of butter, -/ lb. of flour,  lb. of
pounded loaf sugar,  lb. of currants,  eggs,  oz. of candied peel,
/ oz. of citron, / oz. of sweet almonds; when liked, a little
pounded mace.
mode.—work the butter to a cream; dredge in the flour; add the sugar,
currants, candied peel, which should be cut into neat slices, and the
almonds, which should be blanched and chopped, and mix all these well
together; whisk the eggs, and let them be thoroughly blended with the
dry ingredients. beat the cake well for  minutes, and put it into a
round tin, lined at the bottom and sides with a strip of white buttered
paper. bake it from -/ to  hours, and let the oven be well heated
when the cake is first put in, as, if this is not the case, the currants
will all sink to the bottom of it. to make this preparation light, the
yolks and whites of the eggs should be beaten separately, and added
separately to the other ingredients. a glass of wine is sometimes added
to the mixture; but this is scarcely necessary, as the cake will be
found quite rich enough without it.
time.—-/ to  hours.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient.—the above quantity divided in two will make two
nice-sized cakes.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour, / lb. of ground rice, / lb. of
raisins stoned and cut into small pieces, / lb. of currants, / lb.
of butter,  oz. of sweet almonds, / lb. of sifted loaf sugar, /
nutmeg grated,  pint of milk,  teaspoonful of carbonate of soda.
mode.—stone and cut the raisins into small pieces; wash, pick, and
dry the currants; melt the butter to a cream, but without oiling it;
blanch and chop the almonds, and grate the nutmeg. when all these
ingredients are thus prepared, mix them well together; make the milk
warm, stir in the soda, and with this liquid make the whole into a
paste. butter a mould, rather more than half fill it with the dough, and
bake the cake in a moderate oven from -/ to  hours, or less time
should it be made into  cakes.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: cake-mould.]
. ingredients.—/ lb. of ground rice, / lb. of flour, / lb. of
loaf sugar,  eggs,  drops of essence of lemon, or the rind of 
lemon, / lb. of butter.
mode.—separate the whites from the yolks of the eggs; whisk them both
well, and add to the latter the butter beaten to a cream. stir in the
flour, rice, and lemon (if the rind is used, it must be very finely
minced), and beat the mixture well; then add the whites of the eggs,
beat the cake again for some time, put it into a buttered mould or tin,
and bake it for nearly -/ hour. it may be flavoured with essence of
almonds, when this is preferred.
time.—nearly -/ hour. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of flour, / lb. of butter, / lb. of
pounded loaf sugar,  eggs,  teacupful of cream, / lb. of currants, 
teaspoonful of carbonate of soda, essence of lemon, or almonds to taste.
mode.—work the butter to a cream; dredge in the flour, add the sugar
and currants, and mix the ingredients well together. whisk the eggs, mix
them with the cream and flavouring, and stir these to the flour; add the
carbonate of soda, beat the paste well for  minutes, put it into small
buttered pans, and bake the cake from / to / hour.
grated lemon-rind may be substituted for the lemon and almond
flavouring, which will make the cakes equally nice.
time. / to / hour.
average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of flour, / lb. of tous-les-mois, /
lb. of pounded white sugar, / lb. of butter,  eggs,  oz. of candied
orange or lemon-peel.
mode.—mix the flour and tous-les-mois together; add the sugar, the
candied peel cut into thin slices, the butter beaten to a cream, and the
eggs well whisked. beat the mixture for  minutes, put it into a
buttered cake-tin or mould, or, if this is not obtainable, a soup-plate
answers the purpose, lined with a piece of buttered paper. bake the cake
in a moderate oven from  to -/ hour, and when cold, put it away in a
covered canister. it will remain good some weeks, even if it be cut into
slices.
time.— to -/ hour.
average cost, s.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ quartern of dough, / lb. of good dripping, 
oz. of moist sugar, / oz. of caraway seeds,  egg.
mode.—if the dough is sent in from the baker's, put it in a basin
covered with a cloth, and set it in a warm place to rise. then with a
wooden spoon beat the dripping to a liquid; add it, with the other
ingredients, to the dough, and beat it until everything is very
thoroughly mixed. put it into a buttered tin, and bake the cake for
rather more than  hours.
time.—rather more than  hours.
average cost, d.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of butter,  eggs, / lb. of sifted sugar,
pounded mace and grated nutmeg to taste,  lb. of flour, / oz. of
caraway seeds,  wineglassful of brandy.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream; dredge in the flour; add the sugar,
mace, nutmeg, and caraway seeds, and mix these ingredients well
together. whisk the eggs, stir to them the brandy, and beat the cake
again for  minutes. put it into a tin lined with buttered paper, and
bake it from -/ to  hours. this cake would be equally nice made with
currants, and omitting the caraway seeds.
time.—-/ to  hours. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
 bread-making in spain.—the bread in the south of spain is
 delicious: it is white as snow, close as cake, and yet very
 light; the flavour is most admirable, for the wheat is good and
 pure, and the bread well kneaded. the way they make this bread
 is as follows:—from large round panniers filled with wheat they
 take out a handful at a time, sorting it most carefully and
 expeditiously, and throwing every defective grain into another
 basket. this done, the wheat is ground between two circular
 stones, as it was ground in egypt , years ago (see no. ),
 the requisite rotary motion being given by a blindfolded mule,
 which paces round and round with untiring patience, a bell being
 attached to his neck, which, as long as he is in movement,
 tinkles on; and when it stops, he is urged to his duty by the
 shout of "arre, mula," from some one within hearing. when
 ground, the wheat is sifted through three sieves, the last of
 these being so fine that only the pure flour can pass through
 it: this is of a pale apricot-colour. the bread is made in the
 evening. it is mixed with only sufficient water, with a little
 salt in it, to make it into dough: a very small quantity of
 leaven, or fermenting mixture is added. the scripture says, "a
 little leaven leaveneth the whole lump;" but in england, to
 avoid the trouble of kneading, many put as much leaven or yeast
 in one batch of household bread as in spain would last them a
 week for the six or eight donkey-loads of bread they send every
 night from their oven. the dough made, it is put into sacks, and
 carried on the donkeys' backs to the oven in the centre of the
 village, so as to bake it immediately it is kneaded. on arriving
 there, the dough is divided into portions weighing  lbs. each.
 two long narrow wooden tables on trestles are then placed down
 the room; and now a curious sight may be seen. about twenty men
 (bakers) come in and range themselves on one side of the tables.
 a lump of dough is handed to the nearest, which he commences
 kneading and knocking about with all his might for about  or 
 minutes, and then passes it on to his neighbour, who does the
 same; and so on successively until all have kneaded it, when it
 becomes as soft as new putty, and ready for the oven. of course,
 as soon as the first baker has handed the first lump to his
 neighbour, another is given to him, and so on till the whole
 quantity of dough is successively kneaded by them all. the
 bakers' wives and daughters shape the loaves for the oven, and
 some of them are very small, and they are baked immediately. the
 ovens are very large, and not heated by fires under them; but
 a quantity of twigs of the herbs of sweet marjoram and thyme,
 which cover the hills in great profusion, are put in the oven
 and ignited. they heat the oven to any extent required; and, as
 the bread gets baked, the oven gets gradually colder; so the
 bread is never burned. they knead the bread in spain with such
 force, that the palm of the hand and the second joints of the
 fingers of the bakers are covered with corns; and it so affects
 the chest, that they cannot work more than two hours at a time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of tous-les-mois, / lb. of white pounded
sugar, / lb. of fresh or washed salt butter,  egg, the juice of 
lemon.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream; then add the egg, previously well
beaten, and then the other ingredients; if the mixture is not light, add
another egg, and beat for / hour, until it turns white and light. line
a flat tin, with raised edges, with a sheet of buttered paper; pour in
the cake, and put it into the oven. it must be rather slow, and the cake
not allowed to brown at all. if the oven is properly heated,  to -/
hour will be found long enough to bake it. let it cool a few minutes,
then with a clean sharp knife cut it into small square pieces, which
should be gently removed to a large flat dish to cool before putting
away. this will keep for several weeks.
time.— to -/ hour. average cost, s. d.
seasonable at any time.
(a genuine scotch recipe.)
. ingredients.— lb. of arrowroot, / lb. of pounded white sugar,
/ lb. of butter, the whites of  eggs; flavouring to taste, of essence
of almonds, or vanilla, or lemon.
mode.—beat the butter to a cream; stir in the sugar and arrowroot
gradually, at the same time beating the mixture. whisk the whites of the
eggs to a stiff froth, add them to the other ingredients, and beat well
for  minutes. put in whichever of the above flavourings may be
preferred; pour the cake into a buttered mould or tin and bake it in a
moderate oven from  to -/ hour.
time.— to -/ hour.
average cost, with the best bermuda arrowroot, s. d.; with st.
vincent ditto, s. d.
sufficient to make a moderate-sized cake. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lbs. of leaf, or the inside fat of a pig; -/
lb. of flour, / lb. of moist sugar, / lb. of currants,  oz. of
candied lemon-peel, ground allspice to taste.
mode.—cut the leaf, or flead, as it is sometimes called, into small
pieces; put it into a large dish, which place in a quick oven; be
careful that it does not burn, and in a short time it will be reduced to
oil, with the small pieces of leaf floating on the surface; and it is of
these that the cakes should be made. gather all the scraps together, put
them into a basin with the flour, and rub them well together. add the
currants, sugar, candied peel, cut into thin slices, and the ground
allspice. when all these ingredients are well mixed, moisten with
sufficient cold water to make the whole into a nice paste; roll it out
thin, cut it into shapes, and bake the cakes in a quick oven from  to
 minutes. these are very economical and wholesome cakes for children,
and the lard, melted at home, produced from the flead, is generally
better than that you purchase. to prevent the lard from burning, and to
insure its being a good colour, it is better to melt it in a jar placed
in a saucepan of boiling water; by doing it in this manner, there will
be no chance of its discolouring.
time.— to  minutes.
sufficient to make  or  dozen cakes.
seasonable from september to march.
[illustration: wheat.]
 wheat is liable to several diseases, which affect the flour made
 from it, and render it unfit for good bread. the principal of
 these are the blight, mildew, and smut, which are occasioned by
 microscopic fungi, which sow themselves and grow upon the stems
 and ears, destroying the nutritive principles, and introducing
 matter of a deleterious kind. the farmer is at the utmost pains
 to keep away these intruders. wheat, as well as all kinds of
 corn, is also very liable to be injured by being stacked before
 it is quite dry; in which case it will heat, and become musty in
 the ricks. in wet harvests it is sometimes impossible to get it
 sufficiently dried, and a great deal of corn is thus often
 spoiled. it is generally reckoned that the sweetest bread is
 made from wheat threshed out before it is stacked; which shows
 the importance of studying the best modes of preserving it.
 the erudite are not agreed as to the aboriginal country of corn:
 some say it is egypt, others tartary; and the learned bailly, as
 well as the traveller pallas, affirms that it grows
 spontaneously in siberia. be that as it may, the phocians
 brought it to marseilles before the romans had penetrated into
 gaul. the gauls ate the corn cooked or bruised in a mortar: they
 did not know, for a long time, how to make fermented bread.
. ingredients.— lbs. of flour,  lb. of butter, / lb. of pounded
loaf sugar, / oz. of caraway seeds,  oz. of sweet almonds, a few
strips of candied orange-peel.
[illustration: shortbread.]
mode.—beat the butter to a cream, gradually dredge in the flour, and
add the sugar, caraway seeds, and sweet almonds, which should be
blanched and cut into small pieces. work the paste until it is quite
smooth, and divide it into six pieces. put each cake on a separate piece
of paper, roll the paste out square to the thickness of about an inch,
and pinch it upon all sides. prick it well, and ornament with one or two
strips of candied orange-peel. put the cakes into a good oven, and bake
them from  to  minutes.
time.— to  minutes.
average cost, for this quantity, s.
sufficient to make  cakes.
seasonable at any time.
note.—where the flavour of the caraway seeds is disliked, omit them,
and add rather a larger proportion of candied peel.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of butter,  lb. of flour, / lb. of
currants, / lb. of moist sugar,  teacupful of milk,  eggs, 
teaspoonful of carbonate of soda.
mode.—rub the butter into the flour, add the currants and sugar, and
mix these ingredients well together. whisk the eggs well, stir them to
the flour, &c., with the milk, in which the soda should be previously
dissolved, and beat the whole up together with a wooden spoon or beater.
divide the dough into two pieces, put them into buttered moulds or
cake-tins, and bake in a moderate oven for nearly an hour. the mixture
must be extremely well beaten up, and not allowed to stand after the
soda is added to it, but must be placed in the oven immediately. great
care must also be taken that the cakes are quite done through, which may
be ascertained by thrusting a knife into the middle of them: if the
blade looks bright when withdrawn, they are done. if the tops acquire
too much colour before the inside is sufficiently baked, cover them over
with a piece of clean white paper, to prevent them from burning.
time.— hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make  small cakes.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—the weight of  eggs in pounded loaf sugar, the
weight of  in flour, a little grated lemon-rind, or essence of almonds,
or orange-flower water.
mode.—break the  eggs, putting the yolks into one basin and the
whites into another. whisk the former, and mix with them the sugar, the
grated lemon-rind, or any other flavouring to taste; beat them well
together, and add the whites of the eggs, whisked to a froth. put in the
flour by degrees, continuing to beat the mixture for / hour, butter a
mould, pour in the cake, and bake it from -/ to -/ hour. this is a
very nice cake for dessert, and may be iced for a supper-table, or cut
into slices and spread with jam, which converts it into sandwiches.
time.—-/ to -/ hour.
average cost, s.
sufficient for  cake.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: sponge-cake.]
. ingredients.—the weight of  eggs in pounded loaf sugar, the
weight of  in flour, the rind of  lemon,  tablespoonful of brandy.
mode.—put the eggs into one side of the scale, and take the weight of
 in pounded loaf sugar, and the weight of  in good dry flour.
separate the yolks from the whites of the eggs; beat the former, put
them into a saucepan with the sugar, and let them remain over the fire
until milk-warm, keeping them well stirred. then put them into a
basin, add the grated lemon-rind mixed with the brandy, and stir these
well together, dredging in the flour very gradually. whisk the whites of
the eggs to a very stiff froth, stir them to the flour, &c., and beat
the cake well for / hour. put it into a buttered mould strewn with a
little fine sifted sugar, and bake the cake in a quick oven for -/
hour. care must be taken that it is put into the oven immediately, or it
will not be light. the flavouring of this cake may be varied by adding a
few drops of essence of almonds instead of the grated lemon-rind.
time.—-/ hour.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient for  cake.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: egyptian wheat.]
 the egyptian, or mummy wheat, is not grown to any great extent,
 owing to its inferior quality; but it is notable for its large
 produce, and is often cultivated on allotment grounds and on
 small farms, where quantity rather than quality is desired. at
 wix, in essex, the seed of this wheat has produced, without
 artificial assistance, four thousandfold; some of the ears have
 had eleven offshoots, and have contained, altogether, eleven
 grains in one ear.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of loaf sugar, not quite / pint of water,
 eggs,  lemon, / lb. of flour, / teaspoonful of carbonate of soda.
mode.—boil the sugar and water together until they form a thick
syrup; let it cool a little, then pour it to the eggs, which should be
previously well whisked; and after the eggs and syrup are mixed
together, continue beating them for a few minutes. grate the lemon-rind,
mix the carbonate of soda with the flour, and stir these lightly to the
other ingredients; then add the lemon-juice, and, when the whole is
thoroughly mixed, pour it into a buttered mould, and bake in rather a
quick oven for rather more than  hour. the remains of sponge or savoy
cakes answer very well for trifles, light puddings, &c.; and a very
stale one (if not mouldy) makes an excellent tipsy-cake.
time.—rather more than  hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient to make  cake.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—the weight of  eggs in flour, the weight of  in
pounded loaf sugar; flavouring to taste.
mode.—let the flour be perfectly dry, and the sugar well pounded and
sifted. separate the whites from the yolks of the eggs, and beat the
latter up with the sugar; then whisk the whites until they become rather
stiff, and mix them with the yolks, but do not stir them more than is
just necessary to mingle the ingredients well together. dredge in the
flour by degrees, add the flavouring; batter the tins well, pour in the
batter, sift a little sugar over the cakes, and bake them in rather a
quick oven, but do not allow them to take too much colour, as they
should be rather pale. remove them from the tins before they get cold,
and turn them on their faces, where let them remain until quite cold,
when store them away in a closed tin canister or wide-mouthed glass
bottle.
time.— to  minutes in a quick oven.
average cost, d. each.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lbs. of flour, / teaspoonful of salt, / lb. of
butter or lard,  egg, a piece of german yeast the size of a walnut,
warm milk.
mode.—put the flour (which should be perfectly dry) into a basin mix
with it the salt, and rub in the butter or lard; then beat the egg well,
stir to it the yeast, and add these to the flour with as much warm milk
as will make the whole into a smooth paste, and knead it well. let it
rise near the fire, and, when well risen, form it into cakes; place them
on tins, let them rise again for a few minutes before putting them into
the oven, and bake from / to / hour in a moderate oven. these are
very nice with a few currants and a little sugar added to the other
ingredients: they should be put in after the butter is rubbed in. these
cakes should be buttered, and eaten hot as soon as baked; but, when
stale, they are very nice split and toasted; or, if dipped in milk, or
even water, and covered with a basin in the oven till hot, they will be
almost equal to new.
time.—/ to / hour.
average cost, d.
sufficient to make  tea-cakes.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration: tea-cakes.]
. cut each tea-cake into three or four slices, according to its
thickness; toast them on both sides before a nice clear fire, and as
each slice is done, spread it with butter on both sides. when a cake is
toasted, pile the slices one on the top of the other, cut them into
quarters, put them on a very hot plate, and send the cakes immediately
to table. as they are wanted, send them in hot, one or two at a time,
as, if allowed to stand, they spoil, unless kept in a muffin-plate over
a basin of boiling water.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of flour, / lb. of butter, / pint of
milk, -/ tablespoonful of good yeast,  eggs, / lb. of currants,
/ lb. of white moist sugar,  oz. of candied peel.
mode.—put the milk and butter into a saucepan, and shake it round
over a fire until the butter is melted, but do not allow the milk to get
very hot. put the flour into a basin, stir to it the milk and butter,
the yeast, and eggs, which should be well beaten, and form the whole
into a smooth dough. let it stand in a warm place, covered with a cloth,
to rise, and, when sufficiently risen, add the currants, sugar, and
candied peel cut into thin slices. when all the ingredients are
thoroughly mixed, line  moderate-sized cake-tins with buttered paper,
which should be about six inches higher than the tin; pour in the
mixture, let it stand to rise again for another / hour, and then bake
the cakes in a brisk oven for about -/ hour. if the tops of them
become too brown, cover them with paper until they are done through. a
few drops of essence of lemon, or a little grated nutmeg, may be added
when the flavour is liked.
time.—from -/ to -/ hour. average cost, s.
sufficient to make  moderate-sized cakes.
seasonable at any time.
[illustration]
[illustration]
. beverages are innumerable in their variety; but the ordinary
beverages drunk in the british isles, may be divided into three
classes:—. beverages of the simplest kind not fermented. . beverages,
consisting of water, containing a considerable quantity of carbonic
acid. . beverages composed partly of fermented liquors. of the first
class may be mentioned,—water, toast-and-water, barley-water, eau
sucré, lait sucré, cheese and milk whey, milk-and-water, lemonade,
orangeade, sherbet, apple and pear juice, capillaire, vinegar-and-water,
raspberry vinegar and water.
. of the common class of beverages, consisting of water impregnated
with carbonic acid gas, we may name soda-water, single and double,
ordinary effervescing draughts, and ginger-beer.
. the beverages composed partly of fermented liquors, are hot spiced
wines, bishop, egg-flip, egg-hot, ale posset, sack posset, punch, and
spirits-and-water.
. we will, however, forthwith treat on the most popular of our
beverages, beginning with the one which makes "the cup that cheers but
not inebriates."
. the beverage called tea has now become almost a necessary of life.
previous to the middle of the th century it was not used in england,
and it was wholly unknown to the greeks and romans. pepys says, in his
diary,—"september th, .—i sent for a cup of tea (a china drink),
of which i had never drunk before." two years later it was so rare a
commodity in england, that the english east-india company bought  lbs.
 oz. of it, as a present for his majesty. in  it was sold in london
for sixty shillings a pound. from that date the consumption has gone on
increasing from , lbs. to ,, lbs.
. linnaeus was induced to think that there were two species of
tea-plant, one of which produced the black, and the other the green
teas; but later observations do not confirm this. when the leaves of
black and green tea are expanded by hot water, and examined by the
botanist, though a difference of character is perceived, yet this is not
sufficient to authorize considering them as distinct species. the
tea-tree flourishes best in temperate regions; in china it is
indigenous. the part of china where the best tea is cultivated, is
called by us the "tea country." the cultivation of the plant requires
great care. it is raised chiefly on the sides of hills; and, in order to
increase the quantity and improve the quality of the leaves, the shrub
is pruned, so as not to exceed the height of from two to three feet,
much in the same manner as the vine is treated in france. they pluck the
leaves, one selecting them according to the kinds of tea required; and,
notwithstanding the tediousness of the operation, each labourer is able
to gather from four to ten or fifteen pounds a day. when the trees
attain to six or seven years of age, the produce becomes so inferior
that they are removed to make room for a fresh succession, or they are
cut down to allow of numerous young shoots. teas of the finest flavour
consist of the youngest leaves; and as these are gathered at four
different periods of the year, the younger the leaves the higher
flavoured the tea, and the scarcer, and consequently the dearer, the
article.
. the various names by which teas are sold in the british market are
corruptions of chinese words. there are about a dozen different kinds;
but the principal are bohea, congou, and souchong, and signify,
respectively, inferior, middling, and superior. teas are often perfumed
and flavoured with the leaves of different kinds of plants grown on
purpose. different tea-farms in china produce teas of various qualities,
raised by skilful cultivation on various soils.
. tea, when chemically analyzed, is found to contain woody fibre,
mucilage, a considerable quantity of the astringent principle, or
tannin, a narcotic principle, which is, perhaps, connected with a
peculiar aroma. the tannin is shown by its striking a black colour with
sulphate of iron, and is the cause of the dark stain which is always
formed when tea is spilt upon buff-coloured cottons dyed with iron. a
constituent called theine has also been discovered in tea, supposed to
be identical with caffeine, one of the constituents of coffee. liebig
says, "theine yields, in certain processes of decomposition, a series of
most remarkable products, which have much analogy with those derived
from uric acid in similar circumstances. the infusion of tea differs
from that of coffee, by containing iron and manganese. we have in tea,
of many kinds, a beverage which contains the active constituents of the
most powerful mineral springs, and, however small the amount of iron may
be which we daily take in this form, it cannot be destitute of influence
on the vital processes."
. chinese tea has frequently been adulterated in this country, by
the admixture of the dried leaves of certain plants. the leaves of the
sloe, white thorn, ash, elder, and some others, have been employed for
this purpose; such as the leaves of the speedwell, wild germander, black
currants, syringa, purple-spiked willow-herb, sweet-brier, and
cherry-tree. some of these are harmless, others are to a certain degree
poisonous; as, for example, are the leaves of all the varieties of the
plum and cherry tribe, to which the sloe belongs. adulteration by means
of these leaves is by no means a new species of fraud; and several acts
of parliament, from the time of george ii., have been passed, specifying
severe penalties against those guilty of the offence, which,
notwithstanding numerous convictions, continues to the present time.
. in the purchase of tea, that should be chosen which possesses an
agreeable odour and is as whole as possible, in order that the leaf may
be easily examined. the greatest care should be taken that it has not
been exposed to the air, which destroys its flavour.
. it would be impossible, in the space at our command, to enumerate
the various modes adopted in different countries for "making coffee;"
that is, the phrase commonly understood to mean the complete preparation
of this delicious beverage for drinking. for performing this operation,
such recipes or methods as we have found most practical will be inserted
in their proper place; but the following facts connected with coffee
will be found highly interesting.
. the introduction of coffee into this country is comparatively of
recent date. we are assured by bruce that the coffee-tree is a native of
abyssinia, and it is said to have been cultivated in that country from
time immemorial.
. it appears that coffee was first introduced into england by daniel
edwards, a turkey merchant, whose servant, pasqua, a greek, understood
the manner of roasting it. this servant, under the patronage of edwards,
established the first coffee-house in london, in george yard, lombard
street. coffee was then sold at four or five guineas a pound, and a duty
was soon afterwards laid upon it of fourpence a gallon, when made into a
beverage. in the course of two centuries, however, this berry, unknown
originally as an article of food, except to some savage tribes on the
confines of abyssinia, has made its way through the whole of the
civilized world. mahommedans of all ranks drink coffee twice a day; it
is in universal request in france; and the demand for it throughout the
british isles is daily increasing, the more especially since so much
attention has been given to mechanical contrivances for roasting and
grinding the berry and preparing the beverage.
. of the various kinds of coffee the arabian is considered the best.
it is grown chiefly in the districts of aden and mocha; whence the name
of our mocha coffee. mocha coffee has a smaller and rounder bean than
any other, and likewise a more agreeable smell and taste. the next in
reputation and quality is the java and ceylon coffee, and then the
coffees of bourbon and martinique, and that of berbice, a district of
the colony of british guiana. the jamaica and st. domingo coffees are
less esteemed.
. a considerable change takes place in the arrangement of the
constituents of coffee by the application of heat in roasting it.
independently of one of the objects of roasting, namely, that of
destroying its toughness and rendering it easily ground, its tannin and
other principles are rendered partly soluble in water; and it is to the
tannin that the brown colour of the decoction of coffee is owing. an
aromatic flavour is likewise developed during torrefaction, which is not
perceived in the raw berry, and which is not produced in the greatest
perfection until the heat has arrived at a certain degree of
temperature; but, if the heat be increased beyond this, the flavour is
again dissipated, and little remains but a bitter and astringent matter
with carbon.
. the roasting of coffee in the best manner requires great nicety,
and much of the qualities of the beverage depends upon the operation.
the roasting of coffee for the dealers in london and paris has now
become a separate branch of business, and some of the roasters perform
the operation on a great scale, with considerable skill. roasted coffee
loses from  to  per cent, by sufficient roasting, and the powder
suffers much by exposure to the air; but, while raw, it not only does
not lose its flavour for a year or two, but improves by keeping. if a
cup of the best coffee be placed upon a table boiling hot, it will fill
the room with its fragrance; but the coffee, when warmed again after
being cold, will be found to have lost most of its flavour.
. to have coffee in perfection, it should be roasted and ground just
before it is used, and more should not be ground at a time than is
wanted for immediate use, or, if it be necessary to grind more, it
should be kept closed from the air. coffee readily imbibes exhalations
from other substances, and thus often acquires a bad flavour: brown
sugar placed near it will communicate a disagreeable flavour. it is
stated that the coffee in the west indies has often been injured by
being laid in rooms near the sugar-works, or where rum is distilled; and
the same effect has been produced by bringing over coffee in the same
ships with rum and sugar. dr. moseley mentions that a few bags of
pepper, on board a ship from india, spoiled a whole cargo of coffee.
. with respect to the quantity of coffee used in making the
decoction, much depends upon the taste of the consumer. the greatest and
most common fault in english coffee is the too small quantity of the
ingredient. count rumford says that to make good coffee for drinking
after dinner, a pound of good mocha coffee, which, when roasted and
ground, weighs only thirteen ounces, serves to make fifty-six full cups,
or a little less than a quarter of an ounce to a coffee-cup of moderate
size.
. ingredients.—allow / oz. of chocolate to each person; to every
oz. allow / pint of water, / pint of milk.
mode.—make the milk-and-water hot; scrape the chocolate into it, and
stir the mixture constantly and quickly until the chocolate is
dissolved; bring it to the boiling-point, stir it well, and serve
directly with white sugar. chocolate prepared with in a mill, as shown
in the engraving, is made by putting in the scraped chocolate, pouring
over it the boiling milk-and-water, and milling it over the fire until
hot and frothy.
sufficient.—allow / oz. of cake chocolate to each person.
[illustration: mill.]
 chocolate and cocoa.—both these preparations are made from the
 seeds or beans of the cacao-tree, which grows in the west indies
 and south america. the spanish, and the proper name, is cacao,
 not cocoa, as it is generally spelt. from this mistake, the tree
 from which the beverage is procured has been often confounded
 with the palm that produces the edible cocoa-nuts, which are the
 produce of the cocoa-tree (cocos nucifera), whereas the tree
 from which chocolate is procured is very different (the
 theobroma cacao). the cocoa-tree was cultivated by the
 aboriginal inhabitants of south america, particularly in mexico,
 where, according to humboldt, it was reared by montezuma. it was
 transplanted thence into other dependencies of the spanish
 monarchy in ; and it was so highly esteemed by linnaeus
 receive from him the name now conferred upon it, of theobroma, a
 term derived from the greek, and signifying "food for gods."
 chocolate has always been a favourite beverage among the
 spaniards and creoles, and was considered here as a great luxury
 when first introduced, after the discovery of america; but the
 high duties laid upon it, confined it long almost entirely to
 the wealthier classes. before it was subjected to duty, mr.
 bryan edwards stated that cocoa plantations were numerous in
 jamaica, but that the duty caused their almost entire ruin. the
 removal of this duty has increased their cultivation. (for
 engraving of cocoa-bean, see no. .)
. ingredients.—to every / lb. of ground coffee allow  small
teaspoonful of powdered chicory,  small teacupfuls, or  pint, of
water.
mode.—let the coffee be freshly ground, and, if possible, freshly
roasted; put it into a percolater, or filter, with the chicory, and pour
slowly over it the above proportion of boiling water. when it has all
filtered through, warm the coffee sufficiently to bring it to the
simmering-point, but do not allow it to boil; then filter it a second
time, put it into a clean and dry bottle, cork it well, and it will
remain good for several days. two tablespoonfuls of this essence are
quite sufficient for a breakfast-cupful of hot milk. this essence will
be found particularly useful to those persons who have to rise extremely
early; and having only the milk to make boiling, is very easily and
quickly prepared. when the essence is bottled, pour another 
tea-cupfuls of boiling water slowly on the grounds, which, when
filtered through, will be a very weak coffee. the next time there is
essence to be prepared, make this weak coffee boiling, and pour it on
the ground coffee instead of plain water: by this means a better coffee
will be obtained. never throw away the grounds without having made use
of them in this manner; and always cork the bottle well that contains
this preparation, until the day that it is wanted for making the fresh
essence.
time.—to be filtered once, then brought to the boiling-point, and
filtered again.
average cost, with coffee at s. d. per lb., d.
sufficient'-allow  tablespoonfuls for a breakfast-cupful of hot milk.
(a french recipe.)
. it being an acknowledged fact that french coffee is decidedly
superior to that made in england, and as the roasting of the berry is of
great importance to the flavour of the preparation, it will be useful
and interesting to know how they manage these things in france. in
paris, there are two houses justly celebrated for the flavour of their
coffee,—la maison corcellet and la maison royer de chartres; and to
obtain this flavour, before roasting they add to every  lbs. of coffee
a piece of butter the size of a nut, and a dessert-spoonful of powdered
sugar: it is then roasted in the usual manner. the addition of the
butter and sugar develops the flavour and aroma of the berry; but it
must be borne in mind, that the quality of the butter must be of the
very best description.
. ingredients.—allow  oz., or  tablespoonful, of ground coffee to
each person; to every oz. of coffee allow / pint of water.
mode.—to make coffee good, it should never be boiled, but the
boiling water merely poured on it, the same as for tea. the coffee
should always be purchased in the berry,—if possible, freshly roasted;
and it should never be ground long before it is wanted for use. there
are very many new kinds of coffee-pots, but the method of making the
coffee is nearly always the same; namely, pouring the boiling water on
the powder, and allowing it to filter through. our illustration shows
one of loysel's hydrostatic urns, which are admirably adapted for making
good and clear coffee, which should be made in the following,
manner:—warm the urn with boiling water, remove the lid and movable
filter, and place the ground coffee at the bottom of the urn. put the
movable filter over this, and screw the lid, inverted, tightly on the
end of the centre pipe. pour into the inverted lid the above proportion
of boiling water, and when all the water so poured has disappeared from
the funnel, and made its way down the centre pipe and up again through
the ground coffee by hydrostatic pressure, unscrew screw the lid and
cover the urn. pour back direct into the urn, not through the funnel,
one, two, or three cups, according to the size of the percolater, in
order to make the infusion of uniform strength; the contents will then
be ready for use, and should run from the tap strong, hot, and clear.
the coffee made in these urns generally turns out very good, and there
is but one objection to them,—the coffee runs rather slowly from the
tap. this is of no consequence where there is a small party, but tedious
where there are many persons to provide for. a remedy for this objection
may be suggested; namely, to make the coffee very strong, so that not
more than / of a cup would be required, as the rest would be filled up
with milk. making coffee in filters or percolaters does away with the
necessity of using isinglass, white of egg, and various other
preparations to clear it. coffee should always be served very hot, and,
if possible, in the same vessel in which it is made, as pouring it from
one pot to another cools, and consequently spoils it. many persons may
think that the proportion of water we have given for each oz. of coffee
is rather small; it is so, and the coffee produced from it will be very
strong; / of a cup will be found quite sufficient, which should be
filled with nice hot milk, or milk and cream mixed. this is the 'cafe au
lait' for which our neighbours over the channel are so justly
celebrated. should the ordinary method of making coffee be preferred,
use double the quantity of water, and, in pouring it into the cups, put
in more coffee and less milk.
[illustration: loysel's hydrostatic urn.]
sufficient.—for very good coffee, allow / oz., or  tablespoonful,
to each person.
. ingredients.—allow / oz., or  tablespoonful, of coffee to each
person; to every oz. allow  pint of water.
mode.—have a small iron ring made to fit the top of the coffee-pot
inside, and to this ring sew a small muslin bag (the muslin for the
purpose must not be too thin). fit the bag into the pot, pour some
boiling water in it, and, when the pot is well warmed, put the ground
coffee into the bag; pour over as much boiling water as is required,
close the lid, and, when all the water has filtered through, remove the
bag, and send the coffee to table. making it in this manner prevents the
necessity of pouring the coffee from one vessel to another, which cools
and spoils it. the water should be poured on the coffee gradually, so
that the infusion may be stronger; and the bag must be well made, that
none of the grounds may escape through the seams, and so make the coffee
thick and muddy.
sufficient.—allow  tablespoonful, or / oz., to each person.
[illustration: coffee.]
 the coffee plant grows to the height of about twelve or fifteen
 feet, with leaves not unlike those of the common laurel,
 although more pointed, and not so dry and thick. the blossoms
 are white, much like those of jasmine, and issue from the angles
 of the leaf-stalks. when the flowers fade, they are succeeded by
 the coffee-bean, or seed, which is inclosed in a berry of a red
 colour, when ripe resembling a cherry. the coffee-beans are
 prepared by exposing them to the sun for a few days, that the
 pulp may ferment and throw off a strong acidulous moisture. they
 are then gradually dried for about three weeks, and put into a
 mill to separate the husk from the seed.
. this is merely very strong coffee added to a large proportion of
good hot milk; about  tablespoonfuls of strong coffee being quite
sufficient for a breakfast-cupful of milk. of the essence no. ,
which answers admirably for 'cafe an lait', so much would not be
required. this preparation is infinitely superior to the weak watery
coffee so often served at english tables. a little cream mixed with the
milk, if the latter cannot be depended on for richness, improves the
taste of the coffee, as also the richness of the beverage.
sufficient.— tablespoonfuls of strong coffee, or  tablespoonfuls of
the essence, to a breakfast-cupful of milk.
 tea and coffee.—it is true, says liebig, that thousands have
 lived without a knowledge of tea and coffee; and daily
 experience teaches us that, under certain circumstances, they
 may be dispensed with without disadvantage to the merely animal
 functions; but it is an error, certainly, to conclude from this
 that they may be altogether dispensed with in reference to their
 effects; and it is a question whether, if we had no tea and no
 coffee, the popular instinct would not seek for and discover the
 means of replacing them. science, which accuses us of so much in
 these respects, will have, in the first place, to ascertain
 whether it depends on sensual and sinful inclinations merely,
 that every people of the globe have appropriated some such means
 of acting on the nervous life, from the shore of the pacific,
 where the indian retires from life for days in order to enjoy
 the bliss of intoxication with koko, to the arctic regions,
 where kamtschatdales and koriakes prepare an intoxicating
 beverage from a poisonous mushroom. we think it, on the
 contrary, highly probable, not to say certain, that the instinct
 of man, feeling certain blanks, certain wants of the intensified
 life of our times, which cannot be satisfied or filled up by
 mere quantity, has discovered, in these products of vegetable
 life the true means of giving to his food the desired and
 necessary quality.
. this is usually handed round after dinner, and should be drunk
well sweetened, with the addition of a little brandy or liqueurs, which
may be added or not at pleasure. the coffee should be made very strong,
and served in very small cups, but never mixed with milk or cream. cafe
noir may be made of the essence of coffee no. , by pouring a
tablespoonful into each cup, and filling it up with boiling water. this
is a very simple and expeditious manner of preparing coffee for a large
party, but the essence for it must be made very good, and kept well
corked until required for use.
. there is very little art in making good tea; if the water is
boiling, and there is no sparing of the fragrant leaf, the beverage will
almost invariably be good. the old-fashioned plan of allowing a
teaspoonful to each person, and one over, is still practised. warm the
teapot with boiling water; let it remain for two or three minutes for
the vessel to become thoroughly hot, then pour it away. put in the tea,
pour in from / to / pint of boiling water, close the lid, and let it
stand for the tea to draw from  to  minutes; then fill up the pot
with water. the tea will be quite spoiled unless made with water that is
actually 'boiling', as the leaves will not open, and the flavour not be
extracted from them; the beverage will consequently be colourless and
tasteless,—in fact, nothing but tepid water. where there is a very
large party to make tea for, it is a good plan to have two teapots
instead of putting a large quantity of tea into one pot; the tea,
besides, will go farther. when the infusion has been once completed, the
addition of fresh tea adds very little to the strength; so, when more is
required, have the pot emptied of the old leaves, scalded, and fresh tea
made in the usual manner. economists say that a few grains of carbonate
of soda, added before the boiling water is poured on the tea, assist to
draw out the goodness: if the water is very hard, perhaps it is a good
plan, as the soda softens it; but care must be taken to use this
ingredient sparingly, as it is liable to give the tea a soapy taste if
added in too large a quantity. for mixed tea, the usual proportion is
four spoonfuls of black to one of green; more of the latter when the
flavour is very much liked; but strong green tea is highly pernicious,
and should never be partaken of too freely.
time.— minutes to warm the teapot,  to  minutes to draw the
strength from the tea.
sufficient.—allow  teaspoonful to each person, and one over.
 tea.—the tea-tree or shrub belongs to the class and order of
 monadelphia polyandria in the linnaean system, and to the
 natural order of aurantiaceae in the system of jussieu. lately
 it has been made into a new order, the theasia, which includes
 the camellia and some other plants. it commonly grows to the
 height of from three to six feet; but it is said, that, in its
 wild or native state, it reaches twenty feet or more. in china
 it is cultivated in numerous small plantations. in its general
 appearance, and the form of its leaf, it resembles the myrtle.
 the blossoms are white and fragrant, not unlike those of the
 wild rose, but smaller; and they are succeeded by soft green
 capsules, containing each from one to three white seeds. these
 capsules are crushed for oil, which is in general use in china.
[illustration: tea.]
. ingredients.—allow  new-laid egg to every large breakfast-cupful
of tea or coffee.
mode.—beat up the whole of the egg in a basin, put it into a cup (or
a portion of it, if the cup be small), and pour over it the tea or
coffee very hot. these should be added very gradually, and stirred all
the time, to prevent the egg from curdling. in point of nourishment,
both these beverages are much improved by this addition.
sufficient.—allow  egg to every large breakfast-cupful of tea or
coffee.
. ingredients.—allow  teaspoonfuls of the prepared cocoa to 
breakfast-cup; boiling milk and boiling water.
[illustration: cocoa-bean.]
mode.—put the cocoa into a breakfast-cup, pour over it sufficient
cold milk to make it into a smooth paste; then add equal quantities of
boiling milk and boiling water, and stir all well together. care must be
taken not to allow the milk to get burnt, as it will entirely spoil the
flavour of the preparation. the above directions are usually given for
making the prepared cocoa. the rock cocoa, or that bought in a solid
piece, should be scraped, and made in the same manner, taking care to
rub down all the lumps before the boiling liquid is added.
sufficient— teaspoonfuls of prepared cocoa for  breakfast-cup, or
/ oz. of the rock cocoa for the same quantity.
. ingredients.—to every gallon of water allow  lbs. of lump sugar,
the rind of  lemons, the juice of , the rind and juice of  seville
orange,  gallon of cowslip pips. to every -/ gallons of wine allow 
bottle of brandy.
mode.—boil the sugar and water together for / hour, carefully
removing all the scum as it rises. pour this boiling liquor on the
orange and lemon-rinds, and the juice, which should be strained; when
milk-warm, add the cowslip pips or flowers, picked from the stalks and
seeds; and to  gallons of wine  tablespoonfuls of good fresh brewers'
yeast. let it ferment  or  days; then put all together in a cask with
the brandy, and let it remain for  months, when bottle it off for use.
time.—to be boiled / hour; to ferment  or  days; to remain in the
cask  months.
average cost, exclusive of the cowslips, which may be picked in the
fields, s. d. per gallon.
seasonable.—make this in april or may.
. ingredients.—to every  gallons of water allow  peck of
elderberries; to every gallon of juice allow  lbs. of sugar, / oz. of
ground ginger,  cloves,  lb. of good turkey raisins; / pint of
brandy to every gallon of wine. to every  gallons of wine  or 
tablespoonfuls of fresh brewer's yeast.
mode.—pour the water, quite boiling, on the elderberries, which
should be picked from the stalks, and let these stand covered for 
hours; then strain the whole through a sieve or bag, breaking the fruit
to express all the juice from it. measure the liquor, and to every
gallon allow the above proportion of sugar. boil the juice and sugar
with the ginger, cloves, and raisins for  hour, skimming the liquor the
whole time; let it stand until milk-warm, then put it into a clean dry
cask, with  or  tablespoonfuls of good fresh yeast to every  gallons
of wine. let it ferment for about a fortnight; then add the brandy, bung
up the cask, and let it stand some months before it is bottled, when it
will be found excellent. a bunch of hops suspended to a string from the
bung, some persons say, will preserve the wine good for several years.
elder wine is usually mulled, and served with sippets of toasted bread
and a little grated nutmeg.
time.—to stand covered  hours; to be boiled  hour.
average cost, when made at home, s. d. per gallon.
seasonable.—make this in september.
[illustration: elder-berries.]
 elder-berry wine.—the elder-berry is well adapted for the
 production of wine; its juice contains a considerable portion of
 the principle necessary for a vigorous fermentation, and its
 beautiful colour communicates a rich tint to the wine made from
 it. it is, however, deficient in sweetness, and therefore
 demands an addition of sugar. it is one of the very best of the
 genuine old english wines; and a cup of it mulled, just previous
 to retiring to bed on a winter night, is a thing to be "run
 for," as cobbett would say: it is not, however, agreeable to
 every taste.
. ingredients.—to  gallons of water allow  lbs. of loaf sugar, 
lemons,  oz. of bruised ginger,  tablespoonfuls of yeast,  lbs. of
raisins stoned and chopped,  pint of brandy.
mode.—boil together for  hour in a copper (let it previously be well
scoured and beautifully clean) the water, sugar, lemon-rinds, and
bruised ginger; remove every particle of scum as it rises, and when the
liquor is sufficiently boiled, put it into a large tub or pan, as it
must not remain in the copper. when nearly cold, add the yeast, which
must be thick and very fresh, and, the next day, put all in a dry cask
with the strained lemon-juice and chopped raisins. stir the wine every
day for a fortnight; then add the brandy, stop the cask down by degrees,
and in a few weeks it will be fit to bottle.
average cost, s. per gallon. sufficient to make  gallons of wine.
seasonable.—the best time for making this wine is either in march or
september.
note.—wine made early in march will be fit to bottle in june.
(an excellent recipe.)
. ingredients.— pecks of crystal gooseberries,  gallons of water,
 lbs. of foots sugar of the coarsest brown quality.
mode.—mash the gooseberries (which should be quite ripe) in a tub
with a mallet; put to them the water nearly milk-warm; let this stand 
hours; then strain it through a sieve, and put the sugar to it; mix it
well, and tun it. these proportions are for a -gallon cask; and if it
be not quite full, more water must be added. let the mixture be stirred
from the bottom of the cask two or three times daily for three or four
days, to assist the melting of the sugar; then paste a piece of linen
cloth over the bunghole, and set the cask in a warm place, but not in
the sun; any corner of a warm kitchen is the best situation for it. the
following spring it should be drawn off into stone bottles, and the
vinegar will be fit for use twelve months after it is made. this will be
found a most excellent preparation, greatly superior to much that is
sold under the name of the best white wine vinegar. many years'
experience has proved that pickle made with this vinegar will keep, when
bought vinegar will not preserve the ingredients. the cost per gallon is
merely nominal, especially to those who reside in the country and grow
their own gooseberries; the coarse sugar is then the only ingredient to
be purchased.
time.—to remain in the cask  months.
average cost, when the gooseberries have to be purchased, s. per
gallon; when they are grown at home, d. per gallon.
seasonable.—this should be made the end of june or the beginning of
july, when gooseberries are ripe and plentiful.
. ingredients.—to every gallon of water allow  lbs. of green
gooseberries,  lbs. of lump sugar.
mode.—this wine should be prepared from unripe gooseberries, in order
to avoid the flavour which the fruit would give to the wine when in a
mature state. its briskness depends more upon the time of bottling than
upon the unripe state of the fruit, for effervescing wine can be made
from fruit that is ripe as well as that which is unripe. the fruit
should be selected when it has nearly attained its full growth, and
consequently before it shows any tendency to ripen. any bruised or
decayed berries, and those that are very small, should be rejected. the
blossom and stalk ends should be removed, and the fruit well bruised in
a tub or pan, in such quantities as to insure each berry being broken
without crushing the seeds. pour the water (which should be warm) on the
fruit, squeeze and stir it with the hand until all the pulp is removed
from the skin and seeds, and cover the whole closely for  hours; after
which, strain it through a coarse bag, and press it with as much force
as can be conveniently applied, to extract the whole of the juice and
liquor the fruit may contain. to every  or  lbs. of fruit one gallon
more of hot water may be passed through the marc, or husks, in order to
obtain any soluble matter that may remain, and be again pressed. the
juice should be put into a tub or pan of sufficient size to contain all
of it, and the sugar added to it. let it be well stirred until the sugar
is dissolved, and place the pan in a warm situation; keep it closely
covered, and let it ferment for a day or two. it must then be drawn off
into clean casks, placed a little on one side for the scum that arises
to be thrown out, and the casks kept filled with the remaining "must,"
that should be reserved for that purpose. when the active fermentation
has ceased, the casks should be plugged upright, again filled, if
necessary, the bungs be put in loosely, and, after a few days, when the
fermentation is a little more languid (which may be known, by the
hissing noise ceasing), the bungs should be driven in tight, and a
spile-hole made, to give vent if necessary. about november or december,
on a clear fine day, the wine should he racked from its lees into clean
casks, which may be rinsed with brandy. after a month, it should be
examined to see if it is sufficiently clear for bottling; if not, it
must be fined with isinglass, which may be dissolved in some of the
wine:  oz. will be sufficient for  gallons. in march or april, or when
the gooseberry bushes begin to blossom, the wine must be bottled, in
order to insure its being effervescing.
seasonable.—make this the end of may or beginning of june, before the
berries ripen.
. ingredients.— lbs. of loaf sugar,  pints of water,  oz. of
citric acid,  drachm of essence of lemon.
mode.—boil the sugar and water together for / hour, and put it into
a basin, where let it remain till cold. beat the citric acid to a
powder, mix the essence of lemon with it, then add these two ingredients
to the syrup; mix well, and bottle for use. two tablespoonfuls of the
syrup are sufficient for a tumbler of cold water, and will be found a
very refreshing summer drink.
sufficient— tablespoonfuls of syrup to a tumbler-ful of cold water.
. ingredients.—to -/ gallons of water allow the pulp of 
lemons, the rind of ,  lbs. of loaf sugar,—/ oz. of isinglass, 
bottle of brandy.
mode.—peel and slice the lemons, but use only the rind of  of them,
and put them into the cold water. let it stand  or  days, squeezing
the lemons well every day; then strain the water off and put it into a
cask with the sugar. let it work some time, and when it has ceased
working, put in the isinglass. stop the cask down; in about six months
put in the brandy and bottle the wine off.
seasonable.—the best time to make this is in january or february,
when lemons are best and cheapest.
. ingredients.— gallons of water,  lbs. of sugar,  quarts of
sweet-wort,  quarts of tun,  lbs. of raisins, / lb. of candy,  pint
of brandy.
mode.—boil the sugar and water together for  minutes; skim it well,
and put the liquor into a convenient-sized pan or tub. allow it to cool;
then mix it with the sweet-wort and tun. let it stand for  days, then
put it into a barrel; here it will work or ferment for another three
days or more; then bung up the cask, and keep it undisturbed for  or 
months. after this, add the raisins (whole), the candy, and brandy, and,
in  months' time, bottle the wine off. those who do not brew, may
procure the sweet-wort and tun from any brewer. sweet-wort is the liquor
that leaves the mash of malt before it is boiled with the hops; tun is
the new beer after the whole of the brewing operation has been
completed.
time.—to be boiled  minutes; to stand  days after mixing; to
ferment  days; to remain in the cask  mouths before the raisins are
added; bottle  months after.
seasonable.—make this in march or october.
. ingredients.— oz. of bitter almonds,  oz. of sweet ditto,  lb.
of loaf sugar, the rinds of  lemons,  quart of irish whiskey or gin, 
tablespoonful of clarified honey,  pint of new milk.
mode.—blanch and pound the almonds, and mix with them the sugar,
which should also be pounded. boil the milk; let it stand till quite
cold; then mix all the ingredients together, and let them remain for 
days, shaking them every day. filter the mixture through blotting-paper,
bottle off for use in small bottles, and seal the corks down. this will
be found useful for flavouring many sweet dishes.
average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make about  pints of noyeau.
seasonable.—may be made at any time.
(excellent.)
. ingredients.—to every  gallon of brandy allow / pint of
seville orange-juice, -/ lb. of loaf sugar.
mode.—to bring out the full flavour of the orange-peel, rub a few
lumps of the sugar on  or  unpared oranges, and put these lumps to the
rest. mix the brandy with the orange-juice, strained, the rinds of  of
the oranges pared very thin, and the sugar. let all stand in a
closely-covered jar for about  days, stirring it  or  times a day.
when clear, it should be bottled and closely corked for a year; it will
then be ready for use, but will keep any length of time. this is a most
excellent stomachic when taken pure in small quantities; or, as the
strength of the brandy is very little deteriorated by the other
ingredients, it may be diluted with water.
time.—to be stirred every day for  days.
average cost, s.
sufficient to make  quarts. seasonable.—make this in march.
. ingredients.— seville oranges,  lbs. of lump sugar, water.
mode.—break up the sugar into small pieces, and put it into a dry,
sweet -gallon cask, placed in a cellar or other storehouse, where it is
intended to be kept. have ready close to the cask two large pans or
wooden keelers, into one of which put the peel of the oranges pared
quite thin, and into the other the pulp after the juice has been
squeezed from it. strain the juice through a piece of double muslin, and
put it into the cask with the sugar. then pour about -/ gallon of
cold spring water on both the peels and pulp; let it stand for  hours,
and then strain it into the cask; add more water to the peels and pulp
when this is done, and repeat the same process every day for a week: it
should take about a week to fill up the cask. be careful to apportion
the quantity as nearly as possible to the seven days, and to stir the
contents of the cask each day. on the ''third' day after the cask is
full,—that is, the 'tenth' day after the commencement of making,—the
cask may be securely bunged down. this is a very simple and easy method,
and the wine made according to it will be pronounced to be most
excellent. there is no troublesome boiling, and all fermentation takes
place in the cask. when the above directions are attended to, the wine
cannot fail to be good. it should be bottled in  or  months, and will
be fit for use in a twelve month after the time of making. ginger wine
may be made in precisely the same manner, only, with the -gallon cask
for ginger wine,  lbs. of the best whole ginger, 'bruised', must be put
with the sugar. it will be found convenient to tie the ginger loosely in
a muslin bag.
time.—altogether,  days to make it.
average cost, s. d. per gallon. sufficient for  gallons.
seasonable.—make this in march, and bottle it the following january.
. ingredients.—to every  pints of the best vinegar allow -/
pints of freshly-gathered raspberries; to each pint of liquor allow 
lb. of pounded loaf sugar,  wineglassful of brandy.
mode.—let the raspberries be freshly gathered; pick them from the
stalks, and put -/ pint of them into a stone jar; pour  pints of the
best vinegar over them, and let them remain for  hours; then strain
the liquor over another -/ pint of fresh raspberries. let them remain
another  hours, and the following day repeat the process for the third
time; then drain off the liquor without pressing, and pass it through a
jelly-bag (previously wetted with plain vinegar), into a stone jar. add
to every pint of the liquor  lb. of pounded loaf sugar; stir them
together, and, when the sugar is dissolved, cover the jar; set it upon
the fire in a saucepan of boiling water, and let it boil for an hour,
removing the scum as fast as it rises; add to each pint a glass of
brandy, bottle it, and seal the corks. this is an excellent drink in
cases of fevers and colds: it should be diluted with cold water,
according to the taste or requirement of the patient.
time.—to be boiled  hour. average cost, s. per pint.
sufficient to make  quarts.
seasonable.—make this in july or august, when raspberries are most
plentiful.
. ingredients.—to every  lbs. of rhubarb pulp allow  gallon of
cold spring water; to every gallon of liquor allow  lbs. of loaf sugar,
/ oz. of isinglass, the rind of  lemon.
mode.—gather the rhubarb about the middle of may; wipe it with a wet
cloth, and, with a mallet, bruise it in a large wooden tub or other
convenient means. when reduced to a pulp, weigh it, and to every  lbs.
add  gallon of cold spring water; let these remain for  days, stirring
 or  times a day; and, on the fourth day, press the pulp through a
hair sieve; put the liquor into a tub, and to every gallon put  lbs. of
loaf sugar; stir in the sugar until it is quite dissolved, and add the
lemon-rind; let the liquor remain, and, in , , or  days, the
fermentation will begin to subside, and a crust or head will be formed,
which should be skimmed off, or the liquor drawn from it, when the crust
begins to crack or separate. put the wine into a cask, and if, after
that, it ferments, rack it off into another cask, and in a fortnight
stop it down. if the wine should have lost any of its original
sweetness, add a little more loaf sugar, taking care that the cask is
full. bottle it off in february or march, and in the summer it should be
fit to drink. it will improve greatly by keeping; and, should a very
brilliant colour be desired, add a little currant-juice.
seasonable.—make this about the middle of may.
. ingredients.— lb. of raisins,  lemons,  lbs. of loaf sugar, 
gallons of boiling water.
mode.—cut the peel of the lemons very thin, pour upon it the boiling
water, and, when cool, add the strained juice of the lemons, the sugar,
and the raisins, stoned and chopped very fine. let it stand  or  days,
stirring it every day; then strain it through a jelly-bag, and bottle it
for present use.
time.— or  days. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make  gallons.
[illustration: claret cup.]
. ingredients.— bottle of claret,  bottle of soda-water, about
/ lb. of pounded ice,  tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, /
teaspoonful of grated nutmeg,  liqueur-glass of maraschino, a sprig of
green borage.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a silver cup, regulating the
proportion of ice by the state of the weather: if very warm, a larger
quantity would be necessary. hand the cup round with a clean napkin
passed through one of the handles, that the edge of the cup may be wiped
after each guest has partaken of the contents thereof.
seasonable in summer.
 clarets.—all those wines called in england clarets are the
 produce of the country round bordeaux, or the bordelais; but it
 is remarkable that there is no pure wine in france known by the
 name of claret, which is a corruption of clairet, a term that
 is applied there to any red or rose-coloured wine. round
 bordeaux are produced a number of wines of the first quality,
 which pass under the name simply of vins de bordeaux, or have
 the designation of the particular district where they are made;
 as lafitte, latour, &c. the clarets brought to the english
 market are frequently prepared for it by the wine-growers by
 mixing together several bordeaux wines, or by adding to them a
 portion of some other wines; but in france the pure wines are
 carefully preserved distinct. the genuine wines of bordeaux are
 of great variety, that part being one of the most distinguished
 in france; and the principal vineyards are those of medoc,
 palus, graves, and blanche, the product of each having
 characters considerably different.
. ingredients.— quart bottle of champagne,  bottles of
soda-water,  liqueur-glass of brandy or curaçoa,  tablespoonfuls of
powdered sugar,  lb. of pounded ice, a sprig of green borage.
mode.—put all the ingredients into a silver cup; stir them together,
and serve the same as claret-cup no. . should the above proportion
of sugar not be found sufficient to suit some tastes, increase the
quantity. when borage is not easily obtainable, substitute for it a few
slices of cucumber-rind.
seasonable.—suitable for pic-nics, balls, weddings, and other festive
occasions.
 champagne.—this, the most celebrated of french wines, is the
 produce chiefly of the province of that name, and is generally
 understood in england to be a brisk, effervescing, or sparkling
 white wine, of a very fine flavour; but this is only one of the
 varieties of this class. there is both red and white champagne,
 and each of these may be either still or brisk. there are the
 sparkling wines (mousseux), and the still wines (non-mousseux).
 the brisk are in general the most highly esteemed, or, at least,
 are the most popular in this country, on account of their
 delicate flavour and the agreeable pungency which they derive
 from the carbonic acid they contain, and to which they owe their
 briskness.
. ingredients.—-/ lbs. of loaf sugar, -/ oz. of bruised
ginger,  oz. of cream of tartar, the rind and juice of  lemons, 
gallons of boiling water,  large tablespoonfuls of thick and fresh
brewer's yeast.
mode.—peel the lemons, squeeze the juice, strain it, and put the peel
and juice into a large earthen pan, with the bruised ginger, cream of
tartar, and loaf sugar. pour over these ingredients  gallons of boiling
water; let it stand until just warm, when add the yeast, which should be
thick and perfectly fresh. stir the contents of the pan well, and let
them remain near the fire all night, covering the pan over with a cloth.
the next day skim off the yeast, and pour the liquor carefully into
another vessel, leaving the sediment; then bottle immediately, and tie
the corks down, and in  days the ginger beer will be fit for use. for
some tastes, the above proportion of sugar may be found rather too
large, when it may be diminished; but the beer will not keep so long
good.
average cost for this quantity, s.; or /d. per bottle.
sufficient to fill  dozen ginger-beer bottles.
seasonable.—this should be made during the summer months.
. ingredients—the rind of  lemons, the juice of  large or  small
ones,  lb. of loaf sugar,  quart of boiling water.
mode.—rub some of the sugar, in lumps, on  of the lemons until they
have imbibed all the oil from them, and put it with the remainder of the
sugar into a jug; add the lemon-juice (but no pips), and pour over the
whole a quart of boiling water. when the sugar is dissolved, strain the
lemonade through a fine sieve or piece of muslin, and, when cool, it
will be ready for use. the lemonade will be much improved by having the
white of an egg beaten up in it; a little sherry mixed with it, also,
makes this beverage much nicer.
average cost, d. per quart.
 lemonade—"there is a current opinion among women" says brillat
 savarin "which every year causes the death of many young
 women,—that acids, especially vinegar, are preventives of
 obesity. beyond all doubt, acids have the effect of destroying
 obesity; but they also destroy health and freshness. lemonade
 is, of all acids, the most harmless; but few stomachs can resist
 it long. i knew, in , at dijon, a young lady of great
 beauty, to whom i was attached by bonds of friendship, great,
 almost as those of love. one day, when she had for some time
 gradually grown pale and thin (previously she had a slight
 embonpoint), she told me in confidence, that as her young
 friends had ridiculed her for being fat, she had, to counteract
 the tendency, been in the habit every day of drinking a large
 glass of vinaigre. she died at eighteen years of age, from the
 effects of these potions."
. ingredients.—to every pint of port wine allow  quart of boiling
water, / lb. of sugar,  lemon, grated nutmeg to taste.
mode.—as this beverage is more usually drunk at children's parties
than at any other, the wine need not be very old or expensive for the
purpose, a new fruity wine answering very well for it. put the wine into
a jug, rub some lumps of sugar (equal to / lb.) on the lemon-rind
until all the yellow part of the skin is absorbed, then squeeze the
juice, and strain it. add the sugar and lemon-juice to the port wine,
with the grated nutmeg; pour over it the boiling water, cover the jug,
and, when the beverage has cooled a little, it will be fit for use.
negus may also be made of sherry, or any other sweet white wine, but is
more usually made of port than of any other beverage.
sufficient—allow  pint of wine, with the other ingredients in
proportion, for a party of  or  children.
. ingredients.—to every -/ pint of good ale allow  bottle of
ginger beer. mode.—for this beverage the ginger beer must be in an
effervescing state, and the beer not in the least turned or sour. mix
them together, and drink immediately. the draught is refreshing and
wholesome, as the ginger corrects the action of the beer. it does not
deteriorate by standing a little, but, of course, is better when taken
fresh.
. ingredients.—the juice of  lemon, a tumbler-ful of cold water,
pounded sugar to taste,  small teaspoonful of carbonate of soda.
mode.—squeeze the juice from the lemon; strain, and add it to the
water, with sufficient pounded sugar to sweeten the whole nicely. when
well mixed, put in the soda, stir well, and drink while the mixture is
in an effervescing state.
. ingredients.—to every pint of wine allow  large cupful of water,
sugar and spice to taste.
mode.—in making preparations like the above, it is very difficult to
give the exact proportions of ingredients like sugar and spice, as what
quantity might suit one person would be to another quite distasteful.
boil the spice in the water until the flavour is extracted, then add the
wine and sugar, and bring the whole to the boiling-point, when serve
with strips of crisp dry toast, or with biscuits. the spices usually
used for mulled wine are cloves, grated nutmeg, and cinnamon or mace.
any kind of wine may be mulled, but port and claret are those usually
selected for the purpose; and the latter requires a very large
proportion of sugar. the vessel that the wine is boiled in must be
delicately clean, and should be kept exclusively for the purpose. small
tin warmers may be purchased for a trifle, which are more suitable than
saucepans, as, if the latter are not scrupulously clean, they will spoil
the wine, by imparting to it a very disagreeable flavour. these warmers
should be used for no other purposes.
. ingredients.—/ pint of rum, / pint of brandy, / lb. of
sugar,  large lemon, / teaspoonful of nutmeg,  pint of boiling
water.
[illustration: punch-bowl and ladle.]
mode.—rub the sugar over the lemon until it has absorbed all the
yellow part of the skin, then put the sugar into a punchbowl; add the
lemon-juice (free from pips), and mix these two ingredients well
together. pour over them the boiling water, stir well together, add the
rum, brandy, and nutmeg; mix thoroughly, and the punch will be ready to
serve. it is very important in making good punch that all the
ingredients are thoroughly incorporated; and, to insure success, the
processes of mixing must be diligently attended to.
sufficient.—allow a quart for  persons; but this information must be
taken cum grano salis; for the capacities of persons for this kind of
beverage are generally supposed to vary considerably.
 punch is a beverage made of various spirituous liquors or wine,
 hot water, the acid juice of fruits, and sugar. it is considered
 to be very intoxicating; but this is probably because the
 spirit, being partly sheathed by the mucilaginous juice and the
 sugar, its strength does not appear to the taste so great as it
 really is. punch, which was almost universally drunk among the
 middle classes about fifty or sixty years ago, has almost
 disappeared from our domestic tables, being superseded by wine.
 there are many different varieties of punch. it is sometimes
 kept cold in bottles, and makes a most agreeable summer drink.
 in scotland, instead of the madeira or sherry generally used in
 its manufacture, whiskey is substituted, and then its insidious
 properties are more than usually felt. where fresh lemons cannot
 be had for punch or similar beverages, crystallized citric acid
 and a few drops of the essence of lemon will be very nearly the
 same thing. in the composition of "regent's punch," champagne,
 brandy, and veritable martinique are required; "norfolk punch"
 requires seville oranges; "milk punch" may be extemporized by
 adding a little hot milk to lemonade, and then straining it
 through a jelly-bag. then there are "wine punch," "tea punch,"
 and "french punch," made with lemons, spirits, and wine, in
 fantastic proportions. but of all the compounds of these
 materials, perhaps, for a summer drink, the north-american
 "mint julep" is the most inviting. captain marryat gives the
 following recipe for its preparation:—"put into a tumbler about
 a dozen sprigs of the tender shoots of mint; upon them put a
 spoonful of white sugar, and equal proportions of peach and
 common brandy, so as to fill up one third, or, perhaps, a little
 less; then take rasped or pounded ice, and fill up the tumbler.
 epicures rub the lips of the tumbler with a piece of fresh
 pineapple; and the tumbler itself is very often encrusted
 outside with stalactites of ice. as the ice melts, you drink."
 the virginians, say captain marryat, claim the merit of having
 invented this superb compound; but, from a passage in the
 "comus" of milton, he claims it for his own country.
. ingredients.— lb. of ripe white currants, the rind of  lemons,
/ oz. of grated ginger,  quart of whiskey,  lb. of lump sugar.
mode.—strip the currants from the stalks; put them into a large jug;
add the lemon-rind, ginger, and whiskey; cover the jug closely, and let
it remain covered for  hours. strain through a hair sieve, add the
lump sugar, and let it stand  hours longer; then bottle, and cork
well.
time.—to stand  hours before being strained;  hours after the
sugar is added.
seasonable.—make this in july.
[illustration]
. let all the kitchen utensils used in the preparation of invalids'
cookery be delicately and 'scrupulously clean;' if this is not the case,
a disagreeable flavour may be imparted to the preparation, which flavour
may disgust, and prevent the patient from partaking of the refreshment
when brought to him or her.
. for invalids, never make a large quantity of one thing, as they
seldom require much at a time; and it is desirable that variety be
provided for them.
. always have something in readiness; a little beef tea, nicely made
and nicely skimmed, a few spoonfuls of jelly, &c. &c., that it may be
administered as soon almost as the invalid wishes for it. if obliged to
wait a long time, the patient loses the desire to eat, and often turns
against the food when brought to him or her.
. in sending dishes or preparations up to invalids, let everything
look as tempting as possible. have a clean tray-cloth laid smoothly over
the tray; let the spoons, tumblers, cups and saucers, &c., be very clean
and bright. gruel served in a tumbler is more appetizing than when
served in a basin or cup and saucer.
. as milk is an important article of food for the sick, in warm
weather let it be kept on ice, to prevent its turning sour. many other
delicacies may also be preserved good in the same manner for some little
time.
. if the patient be allowed to eat vegetables, never send them up
undercooked, or half raw; and let a small quantity only be temptingly
arranged on a dish. this rule will apply to every preparation, as an
invalid is much more likely to enjoy his food if small delicate pieces
are served to him.
. never leave food about a sick room; if the patient cannot eat it
when brought to him, take it away, and bring it to him in an hour or
two's time. miss nightingale says, "to leave the patient's untasted food
by his side, from meal to meal, in hopes that he will eat it in the
interval, is simply to prevent him from taking any food at all." she
says, "i have known patients literally incapacitated from taking one
article of food after another by this piece of ignorance. let the food
come at the right time, and be taken away, eaten or uneaten, at the
right time, but never let a patient have 'something always standing' by
him, if you don't wish to disgust him of everything."
. never serve beef tea or broth with the smallest particle of fat
or grease on the surface. it is better, after making either of these, to
allow them to get perfectly cold, when all the fat may be easily
removed; then warm up as much as may be required. two or three pieces of
clean whity-brown paper laid on the broth will absorb any greasy
particles that may be floating at the top, as the grease will cling to
the paper.
. roast mutton, chickens, rabbits, calves' feet or head, game, fish
(simply dressed), and simple puddings, are all light food, and easily
digested. of course, these things are only partaken of, supposing the
patient is recovering.
. a mutton chop, nicely cut, trimmed, and broiled to a turn, is a
dish to be recommended for invalids; but it must not be served with all
the fat at the end, nor must it be too thickly cut. let it be cooked
over a fire free from smoke, and sent up with the gravy in it, between
two very hot plates. nothing is more disagreeable to an invalid than
smoked food.
. in making toast-and-water, never blacken the bread, but toast it
only a nice brown. never leave toast-and-water to make until the moment
it is required, as it cannot then be properly prepared,—at least, the
patient will be obliged to drink it warm, which is anything but
agreeable.
. in boiling eggs for invalids, let the white be just set; if boiled
hard, they will be likely to disagree with the patient.
. in miss nightingale's admirable "notes on nursing," a book that no
mother or nurse should be without, she says,—"you cannot be too careful
as to quality in sick diet. a nurse should never put before a patient
milk that is sour, meat or soup that is turned, an egg that is bad, or
vegetables underdone." yet often, she says, she has seen these things
brought in to the sick, in a state perfectly perceptible to every nose
or eye except the nurse's. it is here that the clever nurse
appears,—she will not bring in the peccant article; but, not to
disappoint the patient, she will whip up something else in a few
minutes. remember, that sick cookery should half do the work of your
poor patient's weak digestion.
. she goes on to caution nurses, by saying,—"take care not to spill
into your patient's saucer; in other words, take care that the outside
bottom rim of his cup shall be quite dry and clean. if, every time he
lifts his cup to his lips, he has to carry the saucer with it, or else
to drop the liquid upon and to soil his sheet, or bedgown, or pillow,
or, if he is sitting up, his dress, you have no idea what a difference
this minute want of care on your part makes to his comfort, and even to
his willingness for food."
. ingredients.—two teaspoonfuls of arrowroot,  tablespoonfuls of
cold water, / pint of boiling water.
mode.—mix the arrowroot smoothly in a basin with the cold water, then
pour on it the boiling water, stirring all the time. the water must
be boiling at the time it is poured on the mixture, or it will not
thicken; if mixed with hot water only, it must be put into a clean
saucepan, and boiled until it thickens; but this is more trouble, and
quite unnecessary if the water is boiling at first. put the arrowroot
into a tumbler, sweeten it with lump sugar, and flavour it with grated
nutmeg or cinnamon, or a piece of lemon-peel, or, when allowed, 
tablespoonfuls of port or sherry. as arrowroot is in itself flavourless
and insipid, it is almost necessary to add the wine to make it
palatable. arrowroot made with milk instead of water is far nicer, but
is not so easily digested. it should be mixed in the same manner, with 
tablespoonfuls of cold water, the boiling milk then poured on it, and
well stirred. when made in this manner, no wine should be added, but
merely sugar, and a little grated nutmeg or lemon-peel.
time.—if obliged to be boiled,  minutes. average cost, d. per
pint.
sufficient to make / pint of arrowroot.
 miss nightingale says, in her "notes on nursing," that arrowroot
 is a grand dependence of the nurse. as a vehicle for wine, and
 as a restorative quickly prepared, it is all very well, but it
 is nothing but starch and water; flour is both more nutritive
 and less liable to ferment, and is preferable wherever it can be
 used.
. ingredients.— oz. of scotch or pearl barley, / pint of port
wine, the rind of  lemon,  quart and / pint of water, sugar to
taste.
mode.—after well washing the barley, boil it in / pint of water for
/ hour; then pour this water away; put to the barley the quart of
fresh boiling water, and let it boil until the liquid is reduced to
half; then strain it off. add the wine, sugar, and lemon-peel; simmer
for  minutes, and put it away in a clean jug. it can be warmed from
time to time, as required.
time.—to be boiled until reduced to half. average cost, s. d.
sufficient with the wine to make -/ pint of gruel.
. ingredients.— oz. of pearl barley,  quarts of boiling water, 
pint of cold water.
mode.—wash the barley in cold water; put it into a saucepan with the
above proportion of cold water, and when it has boiled for about /
hour, strain off the water, and add the  quarts of fresh boiling water.
boil it until the liquid is reduced one half; strain it, and it will be
ready for use. it may be flavoured with lemon-peel, after being
sweetened, or a small piece may be simmered with the barley. when the
invalid may take it, a little lemon-juice gives this pleasant drink in
illness a very nice flavour.
time.—to boil until the liquid is reduced one half.
sufficient to make  quart of barley-water.
. ingredients.— lb. of lean gravy-beef,  quart of water, 
saltspoonful of salt.
mode.—have the meat cut without fat and bone, and choose a nice
fleshy piece. cut it into small pieces about the size of dice, and put
it into a clean saucepan. add the water cold to it; put it on the
fire, and bring it to the boiling-point; then skim well. put in the salt
when the water boils, and simmer the beef tea gently from / to /
hour, removing any more scum should it appear on the surface. strain the
tea through a hair sieve, and set it by in a cool place. when wanted for
use, remove every particle of fat from the top; warm up as much as may
be required, adding, if necessary, a little more salt. this preparation
is simple beef tea, and is to be administered to those invalids to whom
flavourings and seasonings are not allowed. when the patient is very
low, use double the quantity of meat to the same proportion of water.
should the invalid be able to take the tea prepared in a more palatable
manner, it is easy to make it so by following the directions in the next
recipe, which is an admirable one for making savoury beef tea. beef tea
is always better when made the day before it is wanted, and then warmed
up. it is a good plan to put the tea into a small cup or basin, and to
place this basin in a saucepan of boiling water. when the tea is warm,
it is ready to serve.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, d. per pint.
sufficient.—allow  lb. of meat for a pint of good beef tea.
 miss nightingale says, one of the most common errors among
 nurses, with respect to sick diet, is the belief that beef tea
 is the most nutritive of all article. she says, "just try and
 boil down a lb. of beef into beef tea; evaporate your beef tea,
 and see what is left of your beef: you will find that there is
 barely a teaspoonful of solid nourishment to / pint of water
 in beef tea. nevertheless, there is a certain reparative quality
 in it,—we do not know what,—as there is in tea; but it maybe
 safely given in almost any inflammatory disease, and is as
 little to be depended upon with the healthy or convalescent,
 where much nourishment is required."
(soyer's recipe.)
. ingredients.— lb. of solid beef,  oz. of butter,  clove, 
button onions or / a large one,  saltspoonful of salt,  quart of
water.
mode.—cut the beef into very small dice; put it into a stewpan with
the butter, clove, onion, and salt; stir the meat round over the fire
for a few minutes, until it produces a thin gravy; then add the water,
and let it simmer gently from / to / hour, skimming off every
particle of fat. when done, strain it through a sieve, and put it by in
a cool place until required. the same, if wanted quite plain, is done by
merely omitting the vegetables, salt, and clove; the butter cannot be
objectionable, as it is taken out in skimming.
time.—/ to / hour. average cost, d. per pint.
sufficient.—allow  lb. of beef to make  pint of good beef tea.
note.—the meat loft from beef tea may be boiled a little longer, and
pounded, with spices, &c., for potting. it makes a very nice breakfast
dish.
 dr. christison says that "every one will be struck with the
 readiness with which certain classes of patients will often take
 diluted meat juice, or beef tea repeatedly, when they refuse all
 other kinds of food." this is particularly remarkable in case of
 gastric fever, in which, he says, little or nothing else besides
 beef tea, or diluted meat juice, has been taken for weeks, or
 even months; and yet a pint of beef tea contains scarcely /
 oz. of anything but water. the result is so striking, that he
 asks, "what is its mode of action? not simple nutriment; / oz.
 of the most nutritive material cannot nearly replace the daily
 wear and tear of the tissue in any circumstances." possibly, he
 says, it belongs to a new denomination of remedies.
. ingredients.— lb. of fleshy beef, -/ pint of water, /
saltspoonful of salt.
mode.—cut the beef into small square pieces, after trimming off all
the fat, and put it into a baking-jar, with the above proportion of
water and salt; cover the jar well, place it in a warm, but not hot
oven, and bake for  or  hours. when the oven is very fierce in the
daytime, it is a good plan to put the jar in at night, and let it remain
till the next morning, when the tea will be done. it should be strained,
and put by in a cool place until wanted. it may also be flavoured with
an onion, a clove, and a few sweet herbs, &c., when the stomach is
sufficiently strong to take those.
time.— or  hours, or to be left in the oven all night.
average cost, d. per pint.
sufficient.—allow  lb. of meat for  pint of good beef tea.
. ingredients.— calf's foot,  pint of milk,  pint of water, 
blade of mace, the rind of / lemon, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—well clean the foot, and either stew or bake it in the
milk-and-water with the other ingredients from  to  hours. to enhance
the flavour, an onion and a small quantity of celery may be added, if
approved; / a teacupful of cream, stirred in just before serving, is
also a great improvement to this dish.
time.— to  hours. average cost, in full season, d. each.
sufficient for  person. seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.— calf's foot,  pints of water,  small lump of
sugar, nutmeg to taste, the yolk of  egg, a piece of butter the size of
a nut.
mode.—stew the foot in the water, with the lemon-peel, very gently,
until the liquid is half wasted, removing any scum, should it rise to
the surface. set it by in a basin until quite cold, then take off every
particle of fat. warm up about / pint of the broth, adding the butter,
sugar, and a very small quantity of grated nutmeg; take it off the fire
for a minute or two, then add the beaten yolk of the egg; keep stirring
over the fire until the mixture thickens, but do not allow it to boil
again after the egg is added, or it will curdle, and the broth will be
spoiled.
time.—to be boiled until the liquid is reduced one half.
average cost, in full season, d. each.
sufficient to make -/ pint of broth.
seasonable from march to october.
. ingredients.—/ fowl, or the inferior joints of a whole one; 
quart of water,  blade of mace, / onion, a small bunch of sweet
herbs, salt to taste,  peppercorns.
mode.—an old fowl not suitable for eating may be converted into very
good broth, or, if a young one be used, the inferior joints may be put
in the broth, and the best pieces reserved for dressing in some other
manner. put the fowl into a saucepan, with all the ingredients, and
simmer gently for -/ hour, carefully skimming the broth well. when
done, strain, and put by in a cool place until wanted; then take all the
fat off the top, warm up as much as may be required, and serve. this
broth is, of course, only for those invalids whose stomachs are strong
enough to digest it, with a flavouring of herbs, &c. it may be made in
the same manner as beef tea, with water and salt only; but the
preparation will be but tasteless and insipid. when the invalid cannot
digest this chicken broth with the flavouring, we would recommend plain
beef tea in preference to plain chicken tea, which it would be without
the addition of herbs, onions, &c.
time.—-/ hour.
sufficient to make rather more than  pint of broth.
. ingredients.—/ oz. of ground coffee,  pint of milk.
mode.—let the coffee be freshly ground; put it into a saucepan, with
the milk, which should be made nearly boiling before the coffee is put
in, and boil both together for  minutes; clear it by pouring some of it
into a cup, and then back again, and leave it on the hob for a few
minutes to settle thoroughly. this coffee may be made still more
nutritious by the addition of an egg well beaten, and put into the
coffee-cup.
time.— minutes to boil,  minutes to settle.
sufficient to make  large breakfast-cupful of coffee.
 our great nurse miss nightingale remarks, that "a great deal too
 much against tea is said by wise people, and a great deal too
 much of tea is given to the sick by foolish people. when you see
 the natural and almost universal craving in english sick for
 their 'tea,' you cannot but feel that nature knows what she is
 about. but a little tea or coffee restores them quite as much as
 a great deal; and a great deal of tea, and especially of coffee,
 impairs the little power of digestion they have. yet a nurse,
 because she sees how one or two cups of tea or coffee restore
 her patient, thinks that three or four cups will do twice as
 much. this is not the case at all; it is, however, certain that
 there is nothing yet discovered which is a substitute to the
 english patient for his cup of tea; he can take it when he can
 take nothing else, and he often can't take anything else, if he
 has it not. coffee is a better restorative than tea, but a
 greater impairer of the digestion. in making coffee, it is
 absolutely necessary to buy it in the berry, and grind it at
 home; otherwise, you may reckon upon its containing a certain
 amount of chicory, at least. this is not a question of the
 taste, or of the wholesomeness of chicory; it is, that chicory
 has nothing at all of the properties for which you give coffee,
 and, therefore, you may as well not give it."
. ingredients.— nice cutlet from a loin or neck of mutton, 
teacupfuls of water,  very small stick of celery, pepper and salt to
taste.
mode.—have the cutlet cut from a very nice loin or neck of mutton;
take off all the fat; put it into a stewpan, with the other ingredients;
stew very gently indeed for nearly  hours, and skim off every
particle of fat that may rise to the surface from time to time. the
celery should be cut into thin slices before it is added to the meat,
and care must be taken not to put in too much of this ingredient, or the
dish will not be good. if the water is allowed to boil fast, the cutlet
will be hard.
time.— hours' very gentle stewing. average cost, d.
sufficient for  person. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of eels, a small bunch of sweet herbs,
including parsley; / onion,  peppercorns,  pints of water, 
cloves, salt and pepper to taste.
mode.—after having cleaned and skinned the eel, cut it into small
pieces, and put it into a stewpan, with the other ingredients; simmer
gently until the liquid is reduced nearly half, carefully removing the
scum as it rises. strain it through a hair sieve; put it by in a cool
place, and, when wanted, take off all the fat from the top, warm up as
much as is required, and serve with sippets of toasted bread. this is a
very nutritious broth, and easy of digestion.
time.—to be simmered until the liquor is reduced to half.
average cost, d.
sufficient to make -/ pint of broth.
seasonable from june to march.
. ingredients.— egg,  tablespoonful and / glass of cold water,
 glass of sherry, sugar and grated nutmeg to taste.
mode.—beat the egg, mixing with it a tablespoonful of cold water;
make the wine-and-water hot, but not boiling; pour it on the egg,
stirring all the time. add sufficient lump sugar to sweeten the mixture,
and a little grated nutmeg; put all into a very clean saucepan, set it
on a gentle fire, and stir the contents one way until they thicken, but
do not allow them to boil. serve in a glass with sippets of toasted
bread or plain crisp biscuits. when the egg is not warmed, the mixture
will be found easier of digestion, but it is not so pleasant a drink.
sufficient for  person.
. ingredients.— tablespoonful of robinson's patent groats, 
tablespoonfuls of cold water,  pint of boiling water.
mode.—mix the prepared groats smoothly with the cold water in a
basin; pour over them the boiling water, stirring it all the time. put
it into a very clean saucepan; boil the gruel for  minutes, keeping it
well stirred; sweeten to taste, and serve. it may be flavoured with a
small piece of lemon-peel, by boiling it in the gruel, or a little
grated nutmeg may be put in; but in these matters the taste of the
patient should be consulted. pour the gruel in a tumbler and serve. when
wine is allowed to the invalid,  tablespoonfuls of sherry or port make
this preparation very nice. in cases of colds, the same quantity of
spirits is sometimes added instead of wine.
time.— minutes.
sufficient to make a pint of gruel.
. ingredients.— shanks of mutton,  quarts of water, a bunch of
sweet herbs, pepper and salt to taste,  blades of mace,  onion,  lb.
of lean beef, a crust of bread toasted brown.
mode.—soak the shanks in plenty of water for some hours, and scrub
them well; put them, with the beef and other ingredients, into a
saucepan with the water, and let them simmer very gently for  hours.
strain the broth, and, when cold, take off all the fat. it may be eaten
either warmed up or cold as a jelly.
time.— hours. average cost, s.
sufficient to make from -/ to  pints of jelly.
seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—/ lemon, lump sugar to taste,  pint of boiling
water.
mode.—pare off the rind of the lemon thinly; cut the lemon into  or
 thick slices, and remove as much as possible of the white outside
pith, and all the pips. put the slices of lemon, the peel, and lump
sugar into a jug; pour over the boiling water; cover it closely, and in
 hours it will be fit to drink. it should either be strained or poured
off from the sediment.
time.— hours. average cost, d.
sufficient to make  pint of lemonade. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—-/ pint of boiling water, the juice of  lemons,
the rinds of , / pint of sherry,  eggs,  oz. of loaf sugar.
mode.—pare off the lemon-rind thinly, put it into a jug with the
sugar, and pour over the boiling water. let it cool, then strain it; add
the wine, lemon-juice, and eggs, previously well beaten, and also
strained, and the beverage will be ready for use. if thought desirable,
the quantity of sherry and water could be lessened, and milk substituted
for them. to obtain the flavour of the lemon-rind properly, a few lumps
of the sugar should be rubbed over it, until some of the yellow is
absorbed.
time.—altogether  hour to make it. average cost, s. d.
sufficient to make -/ pints of lemonade. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— lb. of the scrag end of the neck of mutton, 
onion, a bunch of sweet herbs,  turnip, / pints of water, pepper and
salt to taste.
mode.—put the mutton into a stewpan; pour over the water cold and add
the other ingredients. when it boils, skim it very carefully, cover the
pan closely, and let it simmer very gently for an hour; strain it, let
it cool, take off all the fat from the surface, and warm up as much as
may be required, adding, if the patient be allowed to take it, a
teaspoonful of minced parsley which has been previously scalded. pearl
barley or rice are very nice additions to mutton broth, and should be
boiled as long as the other ingredients. when either of these is added,
the broth must not be strained, but merely thoroughly skimmed. plain
mutton broth without seasoning is made by merely boiling the mutton,
water, and salt together, straining it, letting the broth cool, skimming
all the fat off, and warming up as much as is required. this preparation
would be very tasteless and insipid, but likely to agree with very
delicate stomachs, whereas the least addition of other ingredients would
have the contrary effect.
time.— hour. average cost, d.
sufficient to make from -/ to  pints of broth.
seasonable at any time.
note.—veal broth may be made in the same manner; the knuckle of a leg
or shoulder is the part usually used for this purpose. it is very good
with the addition of the inferior joints of a fowl, or a few
shank-bones.
. ingredients.— or  chops from a neck of mutton,  pint of water,
a small bunch of sweet herbs, / of an onion, pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—cut the meat into small pieces, put it into a saucepan with the
bones, but no skin or fat; add the other ingredients; cover the
saucepan, and bring the water quickly to boil. take the lid off, and
continue the rapid boiling for  minutes, skimming it well during the
process; strain the broth into a basin; if there should be any fat left
on the surface, remove it by laying a piece of thin paper on the top:
the greasy particles will adhere to the paper, and so free the
preparation from them. to an invalid nothing is more disagreeable than
broth served with a quantity of fat floating on the top; to avoid this,
it is always better to allow it to get thoroughly cool, the fat can then
be so easily removed.
time.— minutes after the water boils. average cost, d.
sufficient to make / pint of broth. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.— very young rabbits, not nearly half grown; -/
pint of milk,  blade of mace,  dessertspoonful of flour, a little salt
and cayenne.
mode.—mix the flour very smoothly with  tablespoonfuls of the milk,
and when this is well mixed, add the remainder. cut up the rabbits into
joints, put them into a stewpan, with the milk and other ingredients,
and simmer them very gently until quite tender. stir the contents from
time to time, to keep the milk smooth and prevent it from burning. /
hour will be sufficient for the cooking of this dish.
time.—/ hour. average cost, from s. to s. d. each.
sufficient for  or  meals. seasonable from september to february.
. ingredients.— tablespoonfuls of rice,  quart of milk, sugar to
taste; when liked, a little grated nutmeg.
mode.—well wash the rice, put it into a saucepan with the milk, and
simmer gently until the rice is tender, stirring it from time to time to
prevent the milk from burning; sweeten it, add a little grated nutmeg,
and serve. this dish is also very suitable and wholesome for children;
it may be flavoured with a little lemon-peel, and a little finely-minced
suet may be boiled with it, which renders it more strengthening and more
wholesome. tapioca, semolina, vermicelli, and macaroni, may all be
dressed in the same manner.
time.—from / to  hour. seasonable at any time.
. ingredients.—a slice of bread,  quart of boiling water.
mode.—cut a slice from a stale loaf (a piece of hard crust is better
than anything else for the purpose), toast it of a nice brown on every
side, but do not allow it to burn or blacken. put it into a jug, pour
the boiling water over it, cover it closely, and let it remain until
cold. when strained, it will be ready for use. toast-and-water should
always be made a short time before it is required, to enable it to get
cold: if drunk in a tepid or lukewarm state, it is an exceedingly
disagreeable beverage. if, as is sometimes the case, this drink is
wanted in a hurry, put the toasted bread into a jug, and only just cover
it with the boiling water; when this is cool, cold water may be added in
the proportion required,—the toast-and-water strained; it will then be
ready for use, and is more expeditiously prepared than by the above
method.
. ingredients.—thin cold toast, thin slices of bread-and-butter,
pepper and salt to taste.
mode.—place a very thin piece of cold toast between  slices of thin
bread-and-butter in the form of a sandwich, adding a seasoning of pepper
and salt. this sandwich may be varied by adding a little pulled meat, or
very fine slices of cold meat, to the toast, and in any of these forms
will be found very tempting to the appetite of an invalid.
. besides the recipes contained in this chapter, there are, in the
previous chapters on cookery, many others suitable for invalids, which
it would be useless to repeat here. recipes for fish simply dressed,
light soups, plain roast meat, well-dressed vegetables, poultry, simple
puddings, jelly, stewed fruits, &c. &c., all of which dishes may be
partaken of by invalids and convalescents, will be found in preceding
chapters.
. man, it has been said, is a dining animal. creatures of the
inferior races eat and drink; man only dines. it has also been said that
he is a cooking animal; but some races eat food without cooking it. a
croat captain said to m. brillat savarin, "when, in campaign, we feel
hungry, we knock over the first animal we find, cut off a steak, powder
it with salt, put it under the saddle, gallop over it for half a mile,
and then eat it." huntsmen in dauphiny, when out shooting, have been
known to kill a bird, pluck it, salt and pepper it, and cook it by
carrying it some time in their caps. it is equally true that some races
of men do not dine any more than the tiger or the vulture. it is not a
dinner at which sits the aboriginal australian, who gnaws his bone
half bare and then flings it behind to his squaw. and the native of
terra-del-fuego does not dine when he gets his morsel of red clay.
dining is the privilege of civilization. the rank which a people occupy
in the grand scale may be measured by their way of taking their meals,
as well as by their way of treating their women. the nation which knows
how to dine has learnt the leading lesson of progress. it implies both
the will and the skill to reduce to order, and surround with idealisms
and graces, the more material conditions of human existence; and
wherever that will and that skill exist, life cannot be wholly ignoble.
. dinner, being the grand solid meal of the day, is a matter of
considerable importance; and a well-served table is a striking index of
human, ingenuity and resource. "their table," says lord byron, in
describing a dinner-party given by lord and lady amundevillo at norman
abbey,—
"their table was a board to tempt even ghosts
to pass the styx for more substantial feasts.
i will not dwell upon ragouts or roasts,
albeit all human history attests
that happiness for man—the hungry sinner!—
since eve ate apples, much depends on dinner."
and then he goes on to observe upon the curious complexity of the
results produced by human cleverness and application catering for the
modifications which occur in civilized life, one of the simplest of the
primal instincts:—
"the mind is lost in mighty contemplation
of intellect expended on two courses;
and indigestion's grand multiplication
requires arithmetic beyond my forces.
who would suppose, from adam's simple ration,
that cookery could have call'd forth such resources,
as form a science and a nomenclature
from out the commonest demands of nature?"
and we may well say, who, indeed, would suppose it? the gulf between the
croat, with a steak under his saddle, and alexis soyer getting up a
great dinner at the reform-club, or even thackeray's mrs. raymond gray
giving "a little dinner" to mr. snob (with one of those famous
"roly-poly puddings" of hers),—what a gulf it is!
. that adam's "ration," however, was "simple," is a matter on which
we have contrary judgments given by the poets. when raphael paid that
memorable visit to paradise,—which we are expressly told by milton he
did exactly at dinner-time,—eve seems to have prepared "a little
dinner" not wholly destitute of complexity, and to have added ice-creams
and perfumes. nothing can be clearer than the testimony of the poet on
these points:—
"and eve within, due at her home prepared
for dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please
true appetite, and not disrelish thirst
of nectarous draughts between….
…. with dispatchful looks in haste
she turns, on hospitable thoughts intent,
what choice to choose for delicacy best,
what order so contrived as not to mix
tastes not well join'd, inelegant, but bring
taste after taste, upheld with kindliest change—
"she tempers dulcet creams….
…. then strews the ground
with rose and odours."
it may be observed, in passing, that the poets, though they have more to
say about wine than solid food, because the former more directly
stimulates the intellect and the feelings, do not flinch from the
subject of eating and drinking. there is infinite zest in the above
passage from milton, and even more in the famous description of a dainty
supper, given by keats in his "eve of saint agnes." could queen mab
herself desire to sit down to anything nicer, both as to its
appointments and serving, and as to its quality, than the collation
served by porphyro in the lady's bedroom while she slept?—
"there by the bedside, where the faded moon
made a dim silver twilight, soft he set
a table, and, half-anguish'd, threw thereor
a cloth of woven crimson, gold, and jet.
"while he, from forth the closet, brought a heap
of candied apple, quince, and plum, and gourd;
with jellies smoother than the creamy curd,
and lucent syrups tinct with cinnamon;
manna and dates, in argosy transferr'd
from fez; and spiced dainties, every one,
from silken samarcand to cedar'd lebanon."
but tennyson has ventured beyond dates, and quinces, and syrups, which
may be thought easy to be brought in by a poet. in his idyl of "audley
court" he gives a most appetizing description of a pasty at a pic-nic:—
"there, on a slope of orchard, francis laid
a damask napkin wrought with horse and hound;
brought out a dusky loaf that smelt of home,
and, half cut down, a pasty costly made,
where quail and pigeon, lark and leveret, lay
like fossils of the rock, with golden yolks
imbedded and injellied."
we gladly quote passages like these, to show how eating and drinking may
be surrounded with poetical associations, and how man, using his
privilege to turn any and every repast into a "feast of reason," with a
warm and plentiful "flow of soul," may really count it as not the least
of his legitimate prides, that he is "a dining animal."
. it has been said, indeed, that great men, in general, are great
diners. this, however, can scarcely be true of any great men but men of
action; and, in that case, it would simply imply that persons of
vigorous constitution, who work hard, eat heartily; for, of course, a
life of action requires a vigorous constitution, even though there may
be much illness, as in such cases as william iii. and our brave general
napier. of men of thought, it can scarcely be true that they eat so
much, in a general way, though even they eat more than they are apt to
suppose they do; for, as mr. lewes observes, "nerve-tissue is very
expensive." leaving great men of all kinds, however, to get their own
dinners, let us, who are not great, look after ours. dine we must, and
we may as well dine elegantly as well as wholesomely.
. there are plenty of elegant dinners in modern days, and they were
not wanting in ancient times. it is well known that the dinner-party, or
symposium, was a not unimportant, and not unpoetical, feature in the
life of the sociable, talkative, tasteful greek. douglas jerrold said
that such is the british humour for dining and giving of dinners, that
if london were to be destroyed by an earthquake, the londoners would
meet at a public dinner to consider the subject. the greeks, too, were
great diners: their social and religious polity gave them many chances
of being merry and making others merry on good eating and drinking. any
public or even domestic sacrifice to one of the gods, was sure to be
followed by a dinner-party, the remains of the slaughtered "offering"
being served up on the occasion as a pious pičce de résistance; and as
the different gods, goddesses, and demigods, worshipped by the community
in general, or by individuals, were very numerous indeed, and some very
religious people never let a day pass without offering up something or
other, the dinner-parties were countless. a birthday, too, was an excuse
for a dinner; a birthday, that is, of any person long dead and buried,
as well as of a living person, being a member of the family, or
otherwise esteemed. dinners were, of course, eaten on all occasions of
public rejoicing. then, among the young people, subscription dinners,
very much after the manner of modern times, were always being got up;
only that they would be eaten not at an hotel, but probably at the house
of one of the heterae. a greek dinner-party was a handsome,
well-regulated affair. the guests came in elegantly dressed and crowned
with flowers. a slave, approaching each person as he entered, took off
his sandals and washed his feet. during the repast, the guests reclined
on couches with pillows, among and along which were set small tables.
after the solid meal came the "symposium" proper, a scene of music,
merriment, and dancing, the two latter being supplied chiefly by young
girls. there was a chairman, or symposiarch, appointed by the company to
regulate the drinking; and it was his duty to mix the wine in the
"mighty bowl." from this bowl the attendants ladled the liquor into
goblets, and, with the goblets, went round and round the tables, filling
the cups of the guests.
. the elegance with which a dinner is served is a matter which
depends, of course, partly upon the means, but still more upon the taste
of the master and mistress of the house. it may be observed, in general,
that there should always be flowers on the table, and as they form no
item of expense, there is no reason why they should not be employed
every day.
. the variety in the dishes which furnish forth a modern
dinner-table, does not necessarily imply anything unwholesome, or
anything capricious. food that is not well relished cannot be well
digested; and the appetite of the over-worked man of business, or
statesman, or of any dweller in towns, whose occupations are exciting
and exhausting, is jaded, and requires stimulation. men and women who
are in rude health, and who have plenty of air and exercise, eat the
simplest food with relish, and consequently digest it well; but those
conditions are out of the reach of many men. they must suit their mode
of dining to their mode of living, if they cannot choose the latter. it
is in serving up food that is at once appetizing and wholesome that the
skill of the modern housewife is severely tasked; and she has scarcely a
more important duty to fulfil. it is, in fact, her particular vocation,
in virtue of which she may be said to hold the health of the family, and
of the friends of the family, in her hands from day to day. it has been
said that "the destiny of nations depends on the manner in which they
are fed;" and a great gastronomist exclaims, "tell me what kind of food
you eat, and i will tell you what kind of man you are." the same writer
has some sentences of the same kind, which are rather hyperbolical, but
worth quoting:—"the pleasures of the table belong to all ages, to all
conditions, to all countries, and to all eras; they mingle with all
other pleasures, and remain, at last, to console us for their departure.
the discovery of a new dish confers more happiness upon humanity than
the discovery of a new star."
. the gastronomist from whom we have already quoted, has some
aphorisms and short directions in relation to dinner-parties, which are
well deserving of notice:—"let the number of your guests never exceed
twelve, so that the conversation may be general. [footnote: we have seen
this varied by saying that the number should never exceed that of the
muses or fall below that of the graces.] let the temperature of the
dining-room be about °. let the dishes be few in number in the first
course, but proportionally good. the order of food is from the most
substantial to the lightest. the order of drinking wine is from the
mildest to the most foamy and most perfumed. to invite a person to your
house is to take charge of his happiness so long as he is beneath your
roof. the mistress of the house should always be certain that the coffee
be excellent; whilst the master should be answerable for the quality of
his wines and liqueurs."
 first course.
mock turtle soup,
removed by
cod's head and shoulders.
stewed eels. vase of red mullet.
flowers.
clear oxtail soup,
removed by
fried filleted soles.
 entrées.
riz de veau aux
tomates.
ragoűt of vase of cotelettes de pore
lobster. flowers. ŕ la roberts.
 poulet ŕ la marengo.
 second course.
 roast turkey.
 pigeon pie.
boiled turkey and vase of boiled ham.
celery sauce. flowers.
 tongue, garnished.
 saddle of mutton.
 third course.
charlotte pheasants, apricot jam
ŕ la parisienne. removed by tartlets.
plum-pudding.
 jelly.
cream. vase of cream.
flowers.
 jelly.
snipes,
removed by
pommes ŕ la condé.
we have given above the plan of placing the various dishes of the st
course, entrées, nd course, and rd course. following this will be
found bills of fare for smaller parties; and it will be readily seen, by
studying the above arrangement of dishes, how to place a less number for
the more limited company. several menus for dinners ŕ la russe, are
also included in the present chapter.
.—dinner for  persons (january).
carrot soup ŕ la crécy.
oxtail soup.
turbot and lobster sauce.
fried smelts, with dutch sauce.
mutton cutlets, with soubise sauce.
sweetbreads.
oyster patties.
fillets of rabbits.
roast turkey.
stewed rump of beef ŕ la jardiničre.
boiled ham, garnished with brussels sprouts.
boiled chickens and celery sauce.
roast hare.
teal.
eggs ŕ la neige.
vol-au-vent of preserved fruit.
 jelly.  cream.
potatoes ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
grilled mushrooms.
.—dinner for  persons (january).
soup ŕ la reine.
whitings au gratin.
crimped cod and oyster sauce.
tendrons de veau.
curried fowl and boiled rice.
turkey, stuffed with chestnuts, and chestnut sauce.
boiled leg of mutton, english fashion,
with capers sauce and mashed turnips.
woodcocks or partridges.
widgeon.
charlotte ŕ la vanille.
cabinet pudding.
orange jelly.
blancmange.
artichoke bottoms.
macaroni, with parmesan cheese.
.—dinner for  persons (january).
mulligatawny soup.
brill and shrimp sauce.
fried whitings.
fricasseed chicken.
pork cutlets, with tomato sauce.
haunch of mutton.
boiled turkey and celery sauce.
boiled tongue, garnished with brussels sprouts.
roast pheasants.
meringues ŕ la cręme.
compôte of apples.
orange jelly.
cheesecakes.
soufflé of rice.
.—dinner for  persons (january).—i.
julienne soup.
soles ŕ la normandie.
sweetbreads, with sauce piquante.
mutton cutlets, with mashed potatoes.
haunch of venison.
boiled fowls and bacon, garnished with brussels sprouts.
plum-pudding.
custards in glasses.
apple tart.
fondue ŕ la brillat savarin.
.—dinner for  persons (january).—ii.
vermicelli soup.
fried slices of codfish and anchovy sauce.
john dory.
stewed rump-steak ŕ la jardiničre rissoles.
oyster patties.
leg of mutton.
curried rabbit and boiled rice.
partridges.
apple fritters.
tartlets of greengage jam.
orange jelly.
plum-pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (january).—iii.
pea-soup.
baked haddock.
soles ŕ la cręme.
mutton cutlets and tomato sauce.
fricasseed rabbit.
roast pork and apple sauce.
breast of veal, rolled and stuffed.
vegetables.
jugged hare.
whipped cream, blancmange.
mince pies.
cabinet pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (january).—iv.
palestine soup.
fried smelts.
stewed eels.
ragoűt of lobster.
broiled mushrooms.
vol-au-vent of chicken.
sirloin of beef.
boiled fowls and celery sauce.
tongue, garnished with brussels sprouts.
wild ducks.
charlotte aux pommes.
cheesecakes.
transparent jelly, inlaid with brandy cherries.
blancmange.
nesselrode pudding.
. sunday.—, boiled turbot and oyster sauce, potatoes. . roast
leg or griskin of pork, apple sauce, brocoli, potatoes. . cabinet
pudding, and damson tart made with preserved damsons.
. monday.—. the remains of turbot warmed in oyster sauce,
potatoes. . cold pork, stewed steak. . open jam tart, which should
have been made with the pieces of paste left from the damson tart; baked
arrowroot pudding.
. tuesday.—. boiled neck of mutton, carrots, mashed turnips,
suet dumplings, and caper sauce: the broth should be served first, and a
little rice or pearl barley should be boiled with it along with the
meat. . rolled jam pudding.
. wednesday.—. roast rolled ribs of beef, greens, potatoes, and
horseradish sauce. . bread-and-butter pudding, cheesecakes.
. thursday.—. vegetable soup (the bones from the ribs of beef
should be boiled down with this soup), cold beef, mashed potatoes. .
pheasants, gravy, bread sauce. . macaroni.
. friday.—. fried whitings or soles. . boiled rabbit and onion
sauce, minced beef, potatoes. . currant dumplings.
. saturday.—. rump-steak pudding or pie, greens, and potatoes.
. baked custard pudding and stewed apples.
. sunday.—. codfish and oyster sauce, potatoes. . joint of
roast mutton, either leg, haunch, or saddle; brocoli and potatoes,
red-currant jelly. . apple tart and custards, cheese.
. monday.—. the remains of codfish picked from the bone, and
warmed through in the oyster sauce; if there is no sauce left, order a
few oysters and make a little fresh; and do not let the fish boil, or it
will be watery. . curried rabbit, with boiled rice served separately,
cold mutton, mashed potatoes. . somersetshire dumplings with wine
sauce.
. tuesday.—. boiled fowls, parsley-and-butter; bacon garnished
with brussels sprouts, minced or hashed mutton. . baroness pudding.
. wednesday.—. the remains of the fowls cut up into joints and
fricasseed; joint of roast pork and apple sauce, and, if liked,
sage-and-onion, served on a dish by itself; turnips and potatoes. .
lemon pudding, either baked or boiled.
. thursday.—. cold pork and jugged hare, red-currant jelly,
mashed potatoes. . apple pudding.
. friday.—. boiled beef, either the aitchbone or the silver side
of the round; carrots, turnips, suet dumplings, and potatoes: if there
is a marrowbone, serve the marrow on toast at the same time. . rice
snowballs.
. saturday.—. pea-soup made from liquor in which beef was
boiled; cold beef, mashed potatoes. . baked batter fruit pudding.
 first course.
hare soup,
removed by
turbot and oyster sauce.
fried eels. vase of fried whitings.
flowers.
oyster soup,
removed by
crimped cod ŕ la maître
d'hôtel.
 entrées.
 lark pudding.
lobster patties. vase of filets de perdrix.
flowers.
 fricasseed chicken.
 second course.
braised capon.
boiled ham, garnished.
roast fowls, garnished vase of boiled fowls and
with water-cresses. flowers. white sauce.
pâté chaud.
haunch of mutton.
 third course
 ducklings,
 removed by
 ice pudding.
 meringues. coffee cream. cheesecakes.
orange jelly. vase of clear jelly.
flowers.
victoria blancmange. gâteau de
sandwiches. pommes.
partridges,
removed by
cabinet pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (february).
soup a la reine.
clear gravy soup.
brill and lobster sauce.
fried smelts.
lobster rissoles.
beef palates.
pork cutlets ŕ la soubise.
grilled mushrooms.
braised turkey.
haunch of mutton.
boiled capon and oysters.
tongue, garnished with tufts of brocoli.
vegetables and salads.
wild ducks.
plovers.
orange jelly.
clear jelly.
charlotte russe.
nesselrode pudding.
gâteau de riz.
sea-kale.
maids of honour.
.—dinner for  persons (february).
palestine soup.
john dory, with dutch sauce.
red mullet, with sauce génoise.
sweetbread cutlets, with poivrade sauce.
fowl au béchamel.
roast saddle of mutton.
boiled capon and oysters.
boiled tongue, garnished with brussels sprouts.
guinea-fowls. ducklings.
pain de rhubarb.
orange jelly.
strawberry cream.
cheesecakes.
almond pudding.
fig pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (february).
mock turtle soup.
fillets of turbot a la cręme.
fried filleted soles and anchovy sauce.
larded fillets of rabbits.
tendrons de veau with purée of tomatoes.
stewed rump of beef ŕ la jardiničre.
roast fowls.
boiled ham.
roast pigeons or larks.
rhubarb tartlets.
meringues.
clear jelly. cream.
ice pudding.
soufflé.
.—dinner for  persons (february)—i.
rice soup.
red mullet, with génoise sauce.
fried smelts.
fowl pudding.
sweetbreads.
roast turkey and sausages.
boiled leg of pork.
pease pudding.
lemon jelly.
charlotte ŕ la vanille.
maids of honour.
plum-pudding, removed by ice pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (february).—ii.
spring soup.
boiled turbot and lobster sauce.
fricasseed rabbit.
oyster patties.
boiled round of beef and marrow-bones.
roast fowls, garnished with water-cresses and rolled bacon.
vegetables.
marrow pudding.
cheesecakes.
tartlets of greengage jam.
lemon cream.
rhubarb tart.
.—dinner for  persons (february).—iii.
vermicelli soup.
fried whitings. stewed eels.
poulet ŕ la marengo.
breast of veal stuffed and rolled.
roast leg of pork and apple sauce.
boiled capon and oysters.
tongue, garnished with tufts of brocoli.
wild ducks.
lobster salad.
charlotte aux pommes.
pain de rhubarb.
vanilla cream.
orange jelly.
.—dinner for  persons (february).—iv.
ox-tail soup.
cod ŕ la cręme.
fried soles.
lark pudding.
fowl scollops.
roast leg of mutton.
boiled turkey and celery sauce.
pigeon pie.
small ham, boiled and garnished.
vegetables.
game, when liked.
tartlets of raspberry jam.
vol-au-vent of rhubarb.
swiss cream. cabinet pudding.
brocoli and sea-kale.
. sunday.—. ox-tail soup.  roast beef, yorkshire pudding,
brocoli, and potatoes. . plum-pudding, apple tart. cheese.
. monday.—. fried soles, plain melted butter, and potatoes. .
cold roast beef, mashed potatoes. . the remains of plum-pudding cut in
slices, warmed, and served with sifted sugar sprinkled over it. cheese.
. tuesday.—. the remains of ox-tail soup from sunday. . pork
cutlets with tomato sauce; hashed beef. . boiled jam pudding. cheese.
. wednesday.—. boiled haddock and plain melted butter. .
rump-steak pudding, potatoes, greens. . arrowroot, blancmange,
garnished with jam.
. thursday.—. boiled leg of pork, greens, potatoes, pease
pudding. . apple fritters, sweet macaroni.
. friday.—. pea-soup made with liquor that the pork was boiled
in. . cold pork, mashed potatoes. . baked rice pudding.
. saturday.—. broiled herrings and mustard sauce. . haricot
mutton. . macaroni, either served as a sweet pudding or with cheese.
. sunday.—. carrot soup. . boiled leg of mutton and caper
sauce, mashed turnips, roast fowls, and bacon. . damson tart made with
bottled fruit, ratafia pudding.
. monday.—. the remainder of fowl curried and served with rice;
rump-steaks and oyster sauce, cold mutton. . rolled jam pudding.
. tuesday.—. vegetable soup made with liquor that the mutton was
boiled in on sunday. . roast sirloin of beef, yorkshire pudding,
brocoli, and potatoes. . cheese.
. wednesday.—. fried soles, melted butter. . cold beef and
mashed potatoes: if there is any cold boiled mutton left, cut it into
neat slices and warm it in a little caper sauce. . apple tart.
. thursday.—. boiled rabbit and onion sauce, stewed beef and
vegetables, made with the remains of cold beef and bones. . macaroni.
. friday.—. roast leg of pork, sage and onions and apple sauce;
greens and potatoes. . spinach and poached eggs instead of pudding.
cheese and water-cresses.
. saturday.—. rump-steak-and-kidney pudding, cold pork and
mashed potatoes. . baked rice pudding.
 first course.
turtle or mock turtle soup,
removed by
salmon and dressed
cucumber.
red mullet. vase of filets of whitings.
flowers.
spring soup,
removed by
boiled turbot and lobster
sauce.
 entrées
 fricasseed chicken.
vol-au-vent. vase of compôte of pigeons.
flowers.
 larded sweetbreads.
 second course.
 fore-quarter of lamb.
 braised capon.
 boiled tongue, vase of ham.
 garnished. flowers.
 roast fowls.
rump of beef ŕ la
jardiničre.
 third course.
guinea-fowls, larded,
removed by
cabinet pudding.
apricot wine jelly. rhubarb
tartlets. tart.
custards. vase of jelly in
flowers. glasses.
 italian cream.
damson tart. ducklings, cheesecakes.
removed by
nesselrode pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (march).
white soup.
clear gravy soup.
boiled salmon, shrimp sauce, and dressed cucumber.
baked mullets in paper cases.
filet de boeuf and spanish sauce.
larded sweetbreads.
rissoles.
chicken patties.
roast fillet of veal and béchamel sauce.
boiled leg of lamb.
roast fowls, garnished with water-cresses.
boiled ham, garnished with carrots and mashed turnips.
vegetables—sea-kale, spinach, or brocoli.
two ducklings.
guinea-fowl, larded.
orange jelly.
charlotte russe.
coffee cream.
ice pudding.
macaroni with parmesan cheese.
spinach, garnished with croutons.
.—dinner for  persons (march).
macaroni soup.
boiled turbot and lobster sauce.
salmon cutlets.
compôte of pigeons.
mutton cutlets and tomato sauce.
roast lamb.
boiled half calf's head, tongue, and brains.
boiled bacon-cheek, garnished with spoonfuls of spinach.
vegetables.
ducklings.
plum-pudding.
ginger cream.
trifle.
rhubarb tart.
cheesecakes.
fondues, in cases.
.—dinner for  persons (march).
calf's-head soup.
brill and shrimp sauce.
broiled mackerel ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
lobster cutlets.
calf's liver and bacon, aux fines herbes.
roast loin of veal.
two boiled fowls ŕ la béchamel.
boiled knuckle of ham.
vegetables—spinach or brocoli.
wild ducks.
apple custards.
blancmange.
lemon jelly.
jam sandwiches.
ice pudding.
potatoes ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
.—dinner for  persons (march).—i.
vermicelli soup.
soles ŕ la cręme.
veal cutlets.
small vols-au-vent.
small saddle of mutton.
half calf's head.
boiled bacon-cheek, garnished with brussels sprouts.
cabinet pudding.
orange jelly.
custards, in glasses.
rhubarb tart.
lobster salad.
.—dinner for  persons (march).—ii.
julienne soup.
baked mullets.
chicken cutlets.
oyster patties.
roast lamb and mint sauce.
boiled leg of pork.
pease pudding.
vegetables.
ducklings.
swiss cream.
lemon jelly.
cheesecakes.
rhubarb tart.
macaroni.
 dessert.
.—dinner for  persons (march).—iii.
oyster soup.
boiled salmon and dressed cucumber.
rissoles. fricasseed chicken.
boiled leg of mutton, caper sauce.
roast fowls, garnished with
water-cresses.
vegetables.
charlotte aux pommes.
orange jelly.
lemon cream.
soufflé of arrowroot.
sea-kale.
.—dinner for  persons (march).—iv.
ox-tail soup.
boiled mackerel.
stewed mutton kidneys.
minced veal and oysters.
stewed shoulder of veal.
roast ribs of beef and horseradish sauce.
vegetables.
ducklings.
tartlets of strawberry jam.
cheesecakes.
gateau de riz.
carrot pudding.
sea-kale.
. sunday.—. boiled / calf's head, pickled pork, the tongue on
a small dish with the brains round it; mutton cutlets and mashed
potatoes. . plum tart made with bottled fruit, baked custard pudding,
baroness pudding.
. monday.—. roast shoulder of mutton and onion sauce, brocoli,
baked potatoes. . slices of baroness pudding warmed, and served with
sugar sprinkled over. cheesecakes.
. tuesday.—. mock turtle soup, made with liquor that calf's head
was boiled in, and the pieces of head. . hashed mutton, rump-steaks and
oyster sauce. . boiled plum-pudding.
. wednesday.—. fried whitings, melted butter, potatoes. .
boiled beef, suet dumplings, carrots, potatoes, marrow-bones. .
arrowroot blancmange, and stewed rhubarb.
. thursday.—. pea-soup made from liquor that beef was boiled in.
. stewed rump-steak, cold beef, mashed potatoes. . rolled jam pudding.
. friday.—. fried soles, melted butter, potatoes. . roast loin
of mutton, brocoli, potatoes, bubble-and-squeak. . rice pudding.
. saturday.—.—rump-steak pie, haricot mutton made with remains
of cold loin. . pancakes, ratafia pudding.
. sunday.—. roast fillet of veal, boiled ham, spinach and
potatoes. . rhubarb tart, custards in glasses, bread-and-butter
pudding.
. monday.—. baked soles, potatoes. . minced veal and rump-steak
pie. . somersetshire dumplings with the remains of custards poured
round them; marmalade tartlets.
. tuesday.—. gravy soup. . boiled leg of mutton, mashed
turnips, suet dumplings, caper sauce, potatoes, veal rissoles made with
remains of fillet of veal. . cheese.
. wednesday.—. stewed mullets. . roast fowls, bacon, gravy, and
bread sauce, mutton pudding, made with a few slices of the cold meat and
the addition of two kidneys. . baked lemon pudding.
. thursday.—. vegetable soup made with liquor that the mutton
was boiled in, and mixed with the remains of gravy soup. . roast ribs
of beef, yorkshire pudding, horseradish sauce, brocoli and potatoes. .
apple pudding or macaroni.
. friday.—. stewed eels, pork cutlets and tomato sauce. . cold
beef, mashed potatoes. . plum tart made with bottled fruit.
. saturday.—. rump-steak-and-kidney pudding, broiled beef-bones,
greens and potatoes. . jam tartlets made with pieces of paste from plum
tart, baked custard pudding.
 first course.
spring soup,
removed by
salmon and lobster sauce.
fillet of mackerel. vase of fried smelts.
flowers.
 soles a la cręme.
 entrées.
 lamb cutlets and asparagus peas.
curried lobster. vase of oyster patties.
flowers.
 grenadines de veau.
 second course.
 roast ribs of lamb.
 larded capon.
stewed beef a la vase of boiled ham.
jardiničre. flowers.
 spring chickens.
 braised turkey.
 third course.
ducklings,
removed by
cabinet pudding.
 clear jelly. charlotte a la parisienne. orange jelly.
raspberry jam turtles. vase of cheese-cakes.
victoria sandwiches. flowers. rhubarb tart.
 raspberry cream.
 nesselrode pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (april).
soup ŕ la reine.
julienne soup.
turbot and lobster sauce.
slices of salmon a la genévése.
croquettes of leveret.
fricandeau de veau.
vol-au-vent.
stewed mushrooms.
fore-quarter of lamb.
saddle of mutton.
boiled chickens and asparagus peas.
boiled tongue garnished with tufts of brocoli.
vegetables.
ducklings. larded guinea-fowls.
charlotte a la parisienne.
orange jelly.
meringues.
ratafia ice pudding.
lobster salad.
sea-kale.
.—dinner for  persons (april).
gravy soup.
salmon and dressed cucumber.
shrimp sauce.
fillets of whitings.
lobster cutlets.
chicken patties.
roast fillet of veal.
boiled leg of lamb.
ham, garnished with brocoli.
vegetables.
ducklings.
compôte of rhubarb.
custards.
vanilla cream.
orange jelly.
cabinet pudding.
ice pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (april).
spring soup.
slices of salmon and caper sauce.
fried filleted soles.
chicken vol-au-vent.
mutton cutlets and tomato sauce.
roast loin of veal.
boiled fowls ŕ la béchamel.
tongue.
vegetables.
guinea-fowl.
sea-kale.
artichoke bottoms.
cabinet pudding.
blancmange.
apricot tartlets.
rice fritters.
macaroni and parmesan cheese.
.—dinner for  persons (april).
tapioca soup.
boiled salmon and lobster sauce.
sweetbreads.
oyster patties.
haunch of mutton.
boiled capon and white sauce.
tongue.
vegetables.
soufflé of rice.
lemon cream.
charlotte & la parisienne.
rhubarb tart.
.—dinner for  persons (april).—ii.
julienne soup.
fried whitings.
red mullet.
lamb cutlets and cucumbers.
rissoles.
roast ribs of beef.
neck of veal ŕ la béchamel.
vegetables.
ducklings.
lemon pudding.
rhubarb tart.
custards.
cheesecakes.
.—dinner for  persons (april).—iii.
vermicelli soup.
brill and shrimp sauce.
fricandeau of veal.
lobster cutlets.
roast fore-quarter of lamb.
boiled chickens.
tongue.
vegetables.
goslings.
sea-kale.
plum-pudding.
whipped cream.
compôte of rhubarb.
cheesecakes.
.—dinner for  persons (april).—iv.
ox-tail soup.
crimped salmon.
croquettes of chicken.
mutton cutlets and soubise sauce.
roast fillet of veal.
boiled bacon-cheek garnished with sprouts.
boiled capon. vegetables.
sea-kale. lobster salad.
cabinet pudding.
ginger cream.
raspberry jam tartlets.
rhubarb tart. macaroni.
. sunday.—. clear gravy soup. . roast haunch of mutton,
sea-kale, potatoes. . rhubarb tart, custards in glasses.
. monday.—. crimped skate and caper sauce. . boiled knuckle of
veal and rice, cold mutton, mashed potatoes. . baked plum-pudding.
. tuesday.—. vegetable soup. . toad-in-the-hole, made from
remains of cold mutton. . stewed rhubarb and baked custard pudding.
. wednesday.—. fried soles, anchovy sauce. . boiled beef,
carrots, suet dumplings. . lemon pudding.
. thursday.—. pea-soup made with liquor that beef was boiled in.
. cold beef, mashed potatoes, mutton cutlets and tomato sauce. .
macaroni.
. friday.—. bubble-and-squeak, made with remains of cold beef.
roast shoulder of veal stuffed, spinach, potatoes. . boiled batter
pudding and sweet sauce.
. saturday.—. stewed veal with vegetables, made from the remains
of the shoulder. broiled rump-steaks and oyster sauce. .
yeast-dumplings.
. sunday.—. boiled salmon and dressed cucumber, anchovy sauce .
roast fore-quarter of lamb, spinach, potatoes, mint sauce. . rhubarb
tart, cheesecakes.
. monday.—. curried salmon, made with remains of salmon, dish of
boiled rice. . cold lamb, rump-steak-and-kidney pudding, potatoes. .
spinach and poached eggs.
. tuesday.—. scotch mutton broth with pearl barley. . boiled
neck of mutton, caper sauce, suet dumplings, carrots. . baked
rice-pudding.
. wednesday.—. boiled mackerel and melted butter or fennel
sauce, potatoes. . roast fillet of veal, bacon, and greens. . fig
pudding.
. thursday.—. flemish soup. . roast loin of mutton, brocoli,
potatoes; veal rolls made from remains of cold veal. . boiled rhubarb
pudding.
. friday.—. irish stew or haricot, made from cold mutton, minced
veal. . half-pay pudding.
. saturday.—. rump-steak pie, broiled mutton-chops. . baked
arrowroot pudding.
 first course.
asparagus soup,
removed by
salmon and lobster
sauce.
fried filleted vase of fillets of mackerel,
soles flowers. ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
oxtail soup,
removed by
brill & shrimp sauce.
 entrées.
lamb cutlets and
cucumbers.
lobster pudding. vase of curried fowl.
flowers.
 veal ragoűt.
 second course.
 saddle of lamb.
 raised pie.
roast fowls. vase of boiled capon
flowers. and white sauce.
 braised ham.
 roast veal.
 third course.
almond goslings, lobster salad.
cheesecake removed by
college puddings.
 noyeau jelly.
italian vase of charlotte ŕ la
cream. flowers. parisienne.
 inlaid jelly.
plovers' ducklings,
eggs. removed by tartlets.
nesselrode pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (may).
white soup.
asparagus soup.
salmon cutlets. boiled turbot and lobster sauce.
chicken vol-au-vent.
lamb cutlets and cucumbers.
fricandeau of veal.
stewed mushrooms.
roast lamb. haunch of mutton.
boiled and roast fowls.
vegetables.
ducklings.
goslings.
charlotte russe.
vanilla cream.
gooseberry tart. custards.
cheesecakes.
cabinet pudding and iced pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (may).
spring soup.
salmon ŕ la genévése.
red mullet.
chicken vol-au-vent.
calf's liver and bacon aux fines herbes.
saddle of mutton.
half calf's head, tongue, and brains.
braised ham.
asparagus.
roast pigeons.
ducklings.
sponge-cake pudding.
charlotte ŕ la vanille.
gooseberry tart.
cream.
cheesecakes.
apricot-jam tart.
.—dinner for  persons (may).
julienne soup.
brill and lobster sauce.
fried fillets of mackerel.
lamb cutlets and cucumbers.
lobster patties.
roast fillet of veal.
boiled leg of lamb.
asparagus.
ducklings.
gooseberry tart.
custards.
fancy pastry.
soufflé.
.—dinner for  persons (may).—i.
vermicelli soup.
boiled salmon and anchovy sauce.
fillets of beef and tomato sauce.
sweetbreads.
roast lamb.
boiled capon.
asparagus.
ducklings.
cabinet pudding.
compôte of gooseberries.
custards in glasses.
blancmange.
lemon tartlets.
fondue.
.—dinner for  persons (may).—ii.
macaroni soup.
boiled mackerel ŕ la maitre d'hôtel.
fried smelts.
scollops of fowl.
lobster pudding.
boiled leg of lamb and spinach.
roast sirloin of beef and horseradish sauce.
vegetables.
roast leveret.
salad.
soufflé of rice.
ramekins.
strawberry-jam tartlets.
orange jelly.
.—dinner for  persons (may).—iii.
julienne soup.
trout with dutch sauce.
salmon cutlets.
lamb cutlets and mushrooms.
vol-au-vent of chicken.
roast lamb.
calf's head ŕ la tortue.
vegetables.
spring chickens.
iced pudding.
vanilla cream.
clear jelly.
tartlets.
cheesecakes.
.—dinner for  persons (may).—iv.
soup ŕ la reine.
crimped trout and lobster sauce.
baked whitings aux fines herbes.
braised mutton cutlets and cucumbers.
stewed pigeons.
roast fillet of veal.
bacon-cheek and greens.
fillet of beef ŕ la jardiničre.
ducklings.
soufflé ŕ la vanille.
compôte of oranges.
meringues.
gooseberry tart.
fondue.
. sunday.—. vegetable soup. . saddle of mutton, asparagus and
potatoes. . gooseberry tart, custards.
. monday.—. fried whitings, anchovy sauce. . cold mutton,
mashed potatoes, stewed veal. . fig pudding.
. tuesday.—. haricot mutton, made from remains of cold mutton,
rump-steak pie. . macaroni.
. wednesday.—. roast loin of veal and spinach, boiled bacon,
mutton cutlets and tomato sauce. . gooseberry pudding and cream.
. thursday.—. spring soup. . roast leg of lamb, mint sauce,
spinach, curried veal and rice. . lemon pudding.
. friday.—. boiled mackerel and parsley-and-butter. . stewed
rump-steak, cold lamb and salad. . baked gooseberry pudding.
. saturday.—. vermicelli. . rump-steak pudding, lamb cutlets,
and cucumbers. . macaroni.
. sunday.—. boiled salmon and lobster or caper sauce. . roast
lamb, mint sauce, asparagus, potatoes. . plum-pudding, gooseberry tart.
. monday.—. salmon warmed in remains of lobster sauce and
garnished with croűtons. . stewed knuckle of veal and rice, cold lamb
and dressed cucumber. . slices of pudding warmed, and served with sugar
sprinkled over. baked rice pudding.
. tuesday.—. roast ribs of beef, horseradish sauce, yorkshire
pudding, spinach and potatoes. . boiled lemon pudding.
. wednesday.—. fried soles, melted butter. . cold beef and
dressed cucumber or salad, veal cutlets and bacon. . baked
plum-pudding.
. thursday.—. spring soup. . calf's liver and bacon, broiled
beef-bones, spinach and potatoes. . gooseberry tart.
. friday.—. roast shoulder of mutton, baked potatoes, onion
sauce, spinach. . currant dumplings.
. saturday.—. broiled mackerel, fennel sauce or plain melted
butter. . rump-steak pie, hashed mutton, vegetables. . baked arrowroot
pudding.
 first course.
asparagus soup,
removed by
crimped salmon.
fillets of garnets. vase of soles aux fines herbes.
flowers.
vermicelli soup,
removed by whitebait.
 entrées.
 lamb cutlets and peas.
lobster patties. vase of tendrons de veau
flowers. ŕ la jardiničre.
 larded sweetbreads.
 second course.
 saddle of lamb.
 tongue.
roast spring vase of boiled capon.
chickens. flowers.
 ham.
 boiled calf's head.
 third course.
 prawns. leveret, tartlets.
 removed by
 ice pudding.
 wine jelly.
 vol-au-vent of straw- vase of custards in
 berries and cream. flowers. glasses.
 blancmange.
goslings,
removed by
cheesecake fondues, in cases. plover's eggs.
.—dinner for  persons (june).
green-pea soup.
rice soup.
salmon and lobster sauce.
trout ŕ la genévése.
whitebait.
lamb cutlets and cucumbers.
fricasseed chicken.
lobster rissoles.
stewed veal and peas.
roast quarter of lamb and spinach.
filet de boeuf ŕ la jardiničre.
boiled fowls.
braised shoulder of lamb.
tongue.
vegetables.
goslings.
ducklings.
nesselrode pudding.
charlotte ŕ la parisienne.
gooseberry tartlets.
strawberry cream.
raspberry-and-currant tart.
custards.
.—dinner for  persons (june).
julienne soup.
salmon trout and parsley-and-butter.
red mullet.
stewed breast of veal and peas.
mutton cutlets ŕ la maintenon.
roast fillet of veal.
boiled leg of lamb, garnished with young carrots.
boiled bacon-cheek.
vegetables.
roast ducks.
leveret.
gooseberry tart.
strawberry cream.
strawberry tartlets,
meringues.
cabinet pudding.
iced pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (june).
vermicelli soup.
trout ŕ la genévése
salmon cutlets.
lamb cutlets and peas.
fricasseed chicken.
roast ribs of beef.
half calf's head, tongue, and brains.
boiled ham.
vegetables.
roast ducks.
compôte of gooseberries.
strawberry jelly.
pastry.
iced pudding.
cauliflower with cream sauce.
.—dinner for  persons (june).—i.
spring soup.
boiled salmon and lobster sauce.
entrees. veal cutlets and endive.
ragoűt of duck and green peas.
roast loin of veal.
boiled leg of lamb and white sauce.
tongue, garnished.
vegetables.
strawberry cream.
gooseberry tartlets.
almond pudding.
lobster salad.
calf's-head soup.
mackerel ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
whitebait.
chicken cutlets.
curried lobster.
fore-quarter of lamb and salad.
stewed beef ŕ la jardiničre.
vegetables.
goslings.
green-currant tart.
custards, in glasses.
strawberry blancmange.
soufflé of rice.
green-pea soup.
baked soles aux fines herbes.
stewed trout.
calf's liver and bacon.
rissoles.
roast saddle of lamb and salad.
calf's head ŕ la tortue.
vegetables.
roast ducks.
vol-au-vent of strawberries and cream.
strawberry tartlets.
lemon blancmange.
baked gooseberry pudding.
spinach soup.
soles ŕ la cręme.
red mullet.
roast fillet of veal.
braised ham and spinach.
boiled fowls and white sauce.
vegetables.
leveret.
strawberry jelly.
swiss cream.
cheesecakes.
iced pudding.
. sunday.—. salmon trout and parsley-and-butter, new potatoes.
. roast fillet of veal, boiled bacon-cheek and spinach, vegetables.
. gooseberry tart, custards.
. monday.—. light gravy soup. . small meat pie, minced veal,
garnished with rolled bacon, spinach and potatoes.
. raspberry-and-currant tart.
. tuesday.—. baked mackerel, potatoes. . boiled leg of lamb,
garnished with young carrots. . lemon pudding.
. wednesday.—. vegetable soup. . calf's liver and bacon, peas,
hashed lamb from remains of cold joint. . baked gooseberry pudding.
. thursday—. roast ribs of beef, yorkshire pudding, peas,
potatoes. . stewed rhubarb and boiled rice.
. friday.—. cold beef and salad, lamb cutlets and peas. .
boiled gooseberry pudding and baked custard pudding.
. saturday.—. rump-steak pudding, broiled beef-bones and
cucumber, vegetables. . bread pudding.
. sunday.—. roast fore-quarter of lamb, mint sauce, peas, and
new potatoes. . gooseberry pudding, strawberry tartlets. fondue.
. monday.—. cold lamb and salad, stewed neck of veal and peas,
young carrots, and new potatoes. . almond pudding.
. tuesday.—. green-pea soup. . roast ducks stuffed, gravy, peas
and new potatoes. . baked ratafia pudding.
. wednesday.—. roast leg of mutton, summer cabbage, potatoes. .
gooseberry and rice pudding.
. thursday.—. fried soles, melted butter, potatoes. .
sweetbreads, hashed mutton, vegetables. . bread-and-butter pudding.
. friday.—. asparagus soup. . boiled beef, young carrots and
new potatoes, suet dumplings. . college puddings.
. saturday.—. cold boiled beef and salad, lamb cutlets and green
peas. . boiled gooseberry pudding and plain cream.
 first course.
green-pea soup,
removed by
salmon and dressed
cucumber.
whitebait. vase of stewed trout
flowers.
soup ŕ la reine,
removed by
mackerel ŕ la maitre
d'hôtel.
 entrées
lamb cutlets and
peas.
lobster curry vase of scollops of
en casserole. flowers. chickens.
 chicken patties.
 second course.
 haunch of venison.
 pigeon pie.
boiled capons. vase of spring chickens.
flowers.
 braised ham.
 saddle of lamb.
 third course.
prawns. roast ducks, custards.
removed by vanilla soufflé.
raspberry cream.
cherry tart. vase of raspberry-and-
flowers. currant tart.
 strawberry cream.
green goose,
removed by
creams. iced pudding. tartlets.
.—dinner for  persons (july).
soup ŕ la jardiničre.
chicken soup.
crimped salmon and parsley-and-butter.
trout aux fines herbes, in cases.
tendrons de veau and peas.
lamb cutlets and cucumbers.
loin of veal ŕ la béchamel.
roast fore-quarter of lamb.
salad.
braised ham, garnished with broad beans.
vegetables.
roast ducks.
turkey poult.
stewed peas ŕ la francaise.
lobster salad.
cherry tart.
raspberry-and-currant tart.
custards, in glasses.
lemon creams.
nesselrode pudding.
marrow pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (july)
green-pea soup.
salmon and lobster sauce.
crimped perch and dutch sauce.
stewed veal and peas.
lamb cutlets and cucumbers.
haunch of venison.
boiled fowls ŕ la béchamel.
braised ham.
vegetables.
roast ducks.
peas ŕ la française.
lobster salad.
strawberry cream.
blancmange.
cherry tart.
cheesecakes.
iced pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (july).—i.
soup ŕ la jardiničre.
salmon trout and parsley-and-butter.
fillets of mackerel ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
lobster cutlets.
beef palates ŕ la italienne.
roast lamb.
boiled capon and white sauce.
boiled tongue, garnished with small vegetable marrows.
bacon and beans.
goslings.
whipped strawberry cream.
raspberry-and-currant tart.
meringues.
cherry tartlets.
iced pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (july).—ii.
julienne soup.
crimped salmon and caper sauce.
whitebait.
croquettes ŕ la reine.
curried lobster.
roast lamb.
rump of beef ŕ la jardiničre.
larded turkey poult.
raspberry cream.
cherry tart.
custards, in glasses.
gâteaux ŕ la genévése.
nesselrode pudding.
. sunday.—. salmon trout and parsley-and-butter. . roast fillet
of real, boiled bacon-cheek, peas, potatoes. . raspberry-and-currant
tart, baked custard pudding.
. monday.—. green-pea soup. . roast fowls garnished with
water-cresses; gravy, bread sauce; cold veal and salad. . cherry tart.
. tuesday.—. john dory and lobster sauce. . curried fowl with
remains of cold fowls, dish of rice, veal rolls with remains of cold
fillet. . strawberry cream.
. wednesday.—. roast leg of mutton, vegetable marrow, and
potatoes, melted butter. . black-currant pudding.
. thursday.—. fried soles, anchovy sauce. . mutton cutlets and
tomato sauce, bashed mutton, peas, potatoes. . lemon dumplings.
. friday.—. boiled brisket of beef, carrots, turnips, suet
dumplings, peas, potatoes. . baked semolina pudding.
. saturday.—. cold beef and salad, lamb cutlets and peas. .
rolled jam pudding.
. sunday.—. julienne soup. . roast lamb, half calf's head,
tongue and brains, boiled ham, peas and potatoes. . cherry tart,
custards.
. monday.—. hashed calf's head, cold lamb and salad. .
vegetable marrow and white sauce, instead of pudding.
. tuesday.—. stewed veal, with peas, young carrots, and
potatoes. small meat pie. . raspberry-and-currant pudding.
. wednesday.—. roast ducks stuffed, gravy, peas, and potatoes;
the remains of stewed veal rechauffé. . macaroni served as a sweet
pudding.
. thursday.—. slices of salmon and caper sauce. . boiled
knuckle of veal, parsley-and-butter, vegetable marrow and potatoes. .
black-currant pudding.
. friday.—. roast shoulder of mutton, onion sauce, peas and
potatoes. . cherry tart, baked custard pudding.
. saturday.—. minced mutton, rump-steak-and-kidney pudding. .
baked lemon pudding.
 first course.
mock-turtle soup,
removed by
broiled salmon and
caper sauce.
red mullet. vase of perch.
flowers.
soup ŕ la julienne,
removed by
brill and shrimp sauce.
 entrées.
fricandeau de veau
ŕ la jardiničre.
curried lobster. vase of lamb cutlets ŕ la purée
flowers. de pommes de terre.
fillets of ducks
and peas.
 second course.
 haunch of venison.
 ham, garnished.
capon ŕ la vase of roast fowl.
financičre flowers.
 leveret pie.
 saddle of mutton.
 third course.
grouse,
removed by
cabinet pudding.
 lobster salad. fruit jelly. cheesecakes.
charlotte ŕ la vase of custards.
vanille. flowers.
raspberry vol-au-vent prawns.
tartlets. of pears.
larded peahen,
removed by
iced pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (august)
vermicelli soup.
soup ŕ la reine.
boiled salmon.
fried flounders.
trout en matelot.
stewed pigeons.
sweetbreads.
ragoűt of ducks.
fillets of chickens and mushrooms.
quarter of lamb.
cotelette de boeuf ŕ la jardiničre.
roast fowls and boiled tongue.
bacon and beans.
grouse.
wheatears.
greengage tart.
whipped cream.
vol-au-vent of plums.
fruit jelly.
iced pudding.
cabinet pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (august).
julienne soup.
fillets of turbot and dutch sauce.
red mullet.
riz de veau aux tomates.
fillets of ducks and peas.
haunch of venison.
boiled capon and oysters.
ham, garnished.
vegetables.
leveret.
fruit jelly.
compote of greengages.
plum tart. custards, in glasses.
omelette soufflé.
.—dinner for  persons (august).—i.
macaroni soup.
crimped salmon and sauce hollandaise.
fried fillets of trout.
tendrons de veau and stewed peas.
salmi of grouse.
roast loin of veal.
boiled bacon, garnished with french beans.
stewed beef ŕ la jardiničre.
vegetables.
turkey poult.
plum tart.
custard pudding.
vol-au-vent of pears.
strawberry cream.
ratafia soufflé.
.—dinner for  persons (august).—ii.
vegetable-marrow soup.
stowed mullet.
fillets of salmon and ravigotte sauce.
curried lobster.
fricandeau de veau ŕ la jardiničre.
roast saddle of mutton.
stewed shoulder of veal, garnished with forcemeat balls.
vegetables.
roast grouse and bread sauce.
vol-au-vent of greengages.
fruit jolly.
raspberry cream.
custards.
fig pudding.
. sunday.—. vegetable-marrow soup. . roast quarter of lamb,
mint sauce, french beans and potatoes. . raspberry-and-currant tart,
custard pudding.
. monday.—. cold lamb and salad, small meat pie, vegetable
marrow and white sauce. . lemon dumplings.
. tuesday.—. boiled mackerel. . stewed loin of veal, french
beans and potatoes. . baked raspberry pudding.
. wednesday.—. vegetable soup. . lamb cutlets and french beans;
the remains of stewed shoulder of veal, mashed vegetable marrow. .
black-currant pudding.
. thursday.—. roast ribs of beef, yorkshire pudding, french
beans and potatoes. . bread-and-butter pudding.
. friday.—. fried soles and melted butter. . cold beef and
salad, lamb cutlets and mashed potatoes. . cauliflowers and white sauce
instead of pudding.
. saturday.—. stewed beef and vegetables, with remains of cold
beef; mutton pudding. . macaroni and cheese.
. sunday.—. salmon pudding. . roast fillet of veal, boiled
bacon-cheek garnished with tufts of cauliflowers, french beans and
potatoes. . plum tart, boiled custard pudding.
. monday.—. baked soles. . cold veal and bacon, salad, mutton
cutlets and tomato sauce. . boiled currant pudding.
. tuesday.—. rice soup. . roast fowls and water-cresses, boiled
knuckle of ham, minced veal garnished with croutons; vegetables. .
college puddings.
. wednesday.—. curried fowl with remains of cold fowl; dish of
rice, stewed rump-steak and vegetables. . plum tart.
. thursday.—. boiled brisket of beef, carrots, turnips, suet
dumplings, and potatoes. . baked bread pudding.
. friday.—. vegetable soup, made from liquor that beef was
boiled in. . cold beef and dressed cucumber, veal cutlets and tomato
sauce. . fondue.
. saturday.—. bubble-and-squeak, made from remains of cold beef;
cold veal-and-ham pie, salad. . baked raspberry pudding.
 first course.
julienne soup,
removed by
brill and shrimp sauce.
red mullet & vase of fried eels.
italian sauce. flowers.
giblet soup,
removed by
salmon and lobster sauce.
 entrées.
lamb cutlets and
french beans.
fillets of chicken vase of oysters au gratin.
and truffles. flowers.
sweetbreads and
tomata sauce.
 second course.
 saddle of mutton.
 veal-and-ham pie.
chickens ŕ la vase of braised goose.
béchamel. flowers.
broiled ham, garnished
with cauliflowers.
 filet of veal.
 third course.
 custards. partridges, apple tart.
 removed by
 plum-pudding.
 compôte of greengages.
noyeau jelly. vase of lemon cream.
flowers.
 pastry sandwiches.
grouse & bread sauce,
removed by
plum tart. nesselrode pudding. custards.
.—dinner for  persons (september).
mock-turtle soup.
soup ŕ la jardiničre
salmon and lobster sauce.
fried whitings.
stewed eels.
veal cutlets.
scalloped oysters.
curried fowl.
grilled mushrooms.
haunch of mutton.
boiled calf's head ŕ la béchamel.
braised ham.
roast fowls aux cressons.
leveret.
grouse.
cabinet pudding.
iced pudding.
compôte of plumbs.
damson tart.
cream.
fruit jelly.
prawns.
lobster salad.
.—dinner for  persons (september).
flemish soup.
turbot, garnished with fried smelts.
red mullet and italian sauce.
tendrons de veau and truffles.
lamb cutlets and sauce piquante.
loin of veal ŕ la béchamel.
roast haunch of venison.
braised ham.
grouse pie.
vegetables.
roast hare.
plum tart.
whipped cream.
punch jelly.
compôte of damsons.
marrow pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (september).
game soup.
crimped skate.
slices of salmon a la genévése.
fricasseed sweetbreads.
savoury rissoles.
sirloin of beef and horseradish sauce.
boiled leg of mutton and caper sauce.
vegetables.
roast partridges.
charlotte russe.
apricots and rice.
fruit jelly.
cabinet pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (september).—ii.
thick gravy soup.
fillets of turbot ŕ la cręme.
stewed eels.
vol-au-vent of lobster.
salmi of grouse.
haunch of venison.
rump of beef ŕ la jardiničre.
hare, boned and larded, with mushrooms.
roast grouse.
apricot blancmange.
compôte of peaches.
plum tart.
custards.
plum-pudding.
. sunday.—. julienne soup. . roast ribs of beef, yorkshire
pudding, horseradish sauce, french beans, and potatoes. . greengage
pudding, vanilla cream.
. monday.—. crimped skate and crab sauce. . cold beef and
salad; small veal-and-ham pie. . vegetable marrow and white sauce.
. tuesday.—. fried solos, melted butter. . boiled fowls,
parsley-and-butter; bacon-check, garnished with french beans; beef
rissoles, made from remains of cold beef. . plum tart and cream.
. wednesday.—. boiled round of beef, carrots, turnips, and suet
dumplings; marrow on toast. . baked damsons and rice.
. thursday.—. vegetable soup, made from liquor that beef was
boiled in. . lamb cutlets and cucumbers, cold beef and salad. . apple
pudding.
. friday.—. baked soles. . bubble-and-squeak, made from cold
beef; veal cutlets and rolled bacon. . damson tart.
. saturday.—. irish stew, rump-steaks and oyster sauce. .
somersetshire dumplings.
. sunday.—. fried filleted soles and anchovy sauce. . roast leg
of mutton, brown onion sauce, french beans, and potatoes; half calf's
head, tongue, and brains. . plum tart; custards, in glasses.
. monday.—. vegetable-marrow soup. . calf's head ŕ la maitre
d'hôtel, from remains of cold head; boiled brisket of beef and
vegetables. . stewed fruit and baked rice pudding.
. tuesday.—. roast fowls and water-cresses; boiled bacon,
garnished with tufts of cauliflower; hashed mutton, from remains of
mutton of sunday. . baked plum-pudding.
. wednesday.—. boiled knuckle of veal and rice, turnips,
potatoes; small ham, garnished with french beans. . baked apple
pudding.
. thursday.—. brill and shrimp sauce. . roast hare, gravy, and
red-currant jelly; mutton cutlets and mashed potatoes. . scalloped
oysters, instead of pudding.
. friday.—. small roast loin of mutton; the remains of hare,
jugged; vegetable marrow and potatoes. . damson pudding.
. saturday.—. rump-steaks, broiled, and oyster sauce, mashed
potatoes; veal-and-ham pie,—the ham may be cut from that boiled on
wednesday, if not all eaten cold for breakfast. , lemon pudding.
 first course
mock-turtle soup,
removed by
crimped cod and oyster
sauce.
soles ŕ la vase of red mullet.
normandie. flowers.
julienne soup,
removed by
john dory and dutch
sauce.
 entrées
sweetbreads and tomata
sauce.
oyster patties. vase of stewed mushrooms.
flowers.
fricandeau de veau and
celery sauce.
 second course.
roast saddle of
mutton.
 grouse pie.
roast goose. vase of boiled fowls and
flowers. oyster sauce.
 ham.
 larded turkey.
 third course.
custards. pheasants, prawns.
removed by
cabinet pudding.
 italian cream.
gâteau de vase of compôte of
pommes. flowers. plums.
 peach jelly.
roast hare,
removed by
lobster salad. iced pudding. apple tart.
carrot soup ŕ la créci.
soup ŕ la reine.
baked cod.
stewed eels.
riz de veau and tomata sauce.
vol-au-vent of chicken.
pork cutlets and sauce robert.
grilled mushrooms.
rump of beef ŕ la jardiničre.
roast goose.
boiled fowls and celery sauce.
tongue, garnished.
vegetables.
grouse.
pheasants.
quince jelly.
lemon cream.
apple tart.
compote of peaches.
nesselrode pudding.
cabinet pudding.
scalloped oysters.
.—dinner for  persons (october).
calf's-head soup.
crimped cod and oyster sauce.
stewed eels.
stewed mutton kidneys.
curried sweetbreads.
boiled leg of mutton, garnished with carrots and turnips. roast goose.
partridges.
fruit jelly. italian cream.
vol-au-vent of pears.
apple tart.
cabinet pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (october).—i.
hare soup.
broiled cod ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
haddocks and egg sauce.
veal cutlets, garnished with french beans.
haricot mutton.
roast haunch of mutton.
boiled capon and rice.
vegetables.
pheasants.
punch jelly. blancmange.
apples ŕ la portugaise.
charlotte ŕ la vanille.
marrow pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (october).—ii.
mock-turtle soup.
brill and lobster sauce.
fried whitings.
fowl ŕ la béchamel.
oyster patties.
roast sucking-pig.
stewed hump of beef ŕ la jardiničre.
vegetables.
grouse.
charlotte aux pommes.
coffee cream.
cheesecakes.
apricot tart.
iced pudding.
. sunday.—. roast sucking-pig, tomata sauce and brain sauce;
small boiled leg of mutton, caper sauce, turnips, and carrots. . damson
tart, boiled batter pudding.
. monday.—. vegetable soup, made from liquor that mutton was
boiled in. . sucking-pig en blanquette, small meat pie, french beans,
and potatoes. . pudding, pies.
. tuesday.—. roast partridges, bread sauce, and gravy; slices of
mutton warmed in caper sauce; vegetables. . baked plum-pudding.
. wednesday.—. roast ribs of beef, yorkshire pudding, vegetable
marrow, and potatoes. . damson pudding.
. thursday.—. fried soles, melted butter. . cold beef and
salad; mutton cutlets and tomata sauce. . macaroni.
. friday.—. carrot soup. . boiled fowls and celery sauce;
bacon-check, garnished with greens; beef rissoles, from remains of cold
beef. . baroness pudding.
. saturday.—. curried fowl, from remains of cold ditto; dish of
rice, rump-steak-and-kidney pudding, vegetables. . stewed pears and
sponge cakes.
. sunday.—. crimped cod and oyster sauce. . roast haunch of
mutton, brown onion sauce, and vegetables. . bullace pudding, baked
custards in cups.
. monday.—. the remains of codfish, flaked, and warmed in a
maître d'hôtel sauce. . cold mutton and salad, veal cutlets and rolled
bacon, french beans and potatoes. . arrowroot blancmange and stewed
damsons. . tuesday.—. roast hare, gravy, and red-currant jelly;
hashed mutton, vegetables. . currant dumplings.
. wednesday.—. jugged hare, from remains of roast ditto; boiled
knuckle of veal and rice; boiled bacon-cheek. . apple pudding.
. thursday.—. roast leg of pork, apple sauce, greens, and
potatoes. . rice snowballs.
. friday.—. slices of pork, broiled, and tomata sauce, mashed
potatoes; roast pheasants, bread sauce, and gravy. . baked apple
pudding.
. saturday.—. rump-steak pie, sweetbreads. . ginger pudding.
 first course.
thick grouse soup,
removed by
crimped cod and oyster
sauce.
baked whitings. vase of fried smelts.
flowers.
clear ox-tail soup,
removed by
fillets of turbot ŕ la
cręme.
 entrées.
 poulet ŕ la marengo.
fillets of leveret. vase of ragoűt of lobster.
flowers.
 mushrooms sautés.
 second course.
 haunch of mutton.
 cold game pie.
lark pudding. vase of roast fowls.
flowers.
 boiled ham.
boiled turkey and celery
sauce.
 third course.
apple tart. partridges, shell-fish.
removed by
plum-pudding.
 wine jelly.
pommes ŕ la vase of vol-au-vent
condé. flowers. of pears.
snipes,
removed by
prawns. charlotte glacée. apricot
tartlets.
.—dinner for  persons (november).
hare soup.
julienne soup.
baked cod.
soles ŕ la normandie.
riz de veau aux tomates.
lobster patties.
mutton cutlets and soubise sauce.
croűtades of marrow aux fines herbes.
roast sirloin of beef.
braised goose.
boiled fowls and celery sauce.
bacon-cheek, garnished with sprouts.
wild ducks.
partridges.
apples ŕ la portugaise.
bavarian cream.
apricot-jam sandwiches.
cheesecakes.
charlotte ŕ la vanille.
plum-pudding.
mulligatawny soup.
fried slices of codfish and oyster sauce.
eels en matelote.
broiled pork cutlets and tomata sauce.
tendrons de veau ŕ la jardiničre.
boiled leg of mutton and vegetables.
roast goose.
cold game pie.
snipes.
teal.
apple soufflé.
iced charlotte.
tartlets.
champagne jelly.
coffee cream.
mince pies.
oyster soup.
crimped cod and oyster sauce.
fried perch and dutch sauce.
pigs' feet ŕ la béchamel.
curried rabbit.
roast sucking-pig.
boiled fowls and oyster sauce.
vegetables.
jugged hare.
meringues ŕ la cręme.
apple custard.
vol-au-vent of pears.
whipped cream.
cabinet pudding.
game soup.
slices of codfish and dutch sauce.
fried eels.
kidneys ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
oyster patties.
saddle of mutton.
boiled capon and rice.
small ham.
lark pudding.
roast hare.
apple tart.
pineapple cream.
clear jelly.
cheesecakes.
marrow pudding.
nesselrode pudding.
. sunday.—. white soup. . roast haunch of mutton, haricot
beans, potatoes. . apple tart, ginger pudding.
. monday.—. stewed eels. . veal cutlets garnished with rolled
bacon; cold mutton and winter salad. . baked rice pudding.
. tuesday.—. roast fowls, garnished with water-cresses; boiled
bacon-cheek; hashed mutton from remains of haunch. . apple pudding.
. wednesday.—. boiled leg of pork, carrots, parsnips, and
pease-pudding; fowl croquettes made with remainder of cold fowl. .
baroness pudding.
. thursday.—. cold pork and mashed potatoes; roast partridges,
bread sauce and gravy. . the remainder of pudding cut into neat slices,
and warmed through, and served with sifted sugar sprinkled over; apple
fritters.
. friday.—. roast hare, gravy, and currant jelly; rump-steak and
oyster sauce; vegetables. . macaroni.
. saturday.—. jugged hare; small mutton pudding. . fig pudding.
. sunday.—. crimped cod and oyster sauce. . roast fowls, small
boiled ham, vegetables; rump-steak pie. . baked apple pudding, open jam
tart.
. monday.—. the remainder of cod warmed in maître d'hôtel sauce.
. boiled aitchbone of beef, carrots, parsnips, suet dumplings. . baked
bread-and-butter pudding.
. tuesday.—. pea-soup, made from liquor in which beef was
boiled. . cold beef, mashed potatoes; mutton cutlets and tomata sauce.
. carrot pudding.
. wednesday.—. fried soles and melted butter. . roast leg of
pork, apple sauce, vegetables. . macaroni with parmesan cheese.
. thursday.—. bubble-and-squeak from remains of cold beef;
curried pork. . baked semolina pudding.
. friday.—. roast leg of mutton, stewed spanish onions,
potatoes. . apple tart.
. saturday.—. hashed mutton; boiled rabbit and onion sauce;
vegetables. . damson pudding made with bottled fruit.
 first course.
mock-turtle soup,
removed by
cod's head and shoulders
and oyster sauce.
stewed eels. vase of fried whitings.
flowers.
julienne soup,
removed by
soles aux fines herbes.
 entrées.
fillets of grouse and
sauce piquante.
curried lobster. vase of mutton cutlets and
flowers. soubise sauce.
 sweetbreads.
 second course.
 haunch of mutton.
ham and brussels
sprouts.
roast goose. vase of stewed beef ŕ la
flowers. jardiničre.
 game pie.
boiled turkey and
celery sauce.
 third course.
 apricot torte. pheasants, victoria
 removed by sandwiches.
 plum-pudding.
 vanilla cream.
lemon jelly. vase of champagne jelly.
flowers.
 blancmange.
wild ducks,
removed by
tipsy cake. iced pudding. mince pies.
.—dinner for  persons (december).
game soup.
clear vermicelli soup.
codfish au gratin.
fillets of whitings ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
filet de boeuf and sauce piquante.
fricasseed chicken.
oyster patties.
curried rabbit.
roast turkey and sausages.
boiled leg of pork and vegetables.
roast goose.
stewed beef ŕ la jardiničre.
widgeon.
partridges.
charlotte aux pommes.
mince pies.
orange jelly.
lemon cream.
apple tart.
cabinet pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (december).
mulligatawny soup.
fried slices of codfish.
soles ŕ la cręme.
croquettes of fowl.
pork cutlets and tomata sauce.
roast ribs of beef.
boiled turkey and celery sauce.
tongue, garnished.
lark pudding. vegetables.
roast hare. grouse.
plum-pudding. mince pies.
charlotte ŕ la parisienne.
cheesecakes.
apple tart.
nesselrode pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (december).
carrot soup.
crimped cod and oyster sauce.
baked soles.
mutton kidneys ŕ la française.
oyster patties.
boiled beef and vegetables.
marrow-bones.
roast fowls and water-cresses
tongue, garnished.
game pie.
partridges.
blancmange.
compôte of apples.
vol-au-vent of pears.
almond cheesecakes.
lemon pudding.
.—dinner for  persons (december).—i.
rabbit soup.
brill and shrimp sauce.
curried fowl. oyster patties.
roast turkey and sausages.
boiled leg of pork. vegetables.
hunters' pudding.
lemon cheesecakes.
apple tart. custards, in glasses.
raspberry cream.
.—dinner for,  persons (december).—ii.
ox-tail soup.
crimped cod and oyster sauce.
savoury rissoles.
fowl scollops ŕ la béchamel.
haunch of mutton.
boiled chickens and celery sauce.
bacon-cheek, garnished with brussels sprouts.
vegetables.
snipes.
orange jelly. cheesecakes.
apples ŕ la portugaise.
apricot-jam tartlets.
soufflé of rice.
.—dinner for  persons (december).—iii.
vermicelli soup.
soles ŕ la maître d'hôtel.
fried eels.
pork cutlets and tomato sauce.
ragoűt of mutton ŕ la jardiničre.
roast goose.
boiled leg of mutton and vegetables.
pheasants.
whipped cream.
meringues. compôte of normandy pippins.
mince pies. plum-pudding.
 dessert.
.—dinner for  persons (december).—iv.
carrot soup.
baked cod.
fried smelts.
stewed rump-steak ŕ la jardiničre.
fricasseed chicken.
roast leg of mutton, boned and stuffed.
boiled turkey and oyster sauce.
vegetables.
wild ducks.
fancy pastry.
lemon cream.
damson tart, with bottled fruit.
custards, in glasses.
cabinet pudding.
 dessert.
. sunday.—. carrot soup. . roast beef, horseradish sauce,
vegetables. . plum-pudding, mince pies.
. monday.—. fried whitings, melted butter. . rabbit pie, cold
beef, mashed potatoes. . plum-pudding cut in slices and warmed; apple
tart.
. tuesday.—. hashed beef and broiled bones, pork cutlets and
tomata sauce; vegetables. . baked lemon pudding.
. wednesday.—. boiled neck of mutton and vegetables; the broth
served first with a little pearl barley or rice boiled in it . bakewell
pudding.
. thursday.—. roast leg of pork, apple sauce, vegetables. .
rice snowballs.
. friday.—. soles ŕ la crime. . cold pork and mashed potatoes,
broiled rump-steaks and oyster sauce. . rolled jam pudding.
. saturday.—. the remains of cold pork curried, dish of rice,
mutton cutlets, and mashed potatoes. . baked apple dumplings.
. sunday.—. roast turkey and sausages, boiled leg of pork, pease
pudding, vegetables. . baked apple pudding, mince pies.
. monday.—. hashed turkey, cold pork, mashed potatoes. .
mince-meat pudding.
. tuesday.—. pea-soup made from liquor in which pork was boiled.
. boiled fowls and celery sauce, vegetables. . baked rice pudding.
. wednesday.—. roast leg of mutton, stewed spanish onions,
potatoes. . baked rolled jam pudding.
. thursday.—. baked cod's head. . cold mutton, roast hare,
gravy and red-currant jelly. . macaroni.
. friday.—. hare soup, made with stock and remains of roast
hare. . hashed mutton, pork cutlets, and mashed potatoes. . open
tarts, rice blancmange.
. saturday.—. rump-steak-and-kidney pudding, vegetables. .
mince pies, baked apple dumplings.
.—bill of fare for a game dinner for  persons (november).
 first course.
 hare soup.
purée of grouse. vase of pheasant soup.
flowers.
 soup á la reine.
 entrées.
salmi of fillets of hare salmi of
widgeon. en chevereuil. woodcock.
 perdrixaux choux.
lark pudding. vase of game patties.
flowers.
 curried rabbit.
salmi of fillet of pheasant salmi of
woodcock. and truffles. widgeon.
 second course.
larded pheasants.
leveret, larded and
stuffed.
cold pheasant pie vase of hot raised pie of
á la périgord. flowers. mixed game.
 grouse.
 larded partridges.
 third course.
 snipes. pintails. ortolans.
 quails.
golden vase of widgeon.
plovers. flowers.
 teal.
 wild duck. woodcock. snipes.
 entremets and removes.
apricot boudin ŕ la nesselrode. maids of
tart. honour.
 dantzic jelly.
 vol-au-vent vase of gâteau.
 of pears. flowers. génoise glacé.
 charlotte russe.
maids of plum pudding. compôte of
honour. apples.
 dessert.
olives. strawberry-ice figs.
cream.
preserved pineapples. dried
cherries. fruit.
grapes.
filberts. pears. walnuts.
wafers. biscuits.
ginger-ice cream. vase of orange-water ice.
flowers.
 apples.
dried grapes. preserved
fruit. cherries.
pears.
 figs. lemon-water ice. olives.
.—service a la russe (july).
julienne soup.
vermicelli soup.
boiled salmon.
turbot and lobster sauce.
soles-water souchy.
perch-water souchy.
matelote d'anguilles ŕ la toulouse.
filets de soles ŕ la normandie.
red mullet.
trout.
lobster rissoles.
whitebait.
riz de veau ŕ la banquičre.
filets de poulets aux coucombres.
canards ŕ la rouennaise.
mutton cutlets ŕ la jardiničre.
braised beef ŕ la flamande.
spring chickens.
roast quarter of lamb.
roast saddle of mutton.
tongue.
ham and peas.
quails, larded.
roast ducks.
turkey poult, larded.
mayonnaise of chicken.
tomatas.
green peas ŕ la française.
suédoise of strawberries.
charlotte russe.
compôte of cherries.
neapolitan cakes.
pastry.
madeira wine jelly.
 iced pudding ŕ la nesselrode.
note.—dinners ŕ la russe differ from ordinary dinners in the mode of
serving the various dishes. in a dinner ŕ la russe, the dishes are cut
up on a sideboard, and handed round to the guests, and each dish may be
considered a course. the table for a dinner ŕ la russe should be laid
with flowers and plants in fancy flowerpots down the middle, together
with some of the dessert dishes. a menu or bill of fare should be laid
by the side of each guest.
.—service a la russe (november).
ox-tail soup.
soup ŕ la jardiničre.
turbot and lobster sauce.
crimped cod and oyster sauce.
stewed eels.
soles ŕ la normandie.
pike and cream sauce.
fried filleted soles.
filets de boeuf ŕ la jardiničre.
croquettes of game aux champignons.
chicken cutlets.
mutton cutlets and tomata sauce.
lobster rissoles.
oyster patties.
partridges aux fines herbes.
larded sweetbreads.
roast beef.
poulets aux cressons.
haunch of mutton.
roast turkey.
boiled turkey and celery sauce.
ham.
grouse.
pheasants.
hare.
salad.
artichokes.
stewed celery.
italian cream.
charlotte aux pommes.
compôte of pears.
croűtes madrées aux fruits.
pastry.
punch jelly.
 iced pudding.
note.—dinners ŕ la russe are scarcely suitable for small
establishments; a large number of servants being required to carve; and
to help the guests; besides there being a necessity for more plates,
dishes, knives, forks, and spoons, than are usually to be found in any
other than a very large establishment. where, however, a service ŕ la
russe is practicable, there it, perhaps, no mode of serving a dinner so
enjoyable as this.
. much may be done in the arrangement of a supper-table, at a very
small expense, provided taste and ingenuity are exercised. the
colours and flavours of the various dishes should contrast nicely; there
should be plenty of fruit and flowers on the table, and the room should
be well lighted. we have endeavoured to show how the various dishes may
be placed; but of course these little matters entirely depend on the
length and width of the table used, on individual taste, whether the
tables are arranged round the room, whether down the centre, with a
cross one at the top, or whether the supper is laid in two separate
rooms, &c. &c. the garnishing of the dishes has also much to do with the
appearance of a supper-table. hams and tongues should be ornamented with
cut vegetable flowers, raised pies with aspic jelly cut in dice, and all
the dishes garnished sufficiently to be in good taste without looking
absurd. the eye, in fact, should be as much gratified as the palate. hot
soup is now often served at suppers, but is not placed on the table. the
servants fill the plates from a tureen on the buffet, and then hand them
to the guests: when these plates are removed, the business of supper
commences.
. where small rooms and large parties necessitate having a standing
supper, many things enumerated in the following bill of fare may be
placed on the buffet. dishes for these suppers should be selected which
may be eaten standing without any trouble. the following list may,
perhaps, assist our readers in the arrangement of a buffet for a
standing supper.
. beef, ham, and tongue sandwiches, lobster and oyster patties,
sausage rolls, meat rolls, lobster salad, dishes of fowls, the latter
all cut up; dishes of sliced ham, sliced tongue, sliced beef, and
galantine of veal; various jellies, blancmanges, and creams; custards in
glasses, compôtes of fruit, tartlets of jam, and several dishes of small
fancy pastry; dishes of fresh fruit, bonbons, sweetmeats, two or three
sponge cakes, a few plates of biscuits, and the buffet ornamented with
vases of fresh or artificial flowers. the above dishes are quite
sufficient for a standing supper; where more are desired, a supper must
then be laid and arranged in the usual manner.
.—bill of fare for a ball supper for  persons (for winter)
boar's head,
garnished with aspic jelly.
lobster salad lobster salad.
fruited jelly. mayonnaise of fowl. charlotte russe.
 small ham, garnished.
 small pastry. iced savoy cake. biscuits.
 vanilla cream epergne, with fruit. fruited jelly.
 two roast fowls, cut up. two roast fowls, cut up.
prawns two boiled fowls, with béchamel prawns
sauce.
biscuits small pastry
tongue, ornamented.
custards, trifle, ornamented. custards,
in glasses. in glasses.
raised chicken pie.
tipsy cake
lobster salad. lobster salad.
fruited jelly. swiss cream.
roast pheasant.
 meringues. epergne, with fruit. meringues.
 raspberry cream. galantine of veal. fruited jelly.
tipsy cake.
small pastry. biscuits.
raised game pie.
custards, trifle, ornamented custards,
in glasses. in glasses.
two roast fowls, cut up. two roast fowls, cut up.
tongue, ornamented.
prawns. prawns.
two boiled fowls, with béchamel
sauce.
biscuits. small pastry.
lobster salad. lobster salad.
fruited jelly. iced savoy cake. blancmange.
 small ham, garnished.
mayonnaise of fowl.
charlotte russe. fruited jelly.
larded capon.
note: when soup is served from the buffet, mock turtle and julienne
may be selected. besides the articles enumerated above, ices, wafers,
biscuits, tea, coffee, wines and liqueurs will be required. punch a la
romaine may also be added to the list of beverages.
or a cold collation for a summer entertainment, or wedding or
christening breakfast for  or  persons (july).
[illustration: containing the following—]
 [columns  and ]
  blancmanges, to be placed down the table.
  jellies, to be placed down the table.
  dishes of small pastry.
  fruit tarts.
  cheesecakes.
  compotes of fruit.
  english pines.
  small dishes of various summer fruits.
[column ]
dish of lobster, cut up.
charlotte russe ŕ la vanille.
lobster salad
pigeon pie.
lobster salad.
dish of lobster, cut up.
larded capon.
lobster salad.
pigeon pie.
dish of lobster, cut up.
savoy cake.
lobster salad.
[column ]
tongue.
ribs of lamb.
two roast fowls.
mayonnaise of salmon.
epergne, with flowers.
mayonnaise of trout.
tongue, garnished.
boiled fowls and béchamel sauce.
collared eel.
ham.
raised pie.
two roast fowls.
shoulder of lamb, stuffed.
mayonnaise of salmon.
epergne, with flowers.
mayonnaise of trout.
tongue.
boiled fowls and béchamel sauce.
raised pie.
ham, decorated.
shoulder of lamb, stuffed.
two roast fowls.
mayonnaise of salmon.
epergne, with flowers.
mayonnaise of trout.
tongue, garnished.
boiled fowls and béchamel sauce.
collared eel.
[column ]
veal-and-ham pie.
lobster salad.
savoy cake.
dish of lobster, cut up.
lobster salad.
boar's head.
pigeon pie.
lobster salad.
dish of lobster, cut up.
lobster salad.
charlotte russe ŕ la vanille.
veal and ham pie.
dish of lobster, cut up.
note.—the length of the page will not admit of our giving the dishes
as they should be placed on the table; they should be arranged with the
large and high dishes down the centre, and the spaces filled up with the
smaller dishes, fruit, and flowers, taking care that the flavours and
colours contrast nicely, and that no two dishes of a sort come together.
this bill of fare may be made to answer three or four purposes, placing
a wedding cake or christening cake in the centre on a high stand, if
required for either of these occasions. a few dishes of fowls, lobster
salads, &c. &c., should be kept in reserve to replenish those that are
most likely to be eaten first. a joint of cold roast and boiled beef
should be placed on the buffet, as being something substantial for the
gentlemen of the party to partake of. besides the articles enumerated in
the bill of fare, biscuits and wafers will be required, cream-and-water
ices, tea, coffee, wines, liqueurs, soda-water, ginger-beer, and
lemonade.
. it will not be necessary to give here a long bill of fare of cold
joints, &c., which may be placed on the side-board, and do duty at the
breakfast-table. suffice it to say, that any cold meat the larder may
furnish, should be nicely garnished, and be placed on the buffet.
collared and potted meats or fish, cold game or poultry, veal-and-ham
pies, game-and-rump-steak pies, are all suitable dishes for the
breakfast-table; as also cold ham, tongue, &c. &c.
. the following list of hot dishes may perhaps assist our readers in
knowing what to provide for the comfortable meal called breakfast.
broiled fish, such as mackerel, whiting, herrings, dried haddocks, &c.;
mutton chops and rump-steaks, broiled sheep's kidneys, kidneys ŕ la
maître d'hôtel, sausages, plain rashers of bacon, bacon and poached
eggs, ham and poached eggs, omelets, plain boiled eggs, oeufs-au-plat,
poached eggs on toast, muffins, toast, marmalade, butter, &c. &c.
. in the summer, and when they are obtainable, always have a vase of
freshly-gathered flowers on the breakfast-table, and, when convenient, a
nicely-arranged dish of fruit: when strawberries are in season, these
are particularly refreshing; as also grapes, or even currants.
. the remains of cold joints, nicely garnished, a few sweets, or a
little hashed meat, poultry or game, are the usual articles placed on
the table for luncheon, with bread and cheese, biscuits, butter, &c. if
a substantial meal is desired, rump-steaks or mutton chops may he
served, as also veal cutlets, kidneys, or any dish of that kind. in
families where there is a nursery, the mistress of the house often
partakes of the meal with the children, and makes it her luncheon. in
the summer, a few dishes of fresh fruit should be added to the luncheon,
or, instead of this, a compote of fruit or fruit tart, or pudding.
. of suppers we have little to say, as we have already given two
bills of fare for a large party, which will answer very well for a
smaller number, by reducing the quantity of dishes and by omitting a
few. hot suppers are now very little in request, as people now generally
dine at an hour which precludes the possibility of requiring supper; at
all events, not one of a substantial kind. should, however, a bill of
fare be required, one of those under the head of dinners, with slight
alterations, will be found to answer for a hot supper.
. a joint of cold roast beef, a joint of cold boiled beef,  ribs of
lamb,  shoulders of lamb,  roast fowls,  roast ducks,  ham, 
tongue,  veal-and-ham pies,  pigeon pies,  medium-sized lobsters, 
piece of collared calf's head,  lettuces,  baskets of salad, 
cucumbers.
. stewed fruit well sweetened, and put into glass bottles well
corked;  or  dozen plain pastry biscuits to eat with the stewed fruit,
 dozen fruit turnovers,  dozen cheesecakes,  cold cabinet puddings in
moulds,  blancmanges in moulds, a few jam puffs,  large cold
plum-pudding (this must be good), a few baskets of fresh fruit,  dozen
plain biscuits, a piece of cheese,  lbs. of butter (this, of course,
includes the butter for tea),  quartern loaves of household broad, 
dozen rolls,  loaves of tin bread (for tea),  plain plum cakes, 
pound cakes,  sponge cakes, a tin of mixed biscuits, / lb, of tea.
coffee is not suitable for a picnic, being difficult to make.
things not to be forgotten at a picnic.
. a stick of horseradish, a bottle of mint-sauce well corked, a
bottle of salad dressing, a bottle of vinegar, made mustard, pepper,
salt, good oil, and pounded sugar. if it can be managed, take a little
ice. it is scarcely necessary to say that plates, tumblers,
wine-glasses, knives, forks, and spoons, must not be forgotten; as also
teacups and saucers,  or  teapots, some lump sugar, and milk, if this
last-named article cannot be obtained in the neighbourhood. take 
corkscrews.
. beverages.— dozen quart bottles of ale, packed in hampers;
ginger-beer, soda-water, and lemonade, of each  dozen bottles; 
bottles of sherry,  bottles of claret, champagne ŕ discrétion, and any
other light wine that may be preferred, and  bottles of brandy. water
can usually be obtained so it is useless to take it.
. it is the custom of "society" to abuse its servants,—a façon de
parler, such as leads their lords and masters to talk of the weather,
and, when rurally inclined, of the crops,—leads matronly ladies, and
ladies just entering on their probation in that honoured and honourable
state, to talk of servants, and, as we are told, wax eloquent over the
greatest plague in life while taking a quiet cup of tea. young men at
their clubs, also, we are told, like to abuse their "fellows," perhaps
not without a certain pride and pleasure at the opportunity of
intimating that they enjoy such appendages to their state. it is another
conviction of "society" that the race of good servants has died out, at
least in england, although they do order these things better in france;
that there is neither honesty, conscientiousness, nor the careful and
industrious habits which distinguished the servants of our grandmothers
and great-grandmothers; that domestics no longer know their place; that
the introduction of cheap silks and cottons, and, still more recently,
those ambiguous "materials" and tweeds, have removed the landmarks
between the mistress and her maid, between the master and his man.
. when the distinction really depends on things so insignificant,
this is very probably the case; when the lady of fashion chooses her
footman without any other consideration than his height, shape, and
tournure of his calf, it is not surprising that she should find a
domestic who has no attachment for the family, who considers the figure
he cuts behind her carriage, and the late hours he is compelled to keep,
a full compensation for the wages he exacts, for the food he wastes, and
for the perquisites he can lay his hands on. nor should the fast young
man, who chooses his groom for his knowingness in the ways of the turf
and in the tricks of low horse-dealers, be surprised if he is sometimes
the victim of these learned ways. but these are the exceptional cases,
which prove the existence of a better state of things. the great masses
of society among us are not thus deserted; there are few families of
respectability, from the shopkeeper in the next street to the nobleman
whose mansion dignifies the next square, which do not contain among
their dependents attached and useful servants; and where these are
absent altogether, there are good reasons for it. the sensible master
and the kind mistress know, that if servants depend on them for their
means of living, in their turn they are dependent on their servants for
very many of the comforts of life; and that, with a proper amount of
care in choosing servants, and treating them like reasonable beings, and
making slight excuses for the shortcomings of human nature, they will,
save in some exceptional case, be tolerably well served, and, in most
instances, surround themselves with attached domestics.
. this remark, which is applicable to all domestics, is especially
so to men-servants. families accustomed to such attendants have always
about them humble dependents, whose children have no other prospect than
domestic service to look forward to; to them it presents no degradation,
but the reverse, to be so employed; they are initiated step by step into
the mysteries of the household, with the prospect of rising in the
service, if it is a house admitting of promotion,—to the respectable
position of butler or house-steward. in families of humbler pretensions,
where they must look for promotion elsewhere, they know that can only be
attained by acquiring the goodwill of their employers. can there be any
stronger security for their good conduct,—any doubt that, in the mass
of domestic servants, good conduct is the rule, the reverse the
exception?
. the number of the male domestics in a family varies according to
the wealth and position of the master, from the owner of the ducal
mansion, with a retinue of attendants, at the head of which is the
chamberlain and house-steward, to the occupier of the humbler house,
where a single footman, or even the odd man-of-all-work, is the only
male retainer. the majority of gentlemen's establishments probably
comprise a servant out of livery, or butler, a footman, and coachman, or
coachman and groom, where the horses exceed two or three.
. the domestic duties of the butler are to bring in the eatables at
breakfast, and wait upon the family at that meal, assisted by the
footman, and see to the cleanliness of everything at table. on taking
away, he removes the tray with the china and plate, for which he is
responsible. at luncheon, he arranges the meal, and waits unassisted,
the footman being now engaged in other duties. at dinner, he places the
silver and plated articles on the table, sees that everything is in its
place, and rectifies what is wrong. he carries in the first dish, and
announces in the drawing-room that dinner is on the table, and
respectfully stands by the door until the company are seated, when he
takes his place behind his master's chair on the left, to remove the
covers, handing them to the other attendants to carry out. after the
first course of plates is supplied, his place is at the sideboard to
serve the wines, but only when called on.
. the first course ended, he rings the cook's bell, and hands the
dishes from the table to the other servants to carry away, receiving
from them the second course, which he places on the table, removing the
covers as before, and again taking his place at the sideboard.
. at dessert, the slips being removed, the butler receives the
dessert from the other servants, and arranges it on the table, with
plates and glasses, and then takes his place behind his master's chair
to hand the wines and ices, while the footman stands behind his mistress
for the same purpose, the other attendants leaving the room. where the
old-fashioned practice of having the dessert on the polished table,
without any cloth, is still adhered to, the butler should rub off any
marks made by the hot dishes before arranging the dessert.
. before dinner, he has satisfied himself that the lamps, candles,
or gas-burners are in perfect order, if not lighted, which will usually
be the case. having served every one with their share of the dessert,
put the fires in order (when these are used), and seen the lights are
all right, at a signal from his master, he and the footman leave the
room.
. he now proceeds to the drawing-room, arranges the fireplace, and
sees to the lights; he then returns to his pantry, prepared to answer
the bell, and attend to the company, while the footman is clearing away
and cleaning the plate and glasses.
. at tea he again attends. at bedtime he appears with the candles;
he locks up the plate, secures doors and windows, and sees that all the
fires are safe.
. in addition to these duties, the butler, where only one footman is
kept, will be required to perform some of the duties of the valet, to
pay bills, and superintend the other servants. but the real duties of
the butler are in the wine-cellar; there he should be competent to
advise his master as to the price and quality of the wine to be laid in;
"fine," bottle, cork, and seal it, and place it in the binns. brewing,
racking, and bottling malt liquors, belong to his office, as well as
their distribution. these and other drinkables are brought from the
cellar every day by his own hands, except where an under-butler is kept;
and a careful entry of every bottle used, entered in the cellar-book; so
that the book should always show the contents of the cellar.
 . the office of butler is thus one of very great trust in a
 household. here, as elsewhere, honesty is the best policy: the
 butler should make it his business to understand the proper
 treatment of the different wines under his charge, which he can
 easily do from the wine-merchant, and faithfully attend to it;
 his own reputation will soon compensate for the absence of
 bribes from unprincipled wine-merchants, if he serves a generous
 and hospitable master. nothing spreads more rapidly in society
 than the reputation of a good wine-cellar, and all that is
 required is wines well chosen and well cared for; and this a
 little knowledge, carefully applied, will soon supply.
. the butler, we have said, has charge of the contents of the
cellars, and it is his duty to keep them in a proper condition, to fine
down wine in wood, bottle it off, and store it away in places suited to
the sorts. where wine comes into the cellar ready bottled, it is usual
to return the same number of empty bottles; the butler has not, in this
case, the same inducements to keep the bottles of the different sorts
separated; but where the wine is bottled in the house, he will find his
account, not only in keeping them separate, but in rinsing them well,
and even washing them with clean water as soon as they are empty.
 . there are various modes of fining wine: isinglass,
 gelatine, and gum arabic are all used for the purpose. whichever
 of these articles is used, the process is always the same.
 supposing eggs (the cheapest) to be used,—draw a gallon or so
 of the wine, and mix one quart of it with the whites of four
 eggs, by stirring it with a whisk; afterwards, when thoroughly
 mixed, pour it back into the cask through the bunghole, and stir
 up the whole cask, in a rotatory direction, with a clean split
 stick inserted through the bunghole. having stirred it
 sufficiently, pour in the remainder of the wine drawn off, until
 the cask is full; then stir again, skimming off the bubbles that
 rise to the surface. when thoroughly mixed by stirring, close
 the bunghole, and leave it to stand for three or four days. this
 quantity of clarified wine will fine thirteen dozen of port or
 sherry. the other clearing ingredients are applied in the same
 manner, the material being cut into small pieces, and dissolved
 in the quart of wine, and the cask stirred in the same manner.
 . to bottle wine.—having thoroughly washed and dried the
 bottles, supposing they have been before used for the same kind
 of wine, provide corks, which will be improved by being slightly
 boiled, or at least steeped in hot water,—a wooden hammer or
 mallet, a bottling-boot, and a squeezer for the corks. bore a
 hole in the lower part of the cask with a gimlet, receiving the
 liquid stream which follows in the bottle and filterer, which is
 placed in a tub or basin. this operation is best performed by
 two persons, one to draw the wine, the other to cork the
 bottles. the drawer is to see that the bottles are up to the
 mark, but not too full, the bottle being placed in a clean tub
 to prevent waste. the corking-boot is buckled by a strap to the
 knee, the bottle placed in it, and the cork, after being
 squeezed in the press, driven in by a flat wooden mallet.
 . as the wine draws near to the bottom of the cask, a thick
 piece of muslin is placed in the strainer, to prevent the
 viscous grounds from passing into the bottle.
 . having carefully counted the bottles, they are stored away
 in their respective binns, a layer of sand or sawdust being
 placed under the first tier, and another over it; a second tier
 is laid over this, protected by a lath, the head of the second
 being laid to the bottom of the first; over this another bed of
 sawdust is laid, not too thick, another lath; and so on till the
 binn is filled.
 . wine so laid in will be ready for use according to its
 quality and age. port wine, old in the wood, will be ready to
 drink in five or six months; but if it is a fruity wine, it will
 improve every year. sherry, if of good quality, will be fit to
 drink as soon as the "sickness" (as its first condition after
 bottling is called) ceases, and will also improve; but the
 cellar must be kept at a perfectly steady temperature, neither
 too hot nor too cold, but about ° or °, and absolutely free
 from draughts of cold air.
. where a single footman, or odd man, is the only male servant,
then, whatever his ostensible position, he is required to make himself
generally useful. he has to clean the knives and shoes, the furniture,
the plate; answer the visitors who call, the drawing-room and parlour
bells; and do all the errands. his life is no sinecure; and a methodical
arrangement of his time will be necessary, in order to perform his many
duties with any satisfaction to himself or his master.
 . the footman only finds himself in stockings, shoes, and
 washing. where silk stockings, or other extra articles of linen
 are worn, they are found by the family, as well as his livery, a
 working dress, consisting of a pair of overalls, a waistcoat, a
 fustian jacket, with a white or jean one for times when he is
 liable to be called to answer the door or wait at breakfast;
 and, on quitting his service, he is expected to leave behind him
 any livery had within six months.
. the footman is expected to rise early, in order to get through all
his dirty work before the family are stirring. boots and shoes, and
knives and forks, should be cleaned, lamps in use trimmed, his master's
clothes brushed, the furniture rubbed over; so that he may put aside his
working dress, tidy himself, and appear in a clean jean jacket to lay
the cloth and prepare breakfast for the family.
 . we need hardly dwell on the boot-cleaning process: three
 good brushes and good blacking must be provided; one of the
 brushes hard, to brush off the mud; the other soft, to lay on
 the blacking; the third of a medium hardness, for polishing; and
 each should be kept for its particular use. the blacking should
 be kept corked up, except when in use, and applied to the brush
 with a sponge tied to a stick, which, when put away, rests in a
 notch cut in the cork. when boots come in very muddy, it is a
 good practice to wash off the mud, and wipe them dry with a
 sponge; then leave them to dry very gradually on their sides,
 taking care they are not placed near the fire, or scorched. much
 delicacy of treatment is required in cleaning ladies' boots, so
 as to make the leather look well-polished, and the upper part
 retain a fresh appearance, with the lining free from hand-marks,
 which are very offensive to a lady of refined tastes.
 . patent leather boots require to be wiped with a wet
 sponge, and afterwards with a soft dry cloth, and occasionally
 with a soft cloth and sweet oil, blacking and polishing the edge
 of the soles in the usual way, but so as not to cover the patent
 polish with blacking. a little milk may also be used with very
 good effect for patent leather boots.
 . top boots are still occasionally worn by gentlemen. while
 cleaning the lower part in the usual manner, protect the tops,
 by inserting a cloth or brown paper under the edges and bringing
 it over them. in cleaning the tops, let the covering fall down
 over the boot; wash the tops clean with soap and flannel, and
 rub out any spots with pumice-stone. if the tops are to be
 whiter, dissolve an ounce of oxalic acid and half an ounce of
 pumice-stone in a pint of soft water; if a brown colour is
 intended, mix an ounce of muriatic acid, half an ounce of alum,
 half an ounce of gum arabic, and half an ounce of spirit of
 lavender, in a pint and a half of skimmed milk "turned." these
 mixtures apply by means of a sponge, and polish, when dry, with
 a rubber made of soft flannel.
 . knives are now generally cleaned by means of kent's or
 masters's machine, which gives very little trouble, and is very
 effective; before, however, putting the knives into the machine,
 it is highly necessary that they be first washed in a little
 warm (not hot) water, and then thoroughly wiped: if put into the
 machine with any grease on them, it adheres to the brushes, and
 consequently renders them unfit to use for the next knives that
 may be put in. when this precaution is not taken, the machine
 must come to pieces, so causing an immense amount of trouble,
 which may all be avoided by having the knives thoroughly free
 from grease before using the machine. brushes are also used for
 cleaning forks, which facilitate the operation. when knives are
 so cleaned, see that they are carefully polished, wiped, and
 with a good edge, the ferules and prongs free from dirt, and
 place them in the basket with the handles all one way.
 . lamp-trimming requires a thorough acquaintance with the
 mechanism; after that, constant attention to cleanliness, and an
 occasional entire clearing out with hot water: when this is
 done, all the parts should be carefully dried before filling
 again with oil. when lacquered, wipe the lacquered parts with a
 soft brush and cloth, and wash occasionally with weak soapsuds,
 wiping carefully afterwards. brass lamps may be cleaned with oil
 and rottenstone every day when trimmed. with bronze, and other
 ornamental lamps, more care will be required, and soft flannel
 and oil only used, to prevent the removal of the bronze or
 enamel. brass-work, or any metal-work not lacquered, is cleaned
 by a little oil and rottenstone made into a paste, or with fine
 emery-powder and oil mixed in the same manner. a small portion
 of sal ammoniac, beat into a fine powder and moistened with soft
 water, rubbed over brass ornaments, and heated over a charcoal
 fire, and rubbed dry with bran or whitening, will give to
 brass-work the brilliancy of gold. in trimming moderator lamps,
 let the wick be cut evenly all round; as, if left higher in one
 place than it is in another, it will cause it to smoke and burn
 badly. the lamp should then be filled with oil from a feeder,
 and afterwards well wiped with a cloth or rag kept for the
 purpose. if it can be avoided, never wash the chimneys of a
 lamp, as it causes them to crack when they become hot. small
 sticks, covered with wash-leather pads, are the best things to
 use for cleaning the glasses inside, and a clean duster for
 polishing the outside. the globe of a moderator lamp should be
 occasionally washed in warm soap-and-water, then well rinsed in
 cold water, and either wiped dry or left to drain. where
 candle-lamps are used, take out the springs occasionally, and
 free them well from the grease that adheres to them.
 . french polish, so universally applied to furniture, is
 easily kept in condition by dusting and rubbing with a soft
 cloth, or a rubber of old silk; but dining-tables can only be
 kept in order by hard rubbing, or rather by quick rubbing, which
 warms the wood and removes all spots.
 . brushing clothes is a very simple but very necessary
 operation. fine cloths require to be brushed lightly, and with
 rather a soft brush, except where mud is to be removed, when a
 hard one is necessary, being previously beaten lightly to
 dislodge the dirt. lay the garment on a table, and brush it in
 the direction of the nap. having brushed it properly, turn the
 sleeves back to the collar, so that the folds may come at the
 elbow-joints; next turn the lappels or sides back over the
 folded sleeves; then lay the skirts over level with the collar,
 so that the crease may fall about the centre, and double one
 half over the other, so as the fold comes in the centre of the
 back.
. having got through his dirty work, the single footman has now to
clean himself and prepare the breakfast. he lays the cloth on the table;
over it the breakfast-cloth, and sets the breakfast things in order, and
then proceeds to wait upon his master, if he has any of the duties of a
valet to perform.
. where a valet is not kept, a portion of his duties falls to the
footman's share,—brushing the clothes among others. when the hat is
silk, it requires brushing every day with a soft brush; after rain, it
requires wiping the way of the nap before drying, and, when nearly dry,
brushing with the soft brush and with the hat-stick in it. if the
footman is required to perform any part of a valet's duties, he will
have to see that the housemaid lights a fire in the dressing-room in due
time; that the room is dusted and cleaned; that the washhand-ewer is
filled with soft water; and that the bath, whether hot or cold, is ready
when required; that towels are at hand; that hair-brushes and combs are
properly cleansed, and in their places; that hot water is ready at the
hour ordered; the dressing-gown and slippers in their place, the clean
linen aired, and the clothes to be worn for the day in their proper
places. after the master has dressed, it will be the footman's duty to
restore everything to its place properly cleansed and dry, and the whole
restored to order.
. at breakfast, when there is no butler, the footman carries up the
tea-urn, and, assisted by the housemaid, he waits during breakfast.
breakfast over, he removes the tray and other things off the table,
folds up the breakfast-cloth, and sets the room in order, by sweeping
up all crumbs, shaking the cloth, and laying it on the table again,
making up the fire, and sweeping up the hearth.
. at luncheon-time nearly the same routine is observed, except where
the footman is either out with the carriage or away on other business,
when, in the absence of any butler, the housemaid must assist.
. for dinner, the footman lays the cloth, taking care that the table
is not too near the fire, if there is one, and that passage-room is
left. a tablecloth should be laid without a wrinkle; and this requires
two persons: over this the slips are laid, which are usually removed
preparatory to placing dessert on the table. he prepares knives, forks,
and glasses, with five or six plates for each person. this done, he
places chairs enough for the party, distributing them equally on each
side of the table, and opposite to each a napkin neatly folded, within
it a piece of bread or small roll, and a knife on the right side of each
plate, a fork on the left, and a carving-knife and fork at the top and
bottom of the table, outside the others, with the rests opposite to
them, and a gravy-spoon beside the knife. the fish-slice should be at
the top, where the lady of the house, with the assistance of the
gentleman next to her, divides the fish, and the soup-ladle at the
bottom: it is sometimes usual to add a dessert-knife and fork; at the
same time, on the right side also of each plate, put a wine-glass for as
many kinds of wine as it is intended to hand round, and a finger-glass
or glass-cooler about four inches from the edge. the latter are
frequently put on the table with the dessert.
. about half an hour before dinner, he rings the dinner-bell, where
that is the practice, and occupies himself with carrying up everything
he is likely to require. at the expiration of the time, having
communicated with the cook, he rings the real dinner-bell, and proceeds
to take it up with such assistance as he can obtain. having ascertained
that all is in order, that his own dress is clean and presentable, and
his white cotton gloves are without a stain, he announces in the
drawing-room that dinner is served, and stands respectfully by the door
until the company are seated: he places himself on the left, behind his
master, who is to distribute the soup; where soup and fish are served
together, his place will be at his mistress's left hand; but he must be
on the alert to see that whoever is assisting him, whether male or
female, are at their posts. if any of the guests has brought his own
servant with him, his place is behind his master's chair, rendering such
assistance to others as he can, while attending to his master's wants
throughout the dinner, so that every guest has what he requires. this
necessitates both activity and intelligence, and should be done without
bustle, without asking any questions, except where it is the custom of
the house to hand round dishes or wine, when it will be necessary to
mention, in a quiet and unobtrusive manner, the dish or wine you
present.
 . salt-cellars should be placed on the table in number
 sufficient for the guests, so that each may help themselves, or,
 at least, their immediate neighbours.
 . in some houses the table is laid out with plate and glass,
 and ornamented with flowers, the dessert only being placed on
 the table, the dinner itself being placed on the sideboard, and
 handed round in succession, in courses of soup, fish, entries,
 meat, game, and sweets. this is not only elegant but economical,
 as fewer dishes are required, the symmetry of the table being
 made up with the ornaments and dessert. the various dishes are
 also handed round when hot; but it involves additional and
 superior attendance, as the wines are also handed round; and
 unless the servants are very active and intelligent, many
 blunders are likely to be made. (see p. .)
. while attentive to all, the footman should be obtrusive to none;
he should give nothing but on a waiter, and always hand it with the left
hand and on the left side of the person he serves, and hold it so that
the guest may take it with ease. in lifting dishes from the table, he
should use both hands, and remove them with care, so that nothing is
spilt on the table-cloth or on the dresses of the guests.
. masters as well as servants sometimes make mistakes; but it is not
expected that a servant will correct any omissions, even if he should
have time to notice them, although with the best intentions: thus it
would not be correct, for instance, if he observed that his master took
wine with the ladies all round, as some gentlemen still continue to do,
but stopped at some one:—to nudge him on the shoulder and say, as was
done by the servant of a scottish gentleman, "what ails you at her in
the green gown?" it will be better to leave the lady unnoticed than for
the servant thus to turn his master into ridicule.
. during dinner each person's knife, fork, plate, and spoon should
be changed as soon as he has done with it; the vegetables and sauces
belonging to the different dishes presented without remark to the
guests; and the footman should tread lightly in moving round, and, if
possible, should bear in mind, if there is a wit or humorist of the
party, whose good things keep the table in a roar, that they are not
expected to reach his ears.
 . in opening wine, let it be done quietly, and without
 shaking the bottle; if crusted, let it be inclined to the
 crusted side, and decanted while in that position. in opening
 champagne, it is not necessary to discharge it with a pop;
 properly cooled, the cork is easily extracted without an
 explosion; when the cork is out, the mouth of the bottle should
 be wiped with the napkin over the footman's arm.
. at the end of the first course, notice is conveyed to the cook,
who is waiting to send up the second, which is introduced in the same
way as before; the attendants who remove the fragments, carrying the
dishes from the kitchen, and handing them to the footman or butler,
whose duty it is to arrange them on the table. after dinner, the
dessert-glasses and wines are placed on the table by the footman, who
places himself behind his master's chair, to supply wine and hand round
the ices and other refreshments, all other servants leaving the room.
. as soon as the drawing-room bell rings for tea, the footman enters
with the tray, which has been previously prepared; hands the tray round
to the company, with cream and sugar, the tea and coffee being generally
poured out, while another attendant hands cakes, toast, or biscuits. if
it is an ordinary family party, where this social meal is prepared by
the mistress, he carries the urn or kettle, as the case may be; hands
round the toast, or such other eatable as may be required, removing the
whole in the same manner when tea is over.
 . after each meal, the footman's place is in his pantry:
 here perfect order should prevail—a place for everything and
 everything in its place. a sink, with hot and cold water laid
 on, is very desirable,—cold absolutely necessary. wooden bowls
 or tubs of sufficient capacity are required, one for hot and
 another for cold water. have the bowl three parts full of clean
 hot water; in this wash all plate and plated articles which are
 greasy, wiping them before cleaning with the brush.
 . the footman in small families, where only one man is kept,
 has many of the duties of the upper servants to perform as well
 as his own, and more constant occupation; he will also have the
 arrangement of his time more immediately under his own control,
 and he will do well to reduce it to a methodical division. all
 his rough work should be done before breakfast is ready, when he
 must appear clean, and in a presentable state. after breakfast,
 when everything belonging to his pantry is cleaned and put in
 its place, the furniture in the dining and drawing rooms
 requires rubbing. towards noon, the parlour luncheon is to be
 prepared; and he must be at his mistress's disposal to go out
 with the carriage, or follow her if she walks out.
 . glass is a beautiful and most fragile article: hence it
 requires great care in washing. a perfectly clean wooden bowl is
 best for this operation, one for moderately hot and another for
 cold water. wash the glasses well in the first and rinse them in
 the second, and turn them down on a linen cloth folded two or
 three times, to drain for a few minutes. when sufficiently
 drained, wipe them with a cloth and polish with a finer one,
 doing so tenderly and carefully. accidents will happen; but
 nothing discredits a servant in the drawing-room more than
 continual reports of breakages, which, of course, must reach
 that region.
 . decanters and water-jugs require still more tender
 treatment in cleaning, inasmuch as they are more costly to
 replace. fill them about two-thirds with hot but not boiling
 water, and put in a few pieces of well-soaped brown paper; leave
 them thus for two or three hours; then shake the water up and
 down in the decanters; empty this out, rinse them well with
 clean cold water, and put them in a rack to drain. when dry,
 polish them outside and inside, as far as possible, with a fine
 cloth. to remove the crust of port or other wines, add a little
 muriatic acid to the water, and let it remain for some time.
. when required to go out with the carriage, it is the footman's
duty to see that it has come to the door perfectly clean, and that the
glasses, and sashes, and linings, are free from dust. in receiving
messages at the carriage door, he should turn his ear to the speaker, so
as to comprehend what is said, in order that he may give his directions
to the coachman clearly. when the house he is to call at is reached, he
should knock, and return to the carriage for orders. in closing the door
upon the family, he should see that the handle is securely turned, and
that no part of the ladies' dress is shut in.
. it is the footman's duty to carry messages or letters for his
master or mistress to their friends, to the post, or to the
tradespeople; and nothing is more important than dispatch and exactness
in doing so, although writing even the simplest message is now the
ordinary and very proper practice. dean swift, among his other quaint
directions, all of which are to be read by contraries, recommends a
perusal of all such epistles, in order that you may be the more able to
fulfil your duty to your master. an old lady of forfarshire had one of
those odd old caleb balderston sort of servants, who construed the dean
of st. patrick more literally. on one occasion, when dispatch was of
some importance, knowing his inquiring nature, she called her scotch
paul pry to her, opened the note, and read it to him herself, saying,
"now, andrew, you ken a' aboot it, and needna' stop to open and read it,
but just take it at once." probably most of the notes you are expected
to carry might, with equal harmlessness, be communicated to you; but it
will be better not to take so lively an interest in your mistress's
affairs.
. politeness and civility to visitors is one of the things masters
and mistresses have a right to expect, and should exact rigorously. when
visitors present themselves, the servant charged with the duty of
opening the door will open it promptly, and answer, without hesitation,
if the family are "not at home," or "engaged;" which generally means the
same thing, and might be oftener used with advantage to morals. on the
contrary, if he has no such orders, he will answer affirmatively, open
the door wide to admit them, and precede them to open the door of the
drawing-room. if the family are not there, he will place chairs for
them, open the blinds (if the room is too dark), and intimate civilly
that he goes to inform his mistress. if the lady is in her drawing-room,
he announces the name of the visitors, having previously acquainted
himself with it. in this part of his duty it is necessary to be very
careful to repeat the names correctly; mispronouncing names is very apt
to give offence, and leads sometimes to other disagreeables. the writer
was once initiated into some of the secrets on the "other side" of a
legal affair in which he took an interest, before he could correct a
mistake made by the servant in announcing him. when the visitor is
departing, the servant should be at hand, ready, when rung for, to open
the door; he should open it with a respectful manner, and close it
gently when the visitors are fairly beyond the threshold. when several
visitors arrive together, he should take care not to mix up the
different names together, where they belong to the same family, as mr.,
mrs., and miss; if they are strangers, he should announce each as
distinctly as possible.
. receptions and evening parties.—the drawing-rooms being
prepared, the card-tables laid out with cards and counters, and such
other arrangements as are necessary made for the reception of the
company, the rooms should be lighted up as the hour appointed
approaches. attendants in the drawing-room, even more than in the
dining-room, should move about actively but noiselessly; no creaking of
shoes, which is an abomination; watching the lights from time to time,
so as to keep up their brilliancy. but even if the attendant likes a
game of cribbage or whist himself, he must not interfere in his master
or mistress's game, nor even seem to take an interest in it. we once
knew a lady who had a footman, and both were fond of a game of
cribbage,—john in the kitchen, the lady in her drawing-room. the lady
was a giver of evening parties, where she frequently enjoyed her
favourite amusement. while handing about the tea and toast, john could
not always suppress his disgust at her mistakes. "there is more in that
hand, ma'am," he has been known to say; or, "ma'am, you forgot to count
his nob;" in fact, he identified himself with his mistress's game, and
would have lost twenty places rather than witness a miscount. it is not
necessary to adopt his example on this point, although john had many
qualities a good servant might copy with advantage.
 . the horse is the noblest of quadrupeds, whether we view
 him in his strength, his sagacity, or his beauty. he is also the
 most useful to man of all the animal creation; but his delicacy
 is equal to his power and usefulness. no other animal, probably,
 is so dependent on man in the state of domestication to which he
 has been reduced, or deteriorates so rapidly under exposure, bad
 feeding, or bad grooming. it is, therefore, a point of humanity,
 not to speak of its obvious impolicy, for the owner of horses to
 overlook any neglect in their feeding or grooming. his interest
 dictates that so valuable an animal should be well housed, well
 fed, and well groomed; and he will do well to acquire so much of
 stable lore as will enable him to judge of these points himself.
 in a general way, where a horse's coat is habitually rough and
 untidy, there is a sad want of elbow-grease in the stable. when
 a horse of tolerable breeding is dull and spiritless, he is
 getting ill or badly fed; and where he is observed to perspire
 much in the stables, is overfed, and probably eats his litter in
 addition to his regular supply of food.
 . stables.—the architectural form of the stables will be
 subject to other influences than ours; we confine ourselves,
 therefore, to their internal arrangements. they should be roomy
 in proportion to the number of stalls; warm, with good
 ventilation, and perfectly free from cold draughts; the stalls
 roomy, without excess, with good and well-trapped drainage, so
 as to exclude bad smells; a sound ceiling to prevent the
 entrance of dust from the hayloft, which is usually above them;
 and there should be plenty of light, coming, however, either
 from above or behind, so as not to glare in the horse's eye.
 . heat.—the first of these objects is attained, if the
 stables are kept within a degree or two of ° in winter, and
 ° in summer; although some grooms insist on a much higher
 temperature, in the interests of their own labour.
 . ventilation is usually attained by the insertion of one
 or more tubes or boxes of wood or iron through the ceiling and
 the roof, with a sloping covering over the opening, to keep out
 rain, and valves or ventilators below to regulate the
 atmosphere, with openings in the walls for the admission of
 fresh air: this is still a difficulty, however; for the
 effluvium of the stable is difficult to dispel, and draughts
 must be avoided. this is sometimes accomplished by means of
 hollow walls with gratings at the bottom outside, for the exit
 of bad air, which is carried down through the hollow walls and
 discharged at the bottom, while, for the admission of fresh air,
 the reverse takes place: the fresh by this means gets diffused
 and heated before it is discharged into the stable.
 . the stalls should be divided by partitions of wood-work
 eight or nine feet high at the head and six at the heels, and
 nine feet deep, so as to separate each horse from its neighbour.
 a hay-rack placed within easy reach of the horse, of wood or
 iron, occupies either a corner or the whole breadth of the
 stall, which should be about six feet for on ordinary-sized
 horse. a manger, formerly of wood, but of late years more
 generally of iron lined with enamel, occupies a corner of the
 stall. the pavement of the stall should be nearly level, with a
 slight incline towards the gutter, to keep the bed dry, paved
 with hard dutch brick laid on edge, or asphalte, or smithy
 clinkers, or rubble-stones, laid in strong cement. in the
 centre, about five feet from the wall, a grating should be
 firmly fixed in the pavement, and in communication with a
 well-trapped drain to carry off the water; the gutter outside
 the stall should also communicate with the drains by trapped
 openings. the passage between the stall and the hall should be
 from five to six feet broad at least; on the wall, opposite to
 each stall, pegs should be placed for receiving the harness and
 other things in daily use.
 . a harness-room is indispensable to every stable. it
 should be dry and airy, and furnished with a fireplace and
 boiler, both for the protection of the harness and to prepare
 mashes for the horses when required. the partition-wall should
 be boarded where the harness goes, with pegs to hang the various
 pieces of harness on, with saddle-trees to rest the saddles on,
 a cupboard for the brushes, sponges, and leathers, and a lock-up
 corn-bin.
 . the furniture of a stable with coachhouse, consists of
 coach-mops, jacks for raising the wheels, horse-brushes,
 spoke-brushes, water-brushes, crest and bit-brushes,
 dandy-brushes, currycombs, birch and heath brooms,
 trimming-combs, scissors and pickers, oil-cans and brushes,
 harness-brushes of three sorts, leathers, sponges for horse and
 carriage, stable-forks, dung-baskets or wheelbarrow, corn-sieves
 and measures, horse-cloths and stable pails, horn or glass
 lanterns. over the stables there should be accommodation for the
 coachman or groom to sleep. accidents sometimes occur, and he
 should be at hand to interfere.
. the establishment we have in view will consist of coachman,
groom, and stable-boy, who are capable of keeping in perfect order four
horses, and perhaps the pony. of this establishment the coachman is
chief. besides skill in driving, he should possess a good general
knowledge of horses; he has usually to purchase provender, to see that
the horses are regularly fed and properly groomed, watch over their
condition, apply simple remedies to trifling ailments in the animals
under his charge, and report where he observes symptoms of more serious
ones which he does not understand. he has either to clean the carriage
himself, or see that the stable-boy does it properly.
. the groom's first duties are to keep his horses in condition;
but he is sometimes expected to perform the duties of a valet, to ride
out with his master, on occasions, to wait at table, and otherwise
assist in the house: in these cases, he should have the means of
dressing himself, and keeping his clothes entirely away from the
stables. in the morning, about six o'clock, or rather before, the
stables should be opened and cleaned out, and the horses fed, first by
cleaning the rack and throwing in fresh hay, putting it lightly in the
rack, that the horses may get it out easily; a short time afterwards
their usual morning feed of oats should be put into the manger. while
this is going on, the stable-boy has been removing the stable-dung, and
sweeping and washing out the stables, both of which should be done every
day, and every corner carefully swept, in order to keep the stable sweet
and clean. the real duties of the groom follow: where the horses are not
taken out for early exercise, the work of grooming immediately
commences. "having tied up the head," to use the excellent description
of the process given by old barrett, "take a currycomb and curry him all
over the body, to raise the dust, beginning first at the neck, holding
the left cheek of the headstall in the left hand, and curry him from the
setting-on of his head all over the body to the buttocks, down to the
point of the hock; then change your hands, and curry him before, on his
breast, and, laying your right arm over his back, join your right side
to his left, and curry him all under the belly near the fore-bowels, and
so all over from the knees and back upwards; after that, go to the far
side and do that likewise. then take a dead horse's tail, or, failing
that, a cotton dusting-cloth, and strike that away which the currycomb
hath raised. then take a round brush made of bristles, with a leathern
handle, and dress him all over, both head, body, and legs, to the very
fetlocks, always cleansing the brush from the dust by rubbing it with
the currycomb. in the curry-combing process, as well as brushing, it
must be applied with mildness, especially with fine-skinned horses;
otherwise the tickling irritates them much. the brushing is succeeded by
a hair-cloth, with which rub him all over again very hard, both to take
away loose hairs and lay his coat; then wash your hands in fair water,
and rub him all over while they are wet, as well over the head as the
body. lastly, take a clean cloth, and rub him all over again till he be
dry; then take another hair-cloth, and rub all his legs exceeding well
from the knees and hocks downwards to his hoofs, picking and dressing
them very carefully about the fetlocks, so as to remove all gravel and
dust which will sometimes lie in the bending of the joints." in addition
to the practice of this old writer, modern grooms add wisping, which
usually follows brushing. the best wisp is made from a hayband,
untwisted, and again doubled up after being moistened with water: this
is applied to every part of the body, as the brushing had been, by
changing the hands, taking care in all these operations to carry the
hand in the direction of the coat. stains on the hair are removed by
sponging, or, when the coat is very dirty, by the water-brush; the whole
being finished off by a linen or flannel cloth. the horsecloth should
now be put on by taking the cloth in both hands, with the outside next
you, and, with your right hand to the off side, throw it over his back,
placing it no farther back than will leave it straight and level, which
will be about a foot from the tail. put the roller round, and the
pad-piece under it, about six or eight inches from the fore legs. the
horse's head is now loosened; he is turned about in his stall to have
his head and ears rubbed and brushed over every part, including throat,
with the dusting-cloth, finishing by "pulling his ears," which all
horses seem to enjoy very much. this done, the mane and foretop should
be combed out, passing a wet sponge over them, sponging the mane on both
sides, by throwing it back to the midriff, to make it lie smooth. the
horse is now returned to his headstall, his tail combed out, cleaning it
of stains with a wet brush or sponge, trimming both tail and mane, and
forelock when necessary, smoothing them down with a brush on which a
little oil has been dropped.
 . watering usually follows dressing; but some horses refuse
 their food until they have drunk: the groom should not,
 therefore, lay down exclusive rules on this subject, but study
 the temper and habits of his horse.
 . exercise.—all horses not in work require at least two
 hours' exercise daily; and in exercising them a good groom will
 put them through the paces to which they have been trained. in
 the case of saddle-horses he will walk, trot, canter, and gallop
 them, in order to keep them up to their work. with draught
 horses they ought to be kept up to a smart walk and trot.
 . feeding must depend on their work, but they require
 feeding three times a day, with more or less corn each time,
 according to their work. in the fast coaching days it was a
 saying among proprietors, that "his belly was the measure of his
 food;" but the horse's appetite is not to be taken as a
 criterion of the quantity of food under any circumstances.
 horses have been known to consume  lbs. of hay in twenty-four
 hours, whereas  lbs. to  lbs. is the utmost which should
 have been given. mr. croall, an extensive coach proprietor in
 scotland, limited his horses to -/ lbs. cut straw,  lbs.
 bruised oats, and -/ lbs. bruised beans, in the morning and
 noon, giving them at night  lbs. of the following; viz., 
 lbs. steamed potatoes,  lbs. barley-dust,  lbs. cut straw,
 and  lbs. salt, mixed up together: under this the horses did
 their work well. the ordinary measure given a horse is a peck of
 oats, about  lbs. to the bushel, twice a day, a third feed and
 a rack-full of hay, which may be about  lbs. or  lbs., when
 he is in full work.
 . you cannot take up a paper without having the question
 put, "do you bruise your oats?" well, that depends on
 circumstances: a fresh young horse can bruise its own oats when
 it can get them; but aged horses, after a time, lose the power
 of masticating and bruising them, and bolt them whole; thus much
 impeding the work of digestion. for an old horse, then, bruise
 the oats; for a young one it does no harm and little good. oats
 should be bright and dry, and not too new. where they are new,
 sprinkle them with salt and water; otherwise, they overload the
 horse's stomach. chopped straw mixed with oats, in the
 proportion of a third of straw or hay, is a good food for horses
 in full work; and carrots, of which horses are remarkably fond,
 have a perceptible effect in a short time on the gloss of the
 coat.
 . the water given to a horse merits some attention; it
 should not be too cold; hard water is not to be recommended;
 stagnant or muddy water is positively injurious; river water is
 the best for all purposes; and anything is preferable to spring
 water, which should be exposed to the sun in summer for an hour
 or two, and stirred up before using it; a handful of oatmeal
 thrown into the pail will much improve its quality.
 . shoeing.—a horse should not be sent on a journey or any
 other hard work immediately after new shoeing;—the stiffness
 incidental to new shoes is not unlikely to bring him down. a
 day's rest, with reasonable exercise, will not be thrown away
 after this operation. on reaching home very hot, the groom
 should walk him about for a few minutes; this done, he should
 take off the moisture with the scraper, and afterwards wisp him
 over with a handful of straw and a flannel cloth: if the cloth
 is dipped in some spirit, all the better. he should wash, pick,
 and wipe dry the legs and feet, take off the bridle and crupper,
 and fasten it to the rack, then the girths, and put a wisp of
 straw under the saddle. when sufficiently cool, the horse should
 have some hay given him, and then a feed of oats: if he refuse
 the latter, offer him a little wet bran, or a handful of oatmeal
 in tepid water. when he has been fed, he should be thoroughly
 cleaned, and his body-clothes put on, and, if very much harassed
 with fatigue, a little good ale or wine will be well bestowed on
 a valuable horse, adding plenty of fresh litter under the belly.
 . bridles.—every time a horse is unbridled, the bit
 should be carefully washed and dried, and the leather wiped, to
 keep them sweet, as well as the girths and saddle, the latter
 being carefully dried and beaten with a switch before it is
 again put on. in washing a horse's feet after a day's work, the
 master should insist upon the legs and feet being washed
 thoroughly with a sponge until the water flows over them, and
 then rubbed with a brush till quite dry.
 . harness, if not carefully preserved, very soon gets a
 shabby tarnished appearance. where the coachman has a proper
 harness-room and sufficient assistance, this is inexcusable and
 easily prevented. the harness-room should have a wooden lining
 all round, and be perfectly dry and well ventilated. around the
 walls, hooks and pegs should be placed, for the several pieces
 of harness, at such a height as to prevent their touching the
 ground; and every part of the harness should have its peg or
 hook,—one for the halters, another for the reins, and others
 for snaffles and other bits and metal-work; and either a wooden
 horse or saddle-trees for the saddles and pads. all these parts
 should be dry, clean, and shining. this is only to be done by
 careful cleaning and polishing, and the use of several requisite
 pastes. the metallic parts, when white, should be cleaned by a
 soft brush and plate-powder; the copper and brass parts
 burnished with rottenstone-powder and oil,—steel with
 emery-powder; both made into a paste with a little oil.
 . an excellent paste for polishing harness and the
 leather-work of carriages, is made by melting  lbs. of yellow
 wax, stirring it till completely dissolved. into this pour  lb.
 of litharge of the shops, which has been pounded up with water,
 and dried and sifted through a sieve, leaving the two, when
 mixed, to simmer on the fire, stirring them continually till all
 is melted. when it is a little cool, mix this with -/ lb. of
 good ivory-black; place this again on the fire, and stir till it
 boils anew, and suffer it to cool. when cooled a little, add
 distilled turpentine till it has the consistence of a thickish
 paste, scenting it with any essence at hand, thinning it when
 necessary from time to time, by adding distilled turpentine.
 . when the leather is old and greasy, it should be cleaned
 before applying this polish, with a brush wetted in a weak
 solution of potass and water, washing afterwards with soft river
 water, and drying thoroughly. if the leather is not black, one
 or two coats of black ink may be given before applying the
 polish. when quite dry, the varnish should be laid on with a
 soft shoe-brush, using also a soft brush to polish the leather.
 . when the leather is very old, it may be softened with
 fish-oil, and, after putting on the ink, a sponge charged with
 distilled turpentine passed over, to scour the surface of the
 leather, which should be polished as above.
 . for fawn or yellow-coloured leather, take a quart of
 skimmed milk, pour into it  oz. of sulphuric acid, and, when
 cold, add to it  oz. of hydrochloric acid, shaking the bottle
 gently until it ceases to emit white vapours; separate the
 coagulated from the liquid part, by straining through a sieve,
 and store it away till required. in applying it, clean the
 leather by a weak solution of oxalic acid, washing it off
 immediately, and apply the composition when dry with a sponge.
 . wheel-grease is usually purchased at the shops; but a
 good paste is made as follows:—melt  parts of grease, and
 stir into it, mixing it thoroughly and smoothly,  parts of
 fine black-lead in powder, and store away in a tin box for use.
 this grease is used in the mint at paris, and is highly
 approved.
 . carriages in an endless variety of shapes and names are
 continually making their appearance; but the hackney cab or
 clarence seems most in request for light carriages; the family
 carriage of the day being a modified form of the clarence
 adapted for family use. the carriage is a valuable piece of
 furniture, requiring all the care of the most delicate
 upholstery, with the additional disadvantage of continual
 exposure to the weather and to the muddy streets.
. it requires, therefore, to be carefully cleaned before putting
away, and a coach-house perfectly dry and well ventilated, for the
wood-work swells with moisture; it shrinks also with heat, unless the
timber has undergone a long course of seasoning: it should also have a
dry floor, a boarded one being recommended. it must be removed from the
ammoniacal influence of the stables, from open drains and cesspools, and
other gaseous influences likely to affect the paint and varnish. when
the carriage returns home, it should be carefully washed and dried, and
that, if possible, before the mud has time to dry on it. this is done by
first well slushing it with clean water, so as to wash away all
particles of sand, having first closed the sashes to avoid wetting the
linings. the body is then gone carefully over with a soft mop, using
plenty of clean water, and penetrating into every corner of the carved
work, so that not an atom of dirt remains; the body of the carriage is
then raised by placing the jack under the axletree and raising it so
that the wheel turns freely; this is now thoroughly washed with the mop
until the dirt is removed, using a water-brush for corners where the mop
does not penetrate. every particle of mud and sand removed by the mop,
and afterwards with a wet sponge, the carriage is wiped dry, and, as
soon after as possible, the varnish is carefully polished with soft
leather, using a little sweet oil for the leather parts, and even for
the panels, so as to check any tendency of the varnish to crack. stains
are removed by rubbing them with the leather and sweet oil; if that
fails, a little tripoli powder mixed with the oil will be more
successful.
. in preparing the carriage for use, the whole body should be rubbed
over with a clean leather and carefully polished, the iron-work and
joints oiled, the plated and brass-work occasionally cleaned,—the one
with plate-powder, or with well-washed whiting mixed with sweet oil, and
leather kept for the purpose,—the other with rottenstone mixed with a
little oil, and applied without too much rubbing, until the paste is
removed; but, if rubbed every day with the leather, little more will be
required to keep it untarnished. the linings require careful brushing
every day, the cushions being taken out and beaten, and the glass sashes
should always be bright and clean. the wheel-tires and axletree are
carefully seen to, and greased when required, the bolts and nuts
tightened, and all the parts likely to get out of order overhauled.
. these duties, however, are only incidental to the coachman's
office, which is to drive; and much of the enjoyment of those in the
carriage depends on his proficiency in his art,—much also of the wear
of the carriage and horses. he should have sufficient knowledge of the
construction of the carriage to know when it is out of order,—to know,
also, the pace at which he can go over the road he has under him,
without risking the springs, and without shaking those he is driving too
much.
. having, with or without the help of the groom or stable-boy, put
his horses to the carriage, and satisfied himself, by walking round
them, that everything is properly arranged, the coachman proceeds to the
off-side of the carriage, takes the reins from the back of the horses,
where they were thrown, buckles them together, and, placing his foot on
the step, ascends to his box, having his horses now entirely under
control. in ordinary circumstances, he is not expected to descend, for
where no footman accompanies the carriage, the doors are usually so
arranged that even a lady may let herself out, if she wishes it, from
the inside. the coachman's duties are to avoid everything approaching an
accident, and all his attention is required to guide his horses.
 . the pace at which he drives will depend upon his
 orders,—in all probability a moderate pace of seven or eight
 miles an hour; less speed is injurious to the horses, getting
 them into lazy and sluggish habits; for it is wonderful how soon
 these are acquired by some horses. the writer was once employed
 to purchase a horse for a country friend, and he picked a very
 handsome gelding out of collins's stables, which seemed to
 answer to his friend's wants. it was duly committed to the
 coachman who was to drive it, after some very successful trials
 in harness and out of it, and seemed likely to give great
 satisfaction. after a time, the friend got tired of his
 carriage, and gave it up; as the easiest mode of getting rid of
 the horse, it was sent up to the writer's stables,—a present.
 only twelve months had elapsed; the horse was as handsome as
 ever, with plenty of flesh, and a sleek glossy coat, and he was
 thankfully enough received; but, on trial, it was found that a
 stupid coachman, who was imbued with one of their old maxims,
 that "it's the pace that kills," had driven the horse, capable
 of doing his nine miles an hour with ease, at a jog-trot of four
 miles, or four and a half; and now, no persuasion of the whip
 could get more out of him. after many unsuccessful efforts to
 bring him back to his pace, in one of which a break-down
 occurred, under the hands of a professional trainer, he was sent
 to the hammer, and sold for a sum that did not pay for the
 attempt to break him in. this maxim, therefore, "that it's the
 pace that kills," is altogether fallacious in the moderate sense
 in which we are viewing it. in the old coaching days, indeed,
 when the shrewsbury "wonder" drove into the inn yard while the
 clock was striking, week after week and mouth after month, with
 unerring regularity, twenty-seven hours to a hundred and
 sixty-two miles; when the "quicksilver" mail was timed to eleven
 miles an hour between london and plymouth, with a fine of ł to
 the driver if behind time; when the brighton "age," "tool'd" and
 horsed by the late mr. stevenson, used to dash round the square
 as the fifth hour was striking, having stopped at the half-way
 house while his servant handed a sandwich and a glass of sherry
 to his passengers,—then the pace was indeed "killing." but the
 truth is, horses that are driven at a jog-trot pace lose that
 élan with which a good driver can inspire them, and they are
 left to do their work by mere weight and muscle; therefore,
 unless he has contrary orders, a good driver will choose a smart
 pace, but not enough to make his horses perspire: on level roads
 this should never be seen.
 . in choosing his horses, every master will see that they
 are properly paired,—that their paces are about equal. when
 their habits differ, it is the coachman's duty to discover how
 he can, with least annoyance to the horses, get that pace out of
 them. some horses have been accustomed to be driven on the
 check, and the curb irritates them; others, with harder mouths,
 cannot be controlled with the slight leverage this affords; he
 must, therefore, accommodate the horses as he best can. the
 reins should always be held so that the horses are "in hand;"
 but he is a very bad driver who always drives with a tight rein;
 the pain to the horse is intolerable, and causes him to rear and
 plunge, and finally break sway, if he can. he is also a bad
 driver when the reins are always slack; the horse then feels
 abandoned to himself; he is neither directed nor supported, and
 if no accident occurs, it is great good luck.
. the true coachman's hands are so delicate and gentle, that the
mere weight of the reins is felt on the bit, and the directions are
indicated by a turn of the wrist rather than by a pull; the horses are
guided and encouraged, and only pulled up when they exceed their
intended pace, or in the event of a stumble; for there is a strong
though gentle hand on the reins.
. the whip, in the hands of a good driver, and with well-bred
cattle, is there, more as a precaution than a "tool" for frequent use;
if he uses it, it is to encourage, by stroking the flanks; except,
indeed, he has to punish some waywardness of temper, and then he does it
effectually, taking care, however, that it is done on the flank, where
there is no very tender part, never on the crupper. in driving, the
coachman should never give way to temper. how often do we see horses
stumble from being conducted, or at least "allowed," to go over bad
ground by some careless driver, who immediately wreaks that vengeance on
the poor horse which might, with much more justice, be applied to his
own brutal shoulders. the whip is of course useful, and even necessary,
but should be rarely used, except to encourage and excite the horses.
. attendants on the person.-"no man is a hero to his valet," saith
the proverb; and the corollary may run, "no lady is a heroine to her
maid." the infirmities of humanity are, perhaps, too numerous and too
equally distributed to stand the severe microscopic tests which
attendants on the person have opportunities of applying. the valet and
waiting-maid are placed near the persons of the master and mistress,
receiving orders only from them, dressing them, accompanying them in all
their journeys, the confidants and agents of their most unguarded
moments, of their most secret habits, and of course subject to their
commands,—even to their caprices; they themselves being subject to
erring judgment, aggravated by an imperfect education. all that can be
expected from such servants is polite manners, modest demeanour, and a
respectful reserve, which are indispensable. to these, good sense, good
temper, some self-denial, and consideration for the feelings of others,
whether above or below them in the social scale, will be useful
qualifications. their duty leads them to wait on those who are, from
sheer wealth, station, and education, more polished, and consequently
more susceptible of annoyance; and any vulgar familiarity of manner is
opposed to all their notions of self-respect. quiet unobtrusive manners,
therefore, and a delicate reserve in speaking of their employers, either
in praise or blame, is as essential in their absence, as good manners
and respectful conduct in their presence.
. some of the duties of the valet we have just hinted at in treating
of the duties of the footman in a small family. his day commences by
seeing that his master's dressing-room is in order; that the housemaid
has swept and dusted it properly; that the fire is lighted and burns
cheerfully; and some time before his master is expected, he will do well
to throw up the sash to admit fresh air, closing it, however, in time to
recover the temperature which he knows his master prefers. it is now his
duty to place the body-linen on the horse before the fire, to be aired
properly; to lay the trousers intended to be worn, carefully brushed and
cleaned, on the back of his master's chair; while the coat and
waistcoat, carefully brushed and folded, and the collar cleaned, are
laid in their place ready to put on when required. all the articles of
the toilet should be in their places, the razors properly set and
stropped, and hot water ready for use.
. gentlemen generally prefer performing the operation of shaving
themselves, but a valet should be prepared to do it if required; and he
should, besides, be a good hairdresser. shaving over, he has to brush
the hair, beard, and moustache, where that appendage is encouraged,
arranging the whole simply and gracefully, according to the age and
style of countenance. every fortnight, or three weeks at the utmost, the
hair should be cut, and the points of the whiskers trimmed as often as
required. a good valet will now present the various articles of the
toilet as they are wanted; afterwards, the body-linen, neck-tie, which
he will put on, if required, and, afterwards, waistcoat, coat, and
boots, in suitable order, and carefully brushed and polished.
. having thus seen his master dressed, if he is about to go out, the
valet will hand him his cane, gloves, and hat, the latter well brushed
on the outside with a soft brush, and wiped inside with a clean
handkerchief, respectfully attend him to the door, and open it for him,
and receive his last orders for the day.
. he now proceeds to put everything in order in the dressing-room,
cleans the combs and brushes, and brushes and folds up any clothes that
may be left about the room, and puts them away in the drawers.
. gentlemen are sometimes indifferent as to their clothes and
appearance; it is the valet's duty, in this case, where his master
permits it, to select from the wardrobe such things as are suitable for
the occasion, so that he may appear with scrupulous neatness and
cleanliness; that his linen and neck-tie, where that is white or
coloured, are unsoiled; and where he is not accustomed to change them
every day, that the cravat is turned, and even ironed, to remove the
crease of the previous fold. the coat collar,—which where the hair is
oily and worn long, is apt to get greasy—should also be examined; a
careful valet will correct this by removing the spots day by day as they
appear, first by moistening the grease-spots with a little rectified
spirits of wine or spirits of hartshorn, which has a renovating effect,
and the smell of which soon disappears. the grease is dissolved and
removed by gentle scraping. the grease removed, add a little more of the
spirit, and rub with a piece of clean cloth; finish by adding a few
drops more; rub it with the palm of the hand, in the direction of the
grain of the cloth, and it will be clean and glossy as the rest of the
garment.
 . polish for the boots is an important matter to the valet,
 and not always to be obtained good by purchase; never so good,
 perhaps, as he can make for himself after the following
 recipes:—take of ivory-black and treacle each  oz., sulphuric
 acid  oz., best olive-oil  spoonfuls, best white-wine vinegar
  half-pints: mix the ivory-black and treacle well in an earthen
 jar; then add the sulphuric acid, continuing to stir the
 mixture; next pour in the oil; and, lastly, add the vinegar,
 stirring it in by degrees, until thoroughly incorporated.
 . another polish is made by mixing  oz. each of pounded
 galls and logwood-chips, and  lbs. of red french vine
 (ordinaire). boil together till the liquid is reduced to half
 the quantity, and pour it off through a strainer. now take /
 lb. each of pounded gum-arabic and lump-sugar,  oz. of green
 copperas, and  lbs. of brandy. dissolve the gum-arabic in the
 preceding decoction, and add the sugar and copperas: when all is
 dissolved and mixed together, stir in the brandy, mixing it
 smoothly. this mixture will yield  or  lbs. of a very superior
 polishing paste for boots and shoes.
. it is, perhaps, unnecessary to add, that having discharged all the
commissions intrusted to him by his master, such as conveying notes or
messages to friends, or the tradesmen, all of which he should punctually
and promptly attend to, it is his duty to be in waiting when his master
returns home to dress for dinner, or for any other occasion, and to have
all things prepared for this second dressing. previous to this, he
brings under his notice the cards of visitors who may have called,
delivers the messages be may have received for him, and otherwise
acquits himself of the morning's commissions, and receives his orders
for the remainder of the day. the routine of his evening duty is to have
the dressing-room and study, where there is a separate one, arranged
comfortably for his master, the fires lighted, candles prepared,
dressing-gown and slippers in their place, and aired, and everything in
order that is required for his master's comforts.
. the duties of a lady's-maid are more numerous, and perhaps more
onerous, than those of the valet; for while the latter is aided by the
tailor, the hatter, the linen-draper, and the perfumer, the lady's-maid
has to originate many parts of the mistress's dress herself: she should,
indeed, be a tolerably expert milliner and dressmaker, a good
hairdresser, and possess some chemical knowledge of the cosmetics with
which the toilet-table is supplied, in order to use them with safety and
effect. her first duty in the morning, after having performed her own
toilet, is to examine the clothes put off by her mistress the evening
before, either to put them away, or to see that they are all in order to
put on again. during the winter, and in wet weather, the dresses should
be carefully examined, and the mud removed. dresses of tweed, and other
woollen materials, may be laid out on a table and brushed all over; but
in general, even in woollen fabrics, the lightness of the tissues
renders brushing unsuitable to dresses, and it is better to remove the
dust from the folds by beating them lightly with a handkerchief or thin
cloth. silk dresses should never be brushed, but rubbed with a piece of
merino, or other soft material, of a similar colour, kept for the
purpose. summer dresses of barčge, muslin, mohair, and other light
materials, simply require shaking; but if the muslin be tumbled, it must
be ironed afterwards. if the dresses require slight repair, it should be
done at once: "a stitch in time saves nine."
 . the bonnet should be dusted with a light feather plume, in
 order to remove every particle of dust; but this has probably
 been done, as it ought to have been, the night before. velvet
 bonnets, and other velvet articles of dress, should be cleaned
 with a soft brush. if the flowers with which the bonnet is
 decorated have been crushed or displaced, or the leaves tumbled,
 they should be raised and readjusted by means of flower-pliers.
 if feathers have suffered from damp, they should be held near
 the fire for a few minutes, and restored to their natural state
 by the hand or a soft brush.
 . the chausserie, or foot-gear of a lady, is one of the
 few things left to mark her station, and requires special care.
 satin boots or shoes should be dusted with a soft brush, or
 wiped with a cloth. kid or varnished leather should have the mud
 wiped off with a sponge charged with milk, which preserves its
 softness and polish. the following is also an excellent polish
 for applying to ladies' boots, instead of blacking them:—mix
 equal proportions of sweet-oil, vinegar, and treacle, with  oz.
 of lamp-black. when all the ingredients are thoroughly
 incorporated, rub the mixture on the boots with the palm of the
 hand, and put them in a cool place to dry. ladies' blacking,
 which may be purchased in d, and s. bottles, is also very much
 used for patent leather and kid boots, particularly when they
 are a little worn. this blacking is merely applied with a piece
 of sponge, and the boots should not be put on until the blacking
 is dry und hardened.
. these various preliminary offices performed, the lady's-maid
should prepare for dressing her mistress, arranging her dressing-room,
toilet-table, and linen, according to her mistress's wishes and habits.
the details of dressing we need not touch upon,—every lady has her own
mode of doing so; but the maid should move about quietly, perform any
offices about her mistress's person, as lacing stays, gently, and adjust
her linen smoothly.
. having prepared the dressing-room by lighting the fire, sweeping
the hearth, and made everything ready for dressing her mistress, placed
her linen before the fire to air, and laid out the various articles of
dress she is to wear, which will probably have been arranged the
previous evening, the lady's-maid is prepared for the morning's duties.
. hairdressing is the most important part of the lady's-maid's
office. if ringlets are worn, remove the curl-papers, and, after
thoroughly brushing the back hair both above and below, dress it
according to the prevailing fashion. if bandeaux are worn, the hair is
thoroughly brushed and frizzed outside and inside, folding the hair back
round the head, brushing it perfectly smooth, giving it a glossy
appearance by the use of pomades, or oil, applied by the palm of the
hand, smoothing it down with a small brush dipped in bandoline. double
bandeaux are formed by bringing most of the hair forward, and rolling it
over frizettes made of hair the same colour as that of the wearer: it is
finished behind by plaiting the hair, and arranging it in such a manner
as to look well with the head-dress.
. lessons in hairdressing may be obtained, and at not an
unreasonable charge. if a lady's-maid can afford it, we would advise her
to initiate herself in the mysteries of hairdressing before entering on
her duties. if a mistress finds her maid handy, and willing to learn,
she will not mind the expense of a few lessons, which are almost
necessary, as the fashion and mode of dressing the hair is so
continually changing. brushes and combs should be kept scrupulously
clean, by washing them about twice a week: to do this oftener spoils the
brushes, as very frequent washing makes them so very soft.
to wash brushes.
. dissolve a piece of soda in some hot water, allowing a piece the
size of a walnut to a quart of water. put the water into a basin, and,
after combing out the hair from the brushes, dip them, bristles
downwards, into the water and out again, keeping the backs and handles
as free from the water as possible. repeat this until the bristles look
clean; then rinse the brushes in a little cold water; shake them well,
and wipe the handles and backs with a towel, but not the bristles, and
set the brushes to dry in the sun, or near the fire; but take care not
to put them too close to it. wiping the bristles of a brush makes them
soft, as does also the use of soap.
to clean combs.
. if it can be avoided, never wash combs, as the water often makes
the teeth split, and the tortoiseshell or horn of which they are made,
rough. small brushes, manufactured purposely for cleaning combs, may be
purchased at a trifling cost: with this the comb should be well brushed,
and afterwards wiped with a cloth or towel.
a good wash for the hair.
. ingredients.— pennyworth of borax, / pint of olive-oil,  pint
of boiling water.
mode.—pour the boiling water over the borax and oil; let it cool; then
put the mixture into a bottle. shake it before using, and apply it with
a flannel. camphor and borax, dissolved in boiling water and left to
cool, make a very good wash for the hair; as also does rosemary-water
mixed with a little borax. after using any of these washes, when the
hair becomes thoroughly dry, a little pomatum or oil should be rubbed
in, to make it smooth and glossy.
to make pomade for the hair.
. ingredients.—/ lb. of lard,  pennyworth of castor-oil; scent.
mode.—let the lard be unsalted; beat it up well; then add the
castor-oil, and mix thoroughly together with a knife, adding a few drops
of any scent that may be preferred. put the pomatum into pots, which
keep well covered to prevent it turning rancid.
another recipe for pomatum.
. ingredients.— oz. of olive-oil,  oz. of spermaceti, 
pennyworth of essential oil of almonds,  pennyworth of essence of
lemon.
mode.—mix these ingredients together, and store away in jars for use.
to make bandoline.
. ingredients.— oz. of gum-tragacanth, / pint of cold water, 
pennyworth of essence of almonds,  teaspoonfuls of old rum.
mode.—put the gum-tragacanth into a wide-mouthed bottle with the cold
water; let it stand till dissolved, then stir into it the essence of
almonds; let it remain for an hour or two, when pour the rum on the top.
this should make the stock bottle, and when any is required for use, it
is merely necessary to dilute it with a little cold water until the
desired consistency is obtained, and to keep it in a small bottle, well
corked, for use. this bandoline, instead of injuring the hair, as many
other kinds often do, improves it, by increasing its growth, and making
it always smooth and glossy.
an excellent pomatum.
. ingredients.—-/ lb. of lard, / pint of olive-oil, / pint
of castor-oil,  oz. of spermaceti, bergamot, or any other scent;
elder-flower water.
mode.—wash the lard well in the elder-flower water; drain, and beat
it to a cream. mix the two oils together, and heat them sufficiently to
dissolve the spermaceti, which should be beaten fine in a mortar. mix
all these ingredients together with the brandy and whatever kind of
scent may be preferred; and whilst warm pour into glass bottles for use,
keeping them well corked. the best way to liquefy the pomatum is to set
the bottle in a saucepan of warm water. it will remain good for many
months.
to promote the growth of hair.
. ingredients.—equal quantities of olive-oil and spirit of
rosemary; a few drops of oil of nutmeg.
mode.—mix the ingredients together, rub the roots of the hair every
night with a little of this liniment, and the growth of it will very
soon sensibly increase.
 . our further remarks on dressing must be confined to some
 general advice. in putting on a band, see that it is laid quite
 flat, and is drawn tightly round the waist before it is pinned
 in front; that the pin is a strong one, and that it is secured
 to the stays, so as not to slip up or down, or crease in the
 folds. arrange the folds of the dress over the crinoline
 petticoats; if the dress fastens behind, put a small pin in the
 slit to prevent it from opening. see that the sleeves fall well
 over the arms. if it is finished with a jacket, or other upper
 dress, see that it fits smoothly under the arms; pull out the
 flounces, and spread out the petticoat at the bottom with the
 hands, so that it falls in graceful folds. in arranging the
 petticoat itself, a careful lady's-maid will see that this is
 firmly fastened round the waist.
 . where sashes are worn, pin the bows securely on the inside
 with a pin, so as not to be visible; then raise the bow with the
 fingers. the collar is arranged and carefully adjusted with
 brooch or bow in the centre.
. having dressed her mistress for breakfast, and breakfasted
herself, the further duties of the lady's-maid will depend altogether
upon the habits of the family, in which hardly two will probably agree.
where the duties are entirely confined to attendance on her mistress, it
is probable that the bedroom and dressing-room will be committed to her
care; that, the housemaid will rarely enter, except for the weekly or
other periodical cleaning; she will, therefore, have to make her
mistress's bed, and keep it in order; and as her duties are light and
easy, there can be no allowance made for the slightest approach to
uncleanliness or want of order. every morning, immediately after her
mistress has left it, and while breakfast is on, she should throw the
bed open, by taking off the clothes; open the windows (except in rainy
weather), and leave the room to air for half an hour. after breakfast,
except her attendance on her mistress prevents it, if the rooms are
carpeted, she should sweep them carefully, having previously strewed the
room with moist tea-leaves, dusting every table and chair, taking care
to penetrate to every corner, and moving every article of furniture that
is portable. this done satisfactorily, and having cleaned the
dressing-glass, polished up the furniture and the ornaments, and made
the glass jug and basin clean and bright, emptied all slops, emptied the
water-jugs and filled them with fresh water, and arranged the rooms, the
dressing-room is ready for the mistress when she thinks proper to
appear.
. the dressing-room thoroughly in order, the same thing is to be
done in the bedroom, in which she will probably be assisted by the
housemaid to make the bed and empty the slops. in making the bed, she
will study her lady's wishes, whether it is to be hard or soft, sloping
or straight, and see that it is done accordingly.
. having swept the bedroom with equal care, dusted the tables and
chairs, chimney-ornaments, and put away all articles of dress left from
yesterday, and cleaned and put away any articles of jewellery, her next
care is to see, before her mistress goes out, what requires replacing in
her department, and furnish her with a list of them, that she may use
her discretion about ordering them. all this done, she may settle
herself down to any work on which she is engaged. this will consist
chiefly in mending; which is first to be seen to; everything, except
stockings, being mended before washing. plain work will probably be one
of the lady's-maid's chief employments.
 . a waiting-maid, who wishes to make herself useful, will
 study the fashion-books with attention, so as to be able to aid
 her mistress's judgment in dressing, according to the prevailing
 fashion, with such modifications as her style of countenance
 requires. she will also, if she has her mistress's interest at
 heart, employ her spare time in repairing and making up dresses
 which have served one purpose, to serve another also, or turning
 many things, unfitted for her mistress to use, for the younger
 branches of the family. the lady's-maid may thus render herself
 invaluable to her mistress, and increase her own happiness in so
 doing. the exigencies of fashion and luxury are such, that all
 ladies, except those of the very highest rank, will consider
 themselves fortunate in having about them a thoughtful person,
 capable of diverting their finery to a useful purpose.
. among other duties, the lady's-maid should understand the various
processes for washing, and cleaning, and repairing laces; edging of
collars; removing stains and grease-spots from dresses, and similar
processes, for which the following recipes will be found very useful. in
washing—
 . blonde, fine toilet-soap is used; the blonde is soaped
 over very slightly, and washed in water in which a little
 fig-blue is dissolved, rubbing it very gently; when clean, dry
 it. dip it afterwards in very thin gum-water, dry it again in
 linen, spread it out as flat as it will lie, and iron it. where
 the blonde is of better quality, and wider, it may be stretched
 on a hoop to dry after washing in the blue-water, applying the
 gum with a sponge; or it may be washed finally in water in which
 a lump of sugar has been dissolved, which gives it more the
 appearance of new blonde.
 . lace collars soil very quickly when in contact with the
 neck; they are cleaned by beating the edge of the collar between
 the folds of a fine linen cloth, then washing the edges as
 directed above, and spreading it out on an ironing-board,
 pinning it at each corner with fine pins; then going carefully
 over it with a sponge charged with water in which some
 gum-dragon and fig-blue have been dissolved, to give it a proper
 consistence. to give the collar the same tint throughout, the
 whole collar should be sponged with the same water, taking care
 not to touch the flowers.
. a multiplicity of accidents occur to soil and spot dresses, which
should be removed at once. to remove—
 . grease-spots from cotton or woollen materials of fast
 colours, absorbent pastes, purified bullock's-blood, and even
 common soap, are used, applied to the spot when dry. when the
 colours are not fast, use fuller's-earth or pulverized
 potter's-clay, laid in a layer over the spot, and press it with
 a very hot iron.
 . for silks, moires, and plain or brocaded satins, begin by
 pouring over the spot two drops of rectified spirits of wine;
 cover it over with a linen cloth, and press it with a hot iron,
 changing the linen instantly. the spot will look tarnished, for
 a portion of the grease still remains: this will be removed
 entirely by a little sulphuric ether dropped on the spot, and a
 very little rubbing. if neatly done, no perceptible mark or
 circle will remain; nor will the lustre of the richest silk be
 changed, the union of the two liquids operating with no
 injurious effects from rubbing.
 . fruit-spots are removed from white and fast-coloured
 cottons by the use of chloride of soda. commence by cold-soaping
 the article, then touch the spot with a hair-pencil or feather
 dipped in the chloride, dipping it immediately into cold water,
 to prevent the texture of the article being injured.
 . ink-spots are removed, when fresh applied to the spot,
 by a few drops of hot water being poured on immediately
 afterwards. by the same process, iron-mould in linen or calico
 may be removed, dipping immediately in cold water to prevent
 injury to the fabric.
 . wax dropped on a shawl, table-cover, or cloth dress, is
 easily discharged by applying spirits of wine.
 . syrups or preserved fruits, by washing in lukewarm water
 with a dry cloth, and pressing the spot between two folds of
 clean linen.
 . essence of lemon will remove grease, but will make a
 spot itself in a few days.
to clean silk or ribbons.
. ingredients.—/ pint of gin, / lb. of honey, / lb. of soft
soap, / pint of water.
mode.—mix the above ingredients together; then lay each breadth of
silk upon a clean kitchen table or dresser, and scrub it well on the
soiled side with the mixture. have ready three vessels of cold water;
take each piece of silk at two corners, and dip it up and down in each
vessel, but do not wring it; and take care that each breadth has one
vessel of quite clean water for the last dip. hang it up dripping for a
minute or two, then dab it in a cloth, and iron it quickly with a very
hot iron.
to remove paint-spots from silk cloth.
. if the fabric will bear it, sharp rubbing will frequently entirely
discharge a newly-made paint-stain; but, if this is not successful,
apply spirit of turpentine with a quill till the stains disappear.
to make old crape look nearly equal to new.
. place a little water in a teakettle, and let it boil until there
is plenty of steam from the spout; then, holding the crape in both
hands, pass it to and fro several times through the steam, and it will
to clean and look nearly equal to new.
. linen.—before sending linen to wash, the lady's-maid should see
that everything under her charge is properly mended; for her own sake
she should take care that it is sent out in an orderly manner, each
class of garments by themselves, with a proper list, of which she
retains a copy. on its return, it is still more necessary to examine
every piece separately, so that all missing buttons be supplied, and
only the articles properly washed and in perfect repair passed into the
wardrobe.
. ladies who keep a waiting-maid for their own persons are in the
habit of paying visits to their friends, in which it is not unusual for
the maid to accompany them; at all events, it is her duty to pack the
trunks; and this requires not only knowledge but some practice, although
the improved trunks and portmanteaus now made, in which there is a place
for nearly everything, render this more simple than formerly. before
packing, let the trunks be thoroughly well cleaned, and, if necessary,
lined with paper, and everything intended for packing laid out on the
bed or chairs, so that it may be seen what is to be stowed away; the
nicer articles of dress neatly folded in clean calico wrappers. having
satisfied herself that everything wanted is laid out, and that it is in
perfect order, the packing is commenced by disposing of the most bulky
articles, the dressing-case and work-box, skirts, and other articles
requiring room, leaving the smaller articles to fill up; finally, having
satisfied herself that all is included, she should lock and cover up the
trunk in its canvas case, and then pack her own box, if she is to
accompany her mistress.
. on reaching the house, the lady's-maid will be shown her lady's
apartment; and her duties here are what they were at home; she will
arrange her mistress's things, and learn which is her bell, in order to
go to her when she rings. her meals will be taken in the housekeeper's
room; and here she must be discreet and guarded in her talk to any one
of her mistress or her concerns. her only occupation here will be
attending in her lady's room, keeping her things in order, and making
her rooms comfortable for her.
. the evening duties of a lady's-maid are pretty nearly a repetition
of those of the morning. she is in attendance when her mistress retires;
she assists her to undress if required, brushes her hair, and renders
such other assistance as is demanded; removes all slops; takes care that
the fire, if any, is safe, before she retires to rest herself.
. ironing is a part of the duties of a lady's-maid, and she should
be able to do it in the most perfect manner when it becomes necessary.
ironing is often badly done from inattention to a few very simple
requirements. cleanliness is the first essential: the ironing-board, the
fire, the iron, and the ironing-blanket should all be perfectly clean.
it will not be necessary here to enter into details on ironing, as full
directions are given in the "duties of the laundry-maid." a lady's-maid
will have a great deal of "ironing-out" to do; such as light evening
dresses, muslin dresses, &c., which are not dirty enough to be washed,
but merely require smoothing out to remove the creases. in summer,
particularly, an iron will be constantly required, as also a
skirt-board, which should be covered with a nice clean piece of flannel.
to keep muslin dresses in order, they almost require smoothing out every
time they are worn, particularly if made with many flounces. the
lady's-maid may often have to perform little services for her mistress
which require care; such as restoring the colour to scorched linen, &c.
&c. the following recipe is, we believe, a very good one.
to restore whiteness to scorched linen.
. ingredients.—/ pint of vinegar,  oz. of fuller's-earth,  oz.
of dried fowls' dung, / oz. of soap, the juice of  large onions.
mode.—boil all these ingredients together to the consistency of
paste; spread the composition thickly over the damaged part, and if the
threads be not actually consumed, after it has been allowed to dry on,
and the place has subsequently been washed once or twice, every trace of
scorching will disappear.
 . furs, feathers, and woollens require the constant care
 of the waiting-maid. furs and feathers not in constant use
 should be wrapped up in linen washed in lye. from may to
 september they are subject to being made the depositary of the
 moth-eggs. they should be looked too, and shaken and beaten,
 from time to time, in case some of the eggs should have been
 lodged in them, in spite of every precaution; laying them up
 again, or rather folding them up as before, wrapping them in
 brown paper, which is itself a preservative. shawls and cloaks,
 which would be damaged by such close folds, must be looked to,
 and aired and beaten, putting them away dry before the evening.
preservatives against the ravages of moths.
. place pieces of camphor, cedar-wood, russia leather,
tobacco-leaves, bog-myrtle, or anything else strongly aromatic, in the
drawers or boxes where furs or other things to be preserved from moths
are kept, and they will never take harm.
 . jewels are generally wrapped up in cotton, and kept in
 their cases; but they are subject to tarnish from exposure to
 the air, and require cleaning. this is done by preparing clean
 soap-suds, using fine toilet-soap. dip any article of gold,
 silver, gilt, or precious stones into this lye, and dry them by
 brushing with a brush of soft badgers' hair, or a fine sponge;
 afterwards with a piece of fine cloth, and, lastly, with a soft
 leather.
 . epaulettes of gold or silver, and, in general, all
 articles of jewellery, may be dressed by dipping them in spirits
 of wine warmed in a bain marie, or shallow kettle, placed over
 a slow fire or hot-plate.
. the valet and lady's-maid, from their supposed influence with
their master and mistress, are exposed to some temptations to which
other servants are less subjected. they are probably in communication
with the tradespeople who supply articles for the toilet; such as
batters, tailors, dressmakers, and perfumers. the conduct of
waiting-maid and valet to these people should be civil but independent,
making reasonable allowance for want of exact punctuality, if any such
can be made: they should represent any inconvenience respectfully, and
if an excuse seems unreasonable, put the matter fairly to master or
mistress, leaving it to them to notice it further, if they think it
necessary. no expectations of a personal character should influence them
one way or the other. it would be acting unreasonably to any domestic to
make them refuse such presents as tradespeople choose to give them; the
utmost that can be expected is that they should not influence their
judgment in the articles supplied—that they should represent them truly
to master or mistress, without fear and without favour. civility to all,
servility to none, is a good maxim for every one. deference to a master
and mistress, and to their friends and visitors, is one of the implied
terms of their engagement; and this deference must apply even to what
may be considered their whims. a servant is not to be seated, or wear a
hat in the house, in his master's or mistress's presence; nor offer any
opinion, unless asked for it; nor even to say "good night," or "good
morning," except in reply to that salutation.
to preserve cut flowers.
. a bouquet of freshly-cut flowers may be preserved alive for a long
time by placing them in a glass or vase with fresh water, in which a
little charcoal has been steeped, or a small piece of camphor dissolved.
the vase should be set upon a plate or dish, and covered with a
bell-glass, around the edges of which, when it comes in contact with the
plate, a little water should be poured to exclude the air.
to revive cut flowers after packing.
. plunge the stems into boiling water, and by the time the water is
cold, the flowers will have revived. then cut afresh the ends of the
stems, and keep them in fresh cold water.
. housemaids, in large establishments, have usually one or more
assistants; in this case they are upper and under housemaids. dividing
the work between them, the upper housemaid will probably reserve for
herself the task of dusting the ornaments and cleaning the furniture of
the principal apartments, but it is her duty to see that every
department is properly attended to. the number of assistants depends on
the number in the family, as well as on the style in which the
establishment is kept up. in wealthy families it is not unusual for
every grown-up daughter to have her waiting-maid, whose duty it is to
keep her mistress's apartments in order, thus abridging the housemaid's
duties. in others, perhaps, one waiting-maid attends on two or three,
when the housemaid's assistance will be more requisite. in fact, every
establishment has some customs peculiar to itself, on which we need not
dwell; the general duties are the same in all, perfect cleanliness and
order being the object.
. "cleanliness is next to godliness," saith the proverb, and "order"
is in the next degree; the housemaid, then, may be said to be the
handmaiden to two of the most prominent virtues. her duties are very
numerous, and many of the comforts of the family depend on their
performance; but they are simple and easy to a person naturally clean
and orderly, and desirous of giving satisfaction. in all families,
whatever the habits of the master and mistress, servants will find it
advantageous to rise early; their daily work will thus come easy to
them. if they rise late, there is a struggle to overtake it, which
throws an air of haste and hurry over the whole establishment. where the
master's time is regulated by early business or professional
engagements, this will, of course, regulate the hours of the servants;
but even where that is not the case, servants will find great personal
convenience in rising early and getting through their work in an orderly
and methodical manner. the housemaid who studies her own ease will
certainly be at her work by six o'clock in the summer, and, probably,
half-past six or seven in the winter months, having spent a reasonable
time in her own chamber in dressing. earlier than this would, probably,
be an unnecessary waste of coals and candle in winter.
. the first duty of the housemaid in winter is to open the shutters
of all the lower rooms in the house, and take up the hearth-rugs of
those rooms which she is going to "do" before breakfast. in some
families, where there is only a cook and housemaid kept, and where the
drawing-rooms are large, the cook has the care of the dining-room, and
the housemaid that of the breakfast-room, library, and drawing-rooms.
after the shutters are all opened, she sweeps the breakfast-room,
sweeping the dust towards the fire-place, of course previously removing
the fonder. she should then lay a cloth (generally made of coarse
wrappering) over the carpet in front of the stove, and on this should
place her housemaid's box, containing black-lead brushes, leathers,
emery-paper, cloth, black lead, and all utensils necessary for cleaning
a grate, with the cinder-pail on the other side.
[illustration: carpet-brooms.]
. she now sweeps up the ashes, and deposits them in her cinder-pail,
which is a japanned tin pail, with a wire-sifter inside, and a
closely-fitting top. in this pail the cinders are sifted, and reserved
for use in the kitchen or under the copper, the ashes only being thrown
away. the cinders disposed of, she proceeds to black-lead the grate,
producing the black lead, the soft brush for laying it on, her blacking
and polishing brushes, from the box which contains her tools. this
housemaid's box should be kept well stocked. having blackened, brushed,
and polished every part, and made all clean and bright, she now proceeds
to lay the fire. sometimes it is very difficult to get a proper polish
to black grates, particularly if they have been neglected, and allowed
to rust at all. brunswick black, which is an excellent varnish for
grates, may be prepared in the following manner:—
[illustration: stove brushes.]
[illustration: housemaid's box.]
. ingredients.— lb. of common asphaltum, / pint of linseed oil,
 quart of oil of turpentine.
mode.—melt the asphaltum, and add gradually to it the other two
ingredients. apply this with a small painter's brush, and leave it to
become perfectly dry. the grate will need no other cleaning, but will
merely require dusting every day, and occasionally brushing with a dry
black-lead brush. this is, of course, when no fires are used. when they
are required, the bars, cheeks, and back of the grate will need
black-leading in the usual manner.
 . fire-lighting, however simple, is an operation requiring
 some skill; a fire is readily made by laying a few cinders at
 the bottom in open order; over this a few pieces of paper, and
 over that again eight or ten pieces of dry wood; over the wood,
 a course of moderate-sized pieces of coal, taking care to leave
 hollow spaces between for air at the centre; and taking care to
 lay the whole well back in the grate, so that the smoke may go
 up the chimney, and not into the room. this done, fire the paper
 with a match from below, and, if properly laid, it will soon
 burn up; the stream of flame from the wood and paper soon
 communicating to the coals and cinders, provided there is plenty
 of air at the centre.
 . a new method of lighting a fire is sometimes practised
 with advantage, the fire lighting from the top and burning down,
 in place of being lighted and burning up from below. this is
 arranged by laying the coals at the bottom, mixed with a few
 good-sized cinders, and the wood at the top, with another layer
 of coals and some paper over it; the paper is lighted in the
 usual way, and soon burns down to a good fire, with some economy
 of fuel, as is said.
. bright grates require unceasing attention to keep them in perfect
order. a day should never pass without the housemaid rubbing with a dry
leather the polished parts of a grate, as also the fender and
fire-irons. a careful and attentive housemaid should have no occasion
ever to use emery-paper for any part but the bars, which, of course,
become blackened by the fire. (some mistresses, to save labour, have a
double set of bars, one set bright for the summer, and another black set
to use when fires are in requisition.) when bright grates are once
neglected, small rust-spots begin to show themselves, which a plain
leather will not remove; the following method of cleaning them must then
be resorted to:—first, thoroughly clean with emery-paper; then take a
large smooth pebble from the road, sufficiently large to hold
comfortably in the hand, with which rub the steel backwards and forwards
one way, until the desired polish is obtained. it may appear at first to
scratch, but continue rubbing, and the result will be success. the
following is also an excellent polish for bright stoves and steel
articles:—
. ingredients.— tablespoonful of turpentine,  ditto of sweet oil,
emery powder.
mode.—mix the turpentine and sweet oil together, stirring in
sufficient emery powder to make the mixture of the thickness of cream.
put it on the article with a piece of soft flannel, rub off quickly with
another piece, then polish with a little dry emery powder and clean
leather.
. the several fires lighted, the housemaid proceeds with her
dusting, and polishing the several pieces of furniture in the
breakfast-parlour, leaving no corner unvisited. before sweeping the
carpet, it is a good practice to sprinkle it all over with tea-leaves,
which not only lay all dust, but give a slightly fragrant smell to the
room. it is now in order for the reception of the family; and where
there is neither footman nor parlour-maid, she now proceeds to the
dressing-room, and lights her mistress's fire, if she is in the habit of
having one to dress by. her mistress is called, hot water placed in the
dressing-room for her use, her clothes—as far as they are under the
house-maid's charge—put before the fire to air, hanging a fire-guard on
the bars where there is one, while she proceeds to prepare the
breakfast.
. in summer the housemaid's work is considerably abridged: she
throws open the windows of the several rooms not occupied as bedrooms,
that they may receive the fresh morning air before they are occupied;
she prepares the breakfast-room by sweeping the carpet, rubbing tables
and chairs, dusting mantel-shelf and picture-frames with a light brush,
dusting the furniture, and beating and sweeping the rug; she cleans the
grate when necessary, and replaces the white paper or arranges the
shavings with which it is filled, leaving everything clean and tidy for
breakfast. it is not enough, however, in cleaning furniture, just to
pass lightly over the surface; the rims and legs of tables, and the
backs and legs of chairs and sofas, should be rubbed vigorously daily;
if there is a book-case, every corner of every pane and ledge requires
to be carefully wiped, so that not a speck of dust can be found in the
room.
. after the breakfast-room is finished, the housemaid should proceed
to sweep down the stairs, commencing at the top, whilst the cook has the
charge of the hall, door-step, and passages. after this she should go
into the drawing-room, cover up every article of furniture that is
likely to spoil, with large dusting-sheets, and put the chairs together,
by turning them seat to seat, and, in fact, make as much room as
possible, by placing all the loose furniture in the middle of the room,
whilst she sweeps the corners and sides. when this is accomplished, the
furniture can then be put back in its place, and the middle of the room
swept, sweeping the dirt, as before said, towards the fireplace. the
same rules should be observed in cleaning the drawing-room grates as we
have just stated, putting down the cloth, before commencing, to prevent
the carpet from getting soiled. in the country, a room would not require
sweeping thoroughly like this more than twice a week; but the housemaid
should go over it every morning with a dust-pan and broom, taking up
every crumb and piece she may see. after the sweeping she should leave
the room, shut the door, and proceed to lay the breakfast. where there
is neither footman nor parlour-maid kept, the duty of laying the
breakfast-cloth rests on the housemaid.
[illustration: banister-broom.]
[illustration: staircase-broom.]
. before laying the cloth for breakfast, the heater of the tea-urn
is to be placed in the hottest part of the kitchen fire; or, where the
kettle is used, boiled on the kitchen fire, and then removed to the
parlour, where it is kept hot. having washed herself free from the dust
arising from the morning's work, the housemaid collects the
breakfast-things on her tray, takes the breakfast-cloth from the napkin
press, and carries them all on the tray into the parlour; arranges them
on the table, placing a sufficiency of knives, forks, and salt-cellars
for the family, and takes the tray back to the pantry; gets a supply of
milk, cream, and bread; fills the butter-dish, taking care that the salt
is plentiful, and soft and dry, and that hot plates and egg-cups are
ready where warm meat or eggs are served, and that butter-knife and
bread-knife are in their places. and now she should give the signal for
breakfast, holding herself ready to fill the urn with hot water, or hand
the kettle, and take in the rolls, toast, and other eatables, with which
the cook supplies her, when the breakfast-room bell rings; bearing in
mind that she is never to enter the parlour with dirty hands or with a
dirty apron, and that everything is to be handed on a tray; that she is
to hand everything she may be required to supply, on the left hand of
the person she is serving, and that all is done quietly and without
bustle or hurry. in some families, where there is a large number to
attend on, the cook waits at breakfast whilst the housemaid is busy
upstairs in the bedrooms, or sweeping, dusting, and putting the
drawing-room in order.
. breakfast served, the housemaid proceeds to the bed-chambers,
throws up the sashes, if not already done, pulls up the blinds, throwing
back curtains at the same time, and opens the beds, by removing the
clothes, placing them over a horse, or, failing that, over the backs of
chairs. she now proceeds to empty the slops. in doing this, everything
is emptied into the slop-pail, leaving a little scalding-hot water for a
minute in such vessels as require it; adding a drop of turpentine to the
water, when that is not sufficient to cleanse them. the basin is
emptied, well rinsed with clean water, and carefully wiped; the ewers
emptied and washed; finally, the water-jugs themselves emptied out and
rinsed, and wiped dry. as soon as this is done, she should remove and
empty the pails, taking care that they also are well washed, scalded,
and wiped as soon as they are empty.
. next follows bedmaking, at which the cook or kitchen-maid, where
one is kept, usually assists; but, before beginning, velvet chairs, or
other things injured by dust, should be removed to another room. in
bedmaking, the fancy of its occupant should be consulted; some like beds
sloping from the top towards the feet, swelling slightly in the middle;
others, perfectly flat: a good housemaid will accommodate each bed to
the taste of the sleeper, taking care to shake, beat, and turn it well
in the process. some persons prefer sleeping on the mattress; in which
case a feather bed is usually beneath, resting on a second mattress, and
a straw paillasse at the bottom. in this case, the mattresses should
change places daily; the feather bed placed on the mattress shaken,
beaten, taken up and opened several times, so as thoroughly to separate
the feathers: if too large to be thus handled, the maid should shake and
beat one end first, and then the other, smoothing it afterwards equally
all over into the required shape, and place the mattress gently over it.
any feathers which escape in this process a tidy servant will put back
through the seam of the tick; she will also be careful to sew up any
stitch that gives way the moment it is discovered. the bedclothes are
laid on, beginning with an under blanket and sheet, which are tucked
under the mattress at the bottom. the bolster is then beaten and shaken,
and put on, the top of the sheet rolled round it, and the sheet tucked
in all round. the pillows and other bedclothes follow, and the
counterpane over all, which should fall in graceful folds, and at equal
distance from the ground all round. the curtains are drawn to the head
and folded neatly across the bed, and the whole finished in a smooth and
graceful manner. where spring-mattresses are used, care should be taken
that the top one is turned every day. the housemaid should now take up
in a dustpan any pieces that may be on the carpet; she should dust the
room, shut the door, and proceed to another room. when all the bedrooms
are finished, she should dust the stairs, and polish the handrail of the
banisters, and see that all ledges, window-sills, &c., are quite free
from dust. it will be necessary for the housemaid to divide her work, so
that she may not have too much to do on certain days, and not sufficient
to fill up her time on other days. in the country, bedrooms should be
swept and thoroughly cleaned once a week; and to be methodical and
regular in her work, the housemaid should have certain days for doing
certain rooms thoroughly. for instance, the drawing-room on monday, two
bedrooms on tuesday, two on wednesday, and so on, reserving a day for
thoroughly cleaning the plate, bedroom candlesticks, &c. &c., which she
will have to do where there is no parlour-maid or footman kept. by this
means the work will be divided, and there will be no unnecessary
bustling and hurrying, as is the case where the work is done any time,
without rule or regulation.
[illustration: scrubbing-brush.]
. once a week, when a bedroom is to be thoroughly cleaned, the
house-maid should commence by brushing the mattresses of the bed before
it is made; she should then make it, shake the curtains, lay them
smoothly on the bed, and pin or tuck up the bottom valance, so that she
may be able to sweep under the bed. she should then unloop the
window-curtains, shake them, and pin them high up out of the way. after
clearing the dressing-table, and the room altogether of little articles
of china, &c. &c., she should shake the toilet-covers, fold them up, and
lay them on the bed, over which a large dusting-sheet should be thrown.
she should then sweep the room; first of all sprinkling the carpet with
well-squeezed tea-leaves, or a little freshly-pulled grass, when this is
obtainable. after the carpet is swept, and the grate cleaned, she should
wash with soap and water, with a little soda in it, the washing-table
apparatus, removing all marks or fur round the jugs, caused by the
water. the water-bottles and tumblers must also have her attention, as
well as the top of the washing-stand, which should be cleaned with soap
and flannel if it be marble: if of polished mahogany, no soap must be
used. when these are all clean and arranged in their places, the
housemaid should scrub the floor where it is not covered with carpet,
under the beds, and round the wainscot. she should use as little soap
and soda as possible, as too free a use of these articles is liable to
give the boards a black appearance. in the country, cold soft water, a
clean scrubbing-brush, and a willing arm, are all that are required to
make bedroom floors look white. in winter it is not advisable to scrub
rooms too often, as it is difficult to dry them thoroughly at that
season of the year, and nothing is more dangerous than to allow persons
to sleep in a damp room. the housemaid should now dust the furniture,
blinds, ornaments, &c.; polish the looking-glass; arrange the
toilet-cover and muslin; remove the cover from the bed, and straighten
and arrange the curtains and counterpane. a bedroom should be cleaned
like this every week. there are times, however, when it is necessary to
have the carpet up; this should be done once a year in the country, and
twice a year in large cities. the best time for these arrangements is
spring and autumn, when the bed-furniture requires changing to suit the
seasons of the year. after arranging the furniture, it should all be
well rubbed and polished; and for this purpose the housemaid should
provide herself with an old silk pocket-handkerchief, to finish the
polishing.
[illustration: long hair-broom.]
. as modern furniture is now nearly always french-polished, it
should often be rubbed with an old silk rubber, or a fine cloth or
duster, to keep it free from smears. three or four times a year any of
the following polishes may be applied with very great success, as any of
them make french-polished furniture look very well. one precaution must
be taken,—not to put too much of the polish on at one time, and to
rub, not smear it over the articles.
. ingredients.—/ pint of linseed-oil, / pint of vinegar,  oz.
of spirits of salts, / oz. of muriatic antimony.
mode.—mix all well together, and shake before using.
. ingredients.—equal proportions of linseed-oil, turpentine,
vinegar, and spirits of wine.
mode.—when used, shake the mixture well, and rub on the furniture
with a piece of linen rag, and polish with a clean duster. vinegar and
oil, rubbed in with flannel, and the furniture rubbed with a clean
duster, produce a very good polish.
. ingredients.— oz. of common beeswax,  oz. of white wax,  oz.
of curd soap,  pint of turpentine,  pint of boiled water.
[illustration: furniture brush.]
mode.—mix the ingredients together, adding the water when cold; shake
the mixture frequently in the bottle, and do not use it for  hours
after it is made. it should be applied with a piece of flannel, the
furniture polished with a duster, and then with an old silk rubber.
. the chambers are finished, the chamber candlesticks brought down
and cleaned, the parlour lamps trimmed;—and here the housemaid's utmost
care is required. in cleaning candlesticks, as in every other cleaning,
she should have cloths and brushes kept for that purpose alone; the
knife used to scrape them should be applied to no other purpose; the
tallow-grease should be thrown into a box kept for the purpose; the same
with everything connected with the lamp-trimming; the best mode of doing
which she will do well to learn from the tradesman who supplies the oil;
always bearing in mind, however, that without perfect cleanliness, which
involves occasional scalding, no lamp can be kept in order.
. the drawing and dining-room, inasmuch as everything there is more
costly and valuable, require even more care. when the carpets are of the
kind known as velvet-pile, they require to be swept firmly by a hard
whisk brush, made of cocoanut fibre.
. the furniture must be carefully gone over in every corner with a
soft cloth, that it may be left perfectly free from dust; or where that
is beyond reach, with a brush made of long feathers, or a goose's wing.
the sofas are swept in the same manner, slightly beaten, the cushions
shaken and smoothed, the picture-frames swept, and everything arranged
in its proper place. this, of course, applies to dining as well as
drawing-room and morning-room. and now the housemaid may dress herself
for the day, and prepare for the family dinner, at which she must
attend.
. we need not repeat the long instructions already given for laying
the dinner-table. at the family dinner, even where no footman waits, the
routine will be the same. in most families the cloth is laid with the
slips on each side, with napkins, knives, forks, spoons, and wine and
finger glasses on all occasions.
[illustration: butler's tray and stand.]
. she should ascertain that her plate is in order, glasses free from
smears, water-bottles and decanters the same, and everything ready on
her tray, that she may be able to lay her cloth properly. few things add
more to the neat and comfortable appearance of a dinner-table than
well-polished plate; indeed, the state of the plate is a certain
indication of a well-managed or ill-managed household. nothing is easier
than to keep plate in good order, and yet many servants, from stupidity
and ignorance, make it the greatest trouble of all things under their
care. it should be remembered, that it is utterly impossible to make
greasy silver take a polish; and that as spoons and forks in daily use
are continually in contact with grease, they must require good washing
in soap-and-water to remove it. silver should be washed with a soapy
flannel in one water, rinsed in another, and then wiped dry with a dry
cloth. the plate so washed may be polished with the plate-rags, as in
the following directions:—once a week all the plate should receive a
thorough cleaning with the hartshorn powder, as directed in the first
recipe for cleaning plate; and where the housemaid can find time, rubbed
every day with the plate-rags.
 . hartshorn, we may observe, is one of the best possible
 ingredients for plate-powder in daily use. it leaves on the
 silver a deep, dark polish, and at the same time does less
 injury than anything else. it has also the advantage of being
 very cheap; almost all the ordinary powders sold in boxes
 containing more or less of quicksilver, in some form or another;
 and this in process of time is sure to make the plate brittle.
 if any one wishes to be convinced of the effect of quicksilver
 on plate, he has only to rub a little of it on one place for
 some time,—on the handle of a silver teaspoon for instance, and
 he will find it break in that spot with very little pressure.
to clean plate.
a very excellent method.
[illustration: plate-brush.]
. wash the plate well to remove all grease, in a strong lather of
common yellow soap and boiling water, and wipe it quite dry; then mix as
much hartshorn powder as will be required, into a thick paste, with cold
water or spirits of wine; smear this lightly over the plate with a piece
of soft rag, and leave it for some little time to dry. when perfectly
dry, brush it off quite clean with a soft plate-brush, and polish the
plate with a dry leather. if the plate be very dirty, or much tarnished,
spirits of wine will be found to answer better than the water for mixing
the paste.
plate-rags for daily use.
. boil soft rags (nothing is better for the purpose than the tops of
old cotton stockings) in a mixture of new milk and hartshorn powder, in
the proportion of  oz. of powder to a pint of milk; boil them for 
minutes; wring them as soon as they are taken out, for a moment, in cold
water, and dry them before the fire. with these rags rub the plate
briskly as soon as it has been well washed and dried after daily use. a
most beautiful deep polish will be produced, and the plate will require
nothing more than merely to be dusted with a leather or a dry soft
cloth, before it is again put on the table.
. for waiting at table, the housemaid should be neatly and cleanly
dressed, and, if possible, her dress made with closed sleeves, the large
open ones dipping and falling into everything on the table, and being
very much in the way. she should not wear creaking boots, and should
move about the room as noiselessly as possible, anticipating people's
wants by handing them things without being asked for them, and
altogether be as quiet as possible. it will be needless here to repeat
what we have already said respecting waiting at table, in the duties of
the butler and footman: rules that are good to be observed by them, are
equally good for the parlour-maid or housemaid.
. the housemaid having announced that dinner is on the table, will
hand the soup, fish, meat, or side-dishes to the different members of
the family; but in families who do not spend much of the day together,
they will probably prefer being alone at dinner and breakfast; the
housemaid will be required, after all are helped, if her master does not
wish her to stay in the room, to go on with her work of cleaning up in
the pantry, and answer the bell when rung. in this case she will place a
pile of plates on the table or a dumbwaiter, within reach of her master
and mistress, and leave the room.
[illustration: crumb-brush].
. dinner over, the housemaid removes the plates and dishes on the
tray, places the dirty knives and forks in the basket prepared for them,
folds up the napkins in the ring which indicates by which member of the
family it has been used, brushes off the crumbs on the hand-tray kept
for the purpose, folds up the table-cloth in the folds already made, and
places it in the linen-press to be smoothed out. after every meal the
table should be rubbed, all marks from hot plates removed, and the
table-cover thrown over, and the room restored to its usual order. if
the family retire to the drawing-room, or any other room, it is a good
practice to throw up the sash to admit fresh air and ventilate the room.
. the housemaid's evening service consists in washing up the
dinner-things, the plate, plated articles, and glasses, restoring
everything to its place; cleaning up her pantry, and putting away
everything for use when next required; lastly, preparing for tea, as the
time approaches, by setting the things out on the tray, getting the urn
or kettle ready, with cream and other things usually partaken of at that
meal.
. in summer-time the windows of all the bedrooms, which have been
closed during the heat of the day, should be thrown open for an hour or
so after sunset, in order to air them. before dark they should be
closed, the bedclothes turned down, and the night-clothes laid in order
for use when required. during winter, where fires are required in the
dressing-rooms, they should be lighted an hour before the usual time of
retiring, placing a fire-guard before each fire. at the same time, the
night-things on the horse should be placed before it to be aired, with a
tin can of hot water, if the mistress is in the habit of washing before
going to bed. we may add, that there is no greater preservative of
beauty than washing the face every night in hot water. the housemaid
will probably be required to assist her mistress to undress and put her
dress in order for the morrow; in which case her duties are very much
those of the lady's-maid.
. and now the fire is made up for the night, the fireguard replaced,
and everything in the room in order for the night, the housemaid taking
care to leave the night-candle and matches together in a convenient
place, should they be required. it is usual in summer to remove all
highly fragrant flowers from sleeping-rooms, the impression being that
their scent is injurious in a close chamber.
. on leisure days, the housemaid should be able to do some
needlework for her mistress,—such as turning and mending sheets and
darning the house linen, or assist her in anything she may think fit to
give her to do. for this reason it is almost essential that a housemaid,
in a small family, should be an expert needlewoman; as, if she be a good
manager and an active girl, she will have time on her hands to get
through plenty of work.
. periodical cleanings.—besides the daily routine which we have
described, there are portions of every house which can only be
thoroughly cleaned occasionally; at which time the whole house usually
undergoes a more thorough cleaning than is permitted in the general way.
on these occasions it is usual to begin at the top of the house and
clean downwards; moving everything out of the room; washing the
wainscoting or paint with soft soap and water; pulling down the beds and
thoroughly cleansing all the joints; "scrubbing" the floor; beating
feather beds, mattress, and paillasse, and thoroughly purifying every
article of furniture before it is put back in its place.
. this general cleaning usually takes place in the spring or early
summer, when the warm curtains of winter are replaced by the light and
cheerful muslin curtains. carpets are at the same time taken up and
beaten, except where the mistress of the house has been worried into an
experiment by the often-reiterated question, "why beat your carpets?" in
this case she will probably have made up her mind to try the cleaning
process, and arranged with the company to send for them on the morning
when cleaning commenced. it is hardly necessary to repeat, that on this
occasion every article is to be gone over, the french-polished furniture
well rubbed and polished. the same thorough system of cleaning should be
done throughout the house; the walls cleaned where painted, and swept
down with a soft broom or feather brush where papered; the window and
bed curtains, which have been replaced with muslin ones, carefully
brushed, or, if they require it, cleaned; lamps not likely to be
required, washed out with hot water, dried, and cleaned. the several
grates are now to be furnished with their summer ornaments; and we know
none prettier than the following, which the housemaid may provide at a
small expense to her mistress:—purchase two yards and a half of
crinoline muslin, and tear it into small strips, the selvage way of the
material, about an inch wide; strip this thread by thread on each side,
leaving the four centre threads; this gives about six-and-thirty pieces,
fringed on each side, which are tied together at one end, and fastened
to the trap of the register, while the threads, unravelled, are spread
gracefully about the grate, the lower part of which is filled with paper
shavings. this makes a very elegant and very cheap ornament, which is
much stronger, besides, than those usually purchased.
[illustration: cornice-brush.]
[illustration: house-pail.]
[illustration: dusting-brush.]
. as winter approaches, this house-cleaning will have to be
repeated, and the warm bed and window curtains replaced. the process of
scouring and cleaning is again necessary, and must be gone through,
beginning at the top, and going through the house, down to the kitchens.
. independently of these daily and periodical cleanings, other
occupations will present themselves from time to time, which the
housemaid will have to perform. when spots show on polished furniture,
they can generally be restored by soap-and-water and a sponge, the
polish being brought out by using a little polish, and then well rubbing
it. again, drawers which draw out stiffly may be made to move more
easily if the spot where they press is rubbed over with a little soap.
. chips broken off any of the furniture should be collected and
replaced, by means of a little glue applied to it. liquid glue, which is
sold prepared in bottles, is very useful to have in the house, as it
requires no melting; and anything broken can be so quickly repaired.
. breaking glass and china is about the most disagreeable thing that
can happen in a family, and it is, probably, a greater annoyance to a
right-minded servant than to the mistress. a neat-handed housemaid may
sometimes repair these breakages, where they are not broken in very
conspicuous places, by joining the pieces very neatly together with a
cement made as follows:—dissolve an ounce of gum mastic in a quantity
of highly-rectified spirits of wine; then soften an ounce of isinglass
in warm water, and, finally, dissolve it in rum or brandy, till it forms
a thick jelly. mix the isinglass and gum mastic together, adding a
quarter of an ounce of finely-powdered gum ammoniac; put the whole into
an earthen pipkin, and in a warm place, till they are thoroughly
incorporated together; pour it into a small phial, and cork it down for
use.
. in using it, dissolve a small piece of the cement in a silver
teaspoon over a lighted candle. the broken pieces of glass or china
being warmed, and touched with the now liquid cement, join the parts
neatly together, and hold in their places till the cement has set; then
wipe away the cement adhering to the edge of the joint, and leave it for
twelve hours without touching it: the joint will be as strong as the
china itself, and if neatly done, it will show no joining. it is
essential that neither of the pieces be wetted either with hot or cold
water.
to clean marble.
. mix with / pint of soap lees, / gill of turpentine, sufficient
pipe-clay and bullock's gall to make the whole into rather a thick
paste. apply it to the marble with a soft brush, and after a day or two,
when quite dry, rub it off with a soft rag. apply this a second or third
time till the marble is quite clean.
another method.
. take two parts of soda, one of pumice-stone, and one of
finely-powdered chalk. sift these through a fine sieve, and mix them
into a paste with water. rub this well all over the marble, and the
stains will be removed; then wash it with soap-and-water, and a
beautiful bright polish will be produced.
to clean floorcloth.
. after having washed the floorcloth in the usual manner with a damp
flannel, wet it all over with milk and rub it well with a dry cloth,
when a most beautiful polish will be brought out. some persons use for
rubbing a well-waxed flannel; but this in general produces an unpleasant
slipperiness, which is not the case with the milk.
to clean decanters.
. roll up in small pieces some soft brown or blotting paper; wet
them, and soap them well. put them into the decanters about one quarter
full of warm water; shake them well for a few minutes, then rinse with
clear cold water; wipe the outsides with a nice dry cloth, put the
decanters to drain, and when dry they will be almost as bright as new
ones.
to brighten gilt frames.
. take sufficient flour of sulphur to give a golden tinge to about
-/ pint of water, and in this boil  or  bruised onions, or garlic,
which will answer the same purpose. strain off the liquid, and with it,
when cold, wash, with a soft brush, any gilding which requires
restoring, and when dry it will come out as bright as new work.
to preserve bright grates or fire-irons from rust.
. make a strong paste of fresh lime and water, and with a fine brush
smear it as thickly as possible over all the polished surface requiring
preservation. by this simple means, all the grates and fire-irons in an
empty house may be kept for months free from harm, without further care
or attention.
german furniture-gloss.
. ingredients.—/ lb. yellow wax,  oz. black rosin,  oz. of oil
of turpentine.
mode.—cut the wax into small pieces, and melt it in a pipkin, with
the rosin pounded very fine. stir in gradually, while these two
ingredients are quite warm, the oil of turpentine. keep this composition
well covered for use in a tin or earthen pot. a little of this gloss
should be spread on a piece of coarse woollen cloth, and the furniture
well rubbed with it; afterwards it should be polished with a fine cloth.
. the general servant, or maid-of-all-work, is perhaps the only one
of her class deserving of commiseration: her life is a solitary one, and
in, some places, her work is never done. she is also subject to rougher
treatment than either the house or kitchen-maid, especially in her
earlier career: she starts in life, probably a girl of thirteen, with
some small tradesman's wife as her mistress, just a step above her in
the social scale; and although the class contains among them many
excellent, kind-hearted women, it also contains some very rough
specimens of the feminine gender, and to some of these it occasionally
falls to give our maid-of-all-work her first lessons in her multifarious
occupations: the mistress's commands are the measure of the
maid-of-all-work's duties. by the time she has become a tolerable
servant, she is probably engaged in some respectable tradesman's house,
where she has to rise with the lark, for she has to do in her own person
all the work which in larger establishments is performed by cook,
kitchen-maid, and housemaid, and occasionally the part of a footman's
duty, which consists in carrying messages.
. the general servant's duties commence by opening the shutters (and
windows, if the weather permits) of all the lower apartments in the
house; she should then brush up her kitchen-range, light the fire, clear
away the ashes, clean the hearth, and polish with a leather the bright
parts of the range, doing all as rapidly and as vigorously as possible,
that no more time be wasted than is necessary. after putting on the
kettle, she should then proceed to the dining-room or parlour to get it
in order for breakfast. she should first roll up the rug, take up the
fender, shake and fold up the table-cloth, then sweep the room, carrying
the dirt towards the fireplace; a coarse cloth should then be laid down
over the carpet, and she should proceed to clean the grate, having all
her utensils close to her. when the grate is finished, the ashes cleared
away, the hearth cleaned, and the fender put back in its place, she must
dust the furniture, not omitting the legs of the tables and chairs; and
if there are any ornaments or things on the sideboard, she must not dust
round them, but lift them up on to another place, dust well where they
have been standing, and then replace the things. nothing annoys a
particular mistress so much as to find, when she comes down stairs,
different articles of furniture looking as if they had never been
dusted. if the servant is at all methodical, and gets into a habit of
doing a room in a certain way, she will scarcely ever leave her duties
neglected. after the rug is put down, the table-cloth arranged, and
everything in order, she should lay the cloth for breakfast, and then
shut the dining-room door.
. the hall must now be swept, the mats shaken, the door-step
cleaned, and any brass knockers or handles polished up with the leather.
if the family breakfast very early, the tidying of the hall must then be
deferred till after that meal. after cleaning the boots that are
absolutely required, the servant should now wash her hands and face, put
on a clean white apron, and be ready for her mistress when she comes
down stairs. in families where there is much work to do before
breakfast, the master of the house frequently has two pairs of boots in
wear, so that they may be properly cleaned when the servant has more
time to do them, in the daytime. this arrangement is, perhaps, scarcely
necessary in the summer-time, when there are no grates to clean every
morning; but in the dark days of winter it is only kind and thoughtful
to lighten a servant-of-all-work's duties as much as possible.
[illustration: blacking-brush box.]
. she will now carry the urn into the dining-room, where her
mistress will make the tea or coffee, and sometimes will boil the eggs,
to insure them being done to her liking. in the mean time the servant
cooks, if required, the bacon, kidneys, fish, &c.;—if cold meat is to
be served, she must always send it to table on a clean dish, and nicely
garnished with tufts of parsley, if this is obtainable.
. after she has had her own breakfast, and whilst the family are
finishing theirs, she should go upstairs into the bedrooms, open all the
windows, strip the clothes off the beds, and leave them to air whilst
she is clearing away the breakfast things. she should then take up the
crumbs in a dustpan from under the table, put the chairs in their
places, and sweep up the hearth.
. the breakfast things washed up, the kitchen should be tidied, so
that it may be neat when her mistress comes in to give the orders for
the day: after receiving these orders, the servant should go upstairs
again, with a jug of boiling water, the slop-pail, and two cloths. after
emptying the slops, and scalding the vessels with the boiling water, and
wiping them thoroughly dry, she should wipe the top of the wash-table
and arrange it all in order. she then proceeds to make the beds, in
which occupation she is generally assisted by the mistress, or, if she
have any daughters, by one of them. before commencing to make the bed,
the servant should put on a large bed-apron, kept for this purpose only,
which should be made very wide, to button round the waist and meet
behind, while it should be made as long as the dress. by adopting this
plan, the blacks and dirt on servants' dresses (which at all times it is
impossible to help) will not rub off on to the bed-clothes, mattresses,
and bed furniture. when the beds are made, the rooms should be dusted,
the stairs lightly swept down, hall furniture, closets, &c., dusted. the
lady of the house, where there is but one servant kept, frequently takes
charge of the drawing-room herself, that is to say, dusting it; the
servant sweeping, cleaning windows, looking-glasses, grates, and rough
work of that sort. if there are many ornaments and knick-knacks about
the room, it is certainly better for the mistress to dust these herself,
as a maid-of-all-work's hands are not always in a condition to handle
delicate ornaments.
. now she has gone the rounds of the house and seen that all is in
order, the servant goes to her kitchen to see about the cooking of the
dinner, in which very often her mistress will assist her. she should put
on a coarse apron with a bib to do her dirty work in, which may be
easily replaced by a white one if required.
. half an hour before dinner is ready, she should lay the cloth,
that everything may be in readiness when she is dishing up the dinner,
and take all into the dining-room that is likely to be required, in the
way of knives, forks, spoons, bread, salt, water, &c. &c. by exercising
a little forethought, much confusion and trouble may be saved both to
mistress and servant, by getting everything ready for the dinner in good
time.
. after taking in the dinner, when every one is seated, she removes
the covers, hands the plates round, and pours out the beer; and should
be careful to hand everything on the left side of the person she is
waiting on.
. we need scarcely say that a maid-of-all-work cannot stay in the
dining-room during the whole of dinner-time, as she must dish up her
pudding, or whatever is served after the first course. when she sees
every one helped, she should leave the room to make her preparations for
the next course; and anything that is required, such as bread, &c.,
people may assist themselves to in the absence of the servant.
. when the dinner things are cleared away, the servant should sweep
up the crumbs in the dining-room, sweep the hearth, and lightly dust the
furniture, then sit down to her own dinner.
[illustration: knife-cleaning machine]
. after this, she washes up and puts away the dinner things, sweeps
the kitchen, dusts and tidies it, and puts on the kettle for tea. she
should now, before dressing herself for the afternoon, clean her knives,
boots, and shoes, and do any other dirty work in the scullery that may
be necessary. knife-cleaning machines are rapidly taking the place, in
most households, of the old knife-board. the saving of labour by the
knife-cleaner is very great, and its performance of the work is very
satisfactory. small and large machines are manufactured, some cleaning
only four knives, whilst others clean as many as twelve at once. nothing
can be more simple than the process of machine knife-cleaning; and
although, in a very limited household, the substitution of the machine
for the board may not be necessary, yet we should advise all
housekeepers, to whom the outlay is not a difficulty, to avail
themselves of the services of a machine. we have already spoken of its
management in the "duties of the footman," no. .
. when the servant is dressed, she takes in the tea, and after tea
turns down the beds, sees that the water-jugs and bottles are full,
closes the windows, and draws down the blinds. if the weather is very
warm, these are usually left open until the last thing at night, to cool
the rooms.
. the routine of a general servant's duties depends upon the kind of
situation she occupies; but a systematic maid-of-all-work should so
contrive to divide her work, that every day in the week may have its
proper share. by this means she is able to keep the house clean with
less fatigue to herself than if she left all the cleaning to do at the
end of the week. supposing there are five bedrooms in the house, two
sitting-rooms, kitchen, scullery, and the usual domestic offices:—on
monday she should thoroughly clean the drawing-room; on tuesday, two of
the bedrooms; on wednesday, two more; on thursday, the other bedroom and
stairs; on friday morning she should sweep the dining-room very
thoroughly, clean the hall, and in the afternoon her kitchen tins and
bright utensils. by arranging her work in this manner, no undue
proportion will fall to saturday's share, and she will then have this
day for cleaning plate, cleaning her kitchen, and arranging everything
in nice order. the regular work must, of course, be performed in the
usual manner, as we have endeavoured to describe.
. before retiring to bed, she will do well to clean up glasses,
plates, &c. which have been used for the evening meal, and prepare for
her morning's work by placing her wood near the fire, on the hob, to
dry, taking care there is no danger of it igniting, before she leaves
the kitchen for the night. before retiring, she will have to lock and
bolt the doors, unless the master undertakes this office himself.
. if the washing, or even a portion of it, is done at home, it will
be impossible for the maid-of-all-work to do her household duties
thoroughly, during the time it is about, unless she have some
assistance. usually, if all the washing is done at home, the mistress
hires some one to assist at the wash-tub, and sees to little matters
herself, in the way of dusting, clearing away breakfast things, folding,
starching, and ironing the fine things. with a little management much
can be accomplished, provided the mistress be industrious, energetic,
and willing to lend a helping hand. let washing-week be not the excuse
for having everything in a muddle; and although "things" cannot be
cleaned so thoroughly, and so much time spent upon them, as ordinarily,
yet the house may be kept tidy and clear from litter without a great
deal of exertion either on the part of the mistress or servant. we will
conclude our remarks with an extract from an admirably-written book,
called "home truths for home peace." the authoress says, with respect to
the great wash—"amongst all the occasions in which it is most difficult
and glorious to keep muddle out of a family, 'the great wash' stands
pre-eminent; and as very little money is now saved by having
everything done at home, many ladies, with the option of taking
another servant or putting out the chief part of the washing, have
thankfully adopted the latter course." she goes on to say—"when a
gentleman who dines at home can't bear washing in the house, but gladly
pays for its being done elsewhere, the lady should gratefully submit to
his wishes, and put out anything in her whole establishment rather than
put out a good and generous husband."
. a bustling and active girl will always find time to do a little
needlework for herself, if she lives with consistent and reasonable
people. in the summer evenings she should manage to sit down for two or
three hours, and for a short time in the afternoon in leisure days. a
general servant's duties are so multifarious, that unless she be quick
and active, she will not be able to accomplish this. to discharge these
various duties properly is a difficult task, and sometimes a thankless
office; but it must be remembered that a good maid-of-all-work will make
a good servant in any capacity, and may be safely taken not only without
fear of failure, but with every probability of giving satisfaction to
her employer.
. the duties of the dairy-maid differ considerably in different
districts. in scotland, wales, and some of the northern counties, women
milk the cows. on some of the large dairy farms in other parts of
england, she takes her share in the milking, but in private families the
milking is generally performed by the cowkeeper, and the dairy-maid only
receives the milkpails from him morning and night, and empties and
cleans them preparatory to the next milking; her duty being to supply
the family with milk, cream, and butter, and other luxuries depending on
the "milky mothers" of the herd.
 . the dairy.—the object with which gentlemen keep cows is
 to procure milk unadulterated, and sweet butter, for themselves
 and families: in order to obtain this, however, great
 cleanliness is required, and as visitors, as well as the
 mistress of the house, sometimes visit the dairy, some efforts
 are usually made to render it ornamental and picturesque. the
 locality is usually fixed near to the house; it should neither
 be exposed to the fierce heat of the summer's sun nor to the
 equally unfavourable frosts of winter—it must be both sheltered
 and shaded. if it is a building apart from the house and other
 offices, the walls should be tolerably thick, and if hollow, the
 temperature will be more equable. the walls inside are usually
 covered with dutch glazed tiles; the flooring also of glazed
 tiles set in asphalte, to resist water; and the ceiling, lath
 and plaster, or closely-jointed woodwork, painted. its
 architecture will be a matter of fancy: it should have a
 northern aspect, and a thatched roof is considered most
 suitable, from the shade and shelter it affords; and it should
 contain at least two apartments, besides a cool place for
 storing away butter. one of the apartments, in which the milk is
 placed to deposit cream, or to ripen for churning, is usually
 surrounded by shelves of marble or slate, on which the
 milk-dishes rest; but it will be found a better plan to have a
 large square or round table of stone in the centre, with a
 water-tight ledge all round it, in which water may remain in hot
 weather, or, if some attempt at the picturesque is desired, a
 small fountain might occupy the centre, which would keep the
 apartment cool and fresh. round this table the milk-dishes
 should be ranged; one shelf, or dresser, of slate or marble,
 being kept for the various occupations of the dairy-maid: it
 will be found a better plan than putting them on shelves and
 corners against the wall. there should be a funnel or ventilator
 in the ceiling, communicating with the open air, made to open
 and shut as required. double windows are recommended, but of the
 lattice kind, so that they may open, and with wire-gauze blinds
 fitted into the opening, and calico blinds, which may be wetted
 when additional coolness is required. the other apartment will
 be used for churning, washing, and scrubbing—in fact, the
 scullery of the dairy, with a boiler for hot water, and a sink
 with cold water laid on, which should be plentiful and good. in
 some dairies a third apartment, or, at least, a cool airy
 pantry, is required for storing away butter, with shelves of
 marble or slate, to hold the cream-jars while it is ripening;
 and where cheeses are made, a fourth becomes necessary. the
 dairy utensils are not numerous,—churns, milk-pails for
 each cow, hair-sieves, slices of tin, milk-pans, marble
