if a dot be placed above, the consonant is pronounced with
“e” or “i.”
if the dot be placed below, it is pronounced with “o” or
“u.” thus the “b” with the dot above is
pronounced “bi” or “be,” and with the dot
below, “bo” or “bu.”
for example, in order to say “cama” [i.e., bed]
the two letters “c” and “m” are sufficient
without a dot.
if a dot be placed above the “c”, it will be
“quema” [i.e., “fire”].
if dots be placed below each, it will be “como”
[i.e., “as”].
the final consonants are supplied in all expressions. thus in order
to say “cantar” [i.e., “to sing”], one
writes “cata,” only a “c” and a
“t.” to say “barba” [i.e.,
“beard”], two “b’s” are sufficient.
with all the supplements, he who reads in that language will, if he
be skilful, have no trouble in []pronouncing the words or phrases correctly
by substituting the letters that must be substituted according to the
sense. but since that always occasions difficulty, those who know our
characters are studying how to write their own language in these. all
of them have now adopted our way of writing, with the lines from left
to right; for formerly they only wrote vertically down and up, placing
the first line to the left and running the others continuously to the
right, just opposite to the chinese and japanese, who although they
write in vertical up and down lines, continue the page from the right
to the left. all that points to a great antiquity; for running the line
from the right to the left is in accordance with the present and
general style of the hebrews; and the style of running the lines
vertically from the top to the bottom, is that of the oldest nation of
the chinese—which doubtless greatly resembles the method of the
hebrews, whose characters have much resemblance to theirs. those of the
moro arabs resemble those of the syrians. diodorus siculus, who wrote in the time
of the emperor cæsar augustus, in making mention of an island
which lay in our middle region, or torrid zone (whither iamblicus []the greek went in
the course of his adventures), says that they do not write horizontally
as we do, but from top to bottom in a straight line; and that they use
characters which, although few in number, make up in their use for
many, for each one has four different transformations. consequently,
one may see that that method of writing, and the characters of those
nations, are very old.
. before they knew anything about paper (and even yet they do in
places where they cannot get it), those people wrote on bamboos or on
palm-leaves, using as a pen the point of a knife or other bit of iron,
with which they engraved the letters on the smooth side of the bamboo.
if they write on palm-leaves they fold and then seal the letter when
written, in our manner. they all cling fondly to their own method of
writing and reading. there is scarcely a man, and still less a woman,
who does not know and practice that method, even those who are already
christians in matters of devotion. for from the sermons which they
hear, and the histories and lives of the saints, and the prayers and
poems on divine matters, composed by themselves (they have also some
perfect poets in their manner, who translate elegantly into their
language any spanish comedy), they use small books and prayerbooks in
their language, and manuscripts which are in great number; as is
affirmed in his manuscript history by father pedro chirino, to whom the provisor
and vicar-general []of this archbishopric entrusted the visit and
examination of those books in the year one thousand six hundred and
nine, for the purpose of preventing errors. that was a holy proceeding,
and one that was very proper among so new christians.
the filipinos easily accustom themselves to the spanish letters and
method of writing. they are greatly benefited thereby, for many of them
write now just like us, because of their cleverness and quickness in
imitating any letter or design, and in the doing of anything with the
hands. there are some of them who commonly serve as clerks in the
public accountancies and secretaryships of the kingdom. we have known
some so capable that they have deserved to become officials in those
posts, and perhaps to supply those offices ad interim. they also
are a great help to students in making clean copies of their rough
drafts, not only in romance but also in latin, for there are already
some of them who have learned that language. finally, they are the
printers in the two printing-houses in this city of manila; and they
are entirely competent in that work, in which their skill and ability
are very evident.
. coming now to the other point, that of their languages, there
are many of these. for in this island of manila alone there are six of
them, which correspond to the number of the provinces or civilized
nations; the tagálog, pampanga, camarines (or visayan), cagayan,
and those of the ilocans and pangasinans. these are the civilized
nations. we do not yet know the number of the nations of the []negrillos,
zambals, and other mountain nations. although the civilized languages
are, strictly speaking, dissimilar, they resemble one another, so that
in a short time those people can understand one another, and those of
the one nation can converse with those of another—in the same way
as the tuscan, lombard, and sicilian in italia; and the castilian,
portuguese, and language of valencia in españa. the reason why
these languages resemble one another so closely is the same as in
italia and españa. for as the latter languages originated from
the roman, just so do these originate from the malay. for proof of that
it is necessary to do nothing else than to compare the words and
idioms, or the modes of speech, of each one of these languages with the
malay, as will be seen in the following table, in which is made the
comparison of the three most important languages, the tagálog,
visayan, and pampanga. since for the sake of brevity the comparison is
made in a few words, whoever is interested can with but slight labor
extend the comparison through many words.
spanish
malay
tagálog
pampanga
visayan
cielo [i. e., sky]
langriet
lañgit
banoa
laguit
sol [i. e., sun]
mata ari
arao
aldao
arlao
luna [i. e., moon]
bulam
bouan
bulan
bulan
of these languages the two most general are the tagálog,
which is used through the greater part of the coast and interior of the
island of manila, and the islands of lubang and mindoro; and the
visayan, which is spoken throughout all the islands of the pintados. of
the two without doubt the most courteous, grave, artistic, and elegant
is the tagálog, for it shares in four qualities of the four
greatest languages in the world, namely, hebrew, greek, []latin, and spanish:
with the hebrew, besides the resemblance already noted in the manner of
its vowels and consonants, it has the roots of the vocables and their
hidden and obscure meaning [sus preñezes, y
misterios] and some gutturals; with the greek, the articles in the
declension of nouns, and in the conjugations the abundance of voices
and moods; with the latin, the abundance and elegance; with the
spanish, the fine structure, polish, and courtesy. as a proof of this,
father pedro chirino has inserted in his printed relation of these
islands an example in the prayer of the ave maria, as a short and
clear instance, with his explanation, with notes in the following
manner. it should be noted that the father, belonging to a past age,
wrote it in the old style, which has changed here somewhat since then,
although not substantially.
the ave maria in the tagálog
language
abe
guingoong
maria
matoua
ca
na
ave
señora
maria
alegra
tu
ya
hail
lady
mary
be joyful
thou
now
napopono
ca
nang
gracia
llena
tu
de
gracia
full
thou
of
grace
ang
pañginoong
dios
na
saiyo
el
señor
dios
està
contigo
the
lord
god
is
with thee
bucor
cang
pinagpala
sa
babaying
lahat
singular
tu
bendita
entre
mugeres
todas
especially,
thou
blessed
among
women
all
pinagpala
naman
ang
yyong
anac
si jesus
bendito
tambien
el
tu
hijo
jesus
blessed
also
he
thy
son
jesus
santa
mariang
yna
nang
dios
santa
maria
madre
de
dios
holy
mary,
mother
of
god,
ypanalangin
mo
caming
macasalanan
ng̃ayon
seamos intercedidos
de ti
nosotros
pecadores
agora
may we be interceded for
by thee
we
sinners
now
at cum
mamatay
cami,
amen jesus.
y cuando
muramos
nosotros.
[amen jesus].
and when
shall die
we.
amen jesus.
the first word, “aba” is a mysterious one in the
tagálog, and has the force of a salutation, as has
“ave” in latin; and the same is true of “bucor”
which means “diversity,” “distinction,” and
“singularity.” the article is [seen in] “si
jesus.” its abundance lies in the fact that it has many synonyms
and turns of thought. consequently, the above prayer, over and above
being elegant, could also be expressed in several other ways just as
elegant, and the same sense and meaning would be kept. its polish and
courtesy consists in not saying “ave maria” as does the
latin—for that would be a lack of courtesy and a barbarism in the
tagálog—but by the interposition of that polite word
“guinoo.” the visayan [version] does not contain that word,
as being a less polished language. however, i am not trying to cast a
slur on the latter for that reason, for each language has a beauty and
elegance for its natives which does not strike the foreigner. []
. among the uncivilized nations, although the people are fewer,
the languages are more; for almost every river has its own language. in
mindoro (and the same will be true of other districts more remote) we
saw the barbarous manguianes assembling from places but little distant
from each other, who did not understand one another. they were so
barbarous that they had never seen a spanish face. the things sent them
to attract them were hawk’s-bells, nails, needles, and other
similar things. they thought that the sounds of the harp and guitar
were human voices. when a mirror was held up before them, they
exhibited singular effects, in one of fear and in another of joy. the
lack of civilization and communication is the reason for the
multiplicity of languages. for just as in the primitive multiplication
of languages which took place in the tower of babel, the doctors
observe that the languages equaled the number of the families of the
descendants of noah, so among the barbarous nations each one lives to
itself alone without any recognition of or subjection to public laws.
they are always having petty wars and dissensions among themselves;
and, since they lack communication, they forget the common language,
and each one has so corrupted its own language that it cannot
understand the others. we observed in some districts that one language
was spoken at the mouth of a river and another one at its source. that
is a great hindrance to the conversion and instruction of those
peoples.
. the polish and courtesy, especially of the tagálogs and
those near them, in speech and writing are the same as those of very
civilized nations. they never say “tu” [i.e.,
“thou”] or speak in the []second person, singular or plural, but
always in the third person: [thus], “the chief would like this or
that.” especially a woman when addressing a man, even though they
be equal and of the middle class, never say less than “sir” or
“master,” and that after every word: “when i was
coming, sir, up the river, i saw, sir, etc.” in writing they make
constant use of very fine and delicate expressions of regard, and
beauties and courtesy. their manner of salutation when they met one
another was the removal of the potong, which is a cloth like a
crown, worn as we wear the hat. when an inferior addressed one of
higher rank, the courtesy used by him was to incline his body low, and
then lift one or both hands to the face, touch the cheeks with it, and
at the same time raise one of the feet in the air by doubling the knee,
and then seating oneself. the method of doing it was to fix the sole of
the feet firmly, and double both knees, without touching the ground,
keeping the body upright and the face raised. they bent in this manner
with the head uncovered and the potong thrown over the left
shoulder like a towel; they had to wait until they were questioned, for
it would be bad breeding to say anything until a question was
asked.
. the method of giving names was the following. as soon as a child
was born, it was the mother’s business to name it. generally the
occasion or motive of the name was taken from some one of the
circumstances which occurred at the time. for example, maliuag,
which means “difficult,” because of the difficulty of the
birth; malacas, which signifies “strong,” for it is
thought that the infant will be strong. this is like the custom of the
hebrews, as []appears from holy writ. at other times the name
was given without any hidden meaning, from the first thing that struck
the fancy, as daan, which signifies “road,” and 
damo, signifying “grass.” they were called by those
names, without the use of any surname, until they were married. then
the first son or daughter gave the surname to the parents, as amani
maliuag, ynani malacas, “the father of maliuag,”
“the mother of malacas.” the names of women are
differentiated from those of men by adding the syllable
“in,” as ilog, “river;” si ilog, the
name of a male; si iloguin, the name of a female. they used very
tender diminutives for the children, in our manner. among themselves
they had certain domestic and delicate appellations of various sorts
for the different degrees of relationship—as that of a child for
his father and mother, and vice versa. in the same way [they
have appellations] for their ancestors, descendants, and collaterals.
this shows the abundance, elegance, and courtesy of this language. it
is a general thing in all these nations not to have special family
names which are perpetuated to their successors, but each individual
has the simple name that is given him at birth. at present this name
serves as surname, and the peculiar name is the christian name of juan
or pedro which is imposed at baptism. however, there are now mothers so
christian and civilized that they will not assign any secular name to
their children until the christian name has been given in baptism, and then the
surname []is added, although it has already been chosen
after consultation with the parents and relatives. in place of our
“don” (which indeed has been assigned to them with as much
abuse as among ourselves), in some districts they formerly placed
before their names, lacan or gat: as the moluccans use
cachil, the africans muley, the turks sultan, etc.
the “don” of the women is not lacan or gat,
but dayang, dayang mati, dayang sanguy, i.e.,
“doña mati,” “doña sanguy.”
there is general distaste among our tagálogs to mention one
another among themselves by their own names alone, without adding
something which smells of courtesy. when they are asked by the
spaniards “who is so-and-so?” and they cannot avoid naming
him by his own name, they do it with a certain shamefacedness and
embarrassment. inasmuch as the method of naming one is “the
father of so-and-so,” as soon as he has children, for him who had
no children (among persons of influence) his relatives and
acquaintances assembled at a banquet, and gave him a new name there,
which they designated as pamagat. that was usually a name of
excellence by some circumlocution or metaphor, based on their own old
name. thus if one was called by his own name, bacal, which
signifies “iron,” the new name given him would be 
dimatanassan, signifying “not to spoil with time.” if
it were bayani, which signifies “valiant” and
“spirited,” he was called dimalapitan “he to
whom no one is bold.” it is also the custom among these nations
to call one another among themselves, by way of friendship, by certain
correlative names based on some special circumstance. thus if one had
given a branch of sweet basil to another, the []two among themselves called each
other casolasi, the name of the thing given; or caytlog,
he who ate of an egg with another. this is in the manner of the names
of fellow-students or chums as used by us. these are all arguments in
favor of the civilization of these indians.
chapter xiv
of the appearance, features, clothing, and other ancient customs
of the natives of these islands
. the ordinary stature of these indians is medium, but they are
well built and good-looking, both men and women. their complexion is
yellowish brown, like a boiled quince, and the beard is slight. the
tagálogs wear the hair hanging to the shoulders; the cagayans
longer and hanging over the shoulders; the ilocans shorter, and the
visayans still shorter, for they cut it round in the manner of the
oldtime cues of españa. the nation called zambals wear it shaved
from the front half of the head, while on the skull they have a great
shock of loose hair. the complexion of the women in all the islands
differs little from that of the men, except among the visayans where
some of the women are light-complexioned. all of the women wear the
hair tied up in a knot on top of the head with a tasteful ribbon. both
men and women, universally, consider it essential that the hair should
be very black and well cared for. for that purpose they use lotions
made of certain tree-barks and oils, prepared with musk and other
perfumes. their greatest anxiety and care was the mouth, and from
infancy they polished and filed the teeth so that they might []be even and
pretty. they covered them with a coating of black ink or varnish which
aided in preserving them. among the influential people, especially the
women, it was the custom to set some of the teeth most skilfully with
gold which could not fall out, and gave a beautiful appearance. the men
did not glory in their mustaches or beards, but quite the contrary; and
consequently they pulled them out on purpose. and just as it is an
amusement or custom of some of us to gnaw our finger-nails, they get
amusement in pulling out the hairs of the beard with certain little
bits of cleft bamboo [cañuelas hendidas] or
with little shells in the form of pincers. all the women, and in some
places the men, adorn the ears with large rings or circlets of gold,
for that purpose piercing them at an early age. among the women the
more the ears were stretched and opened, so much greater was the
beauty. some had two holes in each ear for two kinds of earrings, some
being larger than others.
. the men adorned the head with only cendal or long and narrow
thin cloth, with which they bound the forehead and temples, and which
they call potong. it was put on in different modes, now in the
moorish manner like a turban without a bonnet, and now twisted and
wrapped about the head like the crown of a hat. those who were esteemed
as valiant let the elaborately worked ends of the cloth fall down upon
their shoulders, and these were so long that they reached the legs. by
the color of the cloth they displayed their rank, and it was the badge
of their deeds and exploits; and it was not allowed to anyone []to use the red
potong until he had at least killed one person. in order to wear
it embroidered with certain borders, which were like a crown, they must
have killed seven. the personal clothing of those men was a small
garment or short loose jacket [chamarreta] of fine
linen which barely reached the waist. it had no collar and was fitted
formerly with short sleeves. among the chiefs those jackets were of a
scarlet color, and were made of fine indian muslin. for breeches they
wore a richly colored cloth, which was generally edged with gold, about
the waist and brought up between the legs, so that the legs were
decently covered to the middle of the thigh; from there down feet and
legs were bare. the chief adornments consisted of ornaments and jewels
of gold and precious stones. they had various kinds of necklaces, and
chains; bracelets or wristlets, also of gold and ivory, on the arms as
high as the elbow; while some had strings of cornelians, agates, and
other stones which are highly esteemed among them. on the legs, instead
of garters, they wear some strings of the same stones, and certain
cords of many strands, dyed black. the fingers of the hand are covered
with many rings of gold and precious stones. the final complement of
the gala attire was like our sash, a fine bit of colored cloth crossed
over the shoulder, the ends joined under the arm, which they affected
greatly. instead of that the visayans wore a robe [marlota] or jacket [baquero] made without a
collar and reaching quite down to the feet, and embroidered in colors.
the entire dress, in fine, was in the moorish style, and was truly rich
and gay; and even today they affect it.
the dress of the women, besides the small shirt []with sleeves already
mentioned, which was shorter for them, for their gala dress had little
modesty, was a skirt as wide at top as at bottom, which they gathered
into folds at the waist, allowing the folds all to drop to one side.
this was long enough to cover them even to their feet, and was
generally white. when they went outside the house they wore for a cloak
certain colored short cloaks, those of the principal women being of
crimson silk or other cloths, embroidered with gold and adorned with
rich fringe. but their principal gala attire consisted in jewels and
ornaments of gold and stones which they wore in their ears, and on the
neck, the fingers of the hand and the wrists of the arms. but now they
have begun to wear the spanish clothes and ornaments, namely, chains,
necklaces, skirts, shoes, and mantillas, or black veils. the men wear
hats, short jackets [ropillas], breeches, and shoes.
consequently, the present dress of the indians in these regions is now
almost spanish.
 [i.e., ]. besides the exterior clothing and dress,
some of these nations wore another inside dress, which could not be
removed after it was once put on. these are the tattooings of the body
so greatly practiced among the visayans, whom we call pintados for that
reason. for it was a custom among them, and was a mark of nobility and
bravery, to tattoo the whole body from top to toe when they were of an
age and strength sufficient to endure the tortures of the tattooing,
which was done (after being carefully designed by the artists, and in
accordance with the proportion of the parts of the body and the sex)
with instruments like brushes or small twigs, with very fine points of
bamboo. the body was pricked []and marked with them until blood was drawn. upon
that a black powder or soot made from pitch, which never faded, was put
on. the whole body was not tattooed at one time, but it was done
gradually. in olden times no tattooing was begun until some brave deed
had been performed; and after that, for each one of the parts of the
body which was tattooed some new deed had to be performed. the men
tattooed even their chins and about the eyes so that they appeared to
be masked. children were not tattooed, and the women only on one hand
and part of the other. the ilocans in this island of manila also
tattooed themselves but not to the same extent as the visayans. the
dress of both men and women among the ilocans is almost alike in that
province. thus far the dress. we shall now say somewhat of the food and
their customs in eating.
. their usual sustenance is as stated above, rice, well hulled
and cleaned, and boiled only with water, which is called morisqueta by
the spaniards, as if to call it “food of the moors.” the
meat is that of a small fish which is lacking in no part. that is also
boiled in water, and with the broth from it, they give a flavor to the
morisqueta. for lack of rice and fish they use the herbs and many kinds
of native potatoes, and fruits, by which they are sustained well
enough. at their banquets they add venison, pork, or beef, which they
like best when it has begun to spoil, and to smell bad. their manner of
eating is, to be seated on the ground. their tables are small and low,
round or square, and they have no tablecloths or napkins; but the
plates with the food are placed on the same tables. they eat in
companies of four which is as many as can get around a small table.
[]on the
occasion of a wedding or a funeral, or similar feasts, the whole house
will be filled with tables and guests. the food is placed all together
on various plates. the people do not shun all reaching out to the same
plate, or drinking from the same cup. they relish salt, and salty and
acid foods. they have no better dainty for the sick than vinegar and
green or pickled fruits. they eat sparingly but drink often; and when
they are invited to a banquet, they are asked not to eat but to drink.
they waste much time in both eating and drinking. when they have enough
and are drunk, the tables are taken away and the house is cleared. if
the banquet is the occasion of a feast, they sing, play, and dance.
they spend a day and a night in this, amid great racket and cries,
until they fall with weariness and sleep. but rarely do they become
furious or even foolish; on the contrary, after they have taken wine
they preserve due respect and discreet behavior. they only wax more
cheerful, and converse better and say some witty things; and it is well
known that no one of them when he leaves a banquet, although it be at
any hour of the night, fails to go straight to his own house. and if he
has occasion to buy or sell, and to examine and weigh gold or silver he
does it with so great steadiness that the hand does not tremble, nor
does he make any error in the weight.
. the wine commonly used among them is either that made from
palms, as it is throughout india, or from sugar-cane, which they call
quilang. the latter is made by extracting the sap from the
canes, and then bringing it to a boil over the fire, so that it becomes
like red wine, although it does not taste so good. the palm wine is
made by extracting []the sap or liquor from which the fruit was to be
formed. for as soon as the palm begins to send out the shoot from the
end of the twig, and before the flower is unfolded, that flower-stock
is cut, and a bit of bamboo is fastened to it and is tied to the stalk
or shoot. since the sap naturally flows to that part, as in the pruned
vine, all the sap that was to be converted into fruit, flows into that
bamboo, and passes through it to vessels, where, somewhat sour and
steeped with the bark of certain trees which give it color, heat, and
bite, they use it as a common drink and call it tuba. but the
real and proper palm-wine is made from the same liquor before it turns
sour, by distilling it in an alembic in ovens that they have prepared
for it. they give it a greater or less strength, as they please; and
they get a brandy as clear as water, although it is not so hot [as our
brandy]. it
is of a dry quality, and, when used with moderation, it is considered
even outside filipinas as healthful and medicinal for the stomach and a
preventive of watery humors and colds.
the visayans also make a wine, called pañgasi, from rice. the
method of making it is to place in the bottom of a jar of ordinary size
(which is generally of two or three arrobas, with them) a quantity of
yeast made from rice flour and a certain plant. atop of that they put
clean rice until the jar is half full. then water is added to it, and,
after it has stood for a few days, it is fermented by the force of the
yeast, []and is converted into the strongest kind of wine,
which is not liquid, but thick like gachas. in order to drink it
they pour water into the jar. it is a cause for surprise that even
though water be poured in again and again, the liquor is pure and
liquid wine, until the strength vanishes and is lost, and then they
leave it for the children. the method of drinking it is with a tube,
which they insert clear to the bottom where the yeast is. they use
three or four of those tubes, according to the number of the persons
who can find room around the vessel. they suck up as much as they wish,
and then give place to others.
. the banquets are interspersed with singing, in which one or two
sing and the others respond. the songs are usually their old songs and
fables, as is usual with other nations. the dances of men and women are
generally performed to the sound of bells which are made in their style
like basins, large or small, of metal, and the sounds are brought out
quickly and uninterruptedly. for the dance is warlike and passionate,
but it has steps and measured changes, and interposed are some
elevations that really enrapture and surprise. they generally hold in
the hands a towel, or a spear and shield, and with one and the other
they make their gestures in time, which are full of meaning. at other
times with the hands empty they make movements which correspond to the
movements of the feet, now slow, now []rapid. now they attack and retire;
now they incite; now they pacify; now they come close; now they go
away: all the grace and elegance, so much, in fact, that at times they
have not been judged unworthy to accompany and solemnize our christian
feasts.
however, the children and youths now dance, play, and sing in our
manner and so well that we cannot do it better.
they had a kind of guitar which was called coryapi, which had
two or more copper strings. although its music is not very artistic or
fine, it does not fail to be agreeable, especially to them. they play
it with a quill, with great liveliness and skill. it is a fact that, by
playing it alone, they carry on a conversation and make understood
whatever they wish to say.
. all of these islanders are extremely fond of the water for
bathing purposes, and as a consequence they try to settle on the shores
of rivers or creeks, for the more they are in the water the better they
like it. they bathe at all times, for pleasure and cleanliness. when an
infant is born, it is put into the river and bathed in cold water; and
the mother, after having given birth, does not keep away from the
water. the manner of bathing is, to stand with the body contracted and
almost seated, with the water up to the throat. the most usual and
general hour is at sunset, when the people leave work or return from
the field, and bathe for rest and coolness. men and women all swim like
fish, and as if born and reared in the water. each house has a vessel
of water at the door. []whenever any one goes up to the house, whether an
inmate of it or not, he takes water from that vessel to wash his feet,
especially when it is muddy. that is done very easily; one foot is
dried with the other, and the water falls down below, for the floor
there is like a close grating.
chapter xv
of the false heathen religion, idolatries, superstitions, and
other things, of the filipinos
. it is not found that these nations had anything written about
their religion or about their government, or of their old-time history.
all that we have been able to learn has been handed down from father to
son in tradition, and is preserved in their customs; and in some songs
that they retain in their memory and repeat when they go on the sea,
sung to the time of their rowing, and in their merrymakings, feasts,
and funerals, and even in their work, when many of them work together.
in those songs are recounted the fabulous genealogies and vain deeds of
their gods. among their gods is one who is the chief and superior to
all the others, whom the tagálogs call bathala
meycapal, which signifies []“god” the “creator”
or “maker.” the visayans call him laon, which
denotes “antiquity.”
they adored (as did the egyptians) animals and birds; and the sun
and moon, as did the assyrians. they also attributed to the rainbow its
kind of divinity. the tagálogs worshiped a blue bird as large as
a turtle-dove, which they called tigmamanuquin, to which they
attributed the name of bathala, which, as above stated, was
among them a name for divinity. they worshiped the crow, as the
ancients did the god pan or the goddess ceres, and called it 
meylupa, signifying “master of the earth.” they held
the crocodile in the greatest veneration, and when they saw it in the
water cried out, in all subjection, ”nono,”
signifying “grandfather.” they asked it pleasantly and
tenderly not to harm them, and for that purpose offered it a portion of
what they carried in their boat, by throwing it into the water. there
was no old tree to which they did not attribute divine honors, and it
was a sacrilege to think of cutting it under any consideration. even
the very rocks, crags, reefs, and points along the seashore and rivers
were adored, and an offering made to them on passing, by stopping there
and placing the offering upon the rock or reef. the river of manila had
a rock that served as an idol of that wretched people for many years,
and []its
scandal lasted and it gave rise to many evils, until the fathers of st.
augustine, who were near there, broke it, through their holy zeal, into
small bits and set up a cross in its place. today there is an image of
st. nicholas of tolentino in that place, in a small shrine or chapel.
when sailing to the island of panay, one saw on the point called nasso,
near potol, a rock upon which were dishes and other pieces of
crockery-ware, which were offered to it by those who went on the sea.
in the island of mindanao, between la caldera and the river, there is a
great point of land, on a rough and very high coast. the sea is forever
dashing against these headlands, and it is difficult and dangerous to
double them. when the people passed by that one, as it was so high,
they offered it arrows, which they shot at the cliff itself with so
great force that they stuck there, offering them as if in sacrifice so
that it would allow them to pass. there were so many of those arrows
that, although the spaniards set fire to them and burned a countless
number of them in hatred of so cursed a superstition, many remained
there, and the number increased in less than one year to more than four
thousand.
. they also adored private idols, which each one inherited from
his ancestors. the visayans called them divata, and the
tagálogs anito. of those idols some had jurisdiction over
the mountains and open country, and permission was asked from them to
go thither. others had jurisdiction over the sowed fields, and the
fields were commended to them so that they might prove fruitful; and
besides the sacrifices they placed articles of food in the fields for
the anitos to eat, in order to place them under greater
obligations. []there was an anito of the sea, to whom
they commended their fisheries and navigations; an anito of the
house, whose favor they implored whenever an infant was born, and when
it was suckled and the breast offered to it. they placed their
ancestors, the invocation of whom was the first thing in all their work
and dangers, among these anitos. in memory of their ancestors
they kept certain very small and very badly made idols of stone, wood,
gold, or ivory, called licha or laravan. among their gods
they reckoned also all those who perished by the sword, or who were
devoured by crocodiles, as well as those killed by lightning. they
thought that the souls of such immediately ascended to the blest abode
by means of the rainbow, called by them balañgao.
generally, whoever could succeed in it attributed divinity to his aged
father at his death. the aged themselves died in that presumptuous
delusion, and during their sickness and at their death guided all their
actions with what they imagined a divine gravity and manner.
consequently, they chose as the place for their grave some assigned
spot, like
one old man who lived on the seacoast between dulac and abuyog, which
is in the island of leyte. he ordered himself placed there in his
coffin (as was done) in a house standing alone and distant from the
settlement, in order that he might be recognized as a god of
navigators, who were to commend themselves to him. another had himself
buried in certain lands in the mountains of antipolo, and through
reverence to []him no one dared to cultivate those lands (for
they feared that he who should do so would die), until an evangelical
minister removed that fear from them, and now they cultivate them
without harm or fear.
. they mentioned the creation of the world, the beginning of the
human race, the flood, glory, punishment, and other invisible things,
such as evil spirits and devils. they recognized the latter to be
man’s enemy, and hence feared them. by the beginning which they
assigned to the world and the human race, will be seen the vanity of
their belief, and that it is all lies and fables. they say that the
world began with only the sky and water, between which was a kite.
tired of flying and not having any place where it could alight, the
kite stirred up the water against the sky. the sky, in order to
restrain the water and prevent it from mounting to it, burdened it with
islands; and also ordered the kite to light and build its nest on them,
and leave them in peace. they said that men had come from the stem of a
large bamboo (such as one sees in this orient), which had only two
nodules. that bamboo, floating on the water, was carried by the waves
to the feet of the kite, which was on the seacoast. the kite, in anger
at what had struck its feet, opened the bamboo by picking it with its
beak. when it was opened, out of one nodule came man and from the other
woman. after various difficulties because of the obstacle of
consanguinity in the first degree, one of the gods namely, the
earthquake, after consulting with the fish and birds, absolved them,
and they married and had many children. from those children came the
various kinds and classes of people. for it happened []that the parents,
angered at having so many children idle and useless in the house, took
counsel together; afterward the father one day gave way to his anger,
and was desirous of punishing them with a stick which he had in his
hand (a thing which they can never do). the children fled, so that some
of them took refuge in the chambers and innermost parts of the house,
from whom they say came the chiefs; others escaped outside, and from
them came the freemen, whom they call timauas; others fled to
the kitchen and lower parts, and they are the slaves; others fled to
various distant places, and they are the other nations.
. it is not known whether there was any temple in all these islands, or any
place assigned in common for worship; or that the people ever assembled
for public functions. in private they were wont to have in their own
houses (and not outside them in any cave or like place) some kind of
altars, on which they placed their idols, and before them a small
brasier with burning aromatics. but although they had no temples, they
did not lack priests or priestesses for the sacrifices, which each one
offered for his own purpose or necessity. the tagálogs called
those cursed ministers catalonan, and the visayans 
babaylan. some were priests by inheritance and relationship; others
by the dexterity with which they caused themselves to be instructed and
substituted in the office of famous priests by gaining their good-will.
others were deceived by the devil with his wonted wiles, and made a
pact with him to []assist them, and to hold converse with him
through their idols or anitos; and he appeared to them in
various forms. the method of making the sacrifices hinged on the
different purposes for which they were intended. if it were for a feast
of ostentation and vanity that was being made to some chief, they
called it “the feast of the great god.” the method of
celebrating it was near the house of the chief, in a leafy bower which
they erected especially for that purpose, hung round about with
hangings in their fashion, namely, the moorish, which were made from
odds and ends of pieces, of various colors. the guests assembled there,
and the sacrifice having been prepared (on those occasions of a feast
usually some good fat pig), the catalona ordered the girl of the
best appearance and who was best adorned, to give the spear-thrust to
the animal, amid the ceremony of certain dances of theirs. when the
animal was dead it was cut into bits and divided among all the people,
as is the blessed bread. although other animals were killed and eaten,
and other viands and refreshments peculiar to those people were used,
that animal was the one esteemed and was reverently consumed. the chief
part of the feast was the drinking, accompanied, as ever, with much
music and dancing.
. if the sacrifice was because of the danger of death in the
house of sickness, the minister ordered that a new, large, and
capacious house be built at the expense of the sick person, in which to
celebrate the feast. that work was performed in a trice, as the
materials were at hand and all the neighbors took part in it. when it
was finished, the sick person was taken to the new lodging. then
preparing the intended sacrifice—a slave (which []was their custom at
times), a turtle, a large shellfish, or a hog—without an altar or
anything resembling one, they placed it near the sick person, who was
stretched out on the floor of the house on a palm mat (which they use
as a mattress). they also set many small tables there, laden with
various viands. the catalona stepped out, and, dancing to the
sound of gongs, wounded the animal, and anointed with the blood the
sick person, as well as some of the bystanders. the animal was then
drawn slightly to one side and skinned and cleaned. after that it was
taken back to its first location, and the catalona there before them
all, spoke some words between her teeth while she opened it, and took
out and examined the entrails, in the manner of the ancient
soothsayers. besides that the devil became incarnate in her, or the
catalona feigned to be him by grimaces, and shaking of the feet and
hands, and foamings at the mouth, acting as if out of her senses. after
she had returned to her senses, she prophesied to the sick person what
would happen to him. if the prophecy was one of life, the people ate
and drank, chanted the histories of the ancestors of the sick person
and of the anito to which the sacrifice was being made, and
danced until they fell through sheer exhaustion. if the prophecy was
one of death, the prophetess bolstered up her bad news with praises of
the sick person, for whose virtues and prowess she said the 
anitos had chosen him to become one of them. from that time she
commended herself to him and all his family, begging him to remember
her in the other life. she added other flatteries and lies, with which
she made the poor sick person swallow his death; and obliged his
relatives and friends to treat him []from that time as an anito, and make
feasts to him. the end was eating and drinking, for that marked the
termination of their sacrifices. each person who attended the sacrifice
was obliged to offer something—gold, cotton, birds, or other
things—according to his capacity and wish. the offering was given
to the priest or priestess who had performed the sacrifice.
consequently, the latter were generally quite rich and well dressed,
and had plenty of ornaments made of various kinds of jewels. on that
account, however, they were not honored or esteemed; for they were
considered as an idle lot, who lived by the sweat of others. after
their duty was once performed no further attention was paid to them,
unless they united with their office nobility or power.
. to give a list of the omens and auguries would consume much
time and be useless. if the owl lit on the roof at night it was a sign
of death. consequently, when a house was built some sort of scarecrow
was set up to keep that bird away, so that the house might not be lost;
for a house would under no circumstances be lived in if that happened.
the same was true if any serpent was seen in it after it had been newly
built. if they came across a serpent in any road they would not proceed
farther, even if their business was very pressing. the same was true if
they heard any one sneeze, a rat squeal, a dog howl, or a lizard sing.
fishermen would not make []use of the first cast of the net or a new
fish-corral, for they thought that they would get no more fish if they
did the opposite. neither must one talk in the fisherman’s house
of his new nets, or in that of the hunter of dogs recently purchased,
until they had made a capture or had some good luck; for if they did
not observe that, the virtue was taken from the nets and the cunning
from the dogs. a pregnant woman could not cut off her hair, under
penalty of bearing an infant without hair. those who journeyed ashore
could not mention anything of the sea; and those who voyaged on the sea
could not take any land animal with them, or even name it. when a
voyage was begun they rocked the boat to and fro, and let it vibrate,
and if the vibrations of the right side were more pronounced the voyage
would be good, but if bad they were less. they cast lots with some
strands of cord, with the tusks of swine, the teeth of crocodiles, and
other filthy things, at the ends; and their good or evil fortune would
depend on whether or not those ends became tangled.
. the oaths of these nations were all execrations in the form of
awful curses. matay, “may i die!” cagtin nang
buaya, “may i be eaten by the crocodile!” maguin
amo, “may i turn into a monkey!” the one generally used
is matay. when the chiefs of manila and tondo swore allegiance
to our catholic sovereigns, in the year one thousand []five hundred and
seventy-one, they confirmed the peace agreements and the subjection
with an oath, asking “the sun to pierce them through the middle,
the crocodiles to eat them, and the women not to show them any favor or
wish them well, if they broke their word.” sometimes they
performed the pasambahan for greater solemnity and confirmation
of the oath. that consisted in bringing forward the figure of some
monstrous beast asking that they might be broken into pieces by it if
they failed in their promise. others, having placed a lighted candle in
front of them, said that as that candle melted and was consumed, so
might he who failed in his promise be consumed and destroyed. such as
these were their oaths.
. it remains for us to speak of their mortuary customs. as soon
as the sick person dies, they begin to bewail him with sobs and
cries—not only the relatives and friends, but also those who have
that as a trade and hire themselves out for that purpose. they put into
their song innumerable bits of nonsense in praise of the deceased. to
the sound of that sad music, they washed the body. they perfumed it
with storax, or benzoin, and other perfumes, obtained from tree-resins
which are found throughout these forests. having done that they
shrouded the corpse, wrapping it in a greater or less number of cloths,
according to the rank of the deceased. the most powerful were anointed
and embalmed according to the manner of the hebrews, with aromatic
liquors which preserve the body from corruption, especially that made
from the aloes wood, or as it is called, eagle-wood. that wood is much
esteemed and greatly used throughout this india extra gangem.
[]the sap
from the plant called buyo (which is the famous betel of all india) was
also used for that purpose. a quantity of that sap was placed in the
mouth so that it would reach the interior. the grave of poor people was
a hole in the ground under their own houses. after the rich and
powerful were bewailed for three days, they were placed in a box or
coffin of incorruptible wood, the body adorned with rich jewels, and
with sheets of gold over the mouth and eyes. the box of the coffin was
all of one piece, and was generally dug out of the trunk of a large
tree, and the lid was so adjusted that no air could enter. by such
means some bodies have been found uncorrupted after the lapse of many
years. those coffins were placed in one of three places, according to
the inclination and command of the deceased. that place was either in
the upper part of the house with the jewels, which are generally kept
there; or in the lower part of it, raised up from the ground; or in the
ground itself, in an open hole which is surrounded with a small
railing, without covering the coffin over with earth. near it they
generally placed another box filled with the best clothing of the
deceased, and at suitable times various kinds of food were placed on
dishes for them. beside the men were placed the weapons, and beside the
women their looms or other instruments of labor. if they were much
beloved by those who bewailed them, they were not permitted to go
alone. a good meal was given to some slave, male or female, and one of
those most liked by the deceased; and then he was killed, in order that
he might accompany the deceased. shortly before the entrance of the
faith into the island of bool, one of the chiefs 
[]of that island had himself
buried in a kind of boat, which the natives call barangay, surrounded
by seventy slaves with arms, ammunition, and food—just as he was
wont to go out upon his raids and robberies when in life; and as if he
were to be as great a pirate in the other life as in this. others
buried their dead in the open country, and made fires for many days
under the house, and set guards so that the deceased should not return
to carry away those who had remained.
. after the funeral the lamentations ceased, although the eating
and drunkenness did not. on the contrary, the latter continued for a
greater or less time, according to the rank of the deceased. the widow
or widower and the orphans, and other relatives, who were most affected
by grief, fasted as a sign of mourning, and abstained from flesh, fish,
and other food, eating during those days naught but vegetables, and
those only sparingly. that manner of fasting or penitence for the dead
is called sipà by the tagálogs. mourning among the
tagálogs is black, and among the visayans white, and in addition
the visayans shave the head and eyebrows. at the death of a chief
silence must reign in the village until the interdict was raised; and
that lasted a greater or less number of days, according to his rank.
during that time no sound or noise was to be heard anywhere, under
penalty of infamy. in regard to this even the villages along the
river-bank placed a certain signal aloft, so that no one might sail by
that side, or enter or leave the village, under penalty of death. they
deprived anyone who broke that silence of his life, with the greatest
cruelty and violence. those who were killed in war were celebrated
[]in their
lamentations and in their funeral rites, and much time was spent in
offering sacrifices to or for them, accompanied with many banquets and
drunken revels. if the death had happened through violence—in war
or peace, by treason, or any other manner—the mourning was not
laid aside nor the interdict raised until the children, brothers, or
relatives, killed an equal number not only of their enemies and the
murderers, but also of any strange persons who were not their friends.
like highwaymen and robbers they prowled on land and sea, and went on
the hunt for men, killing as many as they could until their fury was
appeased. that barbarous kind of vengeance is called 
balàta and in token of it the neck was girt with a strap
which was worn until the number of persons prescribed had been killed.
then a great feast and banquet was made, the interdict was raised, and
at its proper time the mourning was removed. in all the above are
clearly seen the traces of heathendom and of those ancient rites and
customs so celebrated and noised about by good authors, by which many
other nations, more civilized, were considered as famous and worthy of
history.
chapter xvi
of the government and political customs of these peoples
. there were no kings or rulers worthy of mention, throughout
this archipelago; but there were many chiefs who dominated others less
powerful. as there were many without much power, there was no security
from the continual wars that were waged between them. manila had two
chiefs, uncle and []nephew, who had equal power and authority. they
were at war with another chief, who was chief alone; and he was so near
that they were separated from one another by nothing more than a not
very wide river. the same conditions ruled in all the rest of the
island, and of even the whole archipelago, until the entrance of the
faith, when they were given peace—which they now esteem much more
than all that they then obtained from those petty wars and their
depredations. they were divided into barangays, as roma into districts,
and our cities into parishes or collations. they are called barangays,
which is the name of a boat, preserving the name from the boat in which
they came to settle these islands. since they came subject to one
leader in their barangay, who acted as their captain or pilot—who
was accompanied by his children, relatives, friends, and
comrades—after landing, they kept in company under that leader,
who is the dato. seizing the lands, they began to cultivate them
and to make use of them. they seized as much of the sea and near-by
rivers as they could preserve and defend from any other barangay, or
from many barangays, according as they had settled near or far from
others. although on all occasions some barangays aided and protected
others, yet the slave or even the timaua or freemen could not
pass from one barangay to another, especially a married man or a
married woman, without paying a certain quantity of gold, and giving a
public feast to his whole barangay; where this was not done, it was an
occasion for war between the two barangays. if a man of one barangay
happened to marry a woman of another, the children []had to be divided
between the barangays, in the same manner as the slaves.
. their laws and policy, which were not very barbarous for
barbarians, consisted wholly of traditions and customs, observed with
so great exactness that it was not considered possible to break them in
any circumstance. one was the respect of parents and elders, carried to
so great a degree that not even the name of one’s father could
pass the lips, in the same way as the hebrews [regarded] the name of
god. the individuals, even the children, must follow the general
[custom]. there were other laws also. for the determination of their
suits, both civil and criminal, there was no other judge than the said
chief, with the assistance of some old men of the same barangay. with
them the suit was determined in the following form. they had the
opponents summoned, and endeavored to have them come to an agreement.
but if they would not agree, then an oath was administered to each one,
to the effect that he would abide by what was determined and done. then
they called for witnesses, and examined summarily. if the proof was
equal [on both sides], the difference was split; but, if it were
unequal, the sentence was given in favor of the one who conquered. if
the one who was defeated resisted, the judge made himself a party to
the cause, and all of them at once attacked with the armed hand the one
defeated, and execution to the required amount was levied upon him. the
judge received the larger share of this amount, and some was paid to
the witnesses of the one who won the suit, while the poor litigant
received the least.
in criminal causes there were wide distinctions []made because of the
rank of the murderer and the slain; and if the latter were a chief all
his kinsmen went to hunt for the murderer and his relatives, and both
sides engaged in war, until mediators undertook to declare the quantity
of gold due for that murder, in accordance with the appraisals which
the old men said ought to be paid according to their custom. one half
of that amount belonged to the chiefs, and the other half was divided
among the wife, children, and relatives of the deceased. the penalty of
death was never imposed by process of law, except when the murderer and
his victim were common men and had no gold to satisfy the murder. in
such a case, if the man’s dato or maginoo (for
these are one and the same) did not kill him, the other chiefs did,
spearing him after lashing him to a stake.
. in a matter of theft, if the crime were proved, but not the
criminal, and more than one person was suspected, a canonical clearance
from guilt had to be made in the following form. first they obliged
each person to put in a heap a bundle of cloth, leaves, or anything
else that they wished, in which they might discover the article stolen.
if the article stolen was found in the heap, at the end of this effort,
then the suit ceased; if not, one of three methods was tried. first,
they were placed in the part of the river where it is deepest, each one
with his wooden spear in his hand. then at the same time they were all
to be plunged under the water, for all are equal in this, and he who
came out first was regarded as the criminal. consequently, many let
themselves drown for fear of punishment. the second was to place a
stone in a vessel of boiling water, and to order them to take it out.
he who []refused to put his hand into the water paid the
penalty for the theft. thirdly, each one was given a wax candle of the
same wick, and of equal size and weight. the candles were lighted at
the same time, and he whose candle first went out was the culprit.
. there are three kinds and classes of people: the chiefs, whom
the visayans call dato and the tagálogs maginoo;
the timauas, who are the ordinary common people, called 
maharlicà among the tagálogs; and the slaves, called
oripuen by the visayans and alipin by the
tagálogs. the last are divided into several kinds, as we shall
relate soon. the chiefs attain that position generally through their
blood; or, if not that, because of their energy and strength. for even
though one may be of low extraction, if he is seen to be careful, and
if he gains some wealth by his industry and schemes—whether by
farming and stock-raising, or by trading; or by any of the trades among
them, such as smith, jeweler, or carpenter; or by robbery and tyranny,
which was the most usual method—in that way he gains authority
and reputation, and increases it the more he practices tyranny and
violence. with these beginnings, he takes the name of dato; and
others, whether his relatives or not, come to him, and add credit and
esteem to him, and make him a leader. thus there is no superior who
gives him authority or title, beyond his own efforts and power.
consequently, might was proclaimed as right, and he who robbed most and
tyrannized most was the most powerful. if his children continued those
tyrannies, they conserved that grandeur. if on the contrary, they were
men of little ability, who allowed themselves to be subjugated, or were
reduced either by misfortunes and []disastrous happenings, or by sicknesses and
losses, they lost their grandeur with their possessions, as is
customary throughout the world; and the fact that they had honored
parents or relatives was of no avail to them, or is of no avail to them
now. in this way it has happened that the father might be a chief, and
the son or brother a slave—and worse, even a slave to his own
brother.
. their manner of life and ordinary conduct from the days of old
is trade, in all sorts of things by wholesale, and more by retail in
the products of the earth, in accordance with what is produced in each
district. the maritime peoples are great fishers with net, line, and
corral. the people who live inland are excellent farmers and hunters.
they are always cultivating rice, besides other vegetables and garden
products, quite different from those of europa. the women also are
shrewd in trading, especially of their weaving, needlework, and
embroideries, which they make very neatly; and there is scarcely one
who cannot read and write. sometimes the husband and wife go together
on their trading, and, whether for this or for any other thing, she
must always go ahead; for it is not their custom to go together. even
if it be a band wholly made up of men or of women, or of men and women
mixed, and even if the road be very wide, they go in single file one
after the other.
. the maritime peoples were accustomed to make many raids, and
those of the interior to set ambushes for such depredations, wasting
life in this. their weapons consisted of bow and arrow; a spear with a
short handle, and a head shaped in innumerable ways, most often with
harpoon points; other []spears without any head, with the point made on
the shaft itself (which is now of bamboo and now of wood), a vara long,
hardened in fire. they had swords; large, sharp daggers, made very
beautifully; and slender, long blowpipes [ceruatanas], through
which they shot most dangerous poisoned arrows, in the manner of the
inhabitants of samatra. such are their offensive weapons. their
defensive weapons are wooden shields and rattan or corded breastplates,
and other armor helmets of the same material.
. what justice, what fidelity, what honesty should there be amid
so great cruelty and tyranny? virginity and purity were ignominious,
which is the general vice of idolaters. whether married or single, the
woman who had no lover could not be safe; and by regarding that as an
honor, they considered it a dishonor to give their persons free. when
men children were born in certain provinces, the mothers themselves
performed on them a certain form of circumcision, quite different from
that of the jews and moros, and only in order to render them more
skilful in their lewdness. yet with all this, they abhorred, and
chastised, and rigorously punished incest.
. in the celebration of their marriages, espousals, and divorces,
and in the giving and receiving of dowries, they also proceeded
according to reason. in the first place, they agreed as to the dowry,
which is promised and given even now by the man, in the sum named by
the parents. when it is determined the betrothal takes place, generally
with a conventional penalty which is rigorously executed. however,
neither men nor women take []it for an insult or grieve greatly if the
betrothal be refused, because then they benefit by the fine. the truth
is, that if those who are bound by the fine were the parents, after
their deaths the children are free to break the contract without
incurring the penalty, by only the restitution of the amount received
as dowry.
matrimony at present includes, besides the above, the delivery of
the person and the dowry. the latter is not received by the woman but
by her parents or relatives, as it were selling their girls, in the
manner of the mesopotamians and other nations. the parents convert the
dowry into their own estate, and it is distributed with the other
property, at their deaths, among all the children equally. but if the
son-in-law has been very obedient to his parents-in-law; then the
latter generally return the dowry to their children. the other
relatives are only depositaries of what they must again deliver to the
children. besides the dowry, the chiefs formerly gave some presents to
the parents and relatives, and even to the slaves, to a greater or less
amount according to the rank of the bridegroom.
the pagan ceremony and form of marriage had to be authorized by a
sacrifice; for after the marriage had been agreed upon and the dowry
paid over, the catalona came, and a hog was brought to her. the
ceremonies were performed as in other sacrifices. the lovers having
seated themselves in their bridal chamber, each in the lap of an old
woman who acted as godmother, the latter gave them to eat from one
plate and to drink from one cup. the bridegroom said that he took the
woman to wife, and, accepting her, the catalona or 
babaylana immediately []gave them a thousand benedictions, saying to
them: “may you be well mated. may you beget many children and
grandchildren, all rich and brave,” and other things of this
sort. thereupon the hog was slain, and the lovers were married; and
when the others became tired of dancing and singing, all became
intoxicated and went to sleep. if the recently-married couple did not
suit each other, another sacrifice was ordered, in which the bridegroom
himself danced and slew the victim—the while talking to his 
anito, and offering himself to it for the sake of peace and harmony
with his wife. that having been done, he calmed himself, confident that
then and thenceforth the two would live in harmony, and enjoy their
married life in peace.
these nations consider it important to take a wife only from their
own family, and the nearer the better. only they except the first grade
[of kinship], for they always considered that as a dissolving
impediment. but what marriages were those in which the contract was not
indissoluble, and could be dissolved by the woman, if she were to
blame, merely returning the dowry! if the husband were to blame, it was
not returned; and the marriage could be repudiated by themselves,
without any solemnity of law. that was done daily for very slight
causes, and new marriages were formed with others. polygamy was not the
fashion among the tagálogs. however, if the wife bore no
children, the husband could with his wife’s permission have them
by his slave women, in accordance with the example of the ancient
patriarchs. among the principal visayans, the ministers of the gospel
found established the custom of having two or more legitimate wives,
and []large dowries, which was a great obstacle to
christianity.
. thus far in regard to marriage. as to the children and their
succession and inheritance, if they were legitimate they inherited
equally in the property of their parents. for lack of legitimate
children the nearest relatives inherited. if there were illegitimate
children, who had for example been had by a free woman, they had their
share in the inheritance, but not equally with the legitimate children,
for the latter received two-thirds, and the illegitimate one-third. but
if there were no legitimate children then the illegitimate received all
the inheritance. the children of a slave woman who belonged to the man
were given some part of the household effects, according to the will of
the legitimate children. in addition the mother became free for the
very reason that her master had had a child by her.
there were also adopted children, and the practice was that the one
adopted bought his adoption. for the natural parent gave a certain sum
to the adopted parent in order to have his son or daughter adopted, and
thereupon the latter was adopted without any other subtlety of law or
of paternal power. it was done only to the end that the adopted child,
if he should outlive the one adopting him, should inherit double the
sum that had been given for his adoption. thus, if ten were given, he
must inherit twenty. but if the adopted parent outlived the adopted
child, the adoption expired as well as the right of inheritance, which
was not given to the heirs of the adopted one, either in whole or in
part. but if, on the contrary, the parent died while his own []child was
living, he left him by way of addition to the sum for adoption doubled,
some jewel or slave woman, as a reward for his good services. but, on
the other hand, if the child was ungrateful and acted badly, the
adoptive parent gave him up, by restoring the sum that had been given
for his adoption.
adultery was not punished corporally, but by a pecuniary fine.
therefore the adulterer, by paying to the aggrieved party the sum of
gold agreed upon between them, or given by the sentence and judgment of
the old men, was pardoned for the injury that he had committed; and the
aggrieved party was satisfied, and his honor was not besmirched. also
he continued to live with his wife without anything more being said on
the subject. but those children had by a married woman did not succeed
to the nobility of the parents or to their privileges; but were always
reckoned plebeians, whom those people call timauas. likewise
those children had by a slave woman, although they were free, as was
the mother, were always regarded as of low birth. these who succeeded
to the nobility were the legitimate children. in the barangay, when the
father was lord of it his eldest son inherited that office; but, if he
died, then he who came next in order. if there were no male children,
then the daughters succeeded in the same order; and for want of either
males or females, the succession went to the nearest relative of the
last possessor. thus no will was necessary for all those successions;
for wills were never in vogue among these nations in the form and
solemnity of such. as for legacies it was sufficient to leave them
openly, in writing or entrusted by word of mouth, in the presence of
known persons. []
. a great part of the wealth of these indians consisted in
slaves. for, after gold, no property was held in greater esteem,
because of the many comforts that were enjoyed for their mode of living
through a multitude of slaves. thus our spaniards when they entered the
islands found so many slaves that there were chiefs who had one, two,
and three hundred slaves, and those generally of their own color and
nation, and not of other foreign nations. the most general origin of
those slaveries were interest and usury. that was so much practiced
among them, that no father would aid his son, no son his father, no
brother his brother, and much less any relative his relative, even
though he were suffering extreme necessity, without an agreement to
restore double. if payment was not made when promised, the debtor
remained a slave until he paid. that happened often, for the interest
or increase continued to accumulate just so long as the payment was
deferred. consequently, the interest exceeded the wealth of the debtor,
and therefore the debt was loaded upon his shoulders, and the poor
creature became a slave; and from that time his children and
descendants were slaves. other slaveries were due to tyranny and
cruelty. for slaves were made either in vengeance on enemies, in the
engagements and petty wars that they waged against one another, in
which the prisoners made remained slaves, even though they were of the
same village and race; or as a punishment which the more powerful
inflicted on the weaker ones, even for a matter of little importance,
of which they made a matter of insult. for instance if the lesser did
not observe the interdict on talking and noise, usual in the time of
the burial []of the chiefs; if he passed near where the
chief’s wife was bathing; or if any dust or any other dirt fell
from the house of the timaua upon the chief or his wife when
passing through the street: then in these and numberless other similar
cases the powerful ones deprived the poor wretches of liberty, and
tyrannically made them slaves—and not only them but their
children, and perhaps the wife and near relatives. the worst thing is
that all those who had been made slaves by war, or for punishment of
debts, were rigorously regarded as such, as slaves for any kind of
service or slavery, and served inside the house. the same was true of
their children, in the manner of our slaveries, and they could be sold
at will. however, the masters were not accustomed to sell those born
under their roof, for they regarded them in the light of relatives.
those slaves were allowed to keep for themselves a portion of any
profit which they made. the tagálogs called such true slaves 
sanguiguilir, and the visayans halon.
other slaves were called namamahay, for they did not serve
their master in all capacities, nor inside his house; but in their own
houses, and outside that of their masters. they were bound, however, to
obey their master’s summons either to serve in his house when he
had honored guests, or for the erection of his house and its repair,
and in the seasons of sowing and harvest. they [had also to respond] to
act as his rowers when he went out in his boat, and on other like
occasions, in which they were obliged to serve their master without any
pay.
. among both kinds of slaves, sanguiguilir and 
namamahay, it happens that there are some who are whole slaves,
some who are half slaves, and some []one-fourth part slave. for if the father or
the mother were free, and had an only son he was half free and half
slave. if they had more than one child, these were so divided that the
first followed the condition of the father, whether free or slave, and
the second that of the mother. so did it happen with successive pairs.
but if there were an odd number of children, the last was half free and
half slave. those who descended from them, if they were children of a
free father or mother, were slaves only in the fourth part, as they
were the children of a free father or mother, and of one half slave.
sometimes, because it happened that two people had agreed to marry and
the man had no wealth for the dowry—or rather, nothing with which
to buy his wife—he became her slave. in such case the children
were divided in the said manner, and the first, third, and fifth, and
the remaining ones in the same way were slaves, inasmuch as they
belonged to the father, who was also a slave of the mother—and
not only slaves to her, but also to her brothers and sisters and
relatives, in case of her death and the division of her property. on
the contrary the second, fourth, and others in the same way, were
according to their custom free, inasmuch as they belonged to their
mother who was free; and they were masters and rulers over their own
father and brothers and sisters. the same thing happened in the case of
interest, a thing of so great importance among them that, as already
remarked, the father would not pardon the debt and interest even to the
son, nor the son the father, even in case of necessity, until the one
had made a slave of the other for it. consequently, if one brother
ransomed another brother, or a son his []father, the latter remained a slave,
as did his descendants, until the value of the ransom was paid with
interest. consequently, the captive was gainer only by the change of
master. such as the above are the monstrous things that are seen where
the law of god and christian charity are lacking. in the division made
between heirs, when a slave belonged to many, the time of his service
was divided and each of the masters had the share that belonged to him
and was his in such slave; and the division was made by months, or as
was convenient among the masters. when a slave is not a whole slave but
only a half or fourth part, he has the right to compel his master to
give him his freedom for the just price at which he is appraised,
according to the rank of the slavery, sanguiguilir or 
namamahay. but if he be a whole slave, the master cannot be
compelled to ransom him at any price, even though he should have become
a slave for debt, if already the day set for the payment of the debt
has passed.
. there was another kind of service which was not of a truth
servitude, although it appeared to be such. it was generally seen among
certain persons called cabalangay. whenever such persons wanted
any small trifle, they begged the head chief of their barangay for it,
and he gave it to them. in return, whenever he summoned them they were
obliged to go to him to work in his fields or to row in his boats.
whenever a feast or banquet was given, then they all came together and
helped furnish the tuba, wine, or quilan, such being their method of
service.
. the ancient custom in manumission was for the whole 
sanguiguilir slave to pay ten taes of gold, and the 
namamahay the half; and, in addition to that, []he had to give the
half of whatever things he owned. for instance, if he owned two large
jars he had to give one. in order to make that conveyance, the slave
must make a banquet, at which were present masters, relatives, and
friends. at the height of the banquet the delivery of the gold and
household articles was made, those present being witnesses that the
master had received them. the latter was thereupon satisfied, and the
slave was set free.
even today the tagálogs are wont, at death, to grant freedom
to the children of their slaves who are born in their house, no matter
how young they be. however, they do not free the parents of those
children no matter how old they be, and even if they have been served
throughout life by them. that seems absolutely illogical.
. to what has been said of dowries and marriages, it must be
added that in some districts, besides the bigaycaya and those
presents made to the relatives, there was panhimuyat. this was a
kind of present that was given to the mother of the bride, merely in
return for the bad and watchful nights that she had passed in rearing
her. that panhimuyat signifies “watchfulness and
care.” if the dowry was equal to five taes of gold, the 
panhimuyat was equal to one tinga, which was equivalent to
one tae, or five pesos. that was a custom which well shows the
harshness and greed of these nations, since the mothers wished to be
paid even for the rearing of their daughters.
also, whenever a chief married any daughter of his and asked a large
dowry of his son-in-law, as, for instance, eighteen or twenty taes of
gold, the father was obliged to give his daughter certain gifts called
pasonor, such as a gold chain, or a couple of []slaves, or something
proportional to the dowry. it was very shameful to ask a large dowry
without giving a pasonor. this is still done, resembling the
gifts which among us the father presents to his daughter 
præter dotem, which the civil law calls bona
paraphernalia. []
 for description of borneo, see
vol. xxxiii, p. , note . malayo
refers to a portion of the malay peninsula. for the origin, settlement,
and distribution of the native peoples in the philippines, see
barrows’s account in census of philippine islands, i, pp.
–, –; cf. crawfurd’s dictionary of
indian islands, pp. –.
 joão de barros, the
great portuguese historian, was born at vizeu in  and became page
to the crown prince (afterward joão iii), for whose amusement he
wrote his three-volume [n]romance, cronica de emperador
clarimundo (coimbra, ). joão iii appointed him captain
of the fortress of san jorge de mina, governor of the portuguese
possessions in guinea, and () treasurer and general agent for
portuguese india. an attempt to colonize a grant of land in brazil
(received ) failed, and was abandoned. barros died in . the
book referred to in the text was his decados, a history of
portuguese india, written in fulfilment of a royal commission. the
first “decade” was completed in nine years (), the
second soon after, and the third ten years later. the fourth was left
unfinished at his death, but was completed later by diogo do conto, who
added eight more volumes. a complete edition was printed at lisbon in
twenty-four volumes (–). barros was a conscientious writer
and a good stylist. (new international encyclopædia.)
 an apparent error for the word
“kasis,” and here wrongly used (see vol. xvi, p. , note ).
 thus (sur) in text; but,
as a matter of fact, paragua stretches northeast from the north point
of borneo, and the sulu archipelago in the same direction from its
northeast side.
 sumatra is on the whole
deficient in lakes. the largest is lake singkara, about twenty miles in
length by about twelve to fifteen in breadth, with a depth of
twenty-four fathoms, and is the source of the indragiri river. another
lies near the foot of the mountain mârapi, and is called danau
sapuluh kota, or “lake of the ten forts.” there are two
others in the country of the korinchi malays; and still another in the
country of the lampungs, toward java, and called the ranu (javanese
synonym for “water”). it is about sixteen miles long and
eight miles wide. colin evidently refers to either the first or the
last of these. see crawfurd’s dictionary, p. .
 india citra gangem (if
we accept marco polo’s division) would correspond to greater
india, or the country extending from the ganges to the indus. india 
extra gangem, or lesser india, included the territory between the
eastern coast of the peninsula of india, and that of cochinchina or
champa. see wright’s edition of travels of marco polo
(london and new york, ), p. , note. colin says (p. ), that
india extra gangem or farther india included the coasts of the
rich kingdoms of malacca, sian, camboja, champa, cochinchina, tunquin,
and china, as far as the confines of oriental tartary. the allusion to
an asiatic ethiopia is hopelessly confused, and may have arisen from
marco polo’s second division of india, which includes
abyssinia.
 of the manguianes, or more
properly the mangyan, pardo de tavera says in etimologia
de las nombres de razas de filipinas (manila, ): “in
tagálog, bícol, and visaya, manguian signifies
‘savage,’ ‘mountaineer,’ ‘pagan
negroes.’ it may be that the use of this word is applicable to a
great number of filipinos, but nevertheless it has been applied only to
certain inhabitants of mindoro. in primitive times, without doubt, the
name was even then given to those of that island who to-day bear it,
but its employment in three filipino languages shows that the radical
ngian had in all these languages a sense to-day forgotten. in
pampango this radical ending still exists and signifies
‘ancient,’ from which we can deduce that the name 
was applied to men considered to be the ancient inhabitants, and
that these men were pushed back into the interior by the modern
invaders in whose languages they are called the
‘ancients.’” they live in the mountains of mindoro
and are probably a mixture of the negritos with other filipinos, and
possibly in some localities there may be a small infusion of white
blood. they are non-christian, and are very timid. their dress consists
of the “gee” string, with the addition, in the case of the
younger girls, of some forty or eighty yards of bejuco (rattan) wrapped
around the waist. they are divided into several tribes, chief among
which are the “buquit,” “bangon,” and
“batanganes,” who roam in bunches or by families, the
oldest acting as chief. they are willing workers, and make nearly all
the bancas used in the province. they have no knowledge whatever
of agriculture, and do not know the value of money. the census of 
shows a population of ,. see census of the philippines, i,
pp. , , , and ; and ii, p. .
 the chinese carried on a fairly
active trade in the philippines three centuries before magellan’s
discovery of the archipelago. the articles traded by them for the
products of the country consisted of pottery, lead, glass beads, iron
cooking-pans, and iron needles. some of them may have gone north above
manila. see census of philippines, i, p. .
 see david p. barrows
“history of the population of the philippines,” published
in vol. , of census of philippines, for valuable material in
regard to the peopling of the philippines. see also crawfurd’s
dictionary.
 diodorus, surnamed siculus, or
“the sicilian,” was a greek historian, a native of agyrion,
sicily, who lived in the time of cæsar and augustus. after long
travels in asia and europe he wrote his bibliotheca, a
universal history in  books, covering a period from the oldest time
to  b. c. books – and –, besides other fragments,
are still extant. the early portion of the work is ethnological, but
the later is in the annalist style. (seyffert’s dictionary of
classical antiquities.)
 either iamblichus the syrian
greek romance writer, who lived in the second century a. d., or
iamblichus the greek philosopher from chalcis in syria, who was a pupil
of porphyrius, and the founder of the syrian school of neo-platonic
philosophy, [n]and who died about  a. d. the latter
justified oriental superstition and had the reputation of working
miracles. (seyffert’s dictionary of classical
antiquities.)
 see 
vol. xvi, p. , note .
 señor don antonio
graiño, a bookman in madrid, spain, [n]has an unpublished ms.
history by pedro chirino, probably a copy of the one mentioned by
colin.
 see 
vol. xii, p. .
 this should be compared with
the ave maria as given by chirino (see vol.
xii, p. ). colin also gives the same in the visayan tongue,
but as it differs so slightly from the version as given by chirino
(“ginoon” in place of “guinoon,” line , second
word; “sancta,” in place of “santa,” line ,
first word; “ynahan” in place of “inahan,” line
, third word; “macasala” in place of
“macasasala” line , fourth word; and “camatay”
in place of “camatai,” last line, fourth word), it is
omitted here (see ut supra, p. ). the version in
the harayan tongue that is given (ut supra, p. ) by
chirino, is omitted by colin. in his text we retain also his spanish
translation of the prayer.
 cf. personal names and the
ceremonies attendant on bestowing them among the bornean malays, in
furness’s home-life of borneo head-hunters (philadelphia,
), pp. –; and ling roth’s natives of
sarawak, ii, pp. –.
 light thin stuff made of
silk or thread; crape. see velázquez’s new
dictionary.
 “such is the wine from
nipa, called tanduay. the famous chemist (a chinese mestizo)
anacleto del rosario, discovered a process by which the disagreeable
taste of this brandy disappears; and it becomes equal to that of spain
in color, smell, taste, and strength.” (father pastells, in his
edition of colin, i, p. , note .)
 gachas: a certain food
composed of flour, milk, and water, to which is added honey or sugar,
and the consistency of which is midway between starch and flour paste.
(dominguez’s diccionario.)
 “their most popular
traditional songs are the cundimán, the 
comintán, the balitao, the saloma, and the 
talindao. some are only sung; in others, they sing and dance at the
same time.” (pastells, in his colin, i. p. , note
 “the dance here
described by the author is that which is called in filipinas 
moro-moro.” (pastells, ut supra, p. , note
 pastells (ut supra,
p. , note ) discusses the meaning of the word bathala; he thinks
that it is ascertained “by resolving the word into its primary
elements, bata and ala = ‘son god, or son of
god.’ this is why the first missionaries did not deprive the
natives of this name when they instructed them about the existence of
god and the mysteries of the trinity, the incarnation, and redemption,
as states an anonymous but very circumstantial relation written at
manila, on april , . this is more evident in the song which the
mandayan baylanas use in their sacrifices, when they chant the 
miminsad, saying: [here follow the words of this song, for which
consult our vol. xii, p. , note.] ...
the mandayas believe that mansilatan is the father of batla (man
being a prefix which indicates paternity, [n]being, or dominion), and the
búsao who takes possession of the baylanas when they
tremble, and of the baganis when they become furious; it is a power
which is derived from mansilatan.... this interpretation of the word
bathala is confirmed by that word of the visayans, diuata; we
always find here the same idea signified in the words diwa and
uata, differing only in their transposition.... in closing, we
may note that dewa in malay, déwa in javanese,
sunda, makasar, and day[ak?], deva in maguindanao, and 
djebata in bornean, signify ‘the supreme god,’ or
‘divinity.’”
 the caverns were, in
especial, formerly the usual sepulchres of the indians. the
anthropologists have profited by this circumstance for their studies,
and for furnishing the museums of their respective nations with
skeletons of those natives. (pastells, ut supra, p. , note
 the mahometans
[moros] had their mosque, or lañgà .”
(pastells, ut supra, p. , note .) legazpi says (vol. iii, p. ): “the heathens have no
[religious] law at all; they have neither temples nor idols, nor do
they offer any sacrifices.”
 a reference to the common
little house or chirping lizard, which is often seen and heard on the
walls of the houses. see census of philippines, i, p. .
arthur stanley riggs says in a note in a
forthcoming volume, the filipino drama: “the common or
house lizard in the philippines has a pretty, chirping note. when one
hears a lizard [n]‘sing,’ as the spaniards call
the cry, it means, among the ilocanos, an important visit of some kind.
if hunting at the time one hears several lizards sing, he must turn
back immediately, as disaster will inevitably follow further progress.
other curious and interesting superstitions obtain in like manner in
other parts of the islands.”
 i.e., “over and
above the dowry.”
 i.e., “property
which was given to women over and above the dowry, and remained at
their own disposition.”
 [contents]
the natives of the southern islands
[francisco combés, s.j., in his historia de las islas de
mindanao, iolo, y sus adjacentes (madrid, ), devotes a number
of pages to the peoples of mindanao and other islands. this matter we
translate from the reprint issued (madrid, ) by pablo pastells,
s.j., and w. e. retana, book i, chapters ix–xviii.] []
chapter ix
of the nations of these islands and those adjacent to
them
four nations have renown in this island, the caragas, mindanaos, lutaos, and subanos. that []of most renown is
the nation of caraga, which, although it is the smallest numerically,
has been the greatest in deeds. in times past that nation was the
scourge of the islands, as is today proclaimed by the depredations that
still are fresh in memory in the islands of pintados—especially
so in that of leyte, where there is scarce a village which has not
bewailed its ruin. a good part of this ruin extended to ours, the
pirates having pillaged our town of palo and destroyed all the villages
of the coast, taking prisoner the father ransomer, who exercised that office for
all the jurisdiction, and obliging those who lived in the villages to
retire into the mountains. those nations maintained themselves by their
own valor, without protection of the pagan kings; they were bold
against all, and no one dared to do anything to them. they are a brave
nation on sea and land, and on land they are the first nation of the
islands; and by their aid great exploits have been accomplished, as was
seen in the conquest of the lake of malanao, and in all others that
have occurred since they were subdued by the gospel and the catholic
arms.
the second nation in estimation is the mindanao, which includes the
kingdoms of buhayen; for in olden times they were all one nation, and
today, although various petty rulers govern them, they are one in
customs and language. they are a nation of []some valor, and with their
policy of being subject to kings they have acquired esteem among the
other nations, whom they have united under one political government for
achievements that are too great for their own courage. they are
treacherous and of little faith, as they are now swayed by the impious
worship of mahomet.
the third nation is the lutaya. it is a nation common to these
islands of mindanao, jolo, and basilan. in all these islands it
preserves the name of lutao, for since that is their vocation it well
explains their nature. for lutao means, in those languages, “he
who swims and goes floating over the water.” such is the nature
of these people that they know no other house than the ship. in the
villages which they have formed they well show the inclination with
which they were born; for they are so fond of living on the sea that
their houses are built in it, in places which the low tide leaves
exposed. in that way they can set upright the trunks of the trees with
which they must form their houses, driving them down according to the
load which they have to sustain. when it is high tide the houses are
very far from the shore, and the water in between is so deep that brigs
and craft of heavier tonnage can sail there. these people hate the land
so thoroughly that they do not trouble themselves at all about its
cultivation, nor get any benefit from it. all their labor lies in
fishing, and they get from that the means of barter for whatever they
need, even for the wood that they burn and the logs from which they
build their houses and craft. since they are so slightly attached to
the land, they easily move to other parts, and know no fixed abode
except the sea; for although []they recognize villages, in which they
assemble, they seldom live in these, for they are scattered through the
bays and beaches suitable for their fishing. they live under the kings
of mindanao and jolo, and the chiefs of the same, and those of the
island of basilan; today with some, tomorrow with others, according to
the district in which they are. those of this island are scattered
along all the coast which extends from samboangan to the river of
mindanao, and have no fixed dwelling in any other part—except
some of them who have settled in the city of cebú and a few
others in the village of dapitan. they are equally esteemed in all
parts as being the sinews for the wars of these regions (their campaign
field being the sea), and also for their skill in constructing vessels
fit for the wars of these regions, and their skill in managing
them.
by their constant communication with,all the nations (as they go to
all parts for their advantage), and because of their method of
living—which is so in the manner of traders, enjoying the fruits
of the land—and by the alertness of their intelligence, they are
the most capable, the most clear-sighted, and the most crafty people of
these islands. therefore, they maintain the supremacy in everything,
and, although they are the smallest in number, and everywhere the most
foreign [of all these peoples], they are today the kings, and hold the
rulers as their slaves; for now by loans, now by violence, and now by
private vengeance, they have established the entire slavery of these
islands.
as their work causes but little exertion, naturally they grow up
lazy, and only shake off their laziness for the gains and advantages of
an industry like trading []and sea piracy. and since the gains derived
from that source are sure, both because the cunning employed by them is
that of finished robbers, and because their wings are those of royal
falcons, they are most eager for that exercise, as they are assured by
these advantages from all danger; for, whether it be because of the
swiftness of their ships or because of their skill in rowing them, no
ship of ours has ever been able to overtake them. assured on that
point, they have pillaged whatever their greed has dictated to them.
their method of attack is for all of them to land at once with a
terrifying and barbaric cry, the awfulness of which strikes terror to
the people as they are caught defenseless and separated and thus
incapable of resistance.
they are more circumspect on the sea, when danger does not oblige
them to make resistance. for since these natives do not fight for
reputation, but only for gain, they seek to assure that, and not to buy
it too dear with their blood. therefore, when they meet a ship which
they think cannot make any resistance they go to it in certainty of
making it a prize, and that they will catch it a half-legua from shore.
however small it be, they do not care to seize it if there is any
danger. they continue to row about it, until they cause it to waste its
powder in spectacular warfare, and then, when they see it weakening,
they attack it with great valor throwing by hand so many missile
weapons that no man can [safely] show his face; and when they get
within range there is rarely a man who is not wounded, for they hurl
these missiles in showers. no matter how well equipped a boat may be,
if once it gets within their range it has to surrender; for then their
men, both sailors and soldiers []hurl their arrows with both hands, so that
they confuse those who uncover themselves for the fight. but by
startling them from a distance, that danger is not imminent, and less
resistance suffices. in order that this may be better understood, i
shall relate some attested incidents of such encounters. one happened
to an inhabitant of dapitan, with whom i sailed for many days. he, when
going toward his village in a small boat, met the fleet of the joloans.
a ship with one piece immediately left the fleet to pursue him. the
indian carried a musket, and after he had discharged it the enemy,
recognizing it, moderated their zeal, and coming within range
discharged their own piece. then they backed water in order to load
again and repeated the attack, always keeping a close watch on the
musket. in this way they made three attacks, until at the third their
piece became enraged, and breaking its carriage, fell into the sea.
thereupon the enemy dared attempt nothing more, and retired. the same
fortune happened to father antonio abarca, of our society, of whom we shall
make honorable mention later. he, having left me in dapitan in order to
go over to bohol, on that same day while sailing toward that island,
and while still one legua away from it, found three hostile joangas of
joloans at another island, small and uninhabited, called illaticasa,
which attacked him at the same time. there was but one firearm in the
ship, and the father was []the only one who knew how to manage it. he
seeing himself so far from land, and pursued by an enemy so keen and so
swift on the sea, availed himself of his courage, which was great, and
of his skill, which was remarkable; and, adroitly fighting, he kept
firing at the enemy, until he gained shore, being almost all the time
in range of them, and so near that they talked to one another. by that
means he saved himself and his people—a thing that would have
been impossible in any other manner; but his defense was so fiery that
in less than half an hour he fired the gun more than thirty times.
these people are the instruments of all the exploits by sea, for of
all the other nations no one will embark unless he is forced; and on
account of the little effectiveness that is found by experience in all
the others, our enemies, who are watchful for their own safety and for
fortunate results, are not hindered by those other peoples.
consequently, he who has most men from this nation is considered the
most powerful and is the most feared, as they have power to infest the
seas and coasts, making captives and pillaging, and making themselves
masters of the crossings and passages necessary for communication with
the other islands.
for that same reason the mindanao has become so feared in these
latter years that although he of buhayen is the true and legitimate
king, he is coming to be less esteemed; for since the mindanao king has
many lutaos, he has also power to make war. and although the king of
buhayen has twenty-fold more vassals, he can make no one uneasy because
he has no subjects of this nation; consequently, he has no weight in
these islands. for the wars of these []nations, now because of their
little permanence, now because of the natural ruggedness of their
settled parts, are but seldom offensive by land; for the enemy are
immediately perceived, and the less powerful avail themselves of the
shelter of the mountains. since the people are of little endurance and
less subordination they cannot sustain long campaigns. therefore, at
most the valiant ones set an ambush, and according to the way it falls
out the campaign is finished without the spoils being surrendered; for
their articles of value, as there is so little good faith among them,
are always kept buried, or are so light that they are carried along
with them. on that account he alone is judged powerful who has people
to make war by sea. in ancient times this power caused all this island
to pay tribute to the king of mindanao in order to be free from his
attacks. in the time of buisan, the father of corralat, they had hopes
of rendering all the islands of pintados tributary; and, though the
island of burney is so out of the way, more than twenty thousand
vassals pay tribute to him in the villages called suaco. for the same
reason, although the joloan nation is so small, it has become the most
distinguished in these islands; for on sea it equals the strength of
the mindanaos, as they have as many or more vassals of the lutao
nation.
the fourth nation is the subano. they are the settlers along the
rivers. to them is due the name suba, which is the equivalent of
“river” in the general language of these nations. it is the
nation of least esteem, both because of their natural barbarousness,
for they live in the plains with as little association with one another
as have brutes (one []house being located a legua’s distance
from another, according to where each one wishes to build his hut); and
because of their poverty, which is dire. for since they have no other
intelligence than [what is required for] their work, their slothfulness
reduces their efforts to what necessity [only] requires, so that what
is abundant for a laborious life is always lacking with them. they are
deficient in civilized ways, along with human intercourse, as they are
born so hostile and so averse to communication [with others] that they
grow old in their rude settlements without curiosity drawing them from
their place of residence, or without their seeing the sea, although
some of them live where they hear news of the horror of its tumults and
movements. if either necessity or gain has made them give a glance at
their rivers, they are satisfied with that, and do not seek a better
fortune with its dangers. this inertia forbids them, incapable of
giving force to their ambition, from following its impulses with
[favoring] winds.
they are as cowardly as treacherous, the one being the consequence
of the other. he who better plans a bit of treachery and comes out most
safely is considered the most valiant. as they all know one another,
they look out for one another, and build their houses so high up that a
pike cannot reach and wound them. their usual practice is to seek a
very high tree, where they can build their nests safely; and, their
houses being so unostentatious in size and furnishing, a tree holds
them easily. the ladder by which they ascend is a log, some grooves
that they cut in it serving as steps. on the coming of night they draw
this ladder up and thus []sleep secure. they teach us the little with
which life is satisfied, and the fatigues which our ambition and pride
give us; for in order to satisfy our ambition and pride we take upon us
so many cares, which, so far as life is concerned, are superfluous, and
are not the least of the accidents which our life suffers. this nation
is almost wholly in vassalage to the lutaos, and every village
recognizes some chief of the latter nation to whom they pay tribute; and
that chief bears himself as a king among them, and makes and unmakes at
his will. in the beginning, this authority entered under color of
protection and support against the king of mindanao, and remained in
enthroned tyranny, so that today most of this nation are slaves of the
lutaos—their want of intellect subjecting them to a thousand
cheats, and their want of protection to a thousand outrages. for since
the lutaos are so alert a nation, and so sharp in their affairs, they
have gradually bought the subanos by trading with them, becoming
masters of their entire freedom.
chapter x
of the noble and brave nation of the dapitans
of this island, which has given empires to so many kings, without
doubt the crown is the village of dapitan; and, although it is so small
at present, it has been one of the most densely populated in the past,
the one most respected for its power, and in our times the whole, both
of these conquests and of []their christian churches. in a small number,
reduced to one single village, there is inclosed a nation apart from all the
others, and superior to all those discovered in nobility, valor,
fidelity, and catholicism. they are descended from the island of bool,
where they anciently occupied the strait made by that island and the
island of panglao, which remains dry at low tide, but at high tide
allows a galliot to pass. therefore many brazas in the sea stand, even
today, certain columns of upright wood, as honorable witnesses of the
location so gloriously occupied by this nation, and today the venerable
ruins of poor although adequate buildings which they sustained. they
occupied both shores and the entire island of panglao. there they
conquered the famous people of bohol; for as their nation was the less
numerous in that island, they were obliged to sustain their name by
their deeds. the boholans, conquered and put to flight, abandoned the
site which they occupied from the shore of the strait to the coast of
baclayon and took refuge on the river of loboc, where their name is
still preserved in a few families descended from that stock which
conquered that island, and only the valor of the dapitans subdued. according to
the ancient law of the land the dapitans can call the boholans their
slaves since less title was sufficient for that in []the days of their
antiquity, and the most authoritative reason was always that of
war.
war exiled the dapitans from their country, a proof of their valor
and the unforeseen accidents of their misfortunes; for they were the
only people of all the archipelago who were renowned among foreign
princes for their exploits, and to them alone were embassies made. it
happened then that in an embassy sent by the king of terrenate, the
most warlike and powerful king known, his ambassador lost [due] respect
for the house of the dapitan princes—then represented by dailisan
and pagbuaya, who were brothers—by making advances to a
concubine. they punished the crime more by the laws of offended and
irritated fury than by those of reason, with hideous and indeed cruel
demonstrations of contempt, by cutting off the noses and ears of the
ambassador and his men. when they had returned to terrenate, the horrid
aspect of his subjects aroused the wrath of the king. he armed all his
power in twenty joangas to oppose the dapitans. his general, doubtful
of the outcome, as he knew the valor of those with whom he had to do,
made use of a trick by which he assured a deceitful victory. he sent
his joangas in, one by one, giving out that they were traders, and
under the security of friendship—excusing the above occurrence,
in order to divert the attention [of the dapitans], with the laws of
punishment, deserved because of the boldness of their men. the
dapitans, seeing that the ternatans were attending only to the sale of
their goods, lost their caution, and came up with the same confidence
as ever. when the ternatans had all their fleet together, and saw that
of the dapitans, []they closed with them. although the latter
placed themselves in a position of defense, they retreated before that
multitude, and the terror of arms to which they were unaccustomed; for
the ternatans already had muskets and arquebuses, the use of which they
had before other nations, because of their trade with the portuguese. the frightful
effects of these, as terrible by their ruin as by their novelty, worked
on the minds of the dapitans. dailisan was killed in that fray, and his
brother pagbuaya was left the reigning prince. he, seeing how he was
involved with the ternatans, and how much at the mercy of their new
[arms] was
the place occupied by the dapitans—where the ternatan ships could
succeed in anchoring under the houses of the dapitans, and using their
arms, fight them in safety—resolved to seek another place, better
defended. he also thus resolved because these nations regard as unlucky
the place where fortune has once shown itself hostile to them, and
immediately abandon it as accursed. even today, in these islands, it is
a fact that the house where a chief dies is abandoned by his people and
it remains alone, waiting its ruin. he sought then a place 
[]where, their valor and its
ruggedness joining hands, they could make up, aided by the strength of
the site, for the small number of their nation. as there were no hills
on their coasts, and they were unable to restrain their noble and
warlike nature to the confinement and gloomy prison of the retired
mountains, where they would be deprived of the trade and benefits of
the sea, they crossed to the island of mindanao, a crossing of fifteen
leguas, and twenty from their village, and seized a small rugged hill,
which would allow itself to be monopolized by their valor.
the people who elected to follow pagbuaya numbered one thousand
families of freemen, his subjects, without taking into account the
unmarried men. in these nations, where there is a law of dowry—or
rather a law for the purchase of wives—there are many men who are
denied the bonds of matrimony because of their poverty. neither do we
reckon the slaves of the prince, who exceeded five hundred, and many
other families of the lutao nation, who as they now live under the
protection of the kings of mindanao and jolo, lived then also under the
protection of the dapitan princes.
they had occupied the new site but a short time when their renown
caused anxiety to the most remote princes, who were fearful of their
power. consequently, the king of the great island of burney was the
first to send his ambassador with two joangas, soliciting their
friendship. while they []were yet awaiting the resolution of the
dapitans, the brave magallanes sighted their coasts with his squadron,
as we shall relate in the second book. they immediately made peace with
him, being pleased, as brave men, with the valor which they recognized
in the unknown people. the borneans were sent away with the message that
the dapitans wished no other friendship than that of their new guests.
they have preserved that friendship to this day, as noble people,
without any complaint [arising] of their loyalty, even to the lowest
slave; and their exploits in favor of our arms have deserved much
praise. for the son of that pagbuaya, called manooc, following the
fidelity of his father, and surpassing it with the good fortune of
being a christian, aided the spaniards in their first conquests of
these islands—especially in the conquest of manila, the capital
of all these islands; and later in the conquest of camarines, taking at
their own expense, in all these feats of arms, their men and the
nations subject to them.
that prince, who, as he was the first to become acquainted with the
spaniards (having shared the knowledge of them which his father
acquired with the first sight of the squadron of magallanes), was the
first to receive the blessing of acquaintance with []our holy faith,
giving renown equally to his own banners and to those of our king and
sovereign, and receiving the name don pedro manuel
manooc—continued the greatness of his deeds. for besides the
services rendered in manila and the province of camarines, he sustained
war against mindanao and jolo, and attacked them with his fleets in
their very houses. on one occasion, when among others he went to attack
jolo, he met the king himself, who was also going out with his fleet of
twelve joangas. manooc defeated him and captured his flagship, and, at
the cost of many killed, the king escaped as a fugitive, by hastening
to the land. he made war on the caragas, who were the terror of the
islands at that time. he subdued the village of bayug of the malanao nation, who
were subject to the mindanaos, without our arms having any other
protection amid so many enemies than that of his valor which made easy
so many undertakings. that prince was the father of doña maria
uray, who is today living as an example and ornament of these nations
because of the perfection of her virtues—which she prefers to a
better fortune, for she has spurned marriage with the kings of jolo in
order that she might not subject her faith to the outrages of barbarous
and faithless princes. don pedro manuel manooc left orders that he was
to be buried in the city of cebú, as he had ordered in his will
that his bones be taken to that cathedral. his children carried out his
orders, thereby showing both their affection to us and their devotion
to him. []
the women were not inferior in merit. for doña madalena
baloyog, the sister of don pedro manuel manooc, had so great authority
among the barbarous subanos that she alone by her discretion reduced
more of them than did the arms of her people by their valor and
courage. she obtained the name of pacifier, mistress, and sovereign of
the hard hearts of the chiefs of the subanos. her authority was so
manifest to our men that, the natives of the river of butuan having
rebelled, and killed their alcalde-mayor and their minister, a secular
priest, who was then in charge of it, it was sufficient for her to
assure them of pardon for the deed, and to secure to us their
pacification and due obedience forever.
the cousin of don pedro manuel manooc was laria, who competed in all
things for the greatness of his cousin. he served in the conquest of
maluco with the same nobility and valor, and would receive no pay or
rations for his men. in the seven times when the island of jolo was
attacked in war, he took part in all of those conflicts, always showing
himself remarkable for his princely actions and soldierly valor.
a son worthy the nobility of such a father was []don
gonçalo maglenti, the husband of doña maria uray, whom we
mentioned above, and the father of don pedro cabelin. the latter is
still living and is nowise inferior in his deeds and fidelity to his
forbears, as he was reared from childhood with so good merits of
nobility and christian warfare—accompanying his father from the
age of seven years, on all occasions of danger; thus he came to despise
danger so thoroughly that at the age of thirty (his present age) the
enemies of god and of our king whom he has killed in hand-to-hand
combats, in various frays, surpass two hundred. don gonçalo,
then, the father of so illustrious a son, left him enough examples to
emulate his valor, for in accordance with his surname (which means
“he who hurls down thunderbolts”), his valor hurled them in
a constant shower. he opposed the might of the mindanaos at the time of
their greatest arrogance, when they threatened all these islands with
their arms. he always went in pursuit of their fleets and of those of
the malanaos which were sent by way of the bay of pangil to aid the
mindanaos, for he was an ally for the defeat of their plans. he subdued
from the bay of pangil to the village of sidabay, ten leguas from
samboangan, all of the villages scattered through sixty leguas along
the coast (formerly many more and superior in number). his care watched
perpetually over the islands, and of his own accord he despatched
advices to cebú and oton at the first rumor of hostile fleets,
by means of which the evil designs of the enemies []might be
frustrated. that care merited for his nation exemption from the tribute
and from all personal service, which its natives enjoy today by
concession from his majesty.
in this site the dapitans—now reduced to the enterprises of
his valor to so small a number that they scarce exceed one hundred
families—alone and strangers, have defended themselves from the
power of all the pirates of these islands, all of whom, pursuing them
with their vengeance and injuries, have attempted to extirpate them
entirely. and as they have the land so at their mercy, with nations who
have inherited so much internal hatred [to the dapitans] at being
subdued by this noble nation, the former have been unable to get one
single captive out of their hands, and their sieges are always left
crowned with triumphs. for buhisán, the father of corralat, and
the most warlike of the kings of mindanao, with one hundred joangas and
the incentive of his own person and presence, returned within fifteen
months, his haughtiness undeceived. the joloans, notwithstanding their
power, had no better fortune, and left behind seven joangas in the
enterprise that they attempted—although the opportunity was so in
their favor, when there were scarcely ten men in the stronghold, as the
majority had gone to various places for their trade.
among the subanos—the ports of their conquest, which surround
them on all sides—their valor is so accredited, that a dapitan
has nothing to fear among a hundred of them. for if they see him ready
for them, they do not dare to attack him, however thirsty for his blood
their hatred makes them; []for the subanos are all the triumphs of the
arms of the dapitans, of which the sound and rigorous execution has
drawn the former from their mountains, and made settlements of men from
savages scattered among the thickets, who are reduced to more civilized
life. thus has been established a province which, in our time, has been
given separate an alcalde-mayor, namely, that of iligan; and by that
province is secured to our arms an opening for the conquest of mindanao
and jolo, as we have thereby had soldiers, pilots, and most skilful
sailors, who are better than all those who sail in these islands. their
village remains as a stronghold opposed to the petty rulers of those
peoples.
they are a very prudent race, and are quite hispanicized in their
customs, and by the modesty of their bearing naturally deserved
respectable. thus they do not endure the outrages that the other
subdued nations endure, now from the boldness of the soldiers, now from
the exigencies of our necessities; for they attend to all things
willingly, considering it an honor to satisfy our desires.
consequently, in respect and esteem they are the princes of these
islands.
in matters of the christian faith they yield in no wise to the most
pious european nation or to the loyalty of the most distinguished. they
are the ones who guard religion. the minister who visits the ports of
their coast, with four dapitans whom he takes as a guard goes as safely
as if he were taking an infantry regiment; and no misfortune has ever
happened to such an arrangement. for although misfortunes have been
experienced in the infidelity []of the native subanos, yet they have been
invited by the confidence of the father missionaries, who have gone
among them without that valiant guard, as will be seen in the course of
this history. finally, the faith of this island and those near by is
owing to the dapitans; and, to their fidelity and valor, the glorious
confidence of our arms.
chapter xi
the settlers of these islands, and their origin
the owners of these islands are those who people the mountains.
they, enamored with their peaceful mode of living, and fed with the
happy returns of their cultivation, built their nests there and lost
their liking for the coast and love for its occupations. thereupon, as
they were reared in so deep retirement, which is especially great and
unconquerable in these natives, because of their slothfulness and
because they are so dead to curiosity, by which they have grown old in
their gloomy retreats, they gradually became mountaineers; and, their
intercourse with other peoples ceasing, they became less alert and more
barbarous, allowing the foreign traders to seize the coasts,
harbor-bars, and rivers which they found deserted. since by their
trade, and in every way, the latter were making themselves masters of
all things, the aborigines, being less valiant, yielded to the
foreigners, as these were more civilized. consequently, on the south
coast the rulers of those peoples are the lutaos, who bear themselves
among these nations as princes. in some parts those peoples are called
subanos, as in the jurisdiction of iligan and samboangan; in mindanao,
they are called []manobos and mananapes which is equivalent to
“brutes.” in jolo, they are guinuanos [i.e.,
guimbanos], and in basilan they are called sameacas, and they are subject in all
places equally to the fortune of the lutaos. no other origin to these
peoples can be conjectured than one general to these
islands—whose language, since its structure is founded on malayan
roots, shows by its origin the origin of its natives. to this testimony
corresponds the arrangement of these islands, which are strung out in a
series from burney and macaçar, so that there is scarcely any
considerable break, and there is no such correspondence in any other
part.
the lutaya nation are new in these islands, and live more on the
seas than on their plains. they have no greater stability than is
promised by a log []in the water where no firm foundation can be
laid. they scarcely take their feet from their boats. their moorish
dress of turban and marlota [i.e., a moorish robe], their
arms and worship, clearly show their origin. with all this agrees their
more polished language, which they speak, emulating the grandeur of the
princes of these nations who have made an ostentation of speaking
it—indeed, because their own especial language approaches more
nearly to it than any other, for they owe to it a great number of their
words. as
the moorish faith [i.e., mahometanism] is recent in india, and thence has
steadily spread through these kingdoms it can be understood that this
nation [i.e., the lutaos] occupied these coasts but a short time
ago. the lutaos of this island who are subject to corralat and the
buhayens (both through commerce and by the submission which they
observed toward the king of ternate) show that they are branches of
that stock. they recognize even their protection, which in olden times
was the greatest obligation, and give them aid in their wars and
protect them from their enemies. by the prowess of the lutaos those
rulers were encouraged to cause grievous depredations among these
islands, until the spaniards established themselves so strongly in
ternate that, checked by that, as a bulwark of the islands, the moro
chiefs did not attempt to pass farther, being content with []placing their
domestic affairs in safety without risking it for foreign [gains].
there are black negroes in this island, who pay tribute to no one.
they resemble those of the island of negros, and of the uplands about
manila, called aetas. they live more like brute beasts than like men,
and they flee from the sight of all, doing ill to whomever they can.
they recognize no village, nor in a land of so many inclemencies do
they have any other shelter than that of the trees. they can be seen
daily in the bay of pangil. in the village of layauan, where i was
making the visitation, there appeared to be many of them. they have no
other adornments than those which they inherited from nature; and pay
so scant respect to decency that they do not secure even what is
requisite. their arms are the bow and arrows dipped in poisons, which
they know and with which they prepare the arrows. it appears probable,
from what we know of other islands, where these people are found
gathered in the most inaccessible mountains, that these are the first
ones that occupied all these islands; but, as they are more ancient and
are so shut in, nothing more is known of their origin than what is
evident from this land, connected by its islands in a chain with those
of burney, macaçar, and great maluco. this nation maintains only
one excellence—at the cost, [however,] of its brutal condition
and wretched mode of life—namely, its liberty. no power, not even
that of our spaniards, has been able to subjugate them. they are so
free in their indomitable barbarism that they will not suffer any
subordination among them, not even that which fraternal feeling for
their own people might bring []about if they recognized dignities or any
organized form of social life.
the lutaos of jolo have all their communication with the borneans,
raising the trident of their king in the villages of that enormous island. there
they are judged to be one people [with the borneans], and are declared
such by the fraternal intercourse that they maintain among
themselves—being related by marriage, and conspiring together
with their arms for the invasion of these islands, where their
squadrons are seen daily under one and the same banner.
but the rulers and nobility of all the islands of jolo and basilan
recognize as the place of their origin the village of butuan (which,
although it is located in this island, is within the pale of the
visayan nation) on the northern side, in sight of the island of bool,
and but a few leguas away from leyte and from bool, islands which are
in the same stage of civilization. therefore, that village can glory at
having given kings and nobility to these nations. it is not so long ago
since the branches which flourish so well today were lopped from their
trunk, that the memory charged with the event that divided them can
have forgotten it. the old king of joló who is now living
[i.e., bongso], saw the one who was dismembered from his people,
and whom misfortunes exiled from his fatherland in order to make him
venture on another’s land, thus giving him the foundation of so
warlike a kingdom, which is so feared in these regions. inasmuch as the
tender beginnings of this new kingdom gathered 
[]encouragement from the
protection of our arms, which it enjoyed for some time as pacific and
tributary, it will be well to relate its beginnings before time
obscures them.
the dissensions of two brothers obliged the less powerful to seek,
by way of exile, a path to liberty which oppression denied him. those
affected to him accompanied him, and with them, seeking a land to his
liking, he hit upon the island of basilan. the one who stirred up that
people was named paguian tindig, then a title of nobility, and today the legacy
of kings and princes of the blood royal in the island of joló.
in his company he took his cousin, one adasaolan, whom his fate gave to
him in order to maintain its enmity to him. some of those in his
company allowed themselves to be led away by the fertility and
abundance of this island and remained behind, captivated by its
advantages. with the rest tindig went to joló, whither the
report of its wealth, the advantages of its seas and islands, and the
fertility of its mountains carried him. they easily conquered the
natives, who were barbarians and unaccustomed to the rigors and
ambitions of war. they remained as rulers of the island, and their
prince was paguian tindig, who, as subject to the spaniards (who had
already subdued the river of butuan), continued in the same allegiance
and paid them tribute. his cousin adasaolan he married to a daughter of
dimasangcay,
the king of mindanao named paguian goan [](a dangerous plan) in order to
give himself power in the rivalry [with his brother]. the mother of
corralat, by name imbog, was a joloan, and with the communication
indispensable to relationship easily infected adasaolan with the
perfidy of mahomet, and the tyranny and violence of his law; and he,
puffed up by the favor of the mindanao king, and confident of his help,
which their relationship promised him, planned to kill his cousin, in
order that he might remain absolute master of the island. he blockaded
him, unprepared, in his house with four hundred men who had gathered to
his standards. but in a happening not expected or feared, love acted,
being forewarned, and innocence, being offended. and since there is no
confusion that blinds the courage of foresight, he had taken the
precaution to pour down along the supports of the house (which are here
called arigues, and are of strong wood) a quantity of oil, which
rendered the scaling more difficult; and the besiegers, finding more
resistance than their presumption imagined, and yielding to so great
force, retired. tindig recognized the difficulty in which he was, and
considered war as declared and broken out; and, in order not to stain
it with blood at the cost of his men, planned to absent himself and
look for aid, respect for which would ensure his condition. he went to
manila for that purpose, having repressed the forefront of his danger,
and, as a tributary and subject prince, easily secured the pledge of
our arms for his help; and, because he alone could measure the force
with the necessity, the means was left to []his choice. he thought that two
well-armed caracoas would be enough, and, although a powerful fleet was
offered him, he refused to accept it; for he considered himself as
invincible in his joanga, if reënforced by two spanish
caracoas.
his absence made his rival powerful, for the party without a leader
readily unites with that side that has one; and, the cause of the
rivalry being wanting, tyranny easily united the forces of the island.
eight well-armed joangas were prepared by adasaolan, which were given
to him by buhisan, the father of corralat; and tindig, having come
within sight of joló, went ahead with a lack of caution, to
prepare his people, as he did not believe that the party of his cousin
was so in the ascendancy. the enemy who were awaiting him, all ready,
as soon as they saw his joanga without the shelter of the caracoas, all
surrounded it and boarded it, with the determination to finish the war
at one stroke. ours who were coming behind could not aid him; for he
had gone on ahead, as we have said, to advise his men, and to notify
his enemies of the war, so that fear could accomplish what he desired
without recourse to arms. overcome by the multitude rather than
yielding to force, he was killed. he died unconquerable, his death
leaving the tyrant assured of power. the king of joló, raya
bongso, who was punished by governor don sebastian hurtado de corcuera,
in his conquest of joló, is a good witness of this contest. he,
without much questioning, showed even the wounds that he received on
that occasion, fighting, although but a lad, at the side of paguian
tindig, who was his relative.
the spaniards having arrived, and the cause of []their fighting
(the protection of him who had fallen) being now removed, and not
finding anyone with whom to fight, returned to manila. the tyrant,
flushed with his victory, and being greedy with the hopes that great
captures were assured to him in the islands with alliance with the
mindanaos and borneans, united himself to them; and following their
fleets, with so good masters of piracy his people became so great
pirates, that they surpassed all in deeds, and by themselves caused so
great havoc throughout the islands that they have proved the heaviest
scourge that these natives have suffered. and refusing obedience to his
majesty and the tribute which they have always paid, that principality
[of joló] was founded and has less antiquity in these islands
than the spaniards.
chapter xii
beliefs and superstitions of these islands
the general condition of these islands is paganism. from sangil to
samboangan, the dwellers along the beach follow the law of mahomet, as
well as those of the islands of basilan and joló. this last is
the metropolis of the false religion, and the mecca of this
archipelago; for there is the tomb of their first master, concerning
whom the caciques [i.e., kasis], for the credit of his deceits,
have been establishing innumerable fables, which have already become a
lying tradition in this century. one is that []he came from paradise with
three others, of whom one went to java, and another to burney, and the
other two landed at joló, and thence one went to mindanao. he of
mindanao was ill received; and because of that, and of having been
shipwrecked in the sea by driving on a reef, he went in anger to an
island to become a hermit, walking upon the water. but he who was
wrecked in a ship could ill keep his footing in the water. such is the
character of lies, that some are quite contrary to others. the outfit
that he carried consisted of a net, and it is said that he caught fish
on the mountain with it, by dragging it over the ground. but if he
found fish on the mountain then the fish surely could not escape him,
unless indeed it were a flying-fish. when his followers went to seek
him, satan had already carried him away, and they found only the
net—and that stretched out, for it had been placed to dry. from
that point they took occasion to discuss so disconnected bits of
nonsense as we have mentioned. thereupon he who remained in joló
obtained the chair of the evil [doctrine], and, as he is accredited
with not fewer deceits, he was able to authorize his person and his
doctrine with the barbarians; for he also gave them to understand that
he could get fresh water from the sea, that he could sail on land, and
could establish fisheries on the mountain, as did the other. the use of
these errors gave authority for the common people to invent others.
they believe that the enchanted boat which they never saw, and whose
anchorage they never knew, still exists. the respect that his deceits
gained him in life became ignorant and infamous adoration at his death.
a sepulcher was erected for him, which became the []mausoleum of his
memory, and the mecca of his deceits. they erected it on the famous
hill [of joló], and it was very elegant. at its foot they planted the
singular fruit which they call the king’s fruit, which is unique in
this archipelago, and of which no one ate except himself, although for
devotion the shells were given to the others. as we said, they planted
many jasmines, and made their defenses there, so that animals might not
defile the mausoleum. as an entrance to it, there was arranged in front
of it a little house which was placed at the beginning of the stockade,
as if it were an entrance into the well of st. patrick. there they made
their offerings, all of which went to the benefit of the prebendaries
of the house, who were generally of the blood of the hypocrite. thence
they took their auguries for the war, for, putting water in a vase,
together with some earth from the sepulcher, if it became bitter to the
taste the outcome would be bad; but if sweet, it would be happy. it is
said that this test was made for the war waged on them by don
sebastian, in consequence of which the king was always inclined to
treat for peace.
by the entrance of our forces upon the hill, that place lost its
worship and esteem; for the soldiers turned it all upside down, and dug
it up in the hope of finding some treasure, and found no trace of a
human body. the indians were terrified at their boldness, and asked
whether those who dared to do so much would not die. thereupon, those
people []were left with only the staff [of that
teacher], which the kasis [caciques] keep; for that is the staff
of all virtues, and in going out with it (which is at the time of any
necessity), all make it great reverence, and attend to all that is
asked of them. for if they do not do so, he excommunicates them, with
two blows with it which he gives on the house or the boat, and there
can be neither health in the one or good luck in the other. all these
are the artifices of cupidity, which holds them fast in a deceitful
fear by vain terrors.
the other relic is the cap, which is the hereditary possession of the kings, and
to swear by it is to use the sanction of a great sacrament.
notwithstanding so many lies that are made up to sustain this
deceit, there are but few who esteem it; and in general they are all
atheists, and those who have any religion are sorcerers. for as moros,
beyond not eating pork, and practicing circumcision, and [having] a
multiplicity of women, they know not anything. they drink wine more
than we do, and all their happiness consists in drunken
revels—[to them] a positive act of greatness; and thus all their
knightly deeds consist in emptying more or fewer jars [of wine], and
there is a wedding in which they empty two hundred. all their festivals
consist in this. they live in all respects like men without any law who
do not know god, and without any mode of worship, and unmindful that
there is such []in the world. all regard the law as little more
or less, and, according to the land they inhabit, follow its customs
and laws. accordingly they are neither moors, heathen, nor christians,
but barbarous atheists. corralat, who has civilized his country
somewhat, has his mosque, and makes his people attend it. but when they
leave their village, each one does as he pleases—except some of
the chiefs, who, following the example of the king, have made it a
point of honor to appear to be moors. but the common people, assuredly,
lay no stress on that point.
what they believe in thoroughly are omens, which are almost general
in all the islands. there are many of them: of birds, like the
limocon; of
insects, like the lizard; of accidental occurrences, like sneezing; of
happenings, like deaths or earthquakes; of observances at time of
sowing, and of reaping, and of the hunt—all of these have their
observances, which they fulfil in order to have luck in the work; for
they believe that without these it will be unlucky, and without any
profit. therefore, they do not undertake those things, since in many
districts it is considered an omen when anyone asks for a portion of
what may be caught (as for instance, of the hunter or fisher), if we
say to him when he goes to try his luck: “divide with me what you
shall catch.” they consider that as a bad omen, and return to
their house, for they believe that they will catch nothing.
those who are atheists knowingly are the dwellers in mountains; for
they have no mosques, or []shrines, or any method of praying to god. those
upon whom they call in their illnesses are their ancestors, saying
“alas, my mother!” or “my grandfather.” that is
rather the natural expression of pain than a prayer in which they
experience any efficacy. where there are some to whom the devil talks
(which was more usual in their antiquity), such people offer him their
sacrifices,
and the indians []have recourse to them in their illnesses, so
that they could make the same efforts for them. today the christian
truth has obscured the falsity of hell. at most, the descendants of
those ministers of the devil, who were generally women, do what they
saw them do without the devil taking any notice of them or talking to
them. others, who lay but small stress on all that, do what they heard
said was the custom in the days of their antiquity, let happen what
would. but they do it with so little earnestness that it appears to be
levity rather than religion. with the same fervor they follow any other
rule, so that they always remain without any law, unless it be where
the energy and incessant constancy of the missionaries has made them
forget their ancient customs, and with continual instruction has made
it easy for them to accept the new things of our holy faith.
in caraga there was a barbarous custom to make their ships lucky,
namely, to vow to them the first []time upon some name, which was generally
the name of one of their captives.
that which has great value in all parts is sorcery; and they hold it
in such high esteem that the father hides it from the son, and unless
they receive a great profit they refuse to communicate any secret of
it. the famous sorcerers are feared, although there is no one who is
not ashamed of being called thus, and the word “sorcerer”
is one of the insulting words of these natives. my judgment from seeing
these [sorceries], so alike, is that they are implicit compacts made
with their ancestors. for it also seems impossible that there are herbs
of so powerful poison that they can kill so instantly that some persons
kill, with only the breath alone by chewing those herbs; and others, by
burying those herbs where one has to pass. they also use figures, which
they dedicate to him whom they wish to harm, and these accordingly
torment him; the figure continues to aggravate the evil upon the
sorcerer’s enemy. others work by letters, and that is peculiar to
the moro kasis [caciques], although the most of all this is
fabulous; but as they imagine that it is true, for any accident for
which they find no remedy, and of whose cause they are ignorant, they
throw the blame on the sorcerer. it is recounted of the king of burney
that, on learning the name of one, he can kill him if he chooses.
sargento-mayor pedro duran monforte having made war in his land, the
king was informed of his name, and said that since he knew his name,
therefore monforte could not live much longer, and with that he
consoled his people. but thanks to god, the sargento-mayor has been
living for three years since that threat. thus are all their affairs.
he who unites the excellency of a powerful sorcerer to mahometan
ardor is king corralat. he causes the fish to enter his boat. while one
of our fathers was in his boat, a fish leaped in; the king picked it up
and, giving it to the father, said: “this is for the
father.” it is also related that he makes a piece of artillery
float on the surface of the water by placing an oar in its mouth. he
has a saker, which according to report, when fired, serves him as a
good or evil augury. the fact is, that he talks very familiarly with
the devil. according to the tale of a spaniard (and one for which he
vouched to me), when he was going from samboangan on a certain embassy,
just as he entered the river the favorite of corralat told him that,
the night previous, his king had asked him whether any ship were to be
seen. to his negative answer the king said to him: “then take
note that three ships will arrive tomorrow, and one of them will be
spanish.” that was a fact, for two ships from java entered, and
that of the said spaniard. thereupon the favorite exclaimed:
“great saint corralat, there is no other truth.” with such
things he has established so much credit that if god do not bury his
body in the depths [of the sea], the mindanaos will worship him and
will found another house of mecca, such as they had in joló.
with that he has become a greater king than any of his forbears; for
their fear of him is incredible, as they recognize in him one who has
superior power to avenge himself. consequently, they do not dare
undertake anything against his will; for they regard it as certain that
they will be unlucky. since the devil has been so advantaged by that
way, he manages to make their fears come out true at times, by which
credit for the others is assured. []
chapter xiii
the moderation of their conduct, and the sobriety of their
living
among all the indians it is a general fact that in what relates to
their own persons natural law is more conspicuous, and has a more
firmly established empire, than have the nations. part of that is
founded on the slothfulness of their natures, and part on the rudeness
of their civilization; the former makes them content with little, and
the latter causes them to ignore the niceties of art. their food proves
the first well; and the havoc that they cause, the second. the food is
very poor among the wealthy, and requires little labor; for they
neither know condiments nor for that purpose are drugs valued among
them, of the use of all which they are ignorant. both slave and ruler,
plebeian and prince, eat bread; for, since that consists of a little
boiled rice, one cannot eat it more adorned than the other. since all
of them are bakers of this bread, he who wishes to clean it better eats
it whiter. he who has no slaves to relieve him from that eats it as he
chooses; and, consequently, there is no one who does not know how to
cook his food. for they are under the daily necessity, even the
richest, of making it; and, as ostentation in ordinary life is so
little, it is unavoidable that service is lacking to them on their
voyages and navigations, so that they are forced to use their own
hands. those who do not obtain rice—either because the land does
not bear it, or because it is limited in any year—eat of many
roots, which supply the lack fully, and which require no other
preparation than boiling. he who is so well served that he obtains a
little fish, venison, or pork, with water and salt alone makes his
stew, []without the knowledge of other kinds of
pottages. in order to give their food a sharp flavor, they are wont to
cook it with some herbs of a sour taste. consequently, in the seasoning
of their food they consume nothing, so that they save the cost of
butter, oil, vinegar, and all spices. they are accustomed to make their
puches [i.e., a sort of pap] and poleadas
[i.e., a sort of fritter] from cocoanut milk and the honey made
from sugarcane, which are their preserves and royal cakes. but such is
at a great wedding or at a feast, where their desire for ostentation
arouses their endeavors. such were presented to me by the king of
joló, panguian bachal, while i was visiting at his court. they
consisted of a half-dozen small cakes made of rice flour and kneaded
with cocoanut-milk, and baked until they turned dark, so that they
appeared to be cinnamon to the sight. in fact the color was due to the
toasting and to a preserve, like turpentine, made from the fruit of the
durion with honey made from sugarcane. this is enough to turn the
strongest stomachs—as it were, the chief dainty for the stomach
of a bull—oppressive, as it was all night to the queen mother; and we
satisfied ourselves with looking at it.
their clothing is very simple, without stiffening or linings. all
are dressed after the same style, and innovations due to curiosity are
not allowed. as the country is so hot, they dress very loosely, a fact
which makes the cutting out very easy. each one is the tailor of his
own garments. this is the reason why the indians are so lacking in the
communal idea, and are so hostile to assembling and uniting in
villages; []for since their misery and laziness make them
content with the easiest and most natural, which all obtain, they do
not need one another. for in each house are found all the trades, and
no one makes use of them unless his own necessity compels him. if one
goes to fish, he is content with what will satisfy either his appetite
or his necessity; and the desire of acquiring does not make him break
with his laziness in order to work.
returning to their clothes, the stuffs worn are generally common to
nobles, and plebeians, kings and slaves, and there is no difference
between them—except it be in something extraordinary, in which
the obligation and ostentation of their chief persons induces them to
depart from their accustomed use. at such times they are wont to wear
silks and very beautiful stuffs, with buttons and gold lace. their
krises (which are their inseparable weapons) have gilded scabbards and
hilts of massy gold. i have seen some of them which were valued at nine
slaves each, all covered with precious stones and perhaps encrusted
with pearls. but in daily appearance all resemble one another, both in
the garments in which they dress and in the fashions that they employ.
these clothes consist of breeches and short jacket
[ropilla]—or skirt, to be more accurate. that is not worn
over a shirt, for with them the first garment is not the shirt, but the
skirt, for it is all one. sometimes they wear a jacket with long skirts
cut in the french style; which, although it can be buttoned, is
generally worn open, with the breast exposed. in this particular this
nation is quite different from the others of this region. they use
another style of cut; the skirts and sleeves each ending in a point,
and []the ends which ought to close over the bosom
are brought together in double points, fastened either with a button or
with a knot, so that almost all the breast is left open. the breeches
are full and white, resembling those which the spaniards wear for the
sake of cleanliness under their black ones. they are girt with a bit of
native linen, so long that after having been knotted it hangs from the
waist to the knees; and it serves to make their garb more decent than
it would be because of the meagerness and thinness of the breeches. or
if they do not have that, then they use two brazas’ length of the
same cloth or silk, which at its full width they wind about the body,
joined in front with one end crossed below the other. in that manner
they cover the breeches entirely, and the clothing is much more decent.
in this usage, the gala costumes have special elaboration, and it
displays their ostentation; for they are wont to wear cloth that is
valued at thirty or forty reals of eight. they also wear breeches of
the malay fashion, which are closed like ours, although they are not so
tight. it is the rule that they must be of silk with a gold fringe
below, or with border and buttons of the same which among these people
is always of filigree or of solid gold. in that they consider only
ostentation, without any risk of waste.
on the head, in the moorish style, is worn a turban. its use
throughout the indias is general, but among these people inviolable. i
do not know whether it is because even their hearts are tinged with
their cursed worship, or because of hatred to our nation and to our
customs, or because of flattery to their natural
arrogance—through which they will never, of themselves, come to
depreciate their own []things. even yet throughout the islands, those
who are esteemed as chiefs are ashamed of appearing without hats.
the clothing of the women is plainer, and such that it becomes
indecent; for from the small mantas or textiles of these regions, which
are all very thin, they make a sack nine palmos long and open at both
ends. they gird this in at the waist as much as may be necessary, so
that it falls to the feet; what is left they allow to fall over the
legs, and it does not even reach to the knees, or necessarily serve for
the decency which modesty requires. they adjust it by drawing it close
to one side of the body, and by making folds on the other side of all
the extra width in proportion to their body. this sack, which by day is
a garment—so shameful to decency, because it so ill satisfies
it—serves at night for mattress, sheets, and curtain. for on
retiring they ungird the sack, and the part which they doubled about
the knees they put up to the head. that is all the opulence and comfort
that their beds can boast of, which are made of a thin mat. these are
their holland and rouen linens, which serve for their opulence and
their fastidious cleanliness. that is their whole wealth of quilts and
covers, which protect them from the cold and from the mosquitoes. all
is so exactly adapted to necessity, that there is no difference between
the chief women and the slaves—as i saw in joló in the
queen herself, and in samboangan in many other women, not inferior to
her in vanity. however, the women of highest rank, on retiring let fall
a curtain without a covering. and that is all their ostentation and the
necessary obligation of modesty for the protection from sight of those
who are []careless concerning their manner of sleeping,
in houses where there is no division of apartments, and where there can
be no rooms for the multitude that inhabit them, and where the others
throw themselves down pellmell on the floor. at most, the master is
protected by that little grandeur. this is in regard to the bed, for in
dress no difference is known.
the gala dress of the women of this nation consists wholly of the
shirt [sayuelo] which is made in the style usual to the indians.
it is however, drawn close about the breasts, and the sleeves are very
long, at times each sleeve taking three or four varas of cloth. the
sleeve is gathered at the wrist in a very fine and graceful plait, as
the goods that they wear are so delicate. they heighten that gala dress
with the wealth of gold, the use of which among these indias extends to
the wrists, which they cover with bracelets, either solid or hollow,
and a finger in width. on days of great display they generally wear
three or four pairs. the work is beautiful, and these add much to their
gay and festive appearance; and they show off the arm loaded with such
rich bracelets. for cloaks or mantles they wear textiles of fine silk,
and at times of gold [tissue], which they call patolas which is a very
beautiful and rich kind of goods. generally, when they leave the house
they all wear very long black cloaks; that partly moderates the
ugliness and utter indecency of their dress—which of itself is, i
know not whether more ugly or more immodest, with its sack above
mentioned, which serves them as shirt and petticoat, without its having
any distinction either for station, rank, or display. []
the houses in which they reside have what is sufficient for their
shelter and poor lodging. they have no salons where they can walk, or
higher stories where they can amuse themselves, than that which
separates them from the ground. this is made with logs, upon which as
columns they build their sills, to which they fasten the ends of the
beams with their keys. the roof is thatch, which nature furnished, a
provision very suitable to the needs of the country—which, as it
is so subject to earthquakes, does not allow a greater weight without
danger to the buildings. the floor is of bamboos, split or otherwise
prepared; for, as these are hollow, they can be split with the same
ease, thus avoiding the trouble and niceties of carpentry. thus the
floor is like a grating, and is a necessary precaution of their natural
laziness and dirtiness; for by this way of making their floors they
avoid having to sweep them, since the houses can so easily be washed
and rid of all dirt. they have no benches or chairs, and thus they get
rid of the encumbrance of much furniture. they consider a seat on the
floor as more secure. they use tables somewhat; these are round and
hollowed out in the middle, in the manner of an ordinary brasier, and
are built wholly for use rather than for display. in that hollow they
put all their dishes, which consist of boiled rice, and fish of the
same stew, without there being any danger of the food being spilled
out. they use no tablecloths or napkins; and, although they use dishes
somewhat, they do not usually feel the lack of these, as the trees with
their wide leaves furnish them a cleaner table-service, and the bamboos
make them very tasteful jugs and bowls which are formed from their
lengths between knots. these also form their jars; for there []is a kind
of bamboo from which they make jars containing three or four
azumbres. by
cutting four joint-lengths and boring holes in them, they fill a good
jar. the cocoanuts yield them cups, for here these are very common.
chapter xiv
the laws of their private conduct and the general laws of their
government
following are the laws pertaining to them privately as persons. they
are as much adapted to the nature of the world (although more clothed
with innocence), as they are to their laziness and cupidity which
prohibits them from all expense which is not necessary for life, as
superfluous. for that i have always said of these natives that they are
fine philosophers, adapted to nature. the laws which touch on other
matters and have to do with their neighbors are quite at variance with
the laws of nature; and these extend to a tyranny so manifestly cruel
that at times and in some things it comes to be brutality. i have seen
a son who held his father as slave, and, vice versa, a father
who held his son as slave; for if one make an outlay for another, they
take account of it, as would be done in the case of a stranger.
inasmuch as this son had freed his father by buying him from his
master, that man was reckoned as his son’s slave, and the same
would be true of the son. it may happen that a chief lowers himself [by
having intercourse] with his slave-woman, and the son whom she bears
may be so cruel that at the death of []his father he makes his own mother
his slave. even if, while they are at peace, these points are not
cleared up, and the inner tyranny employs external civility, yet, if
dissensions alter these relations, and they are divided, the men avail
themselves of those rights, and subject their mothers to whatever they
choose, and do not allow them to leave their houses. thus do they come
to be served by their mothers at all times. in regard to those who
descend from them, there is even less shame; and among another kind of
relations is an utter disregard of nature in this respect, for their
own nephews are the slaves of their uncles, and, vice versa,
uncles are slaves of their nephews.
they do not know what charity is. consequently, whatever benefits
they confer are all placed on account as debts, which their tyranny
estimates wholly to their own satisfaction. unfortunate he whom
abandonment or orphanage has flung into the house of another, for now
for his sustenance, and again for his rearing, he must become a slave.
kindness is shown at the cost of liberty. although that was general
throughout the islands, in this island it is excessive, as it is a
tenet of the perfidious sect of mahomet; and its cruelty has left no
liberty that it has not opposed. therefore, there is not in this nation
the middle class that is found in the others which forms the common
people out of the freemen; for there are no freemen, nor any mean
between chiefs and slaves. their community is composed of but two
extremes, so far separated. it is a fact that there are many ways by
which to reduce men to such a condition, and there is no escape from
the injury. for, since self-interest is the advantage of those who
[]are
powerful, it unites them against the unfortunate one who dares to
proclaim the offense that has been done to him, while his punishment
conciliates so many other offenders who might perplex justice; and fear
shuts the mouths of those whom the same fortune might gain to his favor
in the support of his testimonies. therefore, when it comes to proof
there is always a lack of witnesses for innocence; while on the
contrary there is for tyranny an oversupply of ocular witnesses of
things that they have never seen or heard. when some stranger goes to a
village to trade where he does not have the guaranteed patronage of
many powerful relations, in the case of any neglect that is shown him
in courtesy or in the laws, they bring such a case against him that to
get out of it well he abandons his business and perhaps with his
business his freedom. the worst of it is that the punishment is always
more than the offense, for the just pay as if they were sinners. their
avarice or tyranny not satisfied with the vengeance taken on the
criminal makes the offense related to the very blood, in order to
extend their cupidity farther. hence it is that on account of the crime
committed by a single one, they make all the relations slaves. i saw
four brothers who were all deprived of their inherited freedom because
of the incivility and weakness of one. finding myself in iligan—a
nation which, as it is so new, is even yet throwing out the sparks of
this tyrannical fury it happened that a common woman spoke some
insulting words to another woman who had rank; and the latter’s
husband, coming to me to make a complaint, said to me, exaggerating the
offense: “father, if the spaniards were not here, and we could
rule ourselves by our own laws, we []would have made mincemeat [gigote]
of that woman with a campilan, and slaves of her brothers and sisters
and relatives.” finally, he whom avarice rules with a tyrannical
power (for all their laws end in self-interest) gets usury from his
offense and employment from his crime.
avarice rules in all their judgments; and the purse becomes the
gallows of all crimes. money is the vengeance of the aggrieved parties,
and the sponge for injuries. when they are paid for, no spot or sign of
the offense is left. although there are crimes which bear especially a
capital penalty, yet there is no penalty that cannot be redeemed by
money or goods. he who has no possessions at all has still liberty, and
can surrender that also. that is the road most traveled by which some
come to be the slaves of others; and perhaps the chief, if he be poor,
may be the slave of another who is a plebeian. when anyone is caught in
adultery, if sudden wrath does not execute him, which is but seldom,
the wounds are passed on to his purse, in the endeavor to destroy him,
and the husband subjects his own wife to the same harshness and
penalty. for here all persons have a separate purse, and the husband is
not master of what his wife possesses but only of what pertains to him.
nor, under pretext of managing her possessions, does he have more to do
with it than the extent of her permission; and she is always mistress
of her own possessions. thus she pays a fine to her own husband, as if
she were a stranger to him. having received this, the aggrieved party
remains as satisfied as when, among the spaniards, one sword has pinned
both guilty ones together. the offender retains a privilege truly
insulting and barbarous—that []for one year he may have intercourse with
the woman without her husband complaining. then the husband and wife
return in all peace to cohabit as before, the offense being again at
risk, for another atonement.
they especially abhor theft, and they have assigned an ignominious
penalty for the thief, as a warning. this is to cut off the joints of
his fingers, more or fewer according to the crime. that perhaps obliges
them to pass from the hands to the toes, the penalty being proportioned
to the misdeeds of greater atrocity. but that penalty can also be
redeemed, as can the others, by money.
notwithstanding that, some crimes they regard as so capital that
they do not respect petitions or allow bribes, and death is the
necessary punishment for them. the unnatural crime is one of them, and
the severity of the execution well shows their natural horror, for such
people are burned, and their houses; and nothing that they possessed is
allowed to escape from this rigor, as being contaminated. or, having
caged the offenders, they throw them into the sea, and destroy their
houses and fields, by such punishment to make demonstration of their
abhorrence.
the most feared crime is that which they call sumban, which
is incest in the first degree; for they regard it as assured by long
experience and knowledge inherited in tradition from their ancestors,
that the land which allows that crime is bound down by wretchedness and
misfortunes until its infamy is purged by the rigorous chastisement of
the offender. there is no other means which can placate the wrath of
heaven. consequently, when they suffer long droughts, or other general
plagues from heaven, []they immediately attribute them to this. a case
of that nature came to my notice in the year fifty-one, when the
drought was general, and so great that even the water of the rivers
failed, and that river which had any water that found its way to the
sea was rare. the indians of the village which was in my care on the
coast of siocon came to tell me that it was a punishment from the sky,
and that it had been demanded by the awfulness of such crime on the
coast of mindanao, where they said that a mother was living in marriage
with her son. they petitioned me to have the offenders punished, and
warned me that the punishment should be death without remission, such
being their custom, without admitting satisfaction by any other
penalty, however excessive it be. the same report was current in the
island of basilan. however, it was without other foundation than that
the indians are gossipy and suspicious, ignorant of the secrets of the
sky and ruled by the traditions of the past. they are ruled in that
island by greater fear, as they retained more accurately in their
memory certain cases that served them as examples and warnings. for, at
a certain time, the sky was so leaden that for two years not a drop of
rain fell. there was an indian who violated the respect that he owed to
his blood and to nature, with regard to a daughter of his. although he
tried to bury the crime in the depths of his silence, it cried out to
the sky as an offense, and was heard distinctly as a sin; for the
effect, as ungrateful as evil, always turns against its cause. he was a
person of influence, and respect for him did not allow any
investigation to be made; but, the villages grieving over the public
calamity, and unable to endure []their forced famine, men trampled under
foot respect and laws, in their judgment that tolerance in so execrable
an evil had also vexed and hardened the sky. by common consent they
seized father and daughter, and, shutting them up in a cage well
weighted with stones, threw them into the sea. in return they
experienced from the sky approbation for their avenging zeal, in the
heavy rain with which it received them. for at all times god preserves
the credit to virtue, and even among barbarians imposed penance on
vice, so that those who became familiars of vice could have no
excuse.
the joloans executed the same punishment with equal severity, but
through malicious information. god, who is always the protector of
innocence, shielded the wretched; for when they cast two other fathers
in the same manner [into the water], he took away the weight of the
stones, and gave the men strength to keep afloat, without abandoning
them for a whole day, so that, the report of the matter having reached
the king, the wonder forced him to seek new information, by which he
discovered falsity and recognized innocence. in all the nations
innocence considers god as its advocate, and in desperate cases rests
secure on his protection.
judges in suits or causes follow the simple laws of nature, and have
no embarrassment of laws and doubts and contrary interpretations. they
have no delays by reports or prolixity of writs, for they do []not waste a
single dedo
of paper in that. the accusation, the plea, and the evidence are
quickly heard—all in the manner of the time of noah. if there is
no testimony, they admit the parties to the oath, which contains
terrifying imprecations. with that plea the party is usually content;
for the obligation and risk, to which he is exposed by results which
are reckoned as punishments of heaven against perjured ones if the
rigor of their imprecations is executed, are greatly feared. if
perchance the party is satisfied that he has truth on his side, at his
petition they do not rest content with that trial, but judgment of
red-hot coals or hot iron, such as was resorted to in españa and other
countries, in centuries ruder and more immune from laws by the
privilege of their innocence and goodness. if the persons are burned,
then their punishment is proceeded with; and if not, the accuser is
obliged to make requital. that custom seems to have been communicated
by the moros by way of terrenate, where it is still observed. however,
no one is burned, for since the ternatans are so skilled in sorcery,
they know herbs of such efficacy and bewitchments of such power, that
they communicate it to the hands so that they can handle the iron with
impunity, as if it were a nosegay of flowers. also many of those whom
they bury alive, that being the punishment of adultery and rape,
escape. i say []this, for it often occurred that persons
escaped from the execution of this test, in the sight of the spaniards
at ternate, women whose guilt was notorious, but who cleared themselves
of suspicion among their people by this proof. i was told many
happenings of this sort, during the time that i spent in those islands
[i.e., the moluccas]; and i was assured that it was done by
means of an herb, and i was shown some that were famous in its
knowledge. these were the ones to whom the accused had recourse in all
their exigencies, suborning their expertness with a quantity of
money.
chapter xv
the form of government of these natives
the kings, although so tyrannical in government, and in power so
beyond the affliction and trouble which authority and ostentation
incur, yet according to the condition of their poverty maintain the
form and authority of a court. peace affairs are in charge of a chief
justice or counselor, called zarabandal. that is the greatest
court title and he decides the causes and suits, and advises concerning
the sentence. in the outside villages where the king does not reside,
the chiefs meddle wherever they wish, without other law than their
power and will, and their unbridled greed; and the one injured has no
recourse, for, in quarrels between the plebeians and chiefs, the king
always takes the part of the latter—who are more powerful, and
are those who can make trouble for him, and even deprive him of his
kingdom. for his principate is founded more on the recognition that
they make of his nobility than on any absolute power which secures to
him their vassalage; since a slave []will say “no” to the king in
what does not suit him. that happened in joló, in the presence
of father alexandro lopez. when the father was negotiating through the
medium of the king to have the ransom for a christian put at a humane
figure, the other, a joloan slave by condition, who had the christian
in his power, said to the very face of the king, when the latter asked
him to conform to the prices settled upon in the treaty of peace, that he would
not do it; and that was the end of the matter. that signified that the
king’s power in execution extended just so far as his vassals
wished, and that they would obey him just so far as it pleased
them.
they have established orders of nobility, with a distinction of
titles which aggrandize it. some are called tuam, which is the
same as “señor” or the title applied to men in
españa. others are given the title of orancaya, which
signifies “rich man;” it is the greatest title, and
equivalent to grandee of their kingdom. it is equivalent to the same
title that españa gave to its grandees when his majesty used
more simplicity, and called them ricos-homes [i.e., “rich
men”]. the rest are called chiefs, and correspond to what we call
caballeros and hijos-dalgo [i.e., “knights
and nobles”]. they have no greater dignity than the honor. those
of the blood royal are called cachiles following the custom and
style of the kings of maluco, terrenate, tidores, and xilolos. the same
in the peculiar style of joló are called paguian.
the orangcayas or ricos-homes become the rulers of vassals, and have
some villages in their charge. in those villages, although the king is
recognized, []and tribute sent to him, in all else those
rulers are absolute; and especially in government affairs are they
independent. they are the ones who tyrannize most ungovernably over the
people; for whatever fine the king imposes upon them, or whatever gift
he requests from them, they lay hands upon their subjects, and, as if
they were slaves they take away the son from the father in order to
sell him. that has been the case so often that, even since they have
been made subject to our government, it has been necessary to examine
with close attention, whenever they bring any slave to sell, the reason
for his slavery; for it has been found that they sell us many slaves
without any other right than that of their tyranny, relieving their
necessities and making their payments with the first person whom they
meet—bringing him, beguiled by some other pretext, to the
spaniards; and the injury was suffered without any complaint, because
of the incapacity and dullness of the poor subanos. the latter, as they
are so unused to intercourse with us, and so shut up in their own
lives, had no arguments to oppose to what they did not understand; and
showed their wonder, surprise, and bashfulness in brute silence. for
that reason, where the orangcayas govern (which are almost all villages
of the subanos or indians of the mountain), there is scarce one who
enjoys liberty. those chiefs hold them so under their power, that they
regard the very leaders and chiefs of the subano nation as their
slaves. that i experienced on a visit which i made on a dangerous
occasion, when in order to assure the minds of the people i took with
me a lutao chief who was the absolute master before the spaniards
entered, and to whom they still paid hereditary respect []along all the
coast of siocon. being, then, with all the people and chiefs of the
nation assembled together in a village, and i endeavoring to honor them
with signs of the greatest affection, the lutao said: “do not pay
any attention to these people, father, for they are all my
slaves.” this he said in a place where we two and the chiefs of
the village were alone. i thought that that contempt and arrogance
would arouse them; but on the contrary, it softened them, as the
affection and presents of a loving prince would his humble vassal. and,
although they were not slaves, the respect in which they were born
gives the chiefs so much authority, that although we [spaniards]
possess the rule, they, as chiefs, command the people. and, as the
latter were reared in that tyranny, their natural disposition made them
show respect and natural submission; for, notwithstanding the immunity
that our arms give them, they obey those chiefs better than they do us.
may that be tempered in part by the christian government, and the
vigilance of our father ministers, and the recourse which they find in
the royal officials. for a chief of those natives who was governor of
the village of baluasan, near to samboangan, when speaking of the
wretched subjection in which the lutaos held them, and the good fortune
that had come to them with the entrance of our government, by
restraining the lutao tyranny, and giving arms to persecuted liberty,
spoke to me these words: “if you [spaniards] had not arrived when
you did, there would now not be any of us left; for we would already
have been finished, and bartered for goods with the people of
macasar.” these words consoled me, on account of the fidelity
which the interest []and recognized advantages of that barbarian
guaranteed.
such was the government maintained by corralat. and since he made
all of them so powerful, giving them special power by laws, he was very
acceptable to the princes of his nation and therefore most secure.
these men, then, are the ones who grieve over the losses sustained by
the change, who see themselves put under holy laws and just—they
who before had no other laws than those of their own will, and their
unbridled ambition, laws from which the others suffered as a servile,
cowardly, and rude nation.
chapter xvi
some peculiarities of the customs of the subanos
the customs of the subanos or indians of the mountains there is no
reason for relating; for with more hideous extremes they maintain the
evils of the lutaos, while those peculiar to them are, as it were, the
brutal creatures among other citizens. but that even will add praises
to the changes that have resulted from the skill of the omnipotent, and
to the zeal of the missionaries, by whose means virtue produced the
civilized and christian conduct which now is theirs. their dress
approaches that of the inhabitants of the beach with whom they have
communication. accordingly, those who traffic with lutaos or moros
dress in their style; while those familiar with the visayan nations
(such as the peoples of caraga []and the coast of dapitan), through
commerce with them, follow their custom. all their government is
confusion, and they wage war, not some nations with others, nor one
village with another, but all are, as it were, enemies of the human
race. armed against one another, without subordination or greater
subjection than what the might and act of violence of the boldest
obtained, they had no other laws in their causes that the might of the
one provoked to avenge himself; and his rigor, even in the worst cases,
was appeased by gifts. thus when a subano came to acquire a poor
capital that would enable him to pay for a murder, he committed the
murder with the greatest safety, in order that he might be enrolled in
the number of valiant and to have authority as such to wear a red
turban. because of that barbaric vanity they would kill their best
friend, if they caught him asleep or off his guard; for the barbaric
courage of these nations does not consider posts of reputation, but
those of security. in caraga there was a more atrocious custom; for, in
order to be able to clothe oneself in the dress of the
valiant—namely, a striped turban, and breeches of their peculiar
style (which they call baxaque) with similar stripes—one
must have killed seven men.
the peculiarity of this nation, and the thing that gives them some
excellence and esteem, is that their women are more chaste and modest.
they esteem virginity, and keep it inviolate, even to advanced age,
[]for
the vocation of matrimony. it is true that this virtue is aided by
their natural disposition, which furnishes for the defense of chastity
their native stupidity and shyness; but therewith they succeed in an
undertaking which among lutaos and the other nations of these islands
is rare and difficult indeed. this has secured them so much esteem and
confidence in this region that the chiefs of high standing among the
lutaos, in order to guard their daughters more safely, have them reared
among subanos; and they do not take them into the dangerous camp of
their own nation unless it is to establish them in marriage, and with
that station, in safety, as they think. among this nation there is a
class of men who profess celibacy and govern themselves by natural law, []and they
are very punctual and perfect in their observance of it; and such is
the feeling of security in regard to them, that they are allowed to go
about among the women without any fear or suspicion. their dress is
throughout like that of the women, with skirts of the same fashion.
they do not use weapons, or engage in anything else that is peculiar to
men, or communicate with them. they weave the mantas that are used
here, which is the proper employment of women, and all their
conversation is with women. therefore, the purpose of life which they
follow comes to be more extraordinary by its peculiarity and by its
perils, considering both the nature of that country, and the little
regard that they give to their dangers. so satisfied do they live,
either from their own purpose or from their natural disposition, that
they have never discredited their position with weaknesses. they were,
so to speak, hermits of their religion, and were held in high esteem.
and in fact the constancy of their life and modesty of their customs,
obliged one to have respect for them. in a nation so barbarous and who
knew not god, it appears a prodigy worthy of wonder that one of the
special providences of his divine majesty, to place such examples of
virtue in a country where vice had absolute control, so that the
experience of the eyes causes them to esteem what god’s love did
not obtain. i have known two of these men, and one of them i baptized,
to my especial consolation, while visiting the coast of siocon, which
extends for twenty leguas from samboangan toward dapitan. his
reputation reached me in a different village, for in his own they kept
him closely concealed, whether it were for []the sake of their ancient
observances i do not know. like a holy man of his law, or because of
some fear, he also kept himself hidden; for, as he afterward told me,
they had terrified him by telling him that if the spaniards caught him
they would put him in the galleys. by that means, to him whom the
pathway of salvation was most easy, they filled it with such
difficulties that they made it impossible for him. i knew that they
would refuse to let me see him for those same reasons, and therefore
made use of a trick and of a dangerous resolution, to catch him. for
near the village, which was located on the beach in the shade of trees
(the poverty of these barbarians not suffering more shelter), and where
in a few hours they would suffer from hunger, having them all before me
i told them that if the lavia whom they had hidden did not come, then the
mass would not begin. labia is the name they give to those of
this profession. the name of this one was tuto. i added that no one
must return to his house until he arrived, and that if he delayed too
long, i would go to samboangan with the chief of the village and the
subanos of importance. that was the same to them as if i were taking
them to the galleys; so much does their wretchedness grieve to leave
the wretchedness in which they were born, and their lack of
intelligence to appear before reasonable people and spaniards. without
allowing them to talk, or to question whether he was there or not, or
where, but assuming that it was a well-known thing, i turned to a
relative of the governor, and said to him: “go for him quickly,
for i shall not move from this spot until []he comes.” he departed
without a word, and all of the people remained motionless, staring with
fright. when they recovered their equanimity, their whole attempt was
to excuse their negligence by empty excuses, which i accepted in order
to calm their minds. inside of an hour i found in my presence him whom
i desired so much. he, seeing the love with which i received him, and
how differently my purpose was declared from that which his fears gave
him to understand, recovered his courage in full, and immediately
offered himself for baptism—a matter which i was unwilling to
defer, in order that i might leave him with his salvation assured.
consequently, after instructing him briefly, i baptized him, and called
him martin, as that happy lot came to him on that saint’s day. he satisfied
my hopes and hastened to me every time when i afterward visited his
village of malande, very punctually, and always with some special
refreshment both for me and for him who in my company had acted as his
sponsor.
the other lavia whom i saw was in one of the joloan islands, called
pangutara.
him i found to be already a christian, whom father alexandro lopez, a
great apostle of the joloans, had reduced and baptized in samboangan,
and called santiago. this man is naturally very well dispositioned and
has no moral defects, and he is a man of a celestial peace and
serenity. he is always bubbling with laughter, which is the effect of
the security of his soul; for, []when the conscience has nothing to fear,
the heart has gladness to scatter abroad.
i must not neglect to tell one thing that i noticed in regard to the
nature of the people of this profession, from what i could gather from
the exterior of those two, which seems to me to be the reason that
takes them along the pathway so unusual and difficult in a climate so
hot, and lands so dangerous (as he who has had experience in these
islands, and who knows the wretchedness of their natives in this
region, will know). for the physiognomy of those men is that of
eunuchs, and their natural disposition and condition are so cold, that
it made me think that they must be so naturally, and that nature kept
her virtue under control in this region. but since they behave in all
other things with so blameless a life, i shall always consider them as
prodigies of the divine providence in favor of virtue. for no one
despises virtue as a thing unknown, since even to barbarians virtue is
painted in so natural colors that they respect it naturally, without
more external credit than their native security.
this sole spark of good morals have i found among the so great
darkness in which the subanos live. however, they have another custom
belonging to the same aspect of their lives, so vile that it is
sufficient to obscure greater lights than those of that small spark;
for among them is more acceptable the exchange that they make of their
women with one another—the husbands mutually agreeing upon this
exchange, and celebrating the hideous loan and the vile restitution
with dances and drunken revels, according to their custom. their feasts
are like their customs, and one is the manifestation of the other.
chapter xvii
burials and marriages of those natives
i have kept these two acts, so contrary in their effects, in order
to present them in one place in this chapter, inasmuch as they are of
greater display and magnificence, and in them, in spite of the
simplicity of those natives, the serious predominates. in the first,
which is practiced with their dead, i know not whether to praise more
their piety or their generosity and grandeur, or to which of the two
virtues recognition is due; for both are carried to the greatest
extreme. for their liberality, the obligations of their piety (which
declares itself in those attentions a debtor to nature), passes by and
tramples under foot the laws of their poverty and the natural
simplicity of these indians, and makes demonstrations superior to their
fortune, clothing their dead with the magnificence of princes. in the
shroud alone, they clothe the dead person in a hundred brazas of fine
muslin, which serves him as a shirt. over that they place rich 
patolas, which are pieces of cloth of gold, or of silk alone,
worked very beautifully, and of great value, pious generosity
endeavoring to give him the best and to clothe him in the finest and
most precious garments. it is a law, established by immemorial custom,
that the children and near relatives each clothe the deceased in a
piece of gauze or of sinampuli (another fabric of equal
estimation) arranging it with such loops and knots that they find space
for it all. in regard to the dress, this custom is in force even to
this day, and no man who respects himself has ever failed in this law.
there is no one so poor and so wretched that he does not own a piece
[of cloth] eight brazas long, []which is reserved for his burial. they
have abandoned other demonstrations, or rather, exchanged them for
christian ones, of which we shall speak at the proper place. in that
regard they give oldtime christians much to emulate. for formerly they
buried with their dead most of their treasures—gold, bells, and
other things, which are highly esteemed among them. those things were
so sacred to reverence that no one, however abandoned and audacious he
might be, had the courage to stretch forth his hand to take
them—although he could have done so with great safety to himself,
as their dead are buried in caves, islets, or solitary mountains,
without other guard than their imaginary religion. on the day on which
they buried the deceased, about his sepulcher they planted palms,
jasmines, and other flowers peculiar to this region. if the deceased
was a king, or a prince of equal nobility, they placed a tent above the
grave with four white banners at its sides, while inside it they burned
perfumes as long as the time of lamentation or memorial lasted, perhaps
setting aside some slaves for that employ, in order to make it more
lasting.
this heathen display has given way to christian demonstrations of
sumptuous honors and abundant alms which they give for their deceased,
as we shall relate in the proper place. but i shall not defer the
telling of one which may prove a matter of reprehension to our neglect
and forgetfulness, in what is more important to us, namely, that they
are wont to have the coffin prepared during the lifetime for their
burial. they make those coffins out of one single piece, and from
incorruptible woods. they keep them under their houses where they can
see []them whenever they descend from or ascend to
their houses; and they are open to the gaze of all who pass along the
street. that is a care that it would be right for them to have learned
from the oldtime christians, whom the faith of what they hope for,
ought to arouse with greater demonstrations....
the subanos follow the lutaos in some things, their poverty and
misery exerting efforts in the worship of their dead, and their
barbarism showing itself at the side of their piety, when they throw
into the sea, out of grief, the gold of their ornaments, decorations,
and their most precious jewels—a custom wellnigh universal in all
these islands. but in one island their cruelty is shown especially
in their alleviation of their grief and their barbaric pity for their
calamity, by giving associates to the deceased, and making them
companions of their grief, causing the same havoc and loss in others.
because their father, son, near relative, or anyone whom they had loved
had died, they would seize their arms in order to kill the first person
whom they met, and without other cause for offense than that of their
natural disposition and their barbaric ferocity. thus with the blood of
the unfortunate one did they dry the tears of their own ill fortune,
finding consolation in the misfortune of others.
the celebration at their marriages is such that in all that has been
discovered nothing else can compare with it; and the spaniards who
daily wonder at []it as witnesses always do so with new wonder.
for if the marriage is of a chief, the celebration begins a week
beforehand, and is concluded a week after with dancing to the sound of
their bells and drums. there is open table for all who care to go up
into the house. the viands consist of wine, for that is the thing in
which they are especially solicitous to show display, while they take
no account of the food, although it is not lacking. but the deceiving
heat of the wine takes away their taste so strongly that they are
mindful of nothing. its heat serves to give spirit and animation to
their songs (which are in honor of him who makes the feast), and
sprightliness to their dances. the day of the celebration [of the
wedding] when the betrothed couple have to appear for the nuptial
blessings, the bride, breaking the strict confinement which she keeps
all that time, issues forth with a display and gravity superior to her
condition; for her relatives and the other indians of their
partisanship are clad in their gala costume, and armed with lance and
shield, and escort the bride. the march is to the accompaniment of
bells and moorish dulzainas [i.e., a sort of wind
instrument]. the ladies of honor follow in double file, and they
generally consist of all the women of the village, who are invited for
the sake of greater display of grandeur. then the girls follow in the
same order, while those of greater social standing and higher rank are
borne in chairs richly adorned, and carried on the shoulders of four
slaves. at the end comes the bride in a certain very spacious chair
which allows room for a lady who supports and assists her, and to two
or three girls, who serve her with so singular modesty and gravity that
it would []cause wonder even if she did not affect so
great elaborateness; for she scarcely moves an eyelash or must move her
hand, those who accompany her substituting themselves for everything.
one dries the sweat from her, another fans her, and a third looks after
her clothing. down a different street comes the bridegroom to meet the
bride, with a like or even greater retinue in competition with that of
the relatives of the bride. the men are in gala costume, and armed; the
women are in festal array; and the chief women in chairs. the dress of
the bridal pair must be white, until, the [bride’s] consent
having been given, the bridegroom retires, and exchanges it for a red
dress. in this ceremony coquetry displays greater affectations: for the
bride takes a half-hour to give her answer, and, after it is given she
wastes another long half-hour to reach the lattice of the chapel. and
it is necessary to sit down to await the bride for that time, amid the
laughter of those who a few days before saw her running and leaping
about like a mad she-goat, while on this day she deports herself with
so great a demonstration of sedateness and virginal modesty. the
precision of her steps, they say, is a necessity, because she is coming
bound even to the feet. that is the ceremony that they practice for the
reception of the husband who is the one who must come to take those
bonds and shackles from her.
on that day the house is all hung with a canopy that covers
everything, so that neither walls nor ceiling are seen. the
bridal-chamber is open to the sight and richly adorned, for on that day
everything gleams with splendor and adornment. the bride is seated on a
cushion, near a seat made for the groom []from cushions in the moorish
style, with embroidery and strips of silk with a quantity of lace. she
is served with the same ostentation as in the street, and displays no
more animation than a statue. i was present at one of so great display
that, besides the display which the lutaos showed in their weddings,
there came at two o’clock of the same day, marching in a company
formed of their men, lancers and arquebusiers, an assembly of men who
taking position in the plaza de armas, invited the governor and all the
spanish artillery for that afternoon; and for the following day all the
paid soldiers—pampangos and cagayanes—giving food to all
and serving the spaniards quite in the spanish fashion, both in the
cuisine and in the courtesies. it is an event of so great
preëminence that the governor and all his captains and best
soldiers go to it, in order to honor and conciliate those people. and
any prince can well go to see those ceremonies, for neither actions nor
words show that they are barbarians; but [they appear as] the most
modest nation in the world, which is celebrating its marriage without
any idea of the [carnal] delights of it. they are so moderate in
showing their affection that during three days they do not avail
themselves of the license of their estate. such is the way in which
they act that the fathers worthily honor it with their presence, and on
that day go to their houses, for they are unaccustomed to the modesty
and caution unless it is when they confess and anoint them. everything
is dispensed with on that day because of its gravity. we all, then,
went on that day with the superior, and the governor and captains. i
was very glad to be a witness of so great splendor, modesty, and
gravity in []natives who are in other things so simple and
unceremonious; and to see a sacrament so hazardous treated with so much
devotion, in the respect shown to the ministers of it. that chief spent
at that feast more than four hundred arrobas of wine, and more than one
thousand birds. although they are poor, in order to meet the
obligations of that day satisfactorily they strip themselves, showing
an equally generous spirit in such action with the living as is
displayed in the fatherland with the dead; for the greatest displays of
their grandeur are the funerals and weddings.
chapter xviii
boats and weapons of these natives
the craft used by the lutaos for war are, like those of terrible
pirates, built with particular attention to speed—both for
pursuit, and to seek shelter whenever affairs go wrong with them, or
when their undertaking is dangerous to them. for since their wars are
always waged for greed, and reputation never induces them, they try to
advantage themselves quite at their safety; and they readily abandon
any undertaking if they see that it will be costly to them. that care
and attention, which govern their boat-building, cause their ships to
sail like birds, while ours are like lead in this regard. the planking
that they use is very thin, and has no other nails, crotches, or knees
than a little rattan. rattan is the substance which here takes the
place of hemp, in tying things together, some planks [in the craft]
being tied together with it. for that purpose projecting parts are left
at intervals on the inside [of the planks] in which holes are made; and
through these the ligament []passes, without any harm being done to the
plank. upon so light a foundation they build upper works, as high as
they wish, of bamboo upon the cates. the cates are buoys which
run on both sides from bow to stern, and they act as outriggers for the
ship, which is sustained by these two floats. the ship carries more
outside than in. the outside scaffolds allow room for two rows of oars,
beside that of the hull. thus small craft of from seven to twelve
brazas (which is the largest size) have a crew of sixty men and
upwards. i have seen one that was manned with three hundred hands; for,
in order to have the rowing more compressed together they use loose
oars, each one handling his own. those oars are certain round blades,
which an indian manages easily. therefore, when it is necessary they
row exactly to the time of their breathing, by inserting more or less
of the oar, according to the force they wish to give. for the rowing is
excellent and the oar is put directly into the water, because it is
trusted solely to the hands, without being fastened to anything. that
is a custom that obliges them to have their craft very flat, and to
elevate the sides but little, and they are content to leave but one
plank out of the water.
these vessels are crescent-shaped. consequently, there is but a
small keel, or little of it in the water, and that part which they rob
from stern and bow is left out of the water—three or four brazas
of keel or stem, all of which serves for its speed, and there is little
to hold the boat back because of its narrowness. therefore the helm is
not managed like the spanish helm, by the sweep from the end;
accordingly, they use two rudders, one at one side and one []at the other,
where the flat part of the keel begins. one is usually employed for
managing the boat, and both of them when it is stormy. with the second
they keep the boat from getting unsteady, which would follow from its
lightness, that rudder giving the boat more stiffness and serving as
ballast. that is a precaution rendered necessary by its very lightness,
the vessels that are lightest being those that require most care by
being unsteady. in the middle they have a scaffold, four or six brazas
long, which they call burulan or baileo. this consists of
a floor raised above the rowers, and has its awning, which is called
cayanes. those awnings are made from the leaves of a small palm
which grows in the water. that is the quarters for the fighters and the
chiefs, for those vessels do not have any stern-cabin; it is, at the
same time, the little castle from which they fight. all that structure
finds its support and staunchness in what they call the cates,
which are the buoys of which we have spoken. they are made of three or
four bamboos as thick as the arm, and even larger, and reach from stem
to stern. they are so adjusted that they drag through the water about
one and one-half brazas away from the vessel. consequently, they do not
allow it to toss about, however violent the waves, but are the arms
that keep the boat safe. they are used in general by all the craft of
these islands, and by those of burney and maluco; for, since their
ships are of no account without this security, they have no safety in
the sea nor do the indians dare to embark. from this circumstance
molina, who represented to the council that buoys ought to be fastened
to the ships so that they could sail or float with a support made of
certain []bags blown up and thrown alongside, derived his
argument. he thought that that would assure the fleets, as they could
not then sink, as he had experienced, even if they filled with water.
it might have proved successful indeed, and in favor of his discourse,
if some heavy sea raised by the hurricanes would not prove sufficient
to burst the bags and drag them away from the sides; for hurricanes
have more than sufficient violence to break up the stern and destroy
the ship. that has been well known by actual experience here; for a few
hours of a severe storm are sufficient to destroy the fastenings; and
those ships would be wrecked daily if the voyages were not so short,
and the vessels of so small burden that they can find shelter in any
port. when necessity arises, the men in them beach the vessels
themselves, and do so more easily when they go in a fleet, as then they
unite their forces. the crossings are so short, because of the
multiplicity of islands, that the weather never catches them in such a
way that they can not soon escape by drawing near to one land or
another. for fair weather this appliance is very useful, so that they
take comfort in them freely.
in regard to their weapons, the lutao nation is the most curious in
these islands; for all glory in having the most precious and the finest
arms possible. all of them from their earliest age wear their weapons,
with so careful a regard to this matter that no one dares to leave his
house without his weapons. the wearing of weapons is so much a matter
of reputation with them, that they consider it an insult to be obliged
to appear without them, regulating their punctiliousness in this region
very much according to the laws of españa. it casts much shame
[]upon
the negligence into which our military force has fallen, by the poor
reputation of those here who profess arms, who in the sight of these
nations are not ashamed to be seen without swords or daggers; and those
which they carry well demonstrate the care with which they serve in
their posts, since they necessarily satisfy outward appearance,
although they would be useless on occasion. i speak of the simple and
common soldiers; and, since this care is lacking in most of them, it
ought to be felt more, and with effect, by those who can remedy it. the
weapon worn by the natives of the cities is a wavy dagger, which they
call a kris. its blade is engraved with channels and
water-lines, which make it very beautiful. the hilt is a small idol,
made of ivory for the common man, and of gold for the chiefs, studded
with gems which are highly esteemed among them. i saw one worn by the
commander socsocan—who was the lord of samboangan when our men
conquered it—which was valued at ten slaves. the scabbard was
gilded with the same neatness, and at some time had been covered with
sheets of gold. i saw a scabbard in joló, which had a pearl as
large as a musket-ball at the end of the chape. the blades are very
fine, and, although so small (being scarcely two palmos in length),
they are valued at twelve, twenty, or thirty reals of eight.
such are their arms in peace; those of war, for fighting on the
land, are lances and shields. the []shield is round among the coast-dwellers
of the south, and in the islands of basilan and joló. in the
rest of this island, the general custom of the long and narrow shield
which is used in all the other islands is followed; with these, they
shield and protect all the body. from these weapons the kris is
inseparable, and they use it at close quarters, and after they have
used the lance, which they throw in the usual manner. their lances show
the same care as their krises, and are very much ornamented and
engraved, and have their covers gilded. the shaft is of the finest
ebony, or of some other beautiful wood; and at intervals they put rings
of silver or tin on it. the head is of brass, which is used here, and
so highly polished that it vies with gold. it is chased so elaborately
that there are lances that are valued at one slave each. at the end
they fasten a large hawk’s-bell, which they fix upon the shaft in
such a manner that it surrounds it; and when they shake the lance it
sounds in time with the fierce threats and bravadoes. the valiant use
them and as man-slayers, give warning to those who do not know them and
those of less valor, so that they may avoid them as they would
vipers.
the arms used on sea and land—besides those of the plain, in
places where the people fortify themselves with the resolve to defend
themselves—in addition to the one mentioned (which are the most
deadly), are the bagacayes, which are certain small bamboos as thick as
the finger, hardened in the fire and with points sharpened. they throw
these with such skill that they never miss when the object is within
range; and some men throw them five at a time. although it is so weak a
weapon, it has such []violence that it has gone through a boat and
has pierced and killed the rower. brother diego de santiago told me, as
an eyewitness, that he being seated saw that thing (which appears a
prodigy) happen in the same vessel in which he had embarked with a
garrison. to me that seemed so incredible that i wished immediately to
see it myself; and, cutting a bagacay, i had it thrown at a shield. in
samboanga i saw a bull which was killed immediately by a bagacay which
a lad threw at it, which struck it clear to the heart. it is a thing
that would cause laughter in europa, and there would be little esteem
for the valor which does not despise such weapons, and they would jest
at so frail violence. but it is certain that, at close range, there is
no crueler weapon; and it is also certain that, the day on which these
moros have bravery enough to get within range, on that day any ship
must yield. for they send in such a shower of these bagacayes that
scarce a man is unwounded; while many are stuck like bulls, so that
they cannot move for being laden with so many weapons. then the rowing
ceases, and they discharge the missiles with both hands and some from
each finger, both rowers and fighters. that throws their opponents into
disorder, and they are unable to manage their weapons. there must be
many in españa who were in the dangerous sieges which governor
don sebastian hurtado de corcuera undertook against the kings of both
mindanao and joló—where, in the so great mortality which
the glorious boldness and military honor of our men incurred, the most
of those who fell, to exalt their fame forever, were slain by arms so
weak and apparently contemptible. in the same way they use []stakes hardened
in the fire which they hurl with accuracy, and which inflict even more
damage. the lance is used in the same way, and they hurl it with so
extraordinary violence that they pierce a steel-covered shield and
transfix the soldier with it, as has been seen often. in an engagement
that captain gaspar de morales fought in joló, his steel-covered shield did
not avail him; but the lance passed through it and his arm, and did not
fall short of giving him a mortal wound in the breast.
the negrillos of this island use the bow and arrow, as these are the weapons least difficult to obtain, and more
natural [to them], as requiring less skill. they poison arrows, and the
wound is consequently always dangerous. the wooden points of the arrows
are so hard that those people have no occasion to regret the lack of
iron.
the use of the blowpipe [zarbatana], which is one braza long,
has extended from the borneans to the joloans, and even to the lutaos
of this island. by blowing through it they discharge certain small
[]darts
smeared with so deadly a poison that if one single drop of blood is
drawn, death is certain to result, if the antidote is not quickly
applied. when our soldiers have to make an expedition to burney, where
other weapons are rarely used, they go prepared with the most
efficacious antidotes—namely, human excrement, as has always been
happily experienced. these blowpipes are sometimes used also as lances,
having the iron fastened at one side, so that, if the shot is not
accurate, they use it alternately as a lance. then when the opportunity
is offered they make use of their darts. they are so good shots that
they can bring down the smallest bird at twenty or thirty paces.
the joloans who are called ximbanaos, and are more ferocious and of
greater determination, are armed from top to toe with helmet,
bracelets, coat-of-mail, greaves, with linings of
elephant-hide—armor so proof that nothing can make a dint on it
except firearms, for the best sword or cutlass is turned. that was an
experience acquired by many in the conquest of the joloans by general
don pedro []de almonte verastigui, who had brought from ternate
braggarts of that nation, who wielded the campilan or cutlass—a
weapon made for cutting off heads, and for splitting the body from top
to toe. but they could effect nothing, notwithstanding the heavy blows
of those cutlasses; and retired like cowards, giving as an excuse that
their weapons would not cut, and that they were only succeeding in
ruining them, for they were all nicked by the strong resistance. from
the shoulders rise two irons to the height of the helmet and morion by
which they protect the head from being cut off. they knot the flaps of
their skirts on the breast or coat-of-mail, so that they can bend the
knee to the ground, according to their method of fighting, when the
case demands it. they wear a plume of feathers above the forehead, such
as is seen on mules. they leave nothing unarmed, even to the eyes,
which are armed by fierceness—both because of the terrific
appearance of their arms, and by the fierceness which they affect. it
is the fitting dress, among them, for princes and braggarts. when they
put it on they generally take some opium, and, rendered furious and
insensible [to danger] by it, they enter amid the []vessels of a
squadron madly, and destroy it with great slaughter. for their arms are
lance, kris, or dagger; and with their bounds and leaps, in which they
indulge according to their barbarous method of fighting, they appear in
many places, always endeavoring to bring down many [of their foes].
hence, in order that any ball may strike them, it is necessary that it
cause disaster in the troop—besides the injuries that their fury
has executed in safety, armed so proof against those who dress as
lightly as the heat and roughness of the country compel.
the mindanaos use a weapon quite distinct from that of the
ternatans. it is a campilan or cutlass of one edge, and heavier than
the pointless turkish weapon. it is a very bloody weapon, but, being so
heavy, it is a danger for him who handles it, if he is not adroit with
it. it has only two forms of use, namely, to wield it by one edge, and
to raise it by the other, in order to deal another stroke, its weight
allowing time for the spears of the opponents to enter. they do not
gird it on, as that would be too much trouble, but carry it on the
shoulders, in the fashion of the camarlengos who carry the rapiers on their
shoulders in public ceremonies in front of their princes. besides that
weapon the mindanao uses lance, kris, and shield, as do the other
nations. both these and those have begun to use firearms too much,
having acquired that from intercourse with our enemies. they manage all
sorts of artillery excellently, and in their fleets all their craft
carry their []own pieces, with ladle, culverins, esmerils,
and other small weapons. []
 juan francisco combés
was born at zaragoza on october , . at the age of twelve he
entered the jesuit order as a novice, at tarragona; after six years of
study there, he wished to enter the philippine missions, and was
therefore sent to mexico to await an opportunity for going to the
islands. this did not come until , when diego de bobadilla went
from acapulco with forty-seven jesuit missionaries, of whom
combés was one; five of these died in an epidemic, which carried
away one hundred and fifteen of the people on the ship. combés
completed his theological studies at manila, and was ordained in ,
being soon afterward sent to zamboanga. he remained in mindanao twelve
years, often acting as ambassador of the governors to corralat and
other moro chiefs, and ministering in various places; in  he
returned to manila, where he spent two years, and then three years in
leyte. he was then recalled () to manila, and tried to induce the
authorities there to maintain the forts in the moro country; but his
efforts failed. in  he was sent as procurator for his order to
madrid and rome; but he died on the voyage, december  of that year.
(retana and pastells’s ed. of hist. de mindanao,
col. vi–xix.)
 of the caragas, blumentritt
says (tribes of the philippines, mason’s translation, p.
): “in older works are so named the warlike and christian
inhabitants of the localities subdued by the spaniards on the east
coast of mindanao, and, indeed, after their principal city, caraga. it
has been called, if not a peculiar language, a visaya dialect, while
now only visaya (near manobo and mandaya) is spoken, and an especial
caraga nation is no longer known.” it is quite probable that the
term caragas was only a local name applied by the people of this
district to themselves or applied to them by the spaniards; and if they
ever did exist as a separate people they have been completely absorbed
by the surrounding peoples.
 the mindanaos (properly
maguindanaos, “people who come from the lake”) are
mentioned by pigafetta (vol. xxxiii, p.
); they live now, as formerly, principally about the rio grande, and
they gave name to the island of mindanao. they are mahometan moros and
were the chief obstacle of the spaniards in mindanao, but were finally
brought under control by general weyler, and their power and importance
is now almost gone. their political achievements are the only ones of
consequence ever made by peoples of the philippines. see census of
philippine islands, i, pp. –.
 blumentritt (tribes of the
philippines) identities the lutaos with the mono of the district of
zamboanga, who are frequently called ilanos, and adds that the name
appears to be the hispanicized form of the malay orang-laút
(“men of the sea”). the description given by combes fits
rather the orang-laút themselves than the ilanos, who live along
the seacoast west of malabang, and are few in number. the
orang-laút, called also “sea gypsies,”
“bajau” and “sámal-laút”
(“sámal of the sea”) are found throughout the malay
archipelago (in the philippines along southern mindanao and throughout
the sulu archipelago), and live for mouths in their small boats. their
original home was johore and the islands in the strait of malacca; and
they are only imperfectly mahometanized, some being quite pagans. the
sámal living in towns in zamboanga and the sulu archipelago are
probably descendants of the sámal-laút who have abandoned
their wandering life. see census of the philippines, i, pp. ,
 the subanon (spanish form
“subanos”), or “men of the [n]rivers” are an
important pagan tribe of western mindanao, who are found in the
mountains of zamboanga, and extending eastward slightly into cottabato,
misamis, and dapitan. for a modern description that agrees essentially
with that of combés, see census of the philippines, i,
pp. –.
 spanish, redentor; in
religious orders, the father appointed to attend to the ransoming and
return of christians held captive by mahometan enemies.
 antonio de abarca, s.j., was
born in villalba in the diocese of cuenca, september , . he
entered the society march , , went to the philippines in ,
and took his final vows, january , . he was a missionary in
mindanao and the visayan islands, and rector of carigara and
cebú. while going to rome as procurator, he died at sea (january
, ), near acapulco. (combés, pastells and retana
ed., col. .)
 this chief is called 
timoly by the subanos; hari-hari by the mandayas; masali
campo, by the monteses; matado, by the manobos; 
bagani, by the bagobos; and dato and sultán by
the mahometans and moros. (pastells and retana’s 
combés, col. .)
 the so-called dapitan nation
was a visayan tribe and lived in mindanao in the present comandancia of
dapitán in the province of misámis. strictly speaking
they can be called a distinct tribe with no greater accuracy than can
the caragas. see blumentritt’s tribes of the philippines
(mason’s translation); and pastells and retana’s 
combés, col. .
 baclayón is a village
on the extreme southwest coast of bohol. loboc is a village of southern
bohol, and two miles inland. (philippine gazetteer.)
 the portuguese had
discovered the moluccas before magallanes set out on his memorable
voyage in . see vol. xxxiv, pp. ,
 the text which we follow
reads “y quan a fauor de sus
nueuas.” “nueuas” may
possibly be a misprint for “navios,”
in which case the phrase would read “how much at the mercy of
their ships.”
 even yet infidels abandon a
house in which the head of the family has died. father pastells says
that while crossing the island of mindanao with father heras in ,
one sálug died in the house of silungan, a freedman recently
redeemed by the said missionaries. he was baptised before death by
father pastells. silungan demanded from the religious the value of the
house, which he [n]proposed to abandon. the fathers, however,
answered him that since the freedman had died with baptism, the house
was purified. this satisfied the heathens, and they did not insist on
their demand. (pastells and retana’s edition of 
combés, note , col. .)
 this refers to
legazpi’s and not magallanes’s expedition. pagbuaya made
friendship with the former, and gave him a pilot to guide him to the
inland of panglao. in book two of combés’s 
historia, chapter ii, is related
rightly the occurrence with regard to the king of borneo, after the
arrival of legazpi. combés says that the dapitans imagined that
the spaniards were eating fire when they smoked, and the hard white
sea-biscuits they imagined to be stones. the noise of the artillery
they took to be thunder, and the sword with which each one was girt,
they thought to be a tail.
 the term
“malanao” is derived from “ma,” “people
of” and “lanao,” “lake,” and has long
been used to distinguish the moros living on the watershed of lake
lanao. see census of the philippines, i, p. .
 in , fathers valerio de
ledesma and manuel martinez first established the mission of the river
of butuan. that same year, there not being as yet any division into
bishoprics, the manila ecclesiastical cabildo (as the see was vacant),
gave mindanao into the formal possession of the society of jesus, an
act that was confirmed by francisco tello, as viceroyal patron. later,
the question of the jurisdiction about lake malanao was argued in court
between the jesuits and recollects, and was decided in favor of the
former by juan niño de tabora, a sentence confirmed by corcuera
september , . (pastells and retana’s combés,
cols. , .)
 the bay of panguil or pangil
takes its name from a fruit, pangi (hidnocarpus
polyandra—bl.), which is carried down to the coast by the
rivers. (pastells and retana’s combés, col.
 the manobos are a malay
head-hunting heathen tribe of northern mindanao who live in the
interior about the watershed of the agusan river. “manobo”
is a native word, which, in the bagobo language of the gulf of
dávao, means “man.” blumentritt (with whom retana
agrees) says that the correct form of the name is “manuba”
or “man-suba,” i.e., “river-people.” the
term might possibly be extended to the mountain people of misamis
province. see census of the philippines, i, pp. , ;
blumentritt’s tribes of the philippines (mason’s
translation); and pastells and retana’s combés,
col. .
 blumentritt (tribes of
the philippines, mason’s translation) says of the mananapes:
“a heathen people alleged to dwell in the interior of mindanao,
possibly a tribe of buquidnones or manobos.” retana (pastells and
retana’s combés, col. ) says that the
appellation is equivalent to “manap,” and is not the name
of a tribe, but merely a nickname to indicate that those bearing that
name are wild like beasts.
 retana (pastells and
retana’s combés, col. ), derives
“sameacas” from “sumasacas,” a word which he
says is equivalent to the visayan “tagasaca,” “people
of the uplands.” according to him, they are malayan moros, but
montero y gay (blumentritt’s tribes of philippines,
mason’s translation) says that they are heathen. it should be
observed that retana is not always a safe guide in etymological and
ethnological matters.
 this entire sentence is,
like many others of combés, of loose and vague construction.
apparently what he means is, that the lutaos had, like the javanese, a
polite and a vulgar tongue; and that the former more closely resembles
the sanskrit (since he implies that the lutaos came from india).
 the spaniards, mindful of
their own struggles with the moors of spain (moros) called all
mahometan peoples moors.
 see 
vol. xxxvi, p. , note .
 a classic allusion,
occasioned by the marine life and habits of the lutaos.
 paguian tindig is equivalent
to “just king.” in their literal sense, both words signify
“he who causes persons and things to pass by the right
path.” (pastells and retana’s combés, col.
 elsewhere written
limansacay; see vol. iv, pp.
–, the [n]account of gabriel de ribera’s
expedition against the mindanaos in .
 such was the first outbreak
of hostilities which caused the rebellion of the moros of joló
against spain, and originated the piracy of that small archipelago,
which wrought so much ruin, and caused so much bloodshed and
depopulation among the visayan and tagálog islands. (pastells
and retanas combés, col. .)
 regarding the introduction
of mahometanism in those islands, see vol.
iv, pp. , , , .
 a common name for the
mangosteen (garcinia mangostana), a fruit of delicate flavor and
highly prized; this tree grows in joló and mindanao.
(official handbook of philippines, p. .)
 becoquin: “a
sort of cap made with a piece of cloth.” when the joloans made a
treaty with the jesuit lopez, they ratified it by an oath taken
“on the becoquin or cap of tampan, one of the old-time
ministers of their deceit.... when the princes of joló swear by
this becoquin, using this ceremony, it is the strongest oath that they
can take, and that which is most respected.” (combés, 
hist. de mindanao, col. , .)
 the limocon (calcophups
indica) is a species of turtledove with red feet and beak. it is
very beautiful, its plumage being green on a white background. see
delgado’s historia, p. .
 there are offerings and
sacrifices among the mindanao heathen. the first [pagcayog]
consist in offering rice, buyo, and money before a small idol of bayog
[pterospermum] wood (placed on a small altar adorned with bamboo
and bonga [areca]), called diuata or manáug. this
idol, which is a poorly-made image, has for eyes the red fruit of the
tree called mabugaháy, and is painted with the sap of the narra.
the blood sacrifices are of animals, and even of human beings. the
first are called talíbong, if the animal sacrificed is a
cock, and pag-balílig, if it is a hog. in either case,
the priestesses (bailanes) having assembled, to the sound of the
agun and guímbao, are clad according to rule; that
is, with embroidered handkerchiefs on the head; magnificent red shirts,
rich glass beads hanging from the neck; silver medals fastened to the
breast; large gold earrings with strings of beads; a jabol or
dagmay which serves them as a skirt, and is very skilfully woven
and figured with crocodiles and other designs; at the girdle, in the
midst of fragrant flowers and hawk’s-bells, they carry the 
balarao or dagger with which the sacrifice of the victim is made;
on the arms precious bracelets of ságai-ságai and
pamóans; and on the feet hoops and hawk’s-bells,
which sound in cadence with the dance which legalizes such ceremonies.
when the priestesses have taken their places about the altar, upon
which the victim is to be sacrificed, they commence their dances to the
sound of the culintangan, some of them playing on the 
guimbao and the agun. they walk about the altar; they tremble and
belch, while singing the “miminsad,” until they fall
senseless to the ground like those stricken with epileptic fits. then
the spectators go to them, fan them, sprinkle them with water, and the
other women bear them up in their arms until they recover
consciousness. then they repeat the ceremony and the chief priestess
buries her balarao in the heart of the hog or slits the cock’s
neck. thereupon, she sucks up the blood which gushes forth from the
victim, partaking thus of the sacrifice. the other bailanes do the
same. during the epileptic fit, they assert that mansilatan has
appeared to them and notified them of the good or ill outcome of the
war, sickness, harvest, or whatever they have been investigating. [n]then
it all ends in excessive eating and drinking. the human sacrifice is
called huaga, and is only practiced among the bagobos and most
barbarous heathen of mindanao. the victim is offered to the 
mandarangan, the god of the mountain or volcano of apo; this
person’s value is generally apportioned among those who
participate in the sacrifice, and he who pays most is the first to
wound the unfortunate victim. the latter is cut into mincemeat in a
moment amid the horrifying cries of his infamous executioners. thanks
to the painstaking vigilance of the authorities of that district, and
to the incessant care of the missionaries, so impious and criminal a
ceremony is almost entirely eradicated, and is only practiced in
secret, in the densest woods. in addition to the huaga, there
are true cases of cannibalism among the baganis, who are wont to eat
the raw entrails of those who fall before their lances, krises, and
balaraos in battle. they do that as a mark of bravery. they have a
proverb which says: “i am long accustomed to eat the entrails of
men.” (pastells and retana’s combés, cols.
 referring to tuambaloca, the
queen of raya bongso; bactial (misprinted bachal in the combés
text) was his bastard son, who for a time ruled joló, during his
father’s life.
 these patolas are mentioned
by pigafetta in his relation. see vol.
xxxiv, p. .
 a measure of capacity
equivalent to about one-half an english gallon, or two liters.
 this last sentence is in the
language of the inquisition, the original being ”y aun entre barbaros puso con sambenito al vicioso, para que no
tengan escusa los que se le hizieron familiares.”
“sambenito” (translated “penance”) is the
“garment worn by penitent convicts of the inquisition;” or
“an inscription in churches, containing the name, punishment, and
signs of the chastisement of those doing penance.”
 the dedo is a measure
equivalent to one forty-eighth of the vara or spanish yard.
 father pastells has seen the
immediate effects of the execution of judgment by boiling water, and
cured a young man, who had thrust his hand into boiling water, by
sentence of the chiefs, in order to prove his innocence. the judgment
of plunging the parties into water is also practiced, and he who
remains in the water the shortest time is adjudged the criminal.
(pastells and retana’s combés, col. .)
 these prices are mentioned
in vol. xli, appendix.
 one of the chief causes of
the great depopulation of mindanao and the visayan islands was the
slavery produced by the piracy of the lutaos, encouraged by the moros
of borneo, célebes, gilolo, macazar, ternate, and the other
moluccas, who brought the slaves in the markets to which they were
conveyed. (pastells and retana’s combés, col.
 the baganis, who dress in
the manner described by the author, generally count the number of their
victims, by placing on the edge of the shield as many locks of hair as
the assassinations that they have committed. one macusang gave father
pastells his shield as a present, as a sign that he would kill no more
christians; and that shield held one hundred and eight locks of hair.
(pastells and retana’s combés, col. .)
 now called bido. they
dress like women; and some think them hermaphrodites. (pastells and
retana’s combés, col. .)
henry ling roth, in his natives of sarawak and
british north borneo (london, ), i, pp. , , describes
these men in women’s attire as found in borneo, where they are
called manang bali. before such assume women’s dress they
are unsexed; and thenceforth they endevour to imitate as nearly as
possible the women in everything, he who can best do so being regarded
as the most successful. their services are in great demand and they
generally grow wealthy, when in order the better to act their assumed
character as women, the manang bali takes a husband. the latter
is despised by the women and disliked by the men of the tribe, and is
completely under his so-called “wife’s” domination.
men are not brought up in this office as a profession, but one becomes
a manang bali from pure choice, or by sudden inclination, at a
mature age. he is always a person of great consequence in the village,
and may become the chief. he has many cares, and acts often as a
peacemaker, in which he excels, all little differences being brought to
him. his wealth is often at the service of his followers, and he is
ready to help in times of trouble and distress. when the manang
bali marries, he generally adopts some children; and if he has had
children before he becomes a manang bali, he must give them
their portions and start in that career unencumbered.
cf. the “berdashes” among the north
american indians; see jesuit relations (cleveland reissue), lix,
pp. , .
 retana (pastells and
retana’s combés, col. ) derives
“labia” from “labi” and “a”
“he who advantages the others.” “tuto” is said
by retana (ut supra, col. ) to be equivalent to
“tuud-tuud” meaning “in real truth.”
 either the eleventh or
twelfth of november. the first date is the day of st. martin, the
blessed confessor; and the second that of st. martin, pope and martyr,
who was martyred in .
 the island of
pañgutarang, of the sulu group. it is about  ×  miles
in extent, and is low, but is densely inhabited and has considerable
trade with joló. it has some settlements of the sámals,
the descendants of the sámal laút or “sea
gypsies.” see u. s. philippine gazetteer, and census of
the philippine islands, i, p. .
 at present, when anyone
dies, those of his house break out into uncontrollable lamentations,
and the father or husband becomes so beside himself at times that,
seizing his bolo, he slashes right and left whatever he finds,
destroying his clothes, furniture, utensils, and even the very floor of
the house; and it is necessary to lay hold of him in order to avoid a
worse ending to such uncontrolled actions. (pastells and retana’s
combés, col. .)
 socsocan (sofocan, sogsocan)
was a basilan by birth and one of the most esteemed of corralat’s
chiefs. he became friendly to the spaniards and served them well as
commander of the lutaos. his name is said to signify “he who
penetrates the fortresses or the ranks of the enemy.” (pastells
and retana’s combés, col. .)
 captain gaspar de morales
was made admiral of the squadron in joló. he fought bravely in
la sabanilla and in joló, where he was severely wounded. he
became commandant of the stronghold and afterward was governor of the
joloan fort. as governor he was an utter failure; for by his avarice
and licentiousness he occasioned the insurrection of salibansa (whose
daughter he had seized), and the loss of the sulu archipelago for more
than two centuries. (pastells and retana’s combés,
col. .)
 among woods of extraordinary
hardness is the magconó (xanthostemon verdugonianus
naves). this wood is so hard that if a nail be driven into its
heart and it be afterward sawn apart, one does not observe where the
saw strikes the nail, and it said that both substances are of equal
hardness. father pastells asserts that he has seen bits of this wood
that have been converted into real flint after only twenty-five years.
(pastells and retana’s combés, col. .)
 of these people, properly
called guimbajanos (guinbajanos, guimbanos, guimbas, and quimpanos),
blumentritt (tribes of the philippines, mason’s
translation) says: “the historians of the seventeenth century,
under this title, designated a wild, heathen people, apparently of
malay origin, living in the interior of sulu island. their name is
derived from their war drum (guimba). later writers are silent
concerning them. in modern times the first mention of them is by p. a.
de pazos and by a manila journal, from which accounts they are still at
least in caroden and in the valley of the loo; it appears that a
considerable portion of them, if not the entire people, have received
islam.” retana (pastells and retana’s combés,
col. ) derives the name of these people from guimba, “a
mountain.” they are not mentioned under this name by the 
census of the philippines.
 pedro de almonte
vérastegui, of sevilla, was a brave soldier, who served as
general and sargento-mayor, and admiral of an expedition against
maluco. he was especially distinguished for his honesty and
uprightness. in sibuguey he attained equal merit with corcuera, and in
 conquered joló. diego fajardo assigned him the encomienda
of lorenzo cañete, left vacant (july , ), by the death of
the latter’s son. (pastells and retana’s 
combés, col. .) almonte vérastegui has often been
mentioned in this series.
 the chinese, during the
spanish régime of the philippines, were allowed to smoke opium
under certain rules; but its use was prohibited to the natives,
although it was at times used secretly. (pastells and retana’s
combés, col. .)
 the former officer of the
crown of aragon, who was assigned to duty immediate to the king’s
person. he enjoyed several privileges, one of them being to hold the
royal sword naked in public ceremonies. (dominguez, 
diccionario nacional.)
 the arms of the natives of
mindanao, like their clothes, are manufactured by themselves. the
spears and campilans are said to be finely tempered. they themselves
adjust the dies for their pataquias. the sheaths, like the hafts of
their krises, are of gold richly engraved. the haft of the kris used by
dato ayuman of tabiran was of solid gold, and was engraved with
sentences from the koran in arabic characters. the usual weapons are:
campilans, krises (straight and wavy), machetes, bolos, ligdaos,
súndanes, various kinds of spears, balaraos, and badis. they use
coats-of-mail made of brass, tortoise-shell, malibago [-bark], or very
thick cloth, or long sashes wound about the breast. spears and arrows
are generally poisoned with the resin of the tree called quemandag or
the poison of red ants or scorpions; and the points of their daggers
and balaraos are also poisoned. they also use darts made of steel,
iron, bone, palm-wood and bamboo. for defense they construct traps, dig
pits, and set bamboo points. they use also various kinds of lantacas
and other kinds of firearms, with which the chinese supply them, or
which they manufacture themselves. these were considered contraband of
war during the spanish régime. (pastells and retana’s 
combés, col. .)
 [contents]
san agustin’s letter on the filipinos
[gaspar de san agustin, o.s.a., wrote the following letter regarding
the filipinos. this letter has been widely discussed pro and con by
various writers, because of the views expressed therein. many
manuscript copies of it exist in various collections, archives, and
libraries. the present translation is made from an early manuscript
copy, belonging to mr. e. e. ayer, of chicago. in footnotes we give the
variant readings of the ms. conserved in the 
museo-biblioteca de ultramar, madrid (pressmark
“–a; caja ; –a”),
that ms. being indicated in our notes by the letter m.; and of the
letter as published in delgado’s historia (pp.
–, where it shows marks of having been edited by either
delgado or his editor), that publication being indicated by the letter
d. sinibaldo de mas presents many of the essential parts of []the letter
in his informe de las islas filipinas en , i,
“poblacion,” pp. –. he says: “in order to
give an idea of their physical and moral qualities, i am going to
insert some paragraphs from a letter of father gaspar de san augustin
of the year , suppressing many latin citations from the holy
fathers which weigh that letter down, and adding some observations from
my own harvest, when i think them opportune.” we shall use most
of these observations in the annotations herewith presented. sir john
bowring gives, on pp. – of his visit to the philippine
isles (london, ) some excerpts taken from mas’s 
informe, but he has sadly mixed san agustin’s and mas’s
matter, and has ascribed some of the latter’s observations to san
agustin, besides making other errors.] []
letter from fray gaspar de san agustin to a friend in
españa who asked him as to the nature and characteristics
[genio] of the indian natives of these philipinas islands.
my dear sir:
although your command has so great weight with me, the undertaking
of performing it satisfactorily is so difficult that i doubt my ability
to fulfil what you ask. it would be more easy for me, i believe, to
define the formal object of logic; to give the square of a circle; to
find the mathematical [side] of the double of the cube and sphere, or to find a
fixed rule for the measurement of the degrees of longitude of the
terrestrial sphere; than to define the nature of the indians, and their
customs and vices. this is a memorandum-book in which i have employed
myself for forty years, and i shall only say: quadraginta
annis proximus fui generationi huic, et dixi semper hi errant
corde;
and i believe that solomon himself would place this point of knowledge
after the four things impossible to his understanding which he gives in
chapter xxx, verse  of proverbs. only can they tell the one who knows
them by []pointing to the sky and saying, 
ipse cognovit figmentum nostrum. but in order that you may not say to me that i
am thus ridding myself of the burden of the difficulty, without making any
effort or showing any obedience, i shall relate briefly what i have
observed, for it would be impossible to write everything, if one were
to use all the paper that is found in china.
. the knowledge of men has been considered by the most erudite
persons as a difficult thing. dificile est, noscere
hominem animal varium et versipelle. man is a changeable theater of
transformations. the inconstancies of his ages resemble the variation
of the year. a great knowledge of man did that blind man of the eighth
chapter of st. mark have who said, with miraculous sight, that he saw
men as trees: video homines velut arbores
ambulantes. for the tree in the four seasons of the year has its
changes as has man in his four ages; and thus said the english poet
oven:
“ver viridem flavamque æstas, me fervida
canam
autumnus calvam, frigida fecit hyems.”
“for this is the inconstancy of man in his [various] ages:
green in his childhood; fiery in the age of []his virility; white in old age;
and bald in his decrepitude.” but his greatest change is in his
customs, for he is a continual proteus, and an inconstant vertumnus. thus does
martial paint his friend:
“dificilis, facilis, jucundus, acerbus est
idem;
nec tecum possum vivere, nec sine te.”
from this came the proverb ”quot capita, tot
sententiæ.” for in the changeable affection of man are locked up
all the meteoric influences of natural transformations.
. it is a fact that the difficulty of knowing these indians is not
in the individuals, but in the race; for, if one be known, then all are
known, without any distinction—so much so that the greek word 
monopantos fits them, and which another critic gave to another
race of people, because they were all homogeneous and uniform among
themselves. at the eighth meeting of the last lateran council, held
[]in
the time of leo x, the opinion of the monophysite philosophers—who give but
one single soul to all men, each body having a part of it—was
condemned. doubtless that impious opinion originated from some nation
as alike in customs as these indians; and it is not the worst thing to
have been able to give this humble judgment, although it is
defective.
. although we call both the natives of america and those of these
philipinas islands indians, it cannot be denied that they are very
different; for the inclination of the asiatics is somewhat more docile and more
capable of progress through teaching. accordingly, i shall confine my
remarks to the indians of philipinas, leaving the definition of the
americans for those who know them; for they have enough chroniclers who
have undertaken it, although i doubt that they obtained their desire,
such as father juan de torquemada in his monarchia []indiana, fray antonio
de remesal,
and father joseph de acosta. for what has been written of them by the bishop of
chiapa, fray bernardino de cassas, and by don juan de palafox in his treatise on the virtues
of the indians, was written from very remote experience; and they were
carried away by the holy zeal of their defense as they were []deceived by their
remote knowledge of the object—as [in viewing] the hills and
mountains, which anear are green, but afar are blue. gold conceals from
the sight the degree of its fineness; and one must crush the rock himself,
and frequently, in order to recognize the truth.
. the asiatic indians of philipinas, then, are almost the same as
those of the other nations of east india, in what regards their genius
[genio], temper, and disposition. consequently, the malays,
siamese, mogoles, and canarines are distinguished only by their clothing,
languages and ceremonies. i except the japanese (who are, as gracian learnedly
remarked, the spaniards of asia) and the chinese, who, by their culture
and civilization, and love of letters, seem to be
different—although, touched with the stone of experience, they
are the same as the indians. the influence of the stars []which rule assia is common,
whence macrobius and suetonius complain that the corruption of the good
native customs of the romans proceeded, especially from persia, whence
came great evil both to the greeks and to the latins.
. but leaving this immense sea of peoples and customs, let us
return to our natives of these islands, who, besides having been
exceedingly barbarous, living without a ruler, and in a confused
monarchy,
have the vices of the islanders; for they are fickle, false, and
mendacious, and [that] by the special influence and dominion which the
moon exercises upon all the islands, isthmuses, and peninsulas
[chersonesos], of which much will be found in the theatrum
vitæ humanæ of laurencio beyerlinch.
. the temperament of these indians, as is proved by their
physiognomy, is cold and humid, because of the great influence of the
moon. they have []but little or no difference among themselves in
their temperament, as was remarked by a learned doctor who has had
considerable experience in these islands, namely, doctor blas
nuñez de prado. [he observed] that there was no difference, but
a great similarity, in the humors of those who had been treated, and a
fine natural docility in responding to the medicine; in whatever remedy
it was applied to them. for they have not the great rebelliousness and
changeableness of the europeans, because of the infinite combinations
made in them by the four humors. the cause of this is the similarity
and lack of variety in the food that they use and which their ancestors
used, which go to make up a nature different in its root from that of
the europeans, but yet very similar.
. this disposition and influence makes them fickle, malicious,
untrustworthy, dull, and lazy; fond of traveling by river, sea, and lake; fond of
fishing, and ichthyophagous—that is, they sustain themselves best on fish;
they have little courage, on account of their cold nature, and are not
disposed to work. besides this they have other qualities and vices, of
which i do not know the cause, and i do not []believe that i can easily know
them. i
shall mention some of them.
. first, they are remarkable for their ingratitude; and although
ingratitude is an innate vice in all people, through the corruption of
original sin in our vitiated nature, it is not corrected in them by the
understanding, and they lack magnanimity. therefore, it is all one to
do a good turn to an indian, and to prepare oneself to receive the blow
of his ingratitude. consequently, if one lend them money, they do not
pay it; but instead they run away from the father. hence there is
ground for scruples in regard to lending money to them; for that is a
benefit from which evil must result, as they absent themselves and do
not come to mass. if others ask them []why, they answer that the father is angry at
them. in them is verified the picture given by the holy spirit in
chapter xxix, verse[s] [–] of ecclesiasticus.
“many” (he says) “have thought by artifice to satisfy
the thing due, and have given trouble to those who have aided them. so
long as they receive, they kiss the hands of him who gives, and humble
themselves with promises. but when it comes time to pay, they will beg
for time (for they are beggars and not givers); and they will utter
tedious and complaining words, and the time is spent in vain. even
though one can pay, he can be got to do so only with great difficulty.
for one solidus scarcely will he give the half, and that he will
think an unjust artifice; and if he cannot pay he will keep the money,
and will esteem the debtor as an enemy causelessly, and will return him
insults and evil words, and for honor and kindness will return him
dishonor.” this picture of ingratitude given by []ecclesiasticus fits many, but it fits
the indians better than all other nations, except the vix
solidi reddet dimidium, for they pay nothing. this is one of the evil signs
that the royal prophet finds in the evil and ingrate in psalm xxxvi,
verse : “the sinner shall take the loan, and shall not
pay.”
consequently we find our indians pagans in this, although they are
christians.
. if they borrow anything that is not money, they will never
return it until it is requested; and, as an excuse for not having
returned it, they say that they have not been asked for it.
. their laziness is such that if they open a door they never close
it; and if they take any implement for any use, such as a knife, pair
of scissors, hammer, etc., they never return it whence they took it,
but drop it there at the foot of the work. []
. if they are paid anything in advance, they will leave work and
keep the pay. []
. they are naturally rude, and consequently, it is strange to see
them, when talking with the father or a spaniard, first scratch
themselves on the temples, and, if it be a woman, on the thigh; but the more
polished scratch themselves on the head.
. it is a thing of great wonder that in everything they make in
which there is a right and wrong side, they naturally make it wrong
side out. consequently, they have not thus far been able to give in to
difficulty of folding a cloak with its right side in; nor [do they understand] it
can be that when a shirt or habit is wrong side out, on putting the
head in, it is given a turn and remains right side out. consequently,
whenever they see this done, they express more surprise. hence the remark of
a discerning man, that all they did was wrong except folding a cloak,
because in that operation the wrong side is the face or right side. []
. when the men walk with their wives, they go in advance, and the
wives follow, as that is just the contrary of our custom. this was a
bit of carelessness that cost orpheus the loss of his wife, who was
stolen by the prince auresteo, as we are told in mythology.
. they are curious, rude, and impertinent, and accordingly, when
they meet the father they generally ask him where he is going and
whence he is coming; and innumerable questions, all impertinent and
troublesome.
if any letter is read before them, they will go behind one to see
it, although they do [not] know how to read. and if they hear any
talking in private, they draw nigh to listen to it, even though it be
in a language that they do not understand.
. they enter, without being summoned, into the convents and the
houses of the spaniards, even into the most secret apartment, but in
their own houses they practice many civilities. if the door be locked,
they try with might and main to look through the cracks at what is
being done, for they wish to know everything.
they tramp about in the convents and houses of the spaniards so
loudly, that it causes wonder and annoyance; and especially if the
father is asleep. in their own houses, on the contrary, they walk about
so lightly, that they seem to be walking on eggs.
. they are very early risers in their own houses, for their poverty
and the noise demand that. but if their masters sleep until ten, they
must do the same too.
. they must eat and try all that their masters []eat, even though
it be something delicious or from europa; and no spaniard, and
especially the father minister, will have been able to succeed in
making them eat out of other dishes than those from which their master
eats. i know well that i have been unable to obtain it, notwithstanding
my efforts. neither will they drink out of another and separate jar.
. their manner of sitting is generally on their heels [en
cuclillas], and they do that in all places except in the convents,
where they break the seats with sitting on them and leaning back in
them with out-stretched legs. and they must do this in the balconies,
where they can see the women.
. they care more for their disheveled hair than they do for their
souls; and only they will not imitate the spaniards if they have the
custom of shaving, as is now being introduced with the false hair and
perukes.
. their usual habitation and happiness in the convents consists in
not leaving the kitchen. there they hold their meetings and feasts, and
there is their glory, as is the open country in castilla. a religious
whom i knew, called the kitchen flos sanctorum, because the life of
the father and of all the village was discussed there.
. when they go out alone at night, they must have a blazing torch,
and go about waving it like []a censer; and then they throw it down wherever
they please, and this is usually the cause of great fires.
. they would rather wear mourning than go about in gala dress, and
are accordingly very observant in wearing it during their funerals.
. they do not esteem garments or gala dresses given them by their
spanish masters; and accordingly leave such in any place, without
perceiving that they are losing them. but any old rag that they wear
from their own houses they esteem and value highly.
. they do not care for any domestic animal—dog, cat, horse,
or cow. they only care, and too much so, for the fighting cocks; and
every morning, on rising from slumber, the first thing that they do is
to go to the roosting-place of their cock—where, squatting down
on their heels, in its presence, they stay very quietly for at least a
half-hour in contemplation of their cock. this observance is unfailing
in them.
. they live unwillingly in convents, or in houses where they
cannot be at least on the scent of women.
. it is not known that the indian has [ever] broken a dish or a
crock in his own house, and consequently one will find dishes in them
that date from before the arrival of the spaniards in this country. but
in the convents and houses where they serve, []they break so many that one
would believe that they do it on purpose to do their masters an ill
turn.
. one may not trust a sword, mirror, glass, musket, clock, or any
other rare article to them; or allow them to touch it even with the
hands; for immediately, by physical contact alone, they put it out of
joint, break it, and harm it. they can only handle bamboo, rattan,
nipa, or a bolo, and some few a plow.
. they are insolent and free in begging for unjust and foolish
things, and this without considering time or season. when i remember
the circumstance which happened to sancho pancha when he was governor
of the island of barataria, one day after eating with an importunate and intrusive
farmer, who said that he was from miguel turra, i am reminded []of the
indians when they beg. and we shall say that if they bring four eggs, they
think that with justice they ought to be given a price of one hundred
pesos. that is so true that when i see an indian who is bringing
something, which is always a thing of no value, or something that is of
no use to them, such as ates, mangas, or belinbiles [i.e.,
balimbing], i repeat those words of laocoon to the trojans: timeo danaos, [et] dona ferentes (nd æneid). an indian
came to beg from the bishop of troya (as was told me by his illustrious
lordship)—don fray gines barrientos, a specially circumspect
prelate—the loan of fifty pesos, for which he took him a couple
of guavas. an indian brought a cock to the marquis of villa-sierra, don
fernando de valenzuela, while he was in the fort of cavite; and, when that
gentleman ordered that he be given []more than six times its value, the indian
told him that what he wanted was to be given eighty cavans of rice, and that in a
time of so great scarcity it was not to be had for two pesos per cavan.
but they have this curious peculiarity, that they are just as happy if
these things are not given to them as if they had been given. for they
have little or no esteem for what the spaniards give them, and
especially the father. accordingly, when they sell anything that is
worth, say, six, they ask thirty, and are satisfied if six be given
them.
they would rather have one real from the hand 
[]of the sangley than one
peso from the spaniard; and the power that the sangleys have over them
is surprising, for they are generally cheated by those people. []
. they are very fond of play, for they believe that it is a restful way in
which to gain much, and it is very suitable to their laziness and lack
of energy. therefore, an indian would rather lie stretched out in his
house than gain the greatest wage. on this account, when he gets a peso
he stays at home without working, until it is all eaten up or drunk up,
for it all amounts to the same thing. this is the reason why they are
so poor, in comparison with the sangleys and mestizos, who live in
abundance, for they know how to seek and work. egestatem operata
est manus remissa. (proverbs x, verse .) []
. they have contradictory peculiarities, such as being very
cowardly, while on some occasions they are rash; for they confess that
they would rather suffer a hundred lashes than to have one shout aloud
to them—which, they say, penetrates even to the heart, without
the cause being known. []
. it is laughable to see them waken another who is sleeping like a
stone, when they come up without making any noise and touching him very
lightly with the point of the finger, will call him for two hours,
until the sleeper finishes his sleep and awakens. the same thing is
done when they call anyone downstairs, or when the door is shut; for
they remain calling him in a very low tone for two hours, until he
casually answers and opens to them. []
. in another way, they exhibit other rash actions, by which it is
seen that their rashness is rather the daughter of ignorance and
barbarity than of valor. for it occurs that an indian, man or woman,
may be walking along the road and hear a horse which is coming behind
him, running or going at a quick pace; but this indian never turns his
face. if the horse come in front of him, he will not turn out []of the road
so that he may not be trampled underfoot, if he who comes on horseback
does not turn out with greater consideration. the same thing occurs
when they see a very large banca coming down upon them with long sweeps
of the oars, while they are in a small banquilla; when they will allow
themselves to be struck by it, with the danger of being overturned and
drowned. it costs much labor to those in the large banca to avoid that,
while the others could do it with great ease. this has happened to me
on innumerable occasions.
. the same thing happens in the rivers where there are crocodiles,
although they see them swimming about; for they say the same as do the
moros [i.e., mahometans], that if it is from on high it must
happen, even though they avoid it. and thus, as says father fray
gabriel gomez (history of argel, book , chapter ), they say
in the lengua franca “god is great! be not led
by fancy! the world is just so. if it is written on the forehead that
one is to live, then he will live; but if not, then he will die
here.”
for their koran says that each one has his []fortune written in the lines of
his forehead. these indians believe the same thing (and they have never
seen the koran), and only because it is great nonsense. they receive no
warning from the many misfortunes that happen every day for their
sins.
. while it is a fact that they are extremely credulous among
themselves, they will believe of the spaniards only what is against
them. therefore, it is evident that the [christian] faith is a
supernatural act, in that they believe the divine mysteries taught by
the spaniards. however, they do not believe some things, or refuse to
believe them because they find the contrary profitable. consequently,
there is no one who can persuade them that it is a sin to steal from
the religious ministers or the spaniards. of this we have such proofs
that we have not the slightest doubt that it is so; but, only
perceiving it is not being able to remedy it. []
so great is the ease and tenacity with which they believe the
greatest nonsense, if this is to the discredit of the spaniards or
against them, that it would be a long undertaking to recount some of
it. i have deemed it advisable to mention only two [instances] of it of
which i heard and of which i was a witness, so that the rest can
be inferred from them. []
. while i was in bisayas in the year , those islands began to
be depopulated and the indians began to take to the mountains from the
visitas of xaro, because a rogue told them a bit of nonsense like the
following. he told them that the king of españa had gone out
fishing, and the turks had come upon him and made him captive; and that
the king had given for his ransom all the indians of the province of
oton. they believed this so thoroughly that it was with great
difficulty that the alcalde don sebastian de villarreal and the father
ministers could quiet them, and considerable time passed before they
were sure of the whole matter.
the second: while i was in the village of lipa, a mine was
discovered in that of tanavan which was said to be of silver. governor
don fausto cruzat y gongorà sent ministers and officials in
order to find out about it and to assay it. these men made their
efforts, but the mine only said, argentum et aurum non est
mihi.
but the devil willed to have some rogue at this time to sow this
deceit, namely, that the ministers said that the mine would yield no silver until
all the old women of cometan had been caught, and their eyes plucked
out and mixed with other ingredients, in order to anoint the vein of
the mine with []that mixture. this was believed, so that all
was confusion and lamentation, and the old women hid in the fields; and
it took a long time to quiet them, and cost the ministers great
difficulty, as the indians would not believe them because they were
castilians, until time itself undeceived them.
. may god deliver us from any one of those indians whom they
consider as sages, who says any bit of nonsense, even though it be
against the faith, and they only respond, vica nong maronong,
“thus say the sages,” and it is labor lost to persuade them
to the contrary; for the authority that these scholars have over them
is incredible.
. they are extremely arrogant, and hence the son will not obey his
father, or the headman, or captain of the village. they are only bound in this by
fear, and when they have no fear they will not obey. they only
recognize the spaniard to be more than they; and this they say only because of
an interior impulse, which forces them against their will and without
their knowing why. this is the providence of god, so that they can be
governed. []
. they are very fond if imitating the spaniard in all his bad traits, such as
variety of clothes, cursing, gambling, and the rest that they see the
coxcombs
[]do.
they shun the imitation of the good things in the dealings and
civilization of the spaniards, and in the proper rearing of their
children. for in all the rest that treats of trickery, drunken
revelries, and ceremonies in their marriages, burials, and tyrannies
one against another, they observe exactly what they learned from their
ancestors. thus they unite in one the vices of the indians and the
spaniards.
. just as the poor are arrogant, so also are the old ones
ignorant, and they are not to be distinguished 
[]from the youths.
consequently, in their weddings, banquets, and revelries one will see
old men with white hair, mixed with the lads; and slouchy old []women with
their scapularies, clapping their hands and singing nonsensical things
with the lasses. scarcely is there an indian who knows his age, and
many do not
know the baptismal names of their wives, after they have been baptized
for fifty years.
. they are so ignorant that they do not have the slightest
knowledge concerning the origin of the ancestors from whom they
descend, and whence they came to settle these islands. they do not give
any information concerning their paganism, which is not the worst; and
they only preserve in certain parts some ridiculous abuses, which they
observe at births and sicknesses, and the cursed belief that persuades
them that the souls of their ancestors or the grandfathers of the
families are present in the trees and at the bottom of bamboos, and
that they have the power of giving and taking away health and of []giving
success or failure to the crops. therefore, they make their ancestors
offerings of food, according to their custom; and what has been
preached to them and printed in books avails but little, for the word
of any old man regarded as a sage has more weight with them than the
word of the whole world. []
. they act tyrannically one toward another. consequently, the
indian who has some power from the spaniard is insolent and intolerable
among them—so much so that, in the midst of their ingratitude,
[]some
of them recognize it, although very few of them. yet it is a fact that,
if the spaniards had not come to these islands, the indians would have
been destroyed; for, like fish, the greater would have swallowed the lesser, in
accordance with the tyranny which they exercised in their paganism.
. they are wanting in understanding and reflection, so that they
do not recognize any means in anything, but go to extremes.
consequently, if one ask them for warm water, they bring it boiling,
and then if they are reproached and told that one wishes it more
temperate, they go and bring it back as cold as ice. in this vicious circle of
extremes, they will continue ceaselessly without finding a mean.
consider then, how they will act in prudential matters, where one must
seek the mean and not the extremes, as says the poet: []
es[t] modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines.
quos ultra, citraque nequit consistere rectum.
this is the cause of great anxiety to us, and with them a cause of
great happiness to see us grow impatient, even though it cost them some
blows, which they take very willingly because they make us impatient.
they celebrate this in a lively manner in the kitchen. there is nothing
that the indian regrets more than to see the spaniard or the father
calm, and that he patiently and with forbearance restrains his hand
from them when it is necessary; for but rarely do they do anything
willingly, and hence the most prudent among them are wont to say that
“the rattan grows where the indian is born.” virga
in dorso ejus, qui indiget corde (proverbs x, ). []
they resemble in this a mischievous lad who served a good cleric.
one day his master sent him to buy a hen, and he stole and hid a leg. his master
was silent, and overlooked the incident. it came to pass that the
master and the lad walked into a field, where they came upon some
cranes, all of them with one foot lifted high in the air. thereupon the
lad said to his master, “sir, the hen was like these birds which
have but one foot.” the cleric answered, “no, my lad, for
these birds have two feet; and if you do not believe it, look.”
so saying, he threw a stick at the cranes, which flew away in fright,
showing the other foot. at this the lad said, “o, sir, had you
done the same with me, the hen would also have had two feet.”
doubtless, this lad must have been of the same disposition as these
good brothers, who do nothing good without a beating. tu
virga percuties eum (proverbs xxiii, ).
it happened that an augustinian religious—who still lives and
is very well known for his great learning—arrived in these
islands in the year , and was given, shortly after his arrival, a
lad of eight or []nine years for his service. the lad was so
clever and lively, that he was held in esteem, and the said religious was very
fond of him because of his great activity. the lad considered that the
father was very patient with him, and chid his neglect very mildly. one
day he said to the father “father, you know that you are new.
consider the indians like myself. you must not overlook anything. if
you wish to be well served, you must keep a rattan, and when i commit
any fault, you must strike me with it; and then you will see that i
shall move as quickly as a sparrowhawk. for you must know, father, that
the rattan grows where the indian is born. so have i heard said by the
old indians.” trouble enough do the poor wretches have, for one
may say of them: oderunt peccare mali formidinæ
penæ.
. one can give them nothing, even if it be given, for if he happen to
give one anything in the presence of others, even if it be a needle, all will
demand that in justice the same be given to them. in this they closely
resemble the laborers of the twentieth []chapter of st. matthew, who
construed as an injury the favor that the householder showed to their
companions. this is covetousness and lack of consideration. so far is
this foolishness carried that the indian will take fifty lashes
willingly, if he knows with certainty that all the others are to get as
much. surely they cause great trouble with this wretched habit, and
those who might confer some benefit on them often avoid doing so.
. they are so distrustful that they think that the ground on which
they walk and the air which they breathe are about to fail. this does
not make them more provident and industrious, but more foolish and
dull. therefore, if there are many to confess they troop together all
in a body, each one desirous of being first. this causes extraordinary
trouble and impatience to the confessor. but, if there are but few,
they come a legua apart; and one must summon them, and they take an
hour to come. if the father rises in anger, or because it is late, then
they all come together in a crowd, and say “father, me
only.” this is a bit of foolishness in which one can trace the
great deficiency of their understanding.
. as they are so curious, and fond of knowing whatever does not
concern them, what occurs when many of them confess together is
wondrous to see. []for all of them keep a steadfast gaze on the
one who is confessing. one is astonished and amused to see all the
women with their faces turned backward so that they seem to be biformed
januses, or paid dancers with a mask at the back of the head. in this
manner, they remain until the end of the function. the same is true on
ash wednesday or at the adorations of the cross on holy friday, when
all of them wish to kiss at one time, or in other similar
functions.
. they are much given to the sin of blasphemy, because of their natural
vileness, their pride, and their presumption. hence it is quite usual
for them to complain of god, whom they call paghihinanaquit,
asking why he does not give them this or that, and health or wealth, as
he does to other creatures. they utter words of nonsense that horrify
those who do not know that it proceeds from their great lack of
understanding and consideration, and from their very great disability
for conforming themselves with the divine will. thus the royal prophet []david, when
compelled by his superior enthusiasm to touch what he considered
inferior matter, and [][when he] lifted up his complaints of the
divine providence, was excused by his ignorance, as will be []seen in
psalm lxxii, [], where he humbles
himself, []saying: ut jumentum factus sum
apud te: et ego semper tecum.
. they are very vain, and they spend their money never more willingly
than in functions of vanity; for they consider themselves highly, and
wish to be esteemed without doing anything worthy of esteem. the men
especially, even though they do not have anything to eat, must not for
that reason fail []to have a shirt and a hat, and to dress in
style. they give banquets very frequently, for very slight causes; and
everything resolves itself into eating, drinking, and great noise.
their vanity is the only thing that causes them to lessen their
laziness, in order to get the wherewithal to keep up this esteem, and
applause from their compatriots.
. they are revengeful to an excessive degree—so much so that
they are vile and cowardly, and the ministers have great trouble in
reconciling them with their enemies; and although they do it through
fear, it is never with the whole heart, for this passion has great
influence over them. and since they need magnanimity and manliness to
overcome it, and these virtues are foreign to them, hate generally forces its
roots into them so deeply that it is impossible to eradicate it in a
whole lifetime.
this is the reason why they are so inclined to litigation, and to
going before the audiencias and courts with their quarrels, in which they
willingly spend their possessions for the sole purpose of making []others
spend theirs and of causing them harm and trouble. for that they are
even wont to pledge their sons and daughters.
. in order to be contrary in everything to other nations, they
have lust but no love. this is in regard to the illicit love; for in
the supernatural love which grace causes in the sacrament of marriage
(since divine impulse works in this) their evil disposition is
conquered and most of them make very good husbands. but in illicit
intercourse the men have no other purpose than bodily appetite, and to
deprive [of virginity] as many women as they have done, in order to
sport with it. for it is a long established custom among them that the
women shall give to the men, and the latter shall be the ones served
and fêted; while only blows, kicks, and trouble are given to the
women. so true is this that one might say that they have an inferno
both in this and in the other world. hence the women are very poorly
clad, for the men want everything for themselves.
. but in the midst of this, which appears inhuman, one may praise
them for having succeeded in treating their wives as they deserve, in
order to keep them submissive and happy; for this submission []makes them
better, and humble, and prudent, and conformable to their sentence of
being subject to man. and if the europeans would learn this useful and
prudent management from them, they would live in greater peace and with
less expense; and marriage would be more mild and quiet, and well
ordered, according to reason, and better directed toward the end for
which it was instituted—as we see is the case with these people,
with a fertility that causes our wonder.
. they have another remarkable custom, which has been taught them
by the infernal machiavelian satan, which is good for their bodies, but bad for
their souls. this is that they observe very strictly the concealment of
one another’s faults and wrong-doing. they endeavor to see that
no transgression comes to the ear of the father minister, or alcalde,
or any spaniard. they observe this with peculiar secrecy, although they
may be at enmity among themselves, and ready to kill as they say.
consequently, the most serious crime that can happen among them is to
tell the father or alcalde what is passing in the village. they call that 
mabibig, because it is the most abominable fault and the only sin
among them.
. this worst of customs is very prejudicial and troublesome to the
spaniards and to the father ministers. for it might happen that one has
one servant (or all) who wastes and destroys the property of his
master, and there is [no one] who will tell him what is passing. but if it
happens that the wasteful servant leave, then all the others tell what
he did; and, whatever is lacking afterward, they throw the blame on
that absent servant. if the spaniard reprove the servant whom he most
esteems and benefits, asking him why he did not tell of the evil that
the other servant was doing, he replies with great dudgeon that they
must not accuse him of being mabibig, or talebearer of what
happens. this is what takes place, even if the servants know that they
are flaying their master. consequently, the first thing that they do
when any new servant comes is, to threaten him if he turn 
mabibig, and afterwards make him do all the work that belongs to
them all, while the old servants are quite free from toil. hence the
fewer servants a spaniard has, the better served will he be; for only
the newcomer works and does everything, and the others not only do
nothing, but are all served by him. []
. they have another peculiarity, which always causes me great
wonder. i am trying to discover the cause therefor, but i only find, so
far as i can make out, that it is due to their incapacity and
ingratitude and their horror of the spaniards. this is, that while the
difference between the poverty, wretchedness, and want of their houses
and the anxiety and poverty in which they live, when compared with the
abundance, good cheer, good clothes, and comfort which they enjoy in
the service of certain spaniards is almost infinite, if they happen to
be discharged, or to leave for some very slight cause occasioned by
their pride and vanity, they turn from one extreme to the other, so
contented with the present misery that they do not remember or even
consider the past abundance. if they be asked in what condition they
lived better, they answer that everything is one and the same, and
hence we do not get revenge by sending them away in anger [en embiarlos con dios]. but what great happiness is theirs!
. they would rather scorn the goods of the father or of the
spaniards than enjoy them and profit by them. hence what they lose is
greater than what they spend.
. they are greatly lacking in foresight. hence the servants and
stewards do not advise their master to procure any article until it is
completely gone. therefore when they say that there is no more sugar or
no more oil, it is when there is not [][oil] enough to whet a knife. consequently,
great deficiencies and annoyances are suffered because of this
custom.
. if there are visitors or guests to dine with the master, they do
not consider the guests at all, thus causing the poor master of the
house great shame; and it is necessary for him to excuse himself by
the poor instruction that the devil gave them in this matter. no
misfortune can be greater to him than to offend against his civility;
and in a manner that seems good to them, for doubtless they are so
persuaded by the devil. it is also their custom, when there is company,
for all to go to the kitchen and leave the master alone.
. their stomachs are like sackbuts, with systole and diastole; and thus they
contract and expand them in a wonderful manner. for although they
observe parsimony in their own houses, it is a matter for which to
praise god to see them gorge themselves and gulp down things at the
expense of the spaniards, as quevedo said there of galalon: []“galalon, who eats but little at home,
overloads his goodly paunch at another’s expense.”
. but say to them, buen provecho; for usually these
losses are well retrieved when they row. they are horrifying and
frightful in venting their anger, both against one another, and against
the father ministers; and there would be so much to say in this that it
would never be finished. they are able to make their complaints in such a
manner and to such purpose that they persuade those who know most about
their falsity and trickery that they are telling the truth. i remember
that an alcalde of experience was heard to say, when the indians came to him with
complaints: audivi auditionem tuam, et timui. there are usually
indians, both men and women, in the suburbs of manila, who hire out as
mourners in the manner of the mourners of the hebrews, and such as were
in style in castilla in the time of the cid. the authors of the quarrel
go first into the house of some lawyer well known []for his
cleverness, who is one of those called in law rabulas, who do not know
which is their right hand. these men keep books of formulas and of
petitions directed against all the human race; for example, in this
form, “suit against alcalde;” and then follow all the
crimes and excesses that can be committed by alcaldes. the same thing is
true of suits against ministers and curas, and in them is enclosed all
possibility of irregular conduct. then the said “smith of
calumny,” as the italian says, takes the names of the
plaintiffs and defendants, and a few facts; and then puts it all in the
book from beginning to end [de pe á pa], without omitting
one iota. and this is not to speak uncertainly; for in the archives of
the court will be found the chart which was discovered in the
possession of a certain rabula named silva, who, in addition to
this had skill in counterfeiting royal decrees and documents.
. when the petition has been made, they go with it to the
mourners, and they go to press their suit with a lamentation like that
of magedo for king josias, which would soften stones. that has been investigated by
several governors in my time. i remember one investigation by don juan
de vargas, and another by don gabriel de cruce-laegui; and many who are
living remember them. let them judge, then, the pity that ought to be
expressed for the []father ministers, whose honor is exposed to so
great danger.
. their cunning and diabolical cleverness in making an accusation
is not the equal [i.e., is more than the equal] of their
capacity; and it is known that they have the special suggestion of the
father of discord, satan. i remember that they brought to a certain
provincial a complaint against the father minister, saying that he kept
twelve indians busy in caring for but one horse. the provincial made an
investigation and found that the father had but one indian, and that he
used the said horse a great deal, in order to attend to the
administration of souls. when the calumniators were chidden for the
falsity of their complaint, they explained it by saying, “father,
that indian is, in truth, but one; but he is changed every month, and
at the end of the year there are twelve men.” just see what
subtlety, and what confusion in their arithmetic, in order to make
their accusation—the indians maliciously speaking of a year in
order to give color to their calumny. so many cases of this sort can
be stated, that they are unending. and with all this, these natives
have such persuasiveness, or powers of enchantment, that they generally
deceive and persuade the most experienced with their lies.
. inasmuch as any sort of complaint is received, without
subjecting the accuser to a penalty in []case that he cannot prove his
allegations—as ought to be the case, and according to the
orders of the mexican council—no one’s honor is safe. for,
if they prove their accusations, they are the gainers, while if they do
not prove them they return home as cool as ever, for they always go to
gain and never to lose.
. they are very fond of ceremonial acts and festivals where there
is some novelty; and fond of long pilgrimages to images of some new miracle,
while they forget about the old.
. they are especially fond of comedies and farces, and therefore,
there is no feast of consequence, []unless there is a comedy. if possible they
will lose no rehearsal, and in all they pay attention only to the witty
fellow who does innumerable foolish and uncouth things, and at each of
his actions they burst into hearty laughter. he who plays this part
acceptably receives his diploma as an ingenious fellow, and has
permission to go and come anywhere, and even to cajole the women before
their husbands; and the latter must laugh, even though they have no
wish to do so. it is very necessary that these representations be not
harmful, for many of them are printed. accordingly, they receive
considerable benefit from these functions and external acts, such as
the descent from the cross, and other representations, which are
patterned after those called escuitales in nueba españa—in
which is verified the truth of the sentence in the ars poetica
of horace, verses [–].
segnius irritant animos demisa per aures,
quam quæ sunt oculis conspecta fidelibus.
. consequently, those who have experience are wont to declare that
the faith enters into the indians through the eyes; and hence it seems
worthy of consideration that it was the apostle st. thomas whom our
lord had
prepared for the teaching of the []indians—he who desired that the
belief in his glorious resurrection might enter through the eyes: 
nisi videro ... non credam (john xx, ).
. they are extreme in their observance of their usages and
customs, which they call ogali. to be found wanting in these is
a great infamy; and, consequently, in order not to break them they will
trample everything under foot. the ceremonies and abuses practiced in
their weddings and funerals are numerous and curious, and no success
has been had in suppressing them, notwithstanding all the efforts that
have been made; for all they want from the spaniards is their clothes,
and all the evil that they see in them. i believe that these customs
will never be suppressed. []
. another curious peculiarity is that although there are generally
some few who are jealous, if they have any business with the spaniards,
they will not go themselves, but will send their wives or daughters
without any fear of danger, in order that their business may be well
despatched.
. they are very material and literal in their conversations, and
one cannot say the slightest word to the women in jest, however slight
it be; for the most discreet thing that they will answer to one will
be, tampalasanca, which means, “you are a shameless
fellow;” and, if not that, a tempest of words, that will make him repent
having given occasion []for them. this alone is their custom with the
spaniards.
. it is a thing to be wondered at that even the dogs have another
disposition, and have a particular aversion toward spaniards. when they
see spaniards, they choke themselves with barking. and when the
children see a father they cry immediately, and thus from their cradle they
begin to hold every white face in horror. []
. they are so cowardly that they fear any indian who becomes a
bully among them—so much that, if they only see him with a poor
knife, they fear him so greatly that he can do whatever he wishes. all
the village together will not be bold enough to arrest him, for they
say that he is posong, which is the same as “bold.”
i have had many examples of this. []
. the vice of drunkenness is regarded by them as rank in the
fourth degree, and they have made []it a point of nobility; for the
chiefest men think that they are the best workmen at this occupation. it is a fact
that those most given to this vice are the ilocans, then the visayans,
and then our tagálogs. the pampangos can be exempted from this rule, for
they are very temperate in this wretched habit, as well as in all the
other things which we have mentioned. they are very different: for they
are truthful, and love their honor; are very brave, and inclined to
work; and are more civil, and of better customs. in regard to the vices
here mentioned (for they are, in the last analysis, indians like the
rest), they keep them more out of sight and covered. in all things the
pampangos have a nobleness of mind that makes them the castilians of
these same indians. consequently, that people must be distinguished
from the rest in its character, in all that we have said.
. returning now to the others, in general, they possess vanity
without honor; for among them it is no reason for less esteem to be
drunkards, robbers, or connivers in evil deeds, or [to practice] other
like virtues. they lose reputation and honor only if they get the
reputation of being sorcerers. consequently, []in the opinion of a very
learned minister, there is no case of a restitution of honor, unless
some accusation of this infamous sin is imputed to them. in their
marriages and among their kindred their disgust is not moved except by
this, for the others are excused by self interest, but this fault is
not.
. all that i have said of the men is very different in the women,
saltem quoad modum. for they are of better morals, are docile and
affable, and show great love to their husbands and to those who are not
their husbands. they are really very modest in their actions and
conversation, to such a degree that they have a very great horror of
obscene words; and if weak nature craves acts, their natural modesty
abhors words. the notion that i have formed of them is that they
are very honorable, and, most of all, the married women. although beans
are boiled, it is not by the kettleful, as in other regions. scarcely will one
find a tagálog or pampango indian woman, who will put her person
to trade; and they are not so abandoned as we see in the women in other
regions. they are very averse toward the spaniard, and love the
equality [in marriage] of their own nation; and, as a foreign religious
said, are suited “each man to each woman.” they rarely have
any []love for a spaniard. they have another
peculiarity, which if the indian women of america had, that land would
not be so full of mulattoes, who are a ferocious and wicked race. this
is their horror for cafres and negroes, which is so great that they
would sooner suffer themselves to be killed than to receive them. the
visayan women, however, are ready for everything, and are not so
fastidious. on the contrary, they are very ready to consent to any
temptation.
. the women are very devout, and in every way of good habits. the
cause for this is that they are kept so subject and so closely
occupied; for they do not lift their hands from their work, since in
many of the villages they support their husbands and sons, while the
latter are busied in nothing else but in walking, in gambling, and wearing fine
clothes, while the greatest vanity of the women is in the adornment and
demeanor of these gentlemen, for they themselves are very poorly and
modestly
clad.
. in all that i have said, to this point, concerning the nature
and morals of these poor people, i have done no more than to
approximate [to the []truth], as the mathematicians have done in the
squaring of the circle. for an essential, substantial, and exhaustive
definition
is for some other person, to whom divine providence chooses to
communicate this difficult matter. very praiseworthy is barclayo, for in his 
eupormion and his argenis, he succeeded in discerning the
natures of nations; as did juan rodemborgio, and our gracian in his 
criticon. but had they treated of the filipinos, they would
not have been so successful.
. the bishop of la puebla, don juan palafox, wrote a keen treatise on the
virtues of the indians of nueva españa, in which his uncommon
intellect and his holy and good intention are displayed more clearly
than is the truth of his argument on the subject; for in a curious way
he endeavors to []make virtues of all their vices and evil
inclinations. for in what they merit before god through their wills,
they do not merit if it be the impelling force of their natural
inclination and manner of living, because absuetiis non
fit passio. one cannot, indeed, compare the voluntary poverty
of st. francis with that of the indians, which is born of laziness and
full of greed; for theirs is the infamous poverty which virgil places
in hell: et turpis egestas. and just as the economy of a
poor wretch is not reckoned as fasting, so it will not be proper to say
that if st. antony went barefoot, the indians do the same; and that
they live on certain roots, as did the fathers of the thebaid. for the fasting and
the austerities of st. arsenius had a different impelling motive—[]since he
left the pleasures and esteem of the court of the emperor theodosius—than
that which they can have, being so born and reared, and never having
seen anything else. hence, ovid says of the getas that they left the
delights and comforts of roma, and returned to seek the poverty and
misery to which they were accustomed in pontus:
roma quid meltus scyt[h]ico quid frigore peius?
húc tamen ex illa barbarus urbe fugit.
. it is not my intention to include the sangley mestizos here, as
they are a different race. for although they were the children of
indians at the beginning, they have been approaching more and more to
the chinese nation with the lapse of successive generations. et compositum ex multis atrahit ad se nuturam simplicis
dignioris. consequently, i leave their description for
whomever wishes to undertake that task; for i fear that i shall succeed
but very ill with the task which i have here undertaken, as it is so
difficult.
. finally, summing up all the above, the inference will be that
all the actions of these wretched beings are such as are dictated by
nature through the []animal, intent solely on its preservation and
convenience, without any corrective being applied by reason, respect,
and esteem for reputation. consequently, he who first said of a certain
people that if they saw the whole world hanging on one nail and needed
that nail in order to hang up their hat, they would fling the world
down in order to make room for the hat, would have said it of the
indians had he known them. for they think only of what is agreeable to
them, or of what the appetite dictates to them; and this they will put
in action, if fear, which also dwells in them, do not dissuade them. hence they
will be seen dressed in the shirts and clothes of their masters, for
the sole reason that because they no sooner enter any house than
they become the owners of everything in it. and the worst thing is
that, although they are not good and faithful servants, 
intrant in gaudium domini sui.
. they also have other qualities worthy of envy, non
quoad causam sed quoad efectum. such is their contentment with their lot, for
they believe []that there is no people in the whole world
better than they, and that if they possess a bamboo hut, a little rice
for a few days, a few small fish, and a couple of leaves of tobacco,
they do not envy the tables of xerxes or eliogabalus, and can sing with lucan:
o tuta potestas augusti parvique laris.
prohl munera nondum intellecta deum quibus hoc
contingere templis, vel posuit muris nullo
trepidare tumulto, cæsarea pulsata manu.
. they are also worthy of envy for the calmness and conformity
with which they die, with so wonderful peace, as if they were making a
journey from one village to another—the lord working in these
creatures as the lord that he is, for in that []transit his mercy shines forth
more; and thus said david (psalm, xlvii, ) domini,
domini, exitus mortis; whence that reduplication which the hebrew grammar
calls ohatsere, signifies the superlative in name and action. the
same is the declaration of divine wisdom (proverbs, xx): 
in viis justitiæ ambulo, in medio semitarum judicii, ut ditem
diligentes me. the father celestial summons them for the relief of
their burdens, and of the troubles which they have had during life: venite qui laboratis, et onerati estis, et ego reficiam
vos (matthew xi, ).
for it is a fact that if one consider the life and lot of most of
them, they resemble that merchant in []the gospel of matthew (chapter
), who gave all that he had for the precious pearl; for it costs them
more than is apparent to become christians, with so much cutting of
timber, and many personal services; and thus god gives them the true
rest of death, as to poor and needy ones. parcet pauperi,
et inopi, et animas pauperum salvas faciet (psalm, xii, ). 
exiguo enim conceditur missericordia (wisdom, vi, ).
. in all the aforesaid, i find no more than the claw by which this
lion can be recognized, because of the difficulty of the matter;
therefore i refer the matter to another who has greater talent and
experience, who can tell more, since i cannot do everything. i remember once to
have heard from an inexperienced preacher this ingenious bit of
nonsense, that in praising st. john the baptist he cited that passage
of st. matthew (chapter xi, []), cœpit jesus dicere
[ad turbas] de joanne;
. and he said that john was so great a saint, that even in the
mouth of christ our lord it was [only] possible to begin speaking of
him, but that no end could be reached. the same i shall say of this
matter, in all candor.
. there is no little to learn and study in the matter, concerning
the manner in which one must behave with them—especially we
ministers, who come from remote lands in order to assist and teach
them; for because of not understanding this aright []many have become
disconsolate, and have conceived a horror of the indians, and have
returned to españa, or they have lived amid great hardship, in a
continual combat of impatience and anxiety, thus frustrating the good
vocation which brought them to these islands, a vocation so acceptable
to god our lord. for, as says the angelic doctor st. thomas, , book
, article : deo nullum sacrificium est magis acceptum,
quam celus animarum. to those who take this charge upon them, the words
of the lord in his revelations to st. brigida are of great consolation.
among many others, he says (book , chapter ): vos ergo
amici mei qui estis in mundo procedite securi, clamate, et anuntiate
voluntatem meam. ego ero in corde et in ore vestro. ego ero dux vester
in via et consolator in morte. non relinquam vos, procedite alacriter
quia ex labore cresit gloria. for it is a fact that all this exhortation is
necessary, in order to combat the friction that is caused to the
european disposition by dealing with people of customs so different,
and which has caused so many to lose their reason.
. therefore the compass to which the navigator must always be
attentive, in the gulf of the customs of this exasperating race, is
patience. for this is the only remedy which christ our lord left to his
disciples for the attainment of this ministry: 
[](luke xxi, []) in patientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras; and st. paul,
in hebrews x, : patientia est vobis necessaria, ut
reportetis, repromissionis.
. with this knowledge and without losing this strong protection one must
continually consider that all these vices and evil traits are dictated
and impelled by their nature, at times aided by the suggestion of the
common enemy when he hopes to succeed in causing us impatience. very
worth considering in this are the words of st. paul ( cor., xi, ,
): libenter enim suffertis insipientes cum sitis ipsi
sapientes. sustinetis enim si quis vos in servitutem redigit, si quis
devorat, si quis accipit, si quis extollitur, si quis infaciem vos
cædit. for all these hardships, and greater, must be
suffered here among these brothers.
. i confess for my part that, at the beginning, i was afflicted
and was greatly tormented, until with the lapse of time i came to
realize that such was their disposition and nature, and that these
trees could give no better fruit. in time it became to me a motive for
praising god to see the variety of conditions and customs which he has placed in
human nature, which is so beautified with variety; and i took
particular pleasure in seeing youths and boys doing all things
backward—without any malice, []and without having prompters, like actors;
but moved only by that hidden peculiarity that makes them so different
from all other nations, and so uniform among themselves, [a likeness]
which is so great that any one who has seen one of these 
monopantos has seen them all. with these considerations i lived
consoled, and succeeded in making of them wax and wick, as the saying
is.
. first, one must not shout out at them, for that is a matter that
frightens and terrifies them greatly, as can be seen if one cries out
at them when they are unaware—when the whole body trembles; and
they say that a single cry of the spaniard penetrates quite to their
souls.
. one must not strike them with the hands, 
[]for if we are of flesh,
they are of iron, and the hand will suffer greatly, for god does not
choose that they be corrected so indecently.
. all of their faults must not be overlooked, for they will become
insolent and worse daily. consequently, it is necessary for the father
ministers to give them some lashes as a father, with great moderation,
for it is enough to give lashes for vanity and haughtiness. this must
be observed especially in the lads, as is the order of the holy spirit
(proverbs, xxiii, , ): noli subtrahere a puero
disciplinam; si enim percussieris eum virga, non morietur. tu virga
percuties eum: et animam ejus de inferno liberabis. the command of st.
gregory shall be observed carefully ( p. pastoral, chapter ): curandum quippe est ut rectorem subditis, et matrem, et
patrem se exhibeat disciplina.
. nothing must be taken away from them, or received from them,
without paying for it; for they are very poor, and the least thing
produces a great want with them. it must be considered that their
greatest misery arises from their laziness and rude condition, and that
that habit keeps them in its grasp, and they suffer great poverty; for
egestatem operata est manus remissa (proverbs, x, ).
we must consider also that they support us and that they pay as they
are able for our labors. if anything be given to them, let it be
purely for
god’s sake and as an alms, for if it be lent it will be entirely
lost, both []the merit and the patience—considering their
necessity and not their ingratitude, as a thing ordained by god. propter miseriam asume pauperem, et propter inopiam eius ne
dimitas eum vacuum; et cætera (ecclesiasticus, xxix, ).
. it is better, in selecting servants among the indians for the
inside of the house, to see that they be the sons of caciques or
chiefs. they must be shown neither love nor familiarity. they must
indeed always be treated well, but with uprightness and seriousness of
face. it must be considered that in proportion as they are better
caressed and clothed, the worse and more insolent they will become.
this is the teaching of the holy spirit in proverbs xxiv, : qui delicate a pueritia nutrit servum suum, postea sentiet eum
contumacem. they must be taught their duties, and must always be
ordered to perform them with prudence and circumspection, for otherwise
they will come gradually to lose respect for their master, and for the
character which god presents to them in the spaniard in order to
dominate them; and then will result the same thing that happened to the
log which, æsop says, was placed in the lake by jupiter to be
king of the frogs. []but the frogs, seeing after a time that it did
not move, made sport of it, and jumped on top of it, etc. not many
things should be ordered of them at one time; for their memories are
very poor, and they will only keep the last one in mind. the keys of
the pantry or to the money must not be entrusted to them, for that
would be placing opportunity and temptation in their hands, and they
never resist it. good instruction and subjection in the house, and,
above all, the good example of life which they see in their masters,
instil much into them; and under such conditions they generally become
good servants, especially those of the pampango nation. on the other
hand, also, one must not expect a good servant in the house of a bad
master.
. one must not exhaust them or squeeze them much beyond what they
can give of themselves, as we do with the lemon, for all that will be
pressed out will be bitter, as says the proverb of the commentary; qui nimis emungit, solet extorquere cruorem. neither is it well
or proper to go about visiting the caciques or going up into their
houses, except when necessity requires it; for immediately the whole
village will be filled with envy and complaint, and the []esteem of the
father ministers will suffer considerably. besides, their stench and
vice do not render this diversion desirable.
. when
they are sent with a message to any place, one must very patiently
await some notable failure caused ordinarily by their natural sloth and
laziness.
sicut acetum dentibus, et fumus oculis, sic piger his qui
miserunt illum (proverbs, x, ). []
. i do not believe that i should omit mention, saltem
per transenam, of a matter very worthy of
consideration—namely, that if god chooses to chastise the
flourishing christianity of these islands for our and their sins, by
placing it in the hands of indians ordained as priests (as appears
about to threaten us very soon), if god do not apply a remedy, what
abominations will not follow! for to declare that they will change
their customs and the aforesaid vices is impossible. on the
contrary, their arrogance will grow worse with exaltation to so sublime
an estate; their cupidity with power will be better fed; their
laziness, with the lack of necessity; and their vanity, with the
applause that they would wish to have, for they would desire to be
served by those whom they would in another estate respect and obey; and
the villages would suffer from the curse mentioned in isaiah xxiv, ,
sicut populus, sic sacerdos. for the indian who is
ordained does not become a priest because it is the calling that
conduces to the most perfect estate, but because of the great and almost infinite
advantage that comes to him with the new estate that he chooses. how
much it differs from being a father cura, to be a baguntao or
sexton! from paying tribute, to being paid a stipend! from going to the
[compulsory] cutting of timber, to being served in it! from rowing in a
banca, to be rowed in it! that does not count with a spaniard, who, if
he become a cleric, often gives up an office as alcalde-mayor, captain,
or general, with many other comforts in his native place, while []his house
is exalted above all the nation of the indians. let one contrast this
with the vanity with which one who has been freed from the oar, or from an ax
in the cutting of timber, will give his hand to be kissed! what a
burden for the village will be the father, and mother, sister and
nieces ranked as ladies, when many other better women are pounding
rice! for if the indian is insolent and intolerable with but little
power, what will he be with so much superiority! and if the wedge from
the same log is so powerful, what will it be if driven by so
great authority! what plague of locusts can be compared to the
destruction that they would cause in the villages? what respect will the indians
have for him, seeing that he is of their color and nation—and
especially those who consider themselves as good, and even better
perhaps, than he who became a cura, while they do not become anything
better than bilango or servant? how severely the good cura will
chastise them, and for trifling offenses! as we see the indians do when
they act as gobernadorcillos of their villages for even a single
year—when the first thing that they do, and in which they most
delight, is immediately to place the picota in front of their houses, in
order to []apply lashes with the hangman’s strap
[penca]. what tyranny will the cura practice on them, such as
they are wont to practice if they have any power and authority! how
well the wedge of the same wood will force its way, without there being
any one to say to him, curita facis? [i.e.,
“dost thou play the cura?”]
. therefore, if any insurrection or mutiny should arise, how well
could it be arranged and prepared, if the cura entered also into the dance, as he
is also an indian and interested? for, in all the insurrections that
have occurred in these islands, respect for the father ministers has
been of great importance; but the very opposite would have happened if
these were indians. then in the frequent carousals and feasts of which
they are so fond, and on which their vanity and their chieftainship are
founded, without any doubt there would be great indecency; for the cura
would be very tender of conscience who would not pledge them in their
cups. in that and other temptations would happen what lucian relates in
the second of his dialogues.
. a noble youth had a very beautiful and gentle female kitten,
which he esteemed so highly that he begged the goddess venus to change
it into a beautiful maiden, in order that he might marry her. the
goddess did so. thereupon, the youth immediately arranged the wedding, to which he
invited the best people of the city. while, then, the bride was richly
adorned with jewels and surrounded []by many other women, and the guests, a mouse happened
to appear, and began to approach them in order to eat some crumbs of
bread which were scattered about. the bride saw it, and, without power
to control herself, ran after the mouse throughout the length of the
hall, and the guests were unable to restrain her. the groom was
ashamed, and said, “gentlemen, your pardon; for this girl was
formerly a cat, and will always have the habits and bad traits of that
animal.”
. i believe that the same thing would happen with the indians, even when
they belong to the caciques or nobility; for it is incredible that they
can strip themselves of the peculiarities of their nature. i at least
do not believe it at present, although god our lord can very easily do
it, for he is the one who raises up sons of abraham from the stones.
but we must not ask for miracles needlessly, but allow the indian to
remain an indian, and go to his labor as before. if it is desired to
prepare them for the high ministry of the priesthood, it is advisable
to test them in the offices of alcaldes-mayor, captains, regidors, and
councilors; for it appears to me that there is no one who can say that
these said offices are greater and of higher rank and dignity []than the
priesthood, at least where the inquisition exists. then, if they
conduct themselves well in the said employments, they can be given the
management of the body and blood of jesus christ our lord; and then one
can say with reason: quia in pauca fuisti fidelis supra
multa te constituam. for, as the church teaches us through the mouths of
the holy fathers, the dignity of the priesthood is so great that that
of the kings or emperors of the world cannot compare with it. thus says
st. ignatius the martyr in his epistle to smyrna, chapter x, sacerdotium est apex bonorum omnium, quæ sunt in
hominibus. st. ambrose, in chapter  of his book 
de dignitate sacerdotum says so still more []clearly. father molina has considerable to say on
this in the first treatise of his libro de sacerdotes
[i.e., “book of priests”] as has father
señeri in his cura instruido
[i.e., “the cura instructed”].
. then is it possible that, even though they are catholics and
faithful sons of the church, we must exalt to so lofty an estate men
against whom there would be so many complaints if they became
alférezes of a company in the regiment of manila? can the sacred
habit of st. peter, which we religious venerate as that of the greatest
dignity, and to which we yield the most honorable place—which, as
said []the patriarch of antiochia to the emperor of china, is
the first rank and order of the church—be obliged not to
experience disgust at such low creatures? i do not know in what it
[i.e., the proposal to ordain indians] can consist, unless it be
that in it is realized the vision that the said st. peter had in
cesarea when the sheet was let down from heaven filled with toads and
serpents, and a voice commanded him to eat without disgust—as is
read in chapter x of the acts of the apostles. for although it
signified the calling of heathendom, it must not be understood in moral
things of the barbarous and mean nature of some peoples that compose
that heathendom, in order to constitute the ecclesiastic hierarchy. when i come
to discuss this matter, i find no end, and i find that we can only say:
domine adauge [nobis] 
fidem (luke [x]vii, []). []
. it is also a fact that the sacred canons do not demand from
those who are ordained more than an honorable life and example, and a
sufficient knowledge. then, in order to dispense the spurious and
legitimate
and the mestizos, there is a brief of gregory xiii which begins
“nuper ad nos relatum est,” issued at roma, january , one
thousand five hundred and seventy-five. for all that, i regard them
[i.e., indians as priests] as irregular, not only for the
reasons given and stated above, but also because they lack the
ecclesiastical and priestly mental ability, and the prudence necessary;
and without these all the rest serves as almost nothing, as pedro
urceolo sang with graceful elegance in his “epigrams:”
sis licet ingenuus clarisque parentibus ortus;
esse tamen vel sic bestia magna potes.
adde docus patriæ et claros tibi sume
propinquos;
esse tamen vel sic bestia magna potes.
sint tibi divitæ sit larga et munda supellex;
esse tamen vel sic bestia magna potes.
denique, quidquid eris, nisi sit prudentia tecum;
magna quidem dico, bestia semper eris.
. may god our lord preserve your grace for the many years of my
desire. manila, june , one []thousand seven hundred and twenty. your humble
servant, who kisses your hand,
fray gaspar de san
agustin []
[on a loose paper inserted in the copy of this letter owned by the
museo-biblioteca de ultramar (which as stated
above, is unsigned), which was formerly owned by the well known spanish
scholar pascual de gayangos, is the following: “according to
paragraphs [of this letter] which paterno inserted in his work la antigua civilizacion de filipinos (madrid, ), p. ,
this letter must have been written by father fray gaspar de san
agustín; and according to sinibaldo mas, who inserts entire
passages from this ms. in his informe sobre el estado de
filipinas en , i, pp. –, and attributes it to father
gaspar.” paterno has not had access to the document itself, but
has used mas.]
[subjoined to the letter is the following, the origin of which we
cannot account for, but which indicates the wide circulation that the
letter must have had.]
questions of father pedro murillo [velarde] of the society of jesus
. what is the indian? reply—the lowest degree of
rational animal. question—how many and what are his
peculiarities? reply—twenty-one, as follows:
pride
without honor.
friend
without loyalty.
a drunkard
without satiety.
compassionate
without mercy.
reserved
without secrecy. []
long-suffering
without patience.
cowardly
without fear.
bold
without resolution.
obedient
without submissiveness.
one who practices austerities
without suffering.
bashful
without sense of honor.
virtuous
without mortification.
clever
without capacity.
civilized
without politeness.
astute
without sagacity.
merciful
without pity.
modest
without shame.
revengeful
without valor.
poor
without corresponding [mode of life].
rich
without economy.
lazy
without negligence.
laus deo.
résumé of the entire letter by
the said
father murillo
. the filipino indian is the embryo of nature and the offspring
of grossness. he does not feel an insult or show gratitude for a
kindness. his continual habitation is the kitchen; and the smoke that
harms all of us serves him as the most refreshing []breeze. if the
indian has morisqueta and salt, he gives himself no concern, though it
rain thunder and lightning, and the sky fall. he is much given to
lying, theft, and laziness. in the confessional he is a maze [embolismo] of contradictions, now denying proofs and now
affirming impossible things. now he plays the part of a devout pilgrim
over rough roads and through the deepest rivers, in order to hear mass
on a workday at a shrine ten or twelve leguas away; while it is
necessary to use violence to get him to hear mass on sunday in his
parish church. they are impious in their necessities with the father,
but liberal and charitable to their guests, even when they do not know
them; and through that they are greatly disappointed. at the same time
they are humble and proud; bold and atrocious, but cowardly and
pusillanimous; compassionate and cruel; slothful and lazy, and
diligent; careful and negligent in their own affairs; very dull and
foolish for good things, but very clever and intelligent in rogueries.
he who has most to do with them knows them least. their greatest
diversion is cock-fighting, and they love their cocks more than their
wives and children. they are more ready to believe any of their old
people than even an apostolic preacher. they resemble 
mellizas, in their vices and opposite virtues. in lying
alone, is no contradiction found in them; for one does not know when
they are not lying, whether they are telling the truth by mistake. one
indian does not resemble another indian, or even himself. if they are
given one thing, they immediately ask for another. they never fail to deceive,
unless it []crosses their own interest. in their suits,
they are like flies on the food, who never quit it, however much they
be brushed away. finally, there is no fixed rule by which to construe
them; a new syntax is necessary for each one; and, as they are all
anomalous, the most intelligent man would be distracted if he tried to
define them. farewell.
[delgado has the following interesting chapter (pp. – of
his historia) on this letter, which it is judged
advisable to present at this place.]
chapter vii
some considerations concerning the matter in father gaspar de san
agustín’s letter
i confess that i read this letter, in which the reverend author
criticises the customs and dispositions of the natives of filipinas,
some years ago. but i read it as i am wont to read other letters, for
diversion and amusement, without thinking much about its artfulness,
and i was delighted with its erudition. however, when i afterward
considered its contents with some degree of thought, i saw that it
brought forward, in its whole length, no solid proof of what it tries
to make one believe; and it appeared to me a hyperbolical criticism
from the very beginning. on that account i resolved to make a few brief
commentaries on the matter in the letter, both for the consolation of
those whom our lord may call to these missions, and so that it may be
understood that at times sadness and melancholy are accustomed to
heighten things, making giants out of pygmies—all the more, if a
relish for revery and grumbling be joined with a tendency to
exaggeration and with []figures of speech corresponding thereto.
consequently, i am surprised that the reverend annalist or chronicler
[i.e., san antonio] of the seraphic province of san gregorio
praises this letter, saying that it is worth printing, since its author
has penetrated as far as one may penetrate into the characters of the
natives of these islands. and yet the author confesses that it is as
difficult to define their nature as are the eight impossible things
which are recounted there. that seems to me a fine hyperbole.
from the above one can see that, as he commenced this letter by
affirming a hyperbole with eight hyperboles, it is not surprising that
i called it hyperbolical; and especially if all the hyperboles that it
contains from its beginning to its end be enumerated. but ere i begin
to express my opinion i would like to sum up two contradictory and
opposite expressions that i find in these authors. the reverend father
fray gaspar says of the indians, in his letter, that the difficulty of
knowing the indians lies not in the individual but in the race, for, if
one be known, all are known.
father pedro murillo says, in his approbation of the 
cronicas, that “there is no fixed rule by which []to construe
the indians; for each one needs a new syntax, all being anomalous. with
the indians the argument does not conclude by induction, since no one
[]is
like to himself; for, in the short circuit of a day, he changes into
more colors than a chameleon, takes more shapes than a proteus, and has
more movements []than a euripus. he who has most to do with them,
knows them least. in short, they are an aggregate of contrarieties, and
the best logician cannot reconcile them. they are an obscure and
confused chaos, in which no species can be perceived and no points of
exactness distinguished.” all these terms considered one by one,
compose a very exaggerated hyperbole, in which this author showed his
great erudition and little experience, for he only ministered in a few
missions, and for a short time. for during most of the time while he
lived in these islands he did not leave the professor’s chair,
except for a short time; and all that he tells of his journey to and
travels among the visayas was learned in passing and hastily, in
company with the provincial who visited those missions. there he
obtained very little light on the character and temperament of the
indians, as he had no dealings with them as one settled among them.
and, just as in this expression he opposes himself without much reason
to the reverend father fray gaspar, who after forty years of ministry,
affirms that the indians are well designated by the greek word 
monopantas—a term which was given to a certain people by a
critic, as they were all similar and homogeneous—so also when he
affirms that all are anomalous and heterogeneous because they cannot
all be constructed in one and the same syntax, does he go beyond the
credence that can be given to his ingenious hyperboles. the experience
that the said father murillo could have is of the indians []who go about in
manila and its environs, who are interpreters, servants in
accounting-rooms and secretarial offices, who are accustomed to deal
with spaniards of all kinds, with creoles, mestizos, sangleys, and
other kinds of people who assemble there for trade. they have learned
fraud and deceit, as well as the bad morals and propensities of all and
every one of them. as is seen, one cannot judge of a whole
nation—and much less of all the nations of the islands, who are
diverse and distinct in genius and customs by the cases of these
indians who speak spanish. and taking into account so great diversity,
i affirm that it is impossible to find a definition that admits and
includes all of them. for these persons whom i have mentioned, reared
among so many classes, and among people so heterogeneous, and who are
imbued with customs so diverse, cannot form rules by which to explain
their own nation, much less by which to define the other nations.
now if the statements of authors in regard to physical or moral
matters are so at variance that we can say that each author has a
different opinion—as says the proverb, quot capita,
tot sententiæ—and if thus far no ground and certain
point has been found at which the understanding may stop, how is it
strange that they do not find, in order to describe indians with
customs so unusual and artificial as have those of manila, a compound
idea made up of all that they have learned from the spaniard, both good
and evil; all that they have learned from the guachinango; and what they have
learned from the mestizo, []the sangley, the moro, the malabar, the cafre,
and all the other people with whom they have intercourse and with whom
they trade? granting this to be true, it appears that the definition of
father murillo fits these spanish-speaking indians, but not the others,
who have not had any intercourse with diverse classes of people. on
this account it seems to me that father fray gaspar hit the definition
exactly, when he said in his letter that the asiatic indians of
filipinas are almost the same as all the people of the nations of
eastern india, in what concerns their genius, disposition, and
inclination; and are not distinguished one from another except in their
rites, clothing, and languages. i add, in what regards their abilities
and capacities—which are so good, and in general so well
inclined—that i believe that if children, either boys or girls,
were taken from filipinas to viscaya or to castilla, the natives [of
those countries] would not distinguish them from the vizcainos,
castilians, or mountaineers. for their vices are not due so much to
their nature, as to their bad rearing and education; and they are
easily instructed both in the evil and in the good. and notwithstanding
what father fray gaspar, father murillo, and fray juan [francisco] de
san antonio have said, they would have been more successful had they
not said, with exaggeration, that it would be impossible to
write everything that they have observed of the indians, on all the
paper that is found in china. that is a hyperbole that transcends all
faith. thus does he continue in all that he says; and he affirms,
further, that it surpasses all that we can touch with the hands or see
with the eyes. hence from the beginning we can state those two rules of
law: semel []malus, semper præsumitur malus; and
the other, malum ex quocumque defectu....
what mystery is there in the customs and genius of the indians that
should make them so deep and inscrutable that we cannot reach them,
sound them, and explain them? since they are indians like all the rest
of the people of asia, without there being more or less in them.
therefore, “these profundities, this intricate, confused chaos,
this aggregate of contrarieties, this maze of contradictions, are a
collection of rhetorical locutions or tropes invented in order to
exaggerate and to use hyperboles in what of itself has no
mystery—these definitions remaining purely in the manner of
speech, or of the conception, of their authors; or perhaps in a mere
misapprehension formed by a critical, melancholy, or affected
genius.
but since in this letter, the evil propensities of the indians, both
men and lads, who act as servants, are set down in detail, let us see
on the other hand, somewhat of the good that the indians possess. for
one should not write and consider only the evil, and omit as fitting
all the good, in order thereby to make the object more detestable. for,
as says a mystical writer, we must not possess the nature of the
dung-beetle, which goes always to the dungheap, but that of the bee,
which always seeks out the sweet and pleasant. let us see what father
murillo says of the good: “they are most clever in any handiwork,
not in inventing but in imitating what they see. they are most
beautiful writers; and there are many tailors and barbers among them.
they are excellent embroiderers, painters, goldsmiths, and engravers,
[]whose
burin has not the like in all the indias (and i was even about to pass
farther if shame did not restrain me), as is seen clearly in the many
good engravings that they make daily. they are good sculptors, gilders,
and carpenters. they make the water craft of these islands, the
galleys, pataches, and ships of the acapulco line. they act as sailors,
artillery-men, and divers; for there is scarce an indian who cannot
swim excellently. they are the under-pilots of these seas. they are
very expert in making bejuquillos, which are gold chains of a very delicate and
exquisite workmanship. they make hats, petates or
rugs, and mats, from palm-leaves, rattan, and nito, which are very beautiful, and
embroidered with various kinds of flowers and figures. they are
remarkable mechanics and puppet-showmen, and they make complicated
mechanisms which, by means of figures, go through various motions with
propriety and accuracy. there are some jewelers. they make powder, and
cast swivel-guns, cannon, and bells. i have seen them make guns as fine
as those of europa. there are three printing houses in manila, and all
have indian workmen. they have great ability in music. there is no
village however small, that has not its suitable band of musicians for
the services of the church. they have excellent voices—sopranos,
contraltos, tenors, and basses. almost all of them can play the harp,
and there are many []violinists, rebeck, oboe, and flute players.
the most remarkable thing is, that not only do those whose trade it is
make those instruments; but various indians make guitars, flutes,
harps, and violins, for pleasure, with their bolos and machetes. and by
the mere seeing those instruments played, they learn them almost
without any teaching; and the same thing occurs in other things. on
this account it is said that the indians have their understanding in
their eyes, since they imitate whatever they see, by another like
it.” this is what father murillo says; but he left the most
important things in the inkhorn. i will add them here, as i have heard
them affirmed many times by the spaniards in cavite, namely: who are
the men who convey and conduct the ships and galleons from acapulco and
other kingdoms? is it the spaniards? ask that of the pilots, masters,
and boatswains, and they will all affirm that this great and
inestimable good is due to the indian alone. (here is indeed where a
hyperbole will fit exactly.) besides this, who are the people who
support us in these lands and those who furnish us food? perhaps the
spaniards dig, harvest, and plant throughout the islands? of a surety,
no; for when they arrive at manila, they are all gentlemen. the indians
are the ones who plow the lands, who sow the rice, who keep it clear
[of weeds], who tend it, who harvest it, who thrash it out with their
feet—and not only the rice which is consumed in manila, but that
throughout the filipinas—and there is no one in all the islands
who can deny me that. besides this, who cares for the cattle-ranches?
the spaniards? certainly not. the indians are the ones who care for,
and manage and tend the sheep and cattle by which []the spaniards are
supported. who rears the swine? is it not the same indians? who
cultivates the fruits—the bananas, cacao, and all the other
fruits of the earth? of which there is always abundance in the islands,
unless unfavorable weather, locusts, or some other accident cause their
loss? who provide manila and the spaniards with oil? is it not the poor
visayan indians, who bring it in their vessels annually? who furnishes
so great profit to the spaniards in manila with the balate and sigay; and who
buys these products very cheaply from the wretched indians, and resell
them for double the sum to the pataches of the coast and to the
sangleys? who guide and convey us to the villages and missions, and
serve us as guides, sailors, and pilots? perhaps it is the spaniards?
no, it is the indians themselves, with their so exaggerated, magnified,
and heightened laziness. is this the thanks that we give them, when we
are conquering them in their own lands, and have made ourselves masters
in them, and are served by them almost as by slaves? we ought to give
god our lord many thanks, because he maintains us only through the
affection and by the useful labors of the indians in this land; and he
would perhaps have already driven us hence if it were not for this
usefulness of theirs, and for the salvation of the indians. []we also owe
many thanks to the indians, since god our lord sustains us in their
lands by their means; and because we would die of starvation if they
did not sustain us, provide us with food, serve us, and conduct us
through the islands with so much love and security that they would all
first perish before the father in whatever perils arise.
these and many other like things were overlooked by father murillo,
who was enraptured by their music, engraving, and rugs. by the
aforesaid, one will see with how little truth the statement is printed
that the indians are the greatest enemies that the father ministers
have; for certainly all the above could not be reconciled with such a
proposition. on the contrary, it must be said that the indians are
those who defend us from our enemies; for, in the presidios, who are
the soldiers, who sail in the war fleets, who are in the vanguard in
war? could the spaniards, perchance, maintain themselves alone in this
country, if the indians did not aid in everything? little experience
and less reflection would he have who should propose such a thing.
therefore, these two things do not harmonize well, that those who hate
us should defend us, and that those who are our greatest enemies should
be the ones to maintain and support us. nor is it to be wondered at
that there have been insurrections on several occasions; these,
perhaps, have not arisen because the indians were ill-disposed to the
spaniards; but, on the contrary, we know that many of them have been
caused by the cruelty, wickedness, and tyranny of some alcalde-mayor
and other spaniards who, having been elevated from low beginnings, try
to become gods and kings in the provinces, tyrannizing over the indians
[]and
their possessions. this is often the cause of the insurrections. would
that i could mention some especial cases in this matter. however, i do
not care to dip my pen in blood, and write tragedies instead of
history. for, although i could say more, the authority and arrogance
that every spaniard assumes upon his arrival in this country is
incredible. []
 juan josé delgado was
a native of cadiz; the time of his birth is not known. in  he left
spain for filipinas, and perhaps remained for some time in mexico: it
is probable that he reached filipinas as early as . he seems to
have spent most of his life in the visayan islands—sámar,
cebú, leyte, etc.—but to have visited most of the peoples
in the archipelago at some time or other. his historia
was written during the years –; the date of his death is
not known. see sketch of his life in the historia (manila,
), pp. x–xi.
 mas used the ms. of the museo-biblioteca de ultramar, which is wrongly dated.
see post, pp. –. of the letter itself he says (i,
“poblacion” p. ): “these paragraphs and other
ancient documents will show us ... how little the individuals who now
occupy us have changed since that time.”
 for instance, mas says (p.
): “here follows what the author of the celebrated work on the
philippines, called cronicas franciscanas [referring
to san antonio’s chronicas] says: ‘the
very reverend father, fray gaspar de san agustin, an augustinian from
madrid,’” etc. bowring makes this: “among the most
celebrated books on the philippines are the ‘cronicas
franciscanas’ by fr. gaspar de san agustin, an augustine monk of
madrid;” and following gives the impression that he makes the
selections directly from san agustin—a ridiculous error.
in regard to the word “monk” used by
bowring, that author is again in error, technically at least, an error
that is quite often met with in many works. as pointed out by rev. t.
c. middleton, o.s.a., in a letter dated december , , the only
regulars in the philippines who could rightfully be styled
“monks” were the benedictines. the members of the other
orders are “friars,” the equivalent of the spanish
“frailes.” the monks are strictly
cloistered. the friars appeared first in the thirteenth century, and do
not live a strictly cloistered life.
 m. reads on the outside
wrapper: “letter by fray gaspar de san agustin;” and the
heading of the letter is as follows: ”+ letter written by an aged
religious of philipinas to a friend in españa, who asked him as
to the nature and characteristics of the indian natives of these
islands.” d. reads: “letter written by the very reverend
father fray ... giving him an account ...”
 m. and d. read
“mathematical side;” and continuing d. reads “of the
double of the cube of the sphere.”
 i.e., “i was
with this generation for about forty years, and i said ‘these
people always err from the heart.’” m. omits the latin
phrase and reads in its place “and i have only learned that they
are almost incomprehensible.” d. reads as m. and then adds
“and therefore i shall only say,” followed by the latin
phrase.
 i.e., “he
himself knew our formation.” the last word of the latin phrase is
omitted in m.
 d. reads “excuse myself
from the burden and difficulty.”
 i.e., “it is
difficult to know man—a changeable and variable animal.” m.
gives only the first four words of this latin phrase.
 i.e., “i see
men as trees walking.”
 not set off into lines
in the ayer ms. a literal translation of the citation, which is rather
freely translated in the text, is: “spring makes me green;
burning summer, yellow; autumn, white; and chill winter, bald.”
m. omits all the quotation after the first three words; d. reads
“glaucumque” instead of “flavamque.” the poet mentioned by san agustin was a
welshman [n]by the name of john owen, or, according to
his latin name, joannis audoenus. he was born about , at armon,
wales, and died in london, in . he studied law at oxford, and
afterward became a teacher at various places. he imitated the epigrams
of martial, and his epigrammata were published first in three
books at london, in , but were later augmented by seven more books.
they were reprinted many times in various countries and even translated
into other languages—among the latter, into english, french, and
spanish (madrid, –). one of the best editions is that
printed at paris in .
 d. omits this last
phrase.
 m. omits the epigram. it is
the forty-seventh epigram of the twelfth book, and is translated thus
in henry g. bohn’s epigrams of martial (london, ):
“you are at once morose and agreeable, pleasing and repulsive. i
can neither live with you nor without you.” it has been several
times translated into english verse.
 i.e., “as many
opinions as persons.”
 from the greek words 
μονος, “one,”
“single,” and πας, “all;”
thus meaning, “homogeneous.”
 the monophysites held that
there was but one nature in christ. they were condemned at the fourth
general council held at chalcedon in , but the decision of that
council was a few years later set aside by an imperial encyclical
issued by the emperor basilicus. during the next century the
monophysites split up into many sects, and fought among themselves. the
monophysites still exist in armenia, egypt, syria, and mesopotamia; and
are represented by the armenian national church, the jacobite
christians of syria and mesopotamia, the coptic church, and the
abyssinian church. the schismatic christians of st. thomas are now
connected with the jacobites. see addis and arnold’s catholic
dictionary, pp. , .
 m. greatly abridges this
paragraph, among other things omitting all mention of the monophysites.
d. also omits the latter.
 at this point m. adds
“who are the true indians, so named from the river indus or from
indostan, for our indians are so by catachresis or misusage.”
 the title of the franciscan
juan de torquemada’s book, is as follows: ia
(–iiia) parte de los veynte y un
libros rituales y monarchia indiana con el origen y guerras de los
indios occidentales de sus poblaçones, descubrimiento,
conquista, conversion y otras cosas maravillosas de la misma tierra
(sevilla, ; in three parts).
 the title of antonio de
ramesal’s book is historia general de las indias
ocidentales, y particular, de la governacion de chiapa, y guatemala.
escrivese juntamente los principios de nuestro glorioso padre santo
domingo, y de las demas religiones (madrid, ).
remesal was born in allariz in galicia, and took
the dominican habit in salamanca, where he also became doctor of
theology. he was sent to central america in , and on his return
wrote his book. see moreri’s dictionaire, vii,
p. ; and hoefer’s nouvelle biographie
générale, xli, col. .
 see 
vol. viii, p. , note .
 bartolome (not
bernardino) de las casas, the great apostle of the indians. he first
went to the new world in  as a planter, became a dominican
religious in , and in  began to preach against the cruelty
inflicted on the indians by the spaniards, for the purpose of
alleviating their misfortunes, making numerous trips to spain. he
finally obtained from cárlos i the “new laws,” which
were so rigorous that an attempt to enforce them resulted in an
insurrection in peru under gonzalo pizarro, for an account of which see
pedro gutiérrez de santa clara’s historia de
las guerras civiles del peru, – (madrid,
–). he finally returned to spain for the last time, and
died after a few years in the dominican convent of valladolid. his
writings are many, and important. the reference in the text may be to
his brevissima relacion de la destruycion de las
indias (sevilla, ); or to his historia general de
las indias, which existed only in ms., until .
 see 
vol. xxix, p. , note . san agustin probably refers to his
virtudes del indio (?). palafox left many
writings, a number of which are of a controversial nature.
 in d.,
“taught.”
 in d.,
“collect.”
 m. and d. call these last
two peoples the “mogores” and the
“camarines.”
 baltasar gracian was born in
calatayud, aragon, in , and entered the society of jesus in .
he taught belles-lettres, philosophy, moral theology, and the holy
scriptures, and preached for several years. he was rector of the
college at taragona, catalonia, where he died december , . his
first book, el heroë, appeared in . the most
famous of his numerous works was his criticon, which
is probably the book referred to in the text. it is a sort of satire on
the vices and customs of the times; and in places reminds one of 
pilgrim’s progress. it was published in three parts, the
first in  at madrid, and the other two at huesca, in . most of
his works were published under his brother lorenzo’s name. his
talent in writing is vitiated by his affectation and other faults. see
ticknor’s history of spanish literature (new york, );
sommervogel’s bibliothèque;
moreri’s dictionaire, iv, p. ; and
hoefer’s nouvelle biographie
générale, xxi, cols. , .
 m. and d. add “for
most of the defects and vices of these indians are common, on account
of the,” and continue as above.
 this passage is badly
confused in the three copies. the transcriber of m. has wrongly made
the viviendo acephalos of the ayer copy, 
bebiendo à sed [i.e., drinking when thirsty?] which
hardly makes sense. that ms. continues, “and in confused
anarchy,” which is better than the ayer reading. d. reads
“who besides having been living as the greatest barbarians,
leaderless, and in confused anarchy.”
 both m. and d. omit the
passage referring to the influence and dominion of the moon. m. gives
the names as “beyerlinhe,” and d. as
“bayarlinch.”
laurentius beyerlinck was a noted flemish savant
and litterateur. he was born at antwerp in , and, after studying in
that city with the jesuits, went to louvain, where he enjoyed a
benefice until . in that year he was recalled to antwerp to become
head of the seminary, and soon afterward obtained a canonry and then an
archdeaconry there. his death occurred in antwerp june , , at the
age of forty-nine. notwithstanding his short life and his religious
labors, he wrote a surprising amount. an edition of his 
magnum theatrum vitæ humanæ appeared in london, in
eight volumes, in . see moreri’s 
dictionaire.
 “when they grow
delirious in their sickness, they are never frantic, but calm.”
(mas, p. .)
 m. and d. add here
“slow.”
 in the ayer ms.
“serithnophagos.” d. makes it
“ictiófagos,” which reading we have adopted; and m.
omits the phrase.
 the abundance of fish is one
of the means by which nature aids their necessities. in the rainy
season, all the creeks and ravines are full of water and fish. the very
rice fields swarm with eels, shrimps, and a species of fish called 
dalag, which is about two palmos long and more than two inches
thick. it is especially interesting for an european to see a crowd of
people in the month of october on the high-road, busily fishing in the
sowed fields. as the rice is now grown, it is impossible to see the
water that bathes [n]and wets its roots, and consequently, when
the hooks are drawn out with fish two palmos long on them, it appears
to be enchantment, or the inconsequential things of a dream. as the
water dries up, the fish, still living, gather down in toward the
hollows where there is yet some water; and they are there caught with
the hand, or killed with clubs.
“the indians have three meals [per day]:
breakfast, dinner, and supper. these three meals consist of rice boiled
in water but dry like the rice cooked in the valencian style, or like
the turkish pilao. in addition they eat a trifle of fresh or
salt fish, some sort of meat stew, camotes, etc.; but rarely do they
have more than two different dishes, unless it is the occasion of a
banquet. in the dearest provinces, the [expense of] common food cannot
be estimated at more than one-half real of silver per day per adult;
and since the daily wage that they earn is at least one-half real and
their food, it results that this race have great opportunity to save
and acquire considerable wealth. but their vices, their few
necessities, and their disposition, which is indifferent and lacking in
foresight, does not allow them to better the condition of their birth;
and they remain in the wake of the mestizos, who are always the wealthy
people of the villages.” (mas, pp. , .)
 mas says (p. ): “it
is not easy for anyone to explain them, so long as he tries to consider
these men equal to the europeans.”
 this sentence is omitted in
m. and d.
 all the matter above between
the word “father” and this point is lacking in m.
 the solidus was a coin of
the roman empire, which was at first called “aureus,” and
worth about twenty-five denarii, but afterward reduced to about
one-half that value. it is used in the same manner as
“farthing” or “cent” would be in english.
 these passages are
translated as follows in the douay version of the bible:
. many have looked upon a thing lent as a thing
found, and have given trouble to them that helped them.
. till they receive, they kiss the hands of the
lender, and in promise they humble their voice.
. but when they should repay, they will ask time,
and will return tedious and murmuring words, and will complain of the
time:
. and if he be able to pay, he will stand off, he
will scarce pay one-half, and will count it as if he had found it:
. but if not, he will defraud him of his money,
and he shall get him for an enemy without cause:
. and he will pay him with reproaches and curses,
and instead of honour and good turn will repay him injuries.
 i.e., “scarce
does he return the half.”
 in the douay version:
“the sinner shall borrow and not pay again;” being only
one-half the verse. m. omits the reference, but gives the passage.
 delgado (historia, p.
) commenting on this passage says: “i find noted many actions
of the indian boys who serve in the houses and convents; and all are
ridiculous things which we ourselves did in our own country when we
were boys like them.” he objects to san agustin’s quotation
from scripture on the ground that it is too general, and that those
words were not written merely for them. “if twenty cases have
been experienced where the indian borrower has failed to return what he
borrowed, it cannot be said that the entire tagálog nation are
sinners, let alone other nations, which may not have been seen. such a
supposition is illogical.”
 the paragraph structure of
m. and d. differs from our text in the above two paragraphs, and in
other places throughout this letter; and the paragraphs are also
unnumbered in both of these versions. the copy owned by eduardo
navarro, o.s.a., valladolid, agrees with the ayer ms. in having
numbered paragraphs, but the numbering is not in all cases the
same.
 at this point the following
paragraphs which are not contained in either the ayer ms. or in d.
occur. [n]
“they think that it is a fine thing to meddle
and take part in things where they are not invited. consequently, if
any of ours wishes to attend to any bodily necessity, not fit to
mention, even when he least wishes it, there comes an indian before or
behind him even though he leave the banca and seek the most retired
spot to do what no other can do for him.
“they cruelly treat the animals that serve
them, and the danger of losing them does not move them to the contrary.
thus following the very opposite of st. paul’s command: non alligavis vos bobi trituranti [i.e., “thou
shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn,”—i tim.
v, , a quotation from deut. xxv, ], they tie the poor cow or carabao
to a post after it has worked all day; and, if it is a horse, they feed
it without removing bit or bridle. and if they have to look after their
carabao it must be on condition of their being atop of it while it
moves from place to place; and on the road they make sores on its
buttocks.”
that the indian does not shut a door that he has
opened, etc.; delgado says (p. ): “this is done by boys, and
is common in our own country. it is not because of laziness, but
perchance, for lack of attention, or the liveliness or mischievousness
of boys, in which the aged and prudent indians cannot be
included.” he has often seen the carpenters carefully collect
their tools and take them away, so that they should not be lost. san
agustin’s criticism is too general and has proceeded from what he
has experienced in a few foolish lads.
 “this,” says
delgado (p. ) “is peculiar only to some workmen, and not to
all the nations of these islands, and the same thing happens also in
our own country among cobblers, tailors, and other deceitful and tricky
workmen.”
mas comments as follows (pp. , ): “there
is no tailor, cobbler, or workman of any kind, who does not begin by
begging money when any work is ordered. if he is a carpenter, he needs
the money in order to buy lumber; if a laundryman, to buy soap. this is
not for lack of confidence in receiving their pay, for the same thing
happens with those who have the best credit, with the cura of the
village, and even with the captain-general himself. it consists,
firstly, in the fact that the majority have no money, because of their
dissipation; and secondly, because they are sure that after they have
received a part of their price, their customer will not go to another
house, and that he will wait for the workman as long as he wishes
(which is usually as long as what he has collected lasts), and that
then the customer will have to take the work in the way in which it is
delivered to him.”
 m. reads, “in the
region of the genitals;” and d., “ears.”
 delgado says of this:
“let us give thanks to god that our parents reared us in
civilized ways; for if they had not, we would do the same. but how many
blows and lashes we had to take to become so! and indeed it must be
noted that it is not so much because of rudeness that the indian
scratches himself, or does other things somewhat more indecent and
coarse, as has happened to me at times when with them; but because of a
sort of fear or respect, that so confuses them that they do not know at
times what they are doing, or even what they are saying.” the
criticism, like others of san agustin, is too sweeping. delgado has not
noticed this among the visayans, although he has noted it among the
tagálogs. because some women are coarse, coarseness cannot be
charged in general upon all the women of the islands.
 d. reads “and as yet
they have not gotten over the difficulty of folding a cloak with the
right side in.”
 m. and d. read “make
gestures of wonder.”
 “i have observed that
they are very stupid in making anything when one tries to give them
instructions, but not when one allows them to work in their own manner.
for example, one desires to have the cork which has slipped down into a
bottle drawn. [n]the best thing to say then, is ‘see
here, get this cork out without breaking the bottle. take care!’
thereupon the indian goes and fixes it as well as he can. once i asked
an old woman for some fire to light my cigar. there were many live
coals on the ground remaining from a fire. she took a handful of earth
in her palm, and atop of that placed a coal which she presented to me.
in this way they do things that at times show sufficient ingenuity and
skill, especially with bamboo and rattan. general alava declared that
their brains were in their hands.” (mas, pp. , .)
 these last six words are
lacking in m. this refers to the well-known myth of orpheus and
eurydice. by auresteo, san agustin means aristæus, probably an
early greek poet, but deified as a beneficent god and worshiped in
various parts of greece and other places. he was said to be the son of
apollo and the thessalian nymph cyrene, and was reared by hermes, who
made him immortal; although he is also sometimes called the son of
urana and gæa. his connection with the orpheus myth was probably
an innovation of virgil (georgics, iv, ll. –) who
tells how he caused the death of eurydice, who was killed by a serpent
while fleeing from his persecutions. see smith’s dictionary of
greek and roman biography and mythology, and seyffert’s 
dictionary of classical antiquities (london, ).
“it is still the custom in many of the
churches for the men to take their positions in the center toward the
upper part, and the women in the lower half.” (mas, p. .)
 the last two words are
missing in m. and d.
curiosity, says delgado (p. ) and impertinence
is a characteristic of all the peoples of asia.
“they have asked me often as to my employment
or occupation, my manner of living, and the amount of my pay. this
proceeds [n]from the tolerance and benevolence that
they generally find in the spaniards.” (mas, p. .)
 this argues only their
wildness and lack of civilization, says delgado (pp. , ), and
they ought to be taught civilized manners by their masters, or at least
by the missionaries. the spanish houses generally have porters, so that
the indians cannot penetrate into the most retired apartment. it may
happen at times in manila, or in some of the missions; but it is not
the custom in the visayas, or in the province of tagálos.
delgado has never had such a thing happen to him, for the indians have
always announced their arrival before entering.
 “this proves the
severity with which they are treated by their own people, and the
kindness that they experience in us.” (mas, p. .)
 “thank god,”
says delgado (p. ) “that i find the prognosis above that says
‘they are great sleepers’ absolutely false.”
 this sentence is lacking in
m. and d.
 in d., “where the
women go.”
“they do this because they are humored like
children in the convents.” (mas, p. .)
 m. and d. omit “and
perukes.”
 literally, “the flower
of the saints,” perhaps alluding to some book of lives of saints,
thus entitled. m. has “the isles of the saints.”
 m. and d. omit the last
three words.
 “nearly all the
villages have theaters for cock-fighting. before fighting, some very
sharp knives are fastened to the spurs so that one or the other is
killed at the first meeting. on this account the cockfight does not
offer the interest or sport that it does in españa and other
places, and it occupies the attention of these people solely as a means
of winning or losing money. in reality, a cockpit is a house of play.
before the two fowls are placed in attitude of fight, the bets are
placed on two spindles. one of them generally offers a great sum in
favor of the black cock, while others bet on the white one, until the
sum is matched. the leading cocks are loosed and one of them is killed
in less than two minutes. this is in fact a ‘monte,’ as is
playing the races or betting on the jack [at cards]. the filipinos, by
nature idlers and greedy, are passionately fond of play, for they
consider it an excellent and unique way of getting money without
working; and they gather like flies to these pernicious places, in
order to spend what they have and what they can succeed in borrowing or
robbing, abandoning their most sacred and peremptory obligations. [n]furthermore, they pass many hours, both in
their houses and in the cockpit, teaching a cock how to fight and to
have no fear of the people; and examining the other cocks, in order to
ascertain by certain rules and marks which will triumph and which will
succumb. there is nothing more commonly seen even in the very streets
of manila itself, than a man squatted down on his heels with one of
these fowls, in order that it might become accustomed to the noise, so
that it might not grow confused or become frightened in the pit. there
are men who take heed of nothing else or have other thought during the
day than of their cocks.
“the government authorizes these wretched
gatherings, not only on sundays, but also on thursdays or fair-days,
which are not few, and has rented out the right of opening these
theaters. last year this department produced about , pesos
fuertes. a sad recourse which must have occasioned and will occasion so
many tears, crimes, and punishments, since so much vagabondage is
thereby caused. there are often serious quarrels, which two judges of
the theater end by deciding according to the laws. when any one of the
contestants does not conform to the sentence, he has recourse to the
alcalde, who takes the evidences in regard to the matter; and these
quarrels generally go on appeal to the superintendency and to the upper
litigious assembly. these causes are judged according to existing
instructions, which were written in america.
“the indians are also very fond of cards.
they play brisca, burro (which is distinct from that of españa),
and panguingui, which is a game played very commonly by the
chinese. in this occupation they often pass all the night until dawn;
and the cabezas de barangay lose the tributes of their subjects, and
they have to go immediately to jail, or take to the mountain.
“they generally play duplo at their
parties—a game consisting in arithmetical combinations—and
also our game of forfeits.” (mas, pp. –.)
 delgado (p. ) admits that
the youthful servants do break dishes, but they are cheap. “there
are indians in manila who make and repair watches and other delicate
baubles, and do not break them. consequently, not only can they handle
bamboo, rattan, nipa, and bolos, but also other things; and they make
and handle them lovingly.”
“this is because they are generally heedless,
sometimes through stupidity, and at other times because they are
thinking of their sweetheart, or of something else, instead of what
they are doing. when the filipino drops a dish, the spaniard says
nothing, or is satisfied by calling him only a brute, animal, or
savage; while in his own home, he would not escape without some
buffets, which have more effect on this race than would the philippics
of cicero.” (mas, p. .)
 “the father must have
said this of the country people, or of those who are servants; for
among those who devote themselves to the arts there are some who turn
out work very delicate and difficult to execute, even in
europa—as, for instance, the textiles and embroidery of
piña, and the gold chains or bejuquillos, etc.” (mas, pp.
 d. adds “or [rather]
not eating.” this incident is related in the second part of don
quixote, chapter xlvii.
 this sentence is omitted in
m. the following is there a question, “and what shall we say if
they bring four eggs?”
 a dominican and the
assistant of archbishop pardo, who became acting archbishop after the
death of the latter. see ferrando’s historia de los
pp. dominicos, vi, p. cxlvii; and our vol.
xxxix, “the pardo controversy.”
 don fernando valenzuela, a
grandee of spain, marquis of san bartolomé de los pinales and of
villasierra, chief master of the horse, gentleman of the chamber, etc.,
the favorite of the mother of carlos ii of spain, mariana of austria
(with whom his connection was said to be dishonorable), was, as a
youth, page to the duke of infantado. he went to rome with the duke,
who was appointed ambassador to the papal court. on his return he
gained the favor of the queen’s confessor the german jesuit
nitard, who introduced him into court circles. his rise to favor was
rapid, for he was talented and handsome. after the downfall of nitard,
he gained entire ascendancy over the weak queen, who showered honors
upon him. finally he was exiled to the philippines (), through the
efforts of don juan of austria, uncle of the king, and was imprisoned
in the fort of cavite where he landed march , . on the death of
don juan, the first act of the queen was to have valenzuela freed from
his exile, and a special ship was sent to the philippines to take him
to spain. [n]it is reported, however, that he died in
mexico, while on his way to spain, from the kick of a horse. he built
the bridge over the manzanares at toledo, at the cost of one million
ducats. see harrison’s history of spain (boston, );
montero y vidal, i, p. ; and concepción, hist.
de philipinas, vii, pp. –. a document in ventura del
arco’s ms. collection (vol. iii)—which is a compilation
from original documents in the real academia de la historia,
madrid—gives an account of the reception accorded to valenzuela
on his arrival at the philippines, and some details of his life
there.
 m. reads “rice in the
husk.”
 m. and d. add
“pesos.”
 delgado says (p. ):
“if they had as much understanding as the reverend father, they
would not do it.” the cases cited prove nothing general, since
they are only particular cases. “but it must be borne in mind
that all the indians of these islands are very poor, and dress very
poorly and live meanly; and when they see that the spaniards, and
especially these bishops and marquises, bear themselves with so great
ostentation, and are so free and magnanimous and liberal, as their
nobility demands, some indians of little capacity are emboldened to beg
from them things that they ought not; for they think that such men will
never remain poor even though they give much.” we beg god often
for things out of season.
“this is because they know beforehand that
they ask nonsense, and assume that their demand will not be granted,
but they only are trying to see whether it might be met by any chance;
for they are accustomed to the extreme goodness of the spaniards, and
do not fear making them angry by an absurd demand.” (mas,
pp. , .)
 m. and d. read:
“although the sangleys cheat them, as if they were simpletons,
and they are satisfied to be cheated by them.”
delgado says (p. ): “this i absolutely
deny, for i have more than once seen that after the indians have
traversed the whole parian of the sangleys to sell their goods, if they
are not offered more than four they immediately carry their goods to
the spaniards or to the fathers, in order to get eight for them; and
this must be tongod sa calooy, that is, for charity, which the
spaniard and the father always practice with them.”
“this is a fact, but it needs explanation.
the filipino is by nature phlegmatic, and especially when it is a
question of buying or selling anything; for he exerts himself to get
the largest profit possible, and the calculation of that costs him much
trouble. a countryman comes, for instance, to sell two or three
quintals of indigo to a merchant. thereupon, he does not come alone,
but is accompanied by relatives and friends, and sometimes women. very
often the indigo belongs to four or five owners, who all come in the
wake of the seller. each proposition must be communicated to the
society that is squatted there in a circle on their heels. the matter
is discussed at length, and then it is decided to lower the price one
peso per quintal. the buyer claims that the price should be three
pesos. finally this point is settled. then another discussion begins,
namely, that the indigo is damp, and that some pounds must be allowed
for waste. in short the transaction is so tiresome and so eternal, that
there are very few spaniards who have the patience to endure so much
impertinence and importunity; and they generally end by saying dryly,
‘will you or will you not give it?’ and then they order
them angrily into the street. the chinese and mestizos do not hurry
them, but on the contrary invite them to eat, and keep them in their
houses for three or four hours, and sometimes days. finally they get
the goods for what they wish to give, and more often cheat them like
chinese. for the filipino is very stupid even in matters of
self-interest. once i was with a spaniard who was buying indigo. after
the trading had cost him more patience than job must have had, the
indigo was weighed before him, the account was reckoned, the money made
ready and placed on the table in piles of  pesos, while there was one
of , which was placed separately, and another of reals and copper
coins. the man who had been most attentive to everything took the [n]piles of ’s and left the pile of .
we called him back to tell him to take that money which he had left.
thereupon he took the seven pesos, and it was necessary to call him
back the third time to tell him that all the money on the table
belonged to him. he himself had determined that the price should be 
or  per quintal, and then he took what was given him. the majority
are the same. then it is learned that a chinese has bought for  the
same quantity of indigo for which a spaniard offered . it is said
that a filipino would rather receive one real from a chinese than one
peso from a spaniard, as we have just seen was written by father
gaspar.” (mas, pp. , .)
 “and tell me, your
paternity,” says delgado (p. ), “who is not given to
this vice in this land?”—an interesting commentary on
social conditions.
 commenting on this, delgado
(p. ) says: “who are the ones who cut the timber, and build
the ships, galleys, and galliots, as says father murillo, and work in
the ships in the port? then they do this stretched out in their houses,
as says our father master? it is true that they are always poor, but
the true cause of that is different. let them not admit into manila so
many heathen chinese, who possess in themselves all the trades and
employments, by which one may seek his livelihood. the indians would
apply themselves to these trades, and would not lie stretched out in
their houses, for the sangleys do not allow them to engage in these or
to seek their livelihood.”
mas says (pp. –): “i have never
read a single manuscript or printed book about the filipinos that does
not speak of their laziness.
“i, accustomed to hear the term
‘lazy’ given to spaniards, [n]and to other men who have
been or are idle—rather through the influence of bad laws or
because of the lack of laws, than because of the impulses of their
physical organization—was ready to believe that the filipinos
would be found to exhibit the same characteristic in regard to
this—especially when i remembered the system of delivering the
provinces to trading governors and monopolists and the prohibition for
so many years of trading with foreign ports, which still exists, with
the exception of the city of manila. but in spite of the fact that
these things powerfully influence the obstruction of the founts of
wealth and choke incentives to work, i have seen things that have made
me change my opinion. for instance, i have desired to send people to
get grass for my horses; and, in spite of the facts that it was very
abundant and near, and there was not the slightest doubt about the pay,
i have been unable to get anyone to go for it. on arriving at a
village, i have endeavored to get a guide to accompany me to the next
village; and, in spite of the facts that the distance was not more than
one hour and the road excellent, i have found it difficult to obtain
him. and even i have obtained it by means of the justice, as [a carrier
of] baggage; although one pays for this service, according to the
schedule, one silver real, with which a filipino has enough to live on
for at least two days. a few weeks before my departure from filipinas i
was at an estate belonging to religious, where there are various
individuals who enjoy an annual salary sufficient to support
themselves, on condition that they guard the estate against robbers,
and that they work whenever necessary, in which case their day’s
wage is paid them. the question was raised of transferring the rice in
the husk from one granary to another, distant about  paces, and they
were not to work more than the hours usual in that country, which are
very few, for which they were to be given one silver real daily,
besides their food. all this was in addition to their annual pay. it is
to be noted that the season was the dryest and coolest of the whole
year, namely, the month of january, and a filipino’s support cost
then about five cuartos per diem. however, by no means would they
consent to work consecutively all the days, for they said that when
night came they were exhausted, and needed rest on the following day.
had i [n]not been present there i would not have
believed it. i have been in many filipino huts where i saw many men and
women pass the day without doing anything, while everything was
indicative of their poverty. i have examined the condition of the
fields, and i have discovered that any man may become wealthy, and yet
all live in wretchedness. i have been much surprised to hear that they
must be ordered by edict to sow the fields, so that the propitious
season may not pass by; and that those who allow their houses to burn
are punished. especially have i noted that the chinese mestizos, who
are partly of the same blood as the most diligent chinese immigrants,
are always comfortable, and some of them have accumulated considerable
wealth. this might all be in the hands of the filipinos, who are the
most ancient inhabitants, have enjoyed and enjoy greater protection,
and have been owners of all the estates that are now possessed by the
mestizos, which the latter have bought by the fruits of their industry
and their economy. it is to be noted that all the chinese who come to
filipinas are very poor, and come from a colder country. gentil says
that the filipinos have acquired their laziness from the spaniards; but
if they have learned indolence from the spaniards, why did not the
mestizos learn it also, who are on the contrary so active and
industrious? why have they not learned to be diligent from the
mestizos, since they have a more continual and intimate intercourse
with them than with the spaniards? i conclude by saying that after
examining and weighing everything thoroughly, i am of the opinion that
there exists in the nature of the filipino, quite independent of any
accessory and modifying cause, an element of quiet and inertia that is
but slightly neutralized by the ambition of acquiring consideration and
wealth.”
 delgado (pp. –)
says: “this happens perhaps among the boys who serve in the
convents in tagalos and in no other missions; and i have also seen them
awakened in another manner. and although this seems a matter for
laughter among us spaniards, it is not so for them. for they do it in
order not [n]to make the other impatient by waking him
suddenly, and it serves among them as a kind of prudence and respect.
the game thing happens when they call at the door of any house. but
generally they enter without the formulas of etiquette.”
“this is a hard fact and has been called to
my attention often. for in any other matter whatsoever, it is well
understood that ignorance makes an unpolished man appear quite distinct
from a civilized man. but when it comes to waking one who is sleeping,
i cannot conceive that wisdom, or even a knowledge of reading, can have
the least influence. but i believe that i have discovered the origin of
this peculiarity. the remontados filipinos of abra have the greatest
respect for a sleeping man. their deepest curse is ‘may i die
when asleep.’ their oath, when they come to the province of
ilocos for the election of gobernadorcillos, for causes, etc., is
‘may i die when asleep,’ ‘may a bolt of lightning
strike me,’ etc. this same fear of dying when asleep exists also
in other tribes and in the provinces of ilocos, and must have been
formerly a general idea, since, as we have already observed, the origin
of our christianized indians and those at present remontados and called
infidels was the same. whether this fear arose from some disease in
which the people slept and did not awaken, or whether only from the
similitude of sleep to death, it is difficult to ascertain. however, it
is always surprising that, since no one now dies or becomes sick
because his rest is interrupted, the indians still constantly preserve
this so stupid dread; so that even after a master has ordered his
servant to awaken him, the latter has great difficulty in doing it in a
quick and positive manner, although he knows that, if he do not execute
it, it will put his master out greatly. that shows at least the most
powerful influence of habit on the minds of these men. somewhat similar
to this is our custom of saying ‘jesus,’ when anyone
sneezes—a custom which i have heard expressed by ‘god bless
you,’ ‘á vous
souhaits,’ ‘salute,’ etc., among all the
peoples of europa.... this custom generally allows the man who receives
an accident to die without aid, because of not awaking the physician or
cura.” (mas, pp. , .)
 this is because the indians
do not appreciate the danger, says delgado (p. ). this happens often
on narrow roads, and not to indians, but to spaniards or mulattoes, and
neither will yield to the other, whereupon quarrels ensue. but the
lesser always yields to the greater. it has happened once or twice to
delgado.
“this is a fact, and a proof of their
indifference and stolidity.” (mas, p. .)
 the lengua
franca is the trade-jargon of the orient. the original of the
passage above is as follows: “deó grande
nopillar fantacia; mondo cosi cosi; si estar escrito in testa andar
andar; sino acá morir.” m. reads “an andar
andar,” and has other slight differences. d. reads “ha (de)
andar” and has also other slight differences.
the full name of the author above mentioned is
gabriel gomez de losada, and his book is escuela de
trabaios, in quatro [n]libros dividida: primero, del cautiverio
mas cruel.... segundo, noticias y govierno de argel: tercero,
necessidad y conveniencia de la redempcion de cautivos christianos:
quarto, el mejor cautivo rescatado.... (madrid, ).
 m. and d. add (though with a
slight difference in wording) “for they will not believe that he
who loves danger will perish in it.”
some indians are fatalists, but not all, says
delgado (p. ). the visayans are generally careful, and watch out for
the crocodiles. those who have been devoured by those reptiles have
always been evil, and were so punished by god for their sins. mas says
(p. ), that this fatalism must have been imported from asia.
 delgado says (p. ):
“this proceeds from their barbarous condition, and because the
spaniards commonly deceive them, and teach them things that are not
very good, especially the convict guachinangos, of
whom this country is full. but that they cannot be persuaded that it is
a sin to steal from the religious or from the spaniards, i regard as a
misapprehension, or at least it is not common for this to happen,
although his paternity brings forward such evidence, that one cannot
doubt him. for i have seen the contrary in many villages.”
mas (pp. , ), says: “it is a fact that
some indians have but little scruple in stealing from spaniards, for
they say that all [n]that the latter possess is of the
philippines and consequently theirs. but do not believe that they have
any consideration for their fellow-countrymen. in its proper place we
shall see that theft is the greatest part of the criminality of the
islands.... it is to be noted that they generally rob on a small and
rarely on a large scale; for their ambition is limited to satisfying a
vice or to bettering their present condition, but not in changing
it.
“the father provincial of the augustinian
religious, said in his printed report, in the compilation made
concerning the causes of the insurrection in ilocos in :
“‘the indians of ilocos have become
highwaymen, like those of the other provinces. they steal cows, horses,
and carabaos from their own countrymen; and those who are occupied in
this trade are ready for all sorts of evil. it is not surprising that
many of these should have come with the deserters who first rebelled in
the mountains of piddig, and that others should unite with them when
the fire was fanned. but one can not call this a cause for
insurrection, nor do i believe that for such thefts the means should be
to take the stealers of carabaos to manila so that they might be
punished; but it is enough for the alcaldes-mayor to watch over their
province and punish these thefts. by so doing they would succeed in
lessening thefts, for the extermination of them is as impossible as is
making an end of the classes of the thieves according to the proverb of
the indians, 
“when the rats die, then the thieves will come to an
end.”’
“it is true that perhaps one ought not to
ascribe all this demoralization to a perverse disposition. one must not
have lived among the filipinos, or have been very blind in regard to
them, to say that they are all thieves. there are very many who,
although they could steal with impunity, do not do so.... the frequency
of theft may proceed from other causes. perhaps the system of mercy and
impunity that has dictated and is dictating the sentences of the
audiencia of manila has contributed thereto....”
 m. and d. omit “of
which i heard,” and the latter reads “and i shall only tell
of two of which i was a witness.”
spaniards also, says delgado (pp. , ),
recount things [n]that are not credible, and “it is not
to be wondered at that some rude and ignorant people should believe
such nonsense; and if they believe some things that are told them by
some scholars, it is because of the authority of those people among
them.... this happens commonly in other places, besides among the
indians.”
 see an account of this
matter and the trouble caused by it, in vol.
 i.e., “silver
and gold have i none”—a reference to acts iii, .
 m. and d. read
“miners.”
 “when the ship
‘santa ana’ arrived at manila in the year  with 
spanish soldiers, it was rumored among the women of the tobacco factory
that those soldiers were coming to take away their children in order to
irrigate the mines in españa with their blood. all were aroused
and fled to their homes, took their children, and began to take refuge
in the houses of the spanish women, and they could not be persuaded
that it was all nonsense. the house of doña dolores goyena was
filled with them. also many men armed with spears came out on the
streets; but the disorder gradually subsided.” (mas, p. .)
 m. and d. add “for all
the ministers cannot free them from this deceit.”
 this is not so in general,
says delgado (p. ), but is true only of some individuals among the
various nations.
 m. reads “respect the
spaniard more.”
 the truth is that any
spaniard, with rare exceptions, has more penetration, more vivacity,
more nobility, more talent, and more courage than a filipino. this
superiority can do no less than have its effect.... for the rest, few
in manila have an exact idea of the filipino character. their arrogance
may be seen in the importance which the gobernadorcillos give to
themselves. they go daily to the city hall, but they make two regidors
go to their houses to get them. there the regidors wait until the
gobernadorcillo is ready to come out, and the latter then goes in
solemn state to the city hall, preceded by the regidors and the
alguacils, with staffs in hand. when these officers reach the door of
the city hall, they stop in order to allow the gobernadorcillo to pass
between them; and he enters without noticing the salutes given him by
the guards, who take off their hats to him. he immediately takes a seat
which is on an elevated platform, and there he thinks himself to be on
a throne; and even the spaniards who enter casually, especially in the
villages on the highroad, appear of but little importance to him. this
is the place where the auditors of the audiencia of manila, and all
others who have any share in the government of filipinas, ought to come
incognito, and as if in passing, in order to know the
filipinos—instead of forming an opinion of their character from
the servants of their house, or from those who go to the capital with
clasped hands and a downcast look in their eyes to ask some favor of
them. the strange thing is, that the indians do not learn from the
alcaldes-mayor, who administer justice with the greatest equality, and
who do not sit in an elevated place, or even sit down, and go into the
street without any following. this aristocratic spirit may be observed
in the church. all the principales, who consist of the
gobernadorcillos, cabezas de barangay, and all others who have the
title ‘don’ and wear a jacket, seat themselves in the
central aisle or nave; and the following order of etiquette is in
general scrupulously observed: the gobernadorcillo; the
ex-gobernadorcillos, who are called past captains, in order of their
seniority; the actual first lieutenant, who must be a cabeza de
barangay; the two lieutenants; and nine present officials; the
ex-cabezas, in order of seniority. if any ex-captain from another
village is present, he takes a seat among those of his class, and is
given the first place, out of courtesy. when the lieutenants and
officials leave their posts, they are not called 
principales, as are the others, but 
titulados.” (mas, pp. , .)
 d. reads “petty
sextons.”
 delgado says (p. ):
“it is a fact that nature always inclines rather to evil than to
good. but in order to correct their vices there are fervent and zealous
ministers in all parts, who preach to and teach them.”
mas says (pp. –): “in fact some
indians practice ceremonies in their marriages which date from before
the conquest.
“on the birth of an infant, the newborn child
is sometimes taken to another house in order to free it from the
patianac; and, when the child is taken out for baptism, aromatic
substances and incense are burned for the same reason.
“when a person dies, they celebrate a novena
in his house at night, where the relatives (and sometimes those who are
not relatives) assemble. after praying, it is not seldom that they sit
down to gamble. on the last day there is a great banquet, and sometimes
a dance. these mortuary feasts are practiced even yet, in all their
purity, in the mountains, as we have already seen.
“if possible, both men and women bathe daily
in the river. the women enter the water wrapped in their 
tapices, taking care that the bosom is covered. when they are in
the water they take that garment off to wash themselves. the men enter
the water with wide pantaloons and the body bare. they enter the river
at any hour and before everybody; but one must confess that they do it
with great decency and modesty.... when i was in santa cruz de la
laguna, the cura published an edict ordering men and women not to bathe
in the same place. that gave rise to many jokes and jests, and it is to
be supposed that they continued their old-time customs. they consider
us as not overcleanly, because they see us make less use than they of
the bath.... it is also the custom for the families of the country and
many europeans to bathe together. during the outdoor sports of manila,
at the summer houses of mariquina, or other neighboring towns, the
chief diversion is the bath. the women generally enter the water
wearing a kind of blouse, and [n]the men with wide pantaloons and the
body uncovered. newcomers from europa do not consider this amusement at
all decent.
“they kiss by bringing the nostril near and
drawing in the breath. this is the plain kiss in the mountains, but
some filipinos of the plains, especially of manila, have also become
accustomed to kiss with the lips; but they always put the nose to the
face at the same time, and if they have a sincere affection, they
always smell as if they were giving a deep sigh with their mouth
closed.... when they look at a person from a distance, and desire to
express their desire to kiss him, they constrict the nose in the manner
of one smelling. a very extreme kind of kiss is given by rubbing the
nose on the spot that they wish to feel, and drawing in the breath as
long as possible.
“i am greatly surprised that no one of the
writers on the filipinos has spoken of this remarkable fact, which
springs from their exquisite sense of smell. it is so great that a
servant can tell his master’s shirt, after it is cleaned and
ironed, even though it lies with ten or twelve other shirts resembling
it and belonging to other persons, by simply smelling them. they also
assert that if a man be near a woman for whom he experiences a feeling
of love, she knows it by the odor of his perspiration, and vice versa.
as a pledge of affection, they ask for a shirt that has been
worn—which they return after it has lost its odor, and replace by
another, just as we beg for a lock of hair.
“they had the custom of circumcision, a
custom which they did not acquire from the arabs, since it is still
practiced on the peaks of the independent mountains. they practice it
still, and that against the will of the curas. ancient customs have
very great force. it is to be noted that the manner of operation is not
the same as that practiced by the jews, for the cut is made from the
upper to the lower part.
“they had the custom that the suitor for a
maiden’s hand went to serve in the house of his future
father-in-law for three or four years, and did whatever he was
asked—in general, the most onerous duties. then the parents of
the bride had to give him a house, clothes, etc., and the marriage was
celebrated. in many provinces, as for instance, in bulacan, there is
now no trace of this custom, because of the abuses which were
committed. this custom, which we meet in the first pages of the old
testament, could not have been acquired from the mussulmans, who by
their koran hold laws diametrically opposed. this custom is still
followed in laguna, although the young man does not live in the house
of his loved one, for the cura does not permit it. the friars have done
their utmost to destroy this custom. [n]
“they scarify new-born infants in order to
draw blood from them; and then apply lighted matches to various parts
of the body, which cause them burns, and serve the place of
caustics.
“women in childbirth they suspend by the hair
in order to stop the flow; and, after parturition, they compress the
abdomen, and press down with great force on both thighs at once, in
order to make the organs return to their former position; and they
perform other things of like nature, which we consider as injurious and
nonsensical. but they hold one of their old women higher than the best
paris physician.
“they consider the balete tree as sacred. at
marriage, they carry it dishes of food as an offering; and it is very
difficult, or impossible, to make them cut one of them. it has happened
that they have begged incense from the cura on various pretexts in
order to go immediately and burn it under a balete tree.
“they are very fond of telling tales of love
adventures, of witches, and enchantment, and everything else that is
rare and marvelous, even though it be nonsense and against common
sense.
“they believe that all diseases are cured by
drawing out the air that has been introduced into the body; and,
consequently, their favorite remedy is to supply a kind of
cupping-glass of chinese origin, which they drag over two palmos on any
part of the body, and which leaves a great red streak.
“they respect their fathers and mothers
greatly, and even the younger brothers the older. i have seen a married
woman, on entering her house, kiss the hand of a sister older than
herself.
“in order that a young man may marry, he must
give the bride the money or other things up to her value; and that
price is often kept by the parents. the parents would rather have their
daughter remain single, even though she be with child, than to give her
without a dowry. it is not seldom that one can hear a mother say that
she will not give her daughter for less than one hundred pesos, or
fifty, etc.
“in order to strike fire they take a bit of
bamboo, and slit it down the middle lengthwise. in the hollow or inner
part, they dig out one portion near the center, which leaves the bamboo
much thinner. then on the outside they open a chink, lengthwise. then
they take the knife, and scraping the upper part of the other
half-bamboo, they make some very fine shavings. these they roll about
between the two palms of the hands until they form a small ball, and
that they place in the hollow of the half-bamboo. the latter they place
on the ground, with the shavings below. [n]then with the other half
bamboo, they rub (while singing) across the one which has the shavings
below it, upon the same point where the shavings are placed, and in a
few seconds they begin to smoke. thereupon they rub faster and blow,
and a blaze starts. all this is the work of one minute.
“on going out between people, or when passing
in front of anyone, they bend the body and clasp the hands, which they
then move forward as if they wished to open a path or cut the air. this
is a sign of respect, or their method of asking leave to pass.
“the women ride horseback, not astride, but
with a side-saddle, as do europeans.”
 m. reads “most of
them.”
 this is common throughout
the world, says delgado (p. ). “that they do not know their
age happens commonly among rude and wild people, wherever they may be;
but their age is known very well by their datos and chiefs, in order to
assign them their place in the tribute readily. in what pertains to
their ancient beliefs, there is no doubt that these are preserved in
some parts, and there is no lack of babailanes, who are their
priestesses or diuateras; but one must consider that all these
peoples of the indias are new christians, and the seed that the enemy
had sown, and which had thrust so deep roots into them, has not yet
been completely destroyed.”
 m. and d. omit “than
the word of the whole world.”
mas says (pp. –): “the
superstitions of these people can be divided into three classes. the
first consists in believing that certain monsters or ghosts exist, to
which they give names and assign special duties, and even certain
exterior forms, which are described by those who affirm that they have
seen them. such are the tigbalan, osuang, patianac, sava, naanayo,
tavac, nono, mancuculan, aiasip, the rock mutya, etc.
“the antinganting is any object which
promises wealth or happiness, as we would speak of the girdle of venus,
or the ring of giges.
“many spaniards, especially the curas,
imagine that these beliefs are not very deeply rooted, or that they
have declined, and that most of the filipinos are free from them. this
is because in the presence of such the filipinos do not dare tell the
truth, not even in the confessional, because of their fear of the
reprimand that surely awaits them. i have talked to many about these
things, some of whom at the beginning began to laugh, and to joke about
the poor fools who put faith in such nonsense. but when they saw that i
was treating the matter seriously, and with the spirit of inquiry as a
real thing, they changed their tone, and made no difficulty in assuring
me of the existence of the fabulous beings described above....
“the second class consists in various
practices, like that of burning incense under the balete tree; putting
ashes at the door of the house where a person has died, in order that
they might recognize the tracks of the soul of the dead one; leaving a
plate for the dead man at the table, etc.
“when don g. piñeiro went to culamba
in , for the purpose of climbing a lofty mountain, he encountered
innumerable difficulties in getting people to accompany him, in spite
of the orders of the superior government; and he had to desist and
climb from the village of los baños accompanied by the cura, who
had the road opened for him. the reason for that, as the said religious
assured me, was the fear of the filipinos for the anito, although the
excuses that they offered were quite different.
“in the said village of los baños,
they believe that there is [n]an antinganting in one of the hot
water springs, which has water at ° reaumur. this consists in the divine child, who
appears and hops about in the water on good friday; and he who catches
him obtains the antinganting. this last year, , a man tried to get
too near, and fell in. his entire body was scalded, and he was bled;
but not one drop of blood could be drawn from his body, and he died on
the following day.
“the third, and to me the most remarkable,
class is found not in certain personages or superstitious and
determined proceedings, but in sudden and capricious scenes, and in
improbable and inexplainable apparitions.
“there is scarce a filipino, even the most
enlightened, who does not tell marvelous things that have happened to
him—wondrous visions, mute and speechless; ghosts, goblins,
strange figures; dead people; dogs, and fabulous and never imagined
animals; castles, and balls of fire, that have appeared to him;
frightful noises of all sorts that have scared him; and, finally, the
most improbable stories and bits of nonsense that could be invented by
the most raving maniac.
“on hearing them recount so many of these
extravagances, and seeing that they distinguish them from dreams, i
have been unable to believe that they were deceits; and observing their
faces very carefully during the narration, i have been convinced that
they were intimately persuaded that they had seen the things that they
described. whence can this mental weakness come? it is not from
ignorance, for i have noticed the same thing as in the others, in
several clerics who have studied in the university for ten or twelve
years. one day i was in a convent where the boards of the floor began
to creak because of dryness, and the coadjutor became so frightened
that he went away to sleep in another house; and the christian
reflections, jests, and anger of the spanish cura could not restrain
him.... the filipino cura, don j. severiano mallares, committed and
caused to be committed fifty-seven assassinations, because he believed
that he could by this means save his mother, who, he had persuaded
himself, had been bewitched; and was hanged in the year . the
attorney on that cause talked in pathetic terms of the indescribable
and barbarous prodigality of blood shed by that monster. reflecting
upon this phenomenon, i am inclined to think that it is based on their
natural timorousness....”
 in d.,
“indolent.”
 from the word
“islands” to this point, is omitted in d.
 “that they are
tyrants, one over the other,” says delgado (p. ), “i do
not deny. they inherited this peculiarity from their ancestors, and it
has as yet been impossible to uproot it entirely, as many others which
they learned from their ancestors. however, these vices are not so
common as they were formerly. and not only would the indians of these
islands have been consumed if the spaniards had not come hither, but
they would have been conquered and enslaved by the neighboring nations,
such as the borneans, chinese, and japanese, as we see in the books of
history.
” ... the principales were
the aim of the popular wrath in the ilocan insurrection in .
‘kill all the lords and ladies’ was the cry, while the
people hastened toward the capital to petition for the abolition of the
monopolies and the fifths. the same thing happened in the year
.” (mas, p. .)
 m. omits “and bring it
back as cold as ice.”
 this is a general statement
that is not true, says delgado (pp. , ), for the example given is
merely from boys; and, besides, it never freezes in filipinas.
 this citation is
missing in m. it is from horace’s satires, book i, ll,
, . e. c. wickham (horace for english readers; oxford,
, p. ), translates the passage as follows: “there is
measure in everything. there are fixed limits beyond which and short of
which right cannot find resting-place.”
 “that they need
beatings and the rattan,” says delgado (p. ), “as
examples prove, is a fact, and they confess it; but they resemble all
other nations in this particular.... but it must be employed with
prudence and moderation, as the discipline is employed by our fathers
in our own lands, regarding them as sons and small children, and not as
slaves or as our enemies. for god has brought us to their lands, in
order to watch over them, and maintains us here for love of them. we
must note that the indians are not so bad as they seem to us.... it
must also be observed that there are many spaniards, and even
ministers, who are melancholy and crabbed, and so ill-conditioned and
moody, that everything wounds them, and they are contented with
nothing. all the actions of the indians displease them, and they even
believe that the indians do them purposely to make them impatient and
to jest with them. from such ill-conditioned people the indians suffer
much, and tolerate and endure much, because of their respect for them.
consequently what the reverend father says below, namely ‘that it
costs them more to be christians than one would believe’ is a
fact and true.”
“the spaniards cry out and are in despair at
seeing the continual [n]and great acts of rudeness of the
filipinos, some of which are done maliciously, with the sole object of
making us angry, when they contract hate for us. at times after they
have wearied and disgusted the spaniards grievously, and have caused
the latter to give them a buffet, this is a cause for great sport among
them, and they celebrate it in the kitchen amid great guffaws, as i
have heard many times. especially is it so if those who are made angry
are women. but the spaniards persist in not being convinced of this
fact, nor will they ever learn how to treat this people. the old men of
the country say that the spaniard is fire and the filipino snow, and
that the snow consumes the fire.” (mas, pp. , .)
 m. and d. add “his
master chid him, but the lad replied that the hen had but one
leg.”
 this quotation is lacking
in m. and d.
 m. and d. read “in
love and esteem.”
 “i shall not at
present enter upon a discussion of whether one ought or ought not beat
the filipino. i shall only remark, as a matter pertaining to this
section, that the first thing that one sees in any of their houses is
the rattan hanging in a corner. when a father places his son in any
spanish house, this is his charge: ‘sir, beat him often.’
to educate the young people, or to establish order in any place without
the use of the rattan, is a thing that they do not understand.”
(mas, p. .)
it is said that even at the present day a filipino
father will not hesitate to chastise his son corporally, even after the
latter has attained his majority.
 this last phrase and the
latin quotation are lacking in m. englished that quotation is,
“the evil hate sin for fear of punishment.”
 this phrase is omitted in
 in d. this is “even
if it be a leaf.”
 delgado says (p. ):
“but if his paternity knows of this lack, how surprising that
this and other things happen in regard to them, such as that all keep
their faces turned toward him who confesses. if his paternity would
then preach them a sermon and correct them, i assure him that they
would correct themselves, and these backward-looking dancers who are so
immodest in the church, when they ought to be modestly thinking of
their sins and repenting of them, would correct themselves, and would
not cause wonder and laughter.”
 m. omits the remainder of
this sentence. for “januses,” d. reads
“worms.”
 because some of the indians
are given to blasphemy, says delgado (p. ), it does not follow that
all of them are blasphemous.
 “i shall here attempt
a delicate and interesting investigation, namely, the religiousness of
the filipinos. there are opposite opinions on this matter, and serious
errors are liable to arise.... “the women always wear scapulars
about the neck, and usually some sort of a small cross; and a
reliquary, containing the bones of a saint and a bit of the wood of the
cross. but this has become a part of the dress, like earrings or
necklaces, and both the devout women and those who are not devout wear
them.
“the walls of the houses are often covered
with the engravings of saints, and on the tables are many glass globes
and urns containing saints, virgins, and little figures of the divine
child, which generally have the face as well as the hands of ivory, and
silver clothes richly embroidered. in well-to-do houses there are so
many that they resemble a storehouse of saints rather than [n]a
habitation. in many houses this is a matter of vanity and ostentation;
and they regard valuable saints as they do bureaus and mirrors
elsewhere.
“in the church great sedateness and devotion
or silence reigns. in the villages the church is divided into three
parts. in one end the women are seated, in the other the men, while the
gobernadorcillos and principales occupy the center. however, this is
not observed very strictly in some villages. in some churches there are
men in the front half and women in the back half. when a small village
is founded, in order to get the concession for a settlement and for a
cura they offer to give the latter, in addition to paying the sanctórum tribute [a tribute paid to the church by all
philippine natives of sixteen years and over], a monthly quantity of
rice, eggs, fowls, etc., but they are afterward very remiss in living
up to their offer. many friars have had to have recourse to the
alcaldes and to the officials of the district; and i have even heard of
one of them who had to take a musket and kill the fowls in the yards,
and carry them to the convent.
“they are very fond of singing the passion or
history of the death of jesus christ, which is written in
tagálog verse. during the evenings of lent, the young men and
women assemble in the houses for this purpose. but although this was a
religious gathering at the time when it was originated, at the present
time it has been converted into a carnival amusement, or to speak more
plainly, into a pretext for the most scandalous vices; and the result
of these canticles is that many of the girls of the village become
enceinte. so true is what i have just said that the curas have
prohibited everywhere the singing of the passion at night; and some of
the curas go out with a whip in order to disperse them—or rather,
send the fiscal of the church to ascertain who is singing, and send for
such person immediately to beat him.
“they say that all the saints are spanish,
since the patrons of their churches are always of this class. they
would have no veneration for a saint with a flat nose and the
physiognomy of a filipino.
“when any sick person refuses to confess, his
relatives request him to do so. in this case they do not tell him that
he will be condemned, etc., but, ‘consider what a shame it will
be; just think what people will say; consider that you will be buried
outside of holy ground.’ the idea of being buried on the beach is
what gives them most fear. this can only be explained by saying that
they have seen the cemetery and the beach and not hell, nor the other
world, which, as one would believe, costs them much to
conceive—although in reality they do believe in it, in the same
[n]way as many europeans believe in it, but
without understanding it, and only because the sages give assurance of
it....
“in spite of this indifference regarding the
future life, they generally order masses said for the souls of their
ancestors, and not because of compromise or vanity, but true faith and
devotion, although this does not argue much in favor of their
religiousness. for the igorots, who are the type of the filipinos,
although they do not believe in the immortality of the soul, have many
superstitions in regard to the shades of the dead....
“in some places the curas have to lock the
doors of the church after mass, so that the people will not depart
without hearing the sermon, and this in places quite religious, as is
pangasinan. many of those who are carried to mindanao or to jolo as
captives become renegades with the greatest ease; and then they will
not return, even though they may.
“some make the sign of the cross as they go
down the stairways. all stop on the street at the sound of the
prayer-bell; and the same thing happens in the houses, where they often
pray on their knees with true devotion. they all remove their hats when
passing in front of the church, and many stop to pray. nevertheless,
all the curas assert that they make a false confession, for they only
confess the three following sins: absence from mass, eating of meat
during lent, and vain blaspheming; although it is apparent to the curas
that they have committed other greater sins. it is a great trouble to
get them to take part in the procession, and those who can do so escape
through the cross streets. in manila it is necessary for the regimental
heads to appoint soldiers to go to take part in this act, and to pay
them one-half real; and, were it not for this expedient, it would
sometimes be impossible to do it. the curas have considerable trouble
in the villages in getting them to confess. they are given forty days
of grace, and many come after being threatened with twenty-five lashes;
while many of the degree of captain, and many who are not, get along in
spite of all without confession. in the village of lilio, on the brow
of mount banahao, where there are , tributes, there were more than
 persons who did not confess in the year ; and this has not been
one of the most remiss villages in the fulfilment of its religious
duties.”
[father juan ferrando, who examined mas’s
ms., says that ‘the filipinos confess according to the
instruction that is given them. in manila, as i know by experience,
they confess as well as the most fervent spaniard, and i have heard
many fathers say the same of many indians of the provinces.’]
“very many of them also never go to mass in
any village where [n]the cura is not especially zealous. in the
city of vigan, where there are about , persons, not more than 
or  went to church during my stay there on any feast-day, except one
of especial devotion to celebrate a virgin patroness of the city. there
has been and is much talk of the influence of the curas in the
villages. no doubt there is something in it, but their respect and
deference toward the parish priest is influenced not a little, in my
opinion by their idea (and one not ill founded) of the power of the
priest, of the employment that he can give; and of their hope that he
will protect them in any oppression that they receive from the civil
government or from the soldiers. in reality, the friar usually
addresses his parishioners in the language of peace, which is the
method which fits well into the phlegmatic filipino. he constitutes
himself their defender, even without their having any regard for
him—now from the injuries that the avarice of their governors
causes them, now from the tendency of these to acquire preponderance
and to command, which is the first instinct of man. consequently, the
friars, by resisting and restraining in all parts, and at so great a
distance from madrid, the tyranny or greed of the spaniards, have been
very useful to the villages, and have been acquiring their love. and
since the islands are not kept subject by force, but by the will of the
mass of the inhabitants, and the means of persuasion are principally in
the hands of the religious, the government is necessarily obliged to
show the latter considerable deference. from this fact originates their
influence in temporal affairs, and the fear mixed with the respect with
which they inspire the people. three facts naturally result from all
this. the cura, speaking in general, is the one who governs the
village. consequently, when a new village is formed its inhabitants do
not care to be annexed or dependent on another village in regard to
spiritual things; but desire and petition for a parish priest of their
own, in order that they might have in him a powerful defender in their
differences and suits with other settlements, or with the alcalde of
the province. lastly, the ascendency that the minister is seen to enjoy
is perhaps as much civil as religious, if it is not more so. and in
fact ... although they have often succeeded in pacifying seditions by
their mere presence alone, and the insurgents, for instance, in ilocos
in the year , surrendered to the friar the cannon that they had
captured from a band of  soldiers and two patrols of the guard, who
were routed, yet at other times not only have individuals but whole
masses refused to listen to the admonitions of the religious, have
completely lost respect for them, have insulted them, threatened them,
wounded them, and even assassinated them, and have not lacked the
complement of all this, profaning the churches. 
[n]i shall not mention
the thefts in the churches, such as one which happened in the capital
of pangasinan when i was there in that province; for these might be
considered as single individual deeds, isolated and insignificant. i
deduce then, as the resultant conclusion of all these observations,
that there are many filipinos, especially among the feminine sex, who
have the true fear of god, but many others who feel a great natural
indifference in this matter. they exhibit scarce a disposition toward
religion, a fact that i believe must proceed from their little
consideration of the wonders of religion ... which is a mark of their
small amount of intelligence, for they show great indifference for the
punishments of the other world, and even the ecclesiastical punishments
of this. nothing shows this so clearly as the insincere confessions
which they make in order to finish with it. it is to be noted that
almost the same thing happens at the hour of death, and that this is
seen in the small and remote villages where spaniards have never been.
neither can it be the result of errors of faith or philosophic reading, since the
people know no other books than those of the doctrine or the
passion.
“combining the above data and observations
with what i have heard recounted, and what we see in manuscripts and
printed books about the method by which the old-time religious have
maintained devotion in these islands—which has been by calling
the list in order to ascertain those who did not observe their
obligation to attend mass and confession, and by punishing in the
church courtyard those who are remiss—i am inclined to believe
that the law of jesus christ is learned here superficially; and that if
the system adopted some years ago be continued, of obliging the curas
to reduce themselves only to the means of preaching, prohibiting them
rigorously from compulsive and positive means, before a century passes
there will be but few pure-blooded natives in this archipelago who are
true and devout christians....” (mas, pp. –.)
 m. and d. omit all of this
last sentence and quotation.
 a vice common to all the
world, says delgado (p. ).
 “although they have
but little honor, they have in effect only too much vanity. when one
goes to their houses, they make a great effort to show off their
wealth, even if they have to beg a loan in order to meet the expense.
they do not care to bury their relatives for the love of god, although
they try if possible to avoid the payment of the funeral expenses. a
cura told me that after a man had paid him the burial expenses a 
baguio or hurricane began; whereupon the man came to get his money,
saying that he wished the burial of a pauper, because in the end, no
one would have to see it.” (mas, p. .)
 delgado (p. ) utters a
warning against judging on this particular, and says “that
virtues are not so distant from them, as his paternity
writes.”
 m. omits this sentence to
this point.
 what fault do the indians
have in trying to get and defend their own? there may be excess in this
matter, says delgado (p. ), but the indians do not go to law only to
cause trouble.
 m. and d. omit this
sentence.
 in regard to this delgado
says (pp. , ) that “there is no dish more relished in this
land than defamation and complaint.... this is a country where idleness
sits enthroned; for when the ship is despatched to nueva españa
there is nothing to do for a whole year, but to complain and discuss
the lives of others.” delgado does not believe that lust is the
only feature in the intercourse between men and women. neither does he
believe that women are treated, as they deserve, with kicks and blows;
nor that such treatment is in accordance with conjugal love, or with
the text of women being subject to men. san agustin’s advice to
europeans is not good.
 the ayer ms. and m. read
“machiabelo;” d. reads “macabeo,” i.e.,
“maccabæan.”
 from this point m. and d.
read: “they call this mabibig, and this is a thing that
will rouse up the entire village against one, the stones, and the land
itself. hence, the concubinages among them, and other evils, have no
human remedy, nor can have; for no one wishes to be mabibig, for
that is the most abominable fault and the only sin among them.”
 the indians do not tell
tales of one another for a more potent reason than that of being
declared mabibig, is delgado’s commentary (pp. ,
)—namely, the fear, of private revenge. “but the prudent
indians always advise the father minister, if there is [n]any
scandal in the village; now in confession, so that it might be remedied
without anyone knowing the person who has told it; now by a fictitious
and anonymous letter, as has happened to me several times. one must
exercise prudence in this matter, for all that is written or spoken is
not generally true.”
 m. and d. read with some
slight verbal differences, which translate the same: “for one
might happen to have a servant or two who waste and destroy the
property of their master, and no other servant, however kindly he has
been treated by his master, will tell him what is happening.”
 “this league of the
caste of color for mutual protection and defense from the domineering
caste is very natural. the filipinos are not so constant in maintaining
it, however, that it is not [n]broken by two methods: by offering
money to the accuser, or by bestowing so many lashes on each one who is
implicated in the crime.” (mas, p. .)
 delgado (p. ) finds this
very natural, and dismisses it by the reflection that liberty is
dear.
 in m. and d. this reads:
“therefore when they say that there is no more sugar or no more
oil, it is when there is not [sugar] enough to make a cup of chocolate,
or oil enough to whet a knife.”
 m. and d. read: “they
will place the best cup and plate, [d. mentions only the plate] which
are much different than the others, for the master, and will only look
after him, and pay no attention to the guests.”
 m. and d. omit this
sentence.
 spanish, 
sacabuches consistol y deresistol, a transcriber’s error for
con sistol y diastol (this phrase omitted in d.); a
play on words, as the sackbut forms the various tones by lengthening
and shortening the instrument. the phrase systole and diastole is now
applied to the alternate contraction and expansion of the heart; san
agustin apparently uses it through fondness for a learned phrase.
 the citation from quevedo
is lacking in m. san agustin has slightly misquoted; though it
translates the same as the correct version. the lines are as
follows:
galalon, que en casa come poco,
y á costa agena el corpanchon ahita.
the citation is from quevedo’s 
poema heroica de las necedades y locuras de orlando el
enamorado.
 that is, “much good
may it do you,” an expression used at eating or drinking. san
agustin evidently refers in the following clause to the scanty fare
supplied to those who row in the boats as compulsory service.
 this is not a general rule
among the tagálogs, and much less among the visayans. neither
are all the indians forgers. (delgado, pp. , .)
 m. omits
“alcalde” and reads “prudent and experienced
man.” d. reads “a prudent and experienced
alcalde.”
 i.e., “i heard
your evidence, and feared.”
 m. reads “some
indians;” d., “some erudite indians.”
 rabula, “an
ignorant, vociferous lawyer;” cf. english
“pettifogger.”
 this sentence is omitted by
m. d. reads “all the alcaldes.”
 the italian phrase fabro de calumina is used.
 king josiah or josias was
slain at mageddo. see iv kings (ii kings of the king james version),
xxiii, , ; and ii paralipomenon (ii chronicles of the king james
version), xxxv, –.
 m. reads: “the
indians making use of a whole year in order to increase their
calumny.” d. reads: “just see what subtlety and moderate
arithmetic they use in order to make their accusation; the indians
lumping together a whole year in order to give pasture to one single
horse;” and then adds: “and there are so many cases of this
that if i mentioned them all i would never end.”
 we have thus freely
translated the original sin afianzar calumnia, which
is a regular law term.
 “but a short time
ago, when señor seoane was regent of the audiencia, as the
result of an urgent complaint against a spanish cura, a verbal process
was ordered to be made, and from it not the slightest charge resulted
against the priest. another judge was entrusted with the forming of
another verbal process, with the same result. the supreme tribunal,
being persuaded that the matter was not all calumny, sent an expressly
commissioned judge from manila, who found no more crime than did the
others.
“i personally saw a representation signed by
the gobernadorcillo and all the principales of a village, in which they
affirmed that their cura had forced the wife of the first lieutenant;
had punished the lieutenant for opposing her being kept to sleep in the
convent; went out on the street drunk; went into the town hall to beat
individuals of the municipality; and had not celebrated mass on sunday
for the same reason of being drunk. when a verbal process was made of
it, all retracted. i became acquainted personally with this friar, who
is a fine fellow....” (mas, pp. , .)
 from this point, m. and d.
read: “but it is to images of some new miracle. they have the
habit of devotion, but they seek the newest and forget the
old.”
 as to the indians being
fond of making pilgrimages to new and distant shrines where some
notable miracle has occurred, spaniards often have the same love. see
delgado, p. .
 san agustin is speaking of
the indians of manila and its environs, says delgado (p. ):
“for this is rarely seen in the other islands. hence in the
twenty-four years that i have lived in the visayas, only in the city of
cebu have i ever seen any other than some religious drama [auto sacramental], or the pieces of the school
children.”
 in m. escuitiles;
and in d. miscuitiles.
 the verse number is given
correctly in m. san agustin quotes incorrectly, the proper version
being:
segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem,
quam quæ sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus....
the translation given by wickham (ut
supra, p. ), is as follows: “what finds entrance through
the ear stirs the mind less actively than what is submitted to the
eyes, which we cannot doubt.”
“they are very fond of seeing theatrical
pieces. they make some translations from our dramas, and they make a
piece out of anything although it is destitute of the rules of art.
they are [n]especially fond of very long comedies, that
last a month or more, with many hours of representation daily. these
are drawn from histories or from stories, and they stage them. in tondo
there was played, for instance, matilde, ó las
cruzadas [i.e., “matilda, or the crusades”]. the
celestina was probably the origin of this taste. filipino poets
have written several dramas of this kind, as well as some epic,
religious, and love poems. but in the epoch previous to the arrival of
the spaniards, it appears that there existed only a few love songs, of
whose merits i cannot judge, as i know the language so slightly.
“they have verses of as many as twelve
syllables, which are the ones generally used in their poems. they are
divided into quatrains, whose four verses rhyme among themselves. the
filipino rhyme, however, consists in the last letter being a vowel or a
consonant.... they read all their verses in a singing tone, and the
quatrains of the twelve-syllable verse are read with the motif of the
comintan, which is their national song. the custom of singing
when reading poetry is a practice of china, and of all the asiatic
peoples whom i have visited. the kind of versification which i have
just cited is evidently anterior to our conquest, as is also the
above-mentioned air, which is adjusted to it. this air is melancholy
and does not resemble at all any chinese or indian music that i have
heard. there are several comintans, just as there are different
boleros, polish dances, or tyrolian dances. some of them have a great
resemblance to the music of arabia. on the slopes of camachin [which is
a mountain in southern mindanao], i heard a song which is exactly and
purely of that sort....” (mas, pp. , .)
the celestina mentioned by mas is a noted
dramatic story—probably written about , and by rodrigo cota,
of toledo, and others—which has exercised a very strong influence
on the spanish national drama. it has great literary merit, admirable
style, and well-drawn pictures of human nature; and it attained so
extensive and continual popularity that even the inquisition did not
place celestina in the index until , notwithstanding its
grossness of thought and language. (ticknor, history of spanish
literature, i, pp. –.)
 m. and d. read
“christ our lord.”
 “in the
visayas,” says delgado (p. ) “very rarely do the indians
imitate the spaniards in their dress; for almost all of them go
barefoot, according to their custom, and wear long black garments that
cover the entire body (which we call cassocks or lambong), very
wide breeches, and the shirt outside. for they can never accustom
themselves, as do the spaniards, to gathering it inside, as is the
custom of the country. i have seen the same among the tagálogs,
with the exception of some servants of the spaniards, and some
officials and clerks, among them. but these men do not make the rule
for the other nations of this archipelago, who are numerous and
different. i can truly tell what i see among the spaniards of visayas,
who dress in the same manner as the indians; and very rarely do they
put on shoes and stockings or slippers, except on an important
feast-day when they go to the church, for they cannot endure it any
other way. it is a fact that the indians do preserve somewhat their
ancient customs in districts where there is less civilization and
instruction; but where they are well taught and directed, they have
almost forgotten these.”
“a cura told me that he had surprised a man
and three old women crouched down beside the corpse of the
former’s dead wife. the four people were all covered over with
sheets, and were in the attitude of listening with the closest of
attention to see whether the deceased would say anything to them. they
practice [n]many simplicities like this in all their
solemn ceremonies, of which we have spoken. so general is this that in
the ordinances of good government in force, there is an article that
orders the persecution of idolatry and aniterias.” (mas, pp. ,
 “if father fray
gaspar had been in madrid, he would not have been so greatly surprised
that those soliciting anything should send their wives to obtain
favors. moreover, the filipinos, not only fearing, but with full
consciousness, generally send and even take their wives to the
spaniards to obtain some employment, or merely for money. the most
direct means for a general to obtain the friendship of a married woman
is to win over the husband, just as in order to get a single woman one
must gain over the mother. i have known very intimately a steward who
was very much in love with his wife, and was jealous even of her
shadow. nevertheless, at the least insinuation of his master he took
her to the latter’s apartment, and it appears that he desired her
to go there very often. upon thinking over this matter, i am convinced
that a partial cause of it is the little importance that they attach to
the act of love, and especially in the fact to which they are persuaded
that no one of their women will ever love us; and they are only handed
over for the profit, and are lent us as a personal service, just like
any other; and when the woman goes away from us, she takes her heart
with her, which is all for the filipinos.” (mas, p. .)
 m. and d. add
“most.”
 this phrase is omitted in
 it is not to be wondered at
that they are literal and material in their conversation, for they know
only their villages. see delgado, p. .
“i have observed none of this, especially in
the women to whom i have talked. almost all of them are always
attentive, courteous, and kind.” (mas, p. .)
 m. and d. omit this
sentence.
 m. adds: “and run
away, for he is the bugaboo, with which the children are
frightened.”
 dogs do not bark at the
spaniards only, in any country, but at those who are strange to them.
neither do the indians detest the fathers from birth. the fact that the
indians yield to anyone who assumes a boasting attitude, especially if
he be drunk, and have a knife, is not so much cowardice as prudence.
“i believe that the reverend father was very melancholy, and
tired of the ministry, when he began to write his letter.”
(delgado, pp. , .)
“if our father had traveled, he would have
known that dogs bark at anyone whose clothes are unfamiliar to them. in
regard to their horror of white faces, he at least exaggerates. it is
not at all strange that a child should cry at an object being presented
to him that he has never had in his ken before. i have seen many
children burst into sobs at the sight of my eye-glasses. it is a fact
that some of them have just as little as possible to do with us, either
for contempt, embarrassment, or antipathy; but there are a very great
number who profess affection for us. when the government secretary,
cambronero, died in the year , all his servants shed tears
abundantly. a serving-maid of the señora de recaño was
left desolate, when the latter embarked for españa a short time
ago. an old woman on the occasion of [the engagement of] movales in the
year , gave col. santa romana proofs of great affection and
fidelity. during the same engagement, while don domingo benito was
haranguing his artillery sergeants and telling them ‘i shall die
the first,’ one of [n]them answered, ‘no, sir, i shall die
before you.’ when the jesuits were exiled, the villages that they
administered grieved exceedingly. in the archives of st. augustine, i
have seen the relation of one of the friars who went there for their
relief, and he paints in lively colors the memory preserved of the
jesuits: ‘here they cannot look upon a white habit;
notwithstanding the kind words that we speak to them, and the presents
that we make them, we cannot attract to ourselves the good-will of
these people; hence, when we call a child, he runs away instead of
coming to us.’ i have seen some servants ready and anxious to go
with their master to any part of the world; and, if the spaniards would
take than, many would go to españa. when some insurgents in the
island of leite put alcalde lara in the stocks, his servant feigned to
be in accord with them. he made them drunk, and then took his master
from the stocks. he fitted up a barangay quickly, in which they
attempted to escape, but the night was stormy, and all were drowned.
and finally, i myself have received several disinterested proofs of
their good-will.” (mas, pp. , .)
 “it is difficult to
ascertain whether the filipino is a brave man or a coward. on one side,
we see any braggart terrify a multitude; and on the other, some face
dangers and death with unmoved spirit. when one of them decides to kill
another, he does it without thinking at all of the consequences. a man
of vigan killed a girl who did not love him, six other persons, and a
buffalo; and then stabbed at a tree, and killed himself. another
servant of the tobacco superintendent killed a girl for the same
reason, before a crowd of people, and then himself. a soldier killed a
girl for the same reason while i was passing in front of santo
thomás. a coachman, in november, , tried to kill another
man, because of a love affair; and, failing in the attempt, killed
himself. filipino sailors have committed many cruelties, and have a
reputation throughout the entire indian sea as turbulent fellows and
assassins. the [insurance] companies of bengal do not insure at full
risk a vessel in which one-half the crew is composed of islanders. when
i was in the island of pinang, at the strait of malacca, i tried to get
passage to singapor, in order to go to filipinas, in the brigantine
“juana” and to take [n]in my company as a servant one of the
seventeen sailors of manila, who had been discharged from a portuguese
vessel because of a row that they had had with the captain. the
commander of the “juana” was a chinese, and the crew
malayan; counting sailors and chinese passengers there were about 
persons aboard. under no consideration would the captain admit me
together with the servant, telling me: ‘no, no, even if you give
me a hundred pesos, i will take no man from manila.’ in fact,
after much begging, i had to resign myself and leave him ashore, and
take ship without knowing who would guide and serve me; for i
understood neither chinese nor malayan. at the same time, i have heard
that the filipinos are cowards in a storm. the infantry captain molla
told me that the captain of a pontín which encountered a heavy
tempest began to weep, and the sailors hid in order not to work; and he
had to drive them out of the corners with a stick, for which they began
to mutiny and to try to pitch him overboard. ashore they have given
some proofs of boldness by attacking spaniards to their faces....
sergeant mateo was boldly confronted in the insurrection of . the
soldiers have the excellent quality of being obedient, and if they have
spanish officers and sergeants, will not turn their backs on the fire;
but alone they have never given proof of gallantry. in the war with the
english, they always fled ... and the few europeans whom anda had were
his hope, and the soul of all his operations. i have asked many
officers who have fought with filipinos, either against the savages in
the mountains, or against ladrones; and they all have told me that when
it comes to fighting, they preferred to have twenty-five europeans to
one hundred filipinos. many allege, in proof of their bravery, the
indifference with which they die; but this is rather a sign of
stupidity than of good courage. from all of the above data, we might
deduce that the individual whom we are analyzing is more often found to
be cowardly than impassive and fearless; but that he is apt to become
desperate, as is very frequently observed. they express that by the
idea that he is hot-headed, and at such times they commit the most
atrocious crimes and suicide. he is cruel, and sheds blood with but
little symptoms of horror, and awaits death calmly. this is because he
does not feel so strongly as we do the instinct of life. he has no
great spirit for hazardous enterprises, as for instance that of
boarding a warship, breaking a square, gaining a bridge, or assaulting
a breach, unless he be inflamed by the most violent passions, that
render him frantic.” (mas, pp. –.)
 in m., “to a great
degree;” and in d., “in a certain manner.”
 d. reads “on this
occasion.”
 delgado says (p. ) that
the sin of intoxication is overstated. among the visayans, intoxicating
beverages are indulged in in differing degrees, while many are
abstemious. “i would like to hear what the tagálog indians
who live among spaniards in manila would say to this stain, that is
imputed to them alone.”
“perhaps this may have been so in the time of
father gaspar, as the filipinos preserved more of their ancient customs
than now, for we see that intoxication is very common in the
independent tribes living in the mountains, but today it is not
observed that the [civilized filipinos] drink more than the individuals
of other nations who are considered sober.” (mas, pp. ,
 delgado denies that the
indians are robbers (p. ).
 delgado says (p. ):
“this passage is absolutely malicious, so far as the visayans are
concerned; for no visayan woman of good blood will marry with other
than her equal, however poor she be. and although all are of one color,
they make great distinctions among themselves.”
“the same thing is recounted by father mozo
to be the case among the mountain savages.” (mas, p. .)
 i.e., “at
least as to manner.”
 d. omits this last
clause.
 an adaptation of an old
proverb, probably meaning here, “although sins are committed
here, they are not so frequent as in other places.”
 san agustin speaks without
sufficient authority, says delgado (pp. , ), for he only remained
a short time in panay, and learned nothing of the other parts of the
visayans. “i know very well that what he imputes to the visayan
women is not absolutely true. for generally they detest not only cafres
and negroes, but also inequality in birth. they are not so easy as his
paternity declares in admitting any temptation, and there are many of
them who are very modest and reserved.” bad women exist
everywhere, even among the whites.
“there is no doubt that modesty is a peculiar
feature in these women. from the prudent and even humble manner in
which the single youths approach their sweethearts, one can see that
these young ladies hold their lovers within strict bounds and cause
themselves to be treated by them with the greatest respect. i have not
seen looseness and impudence, even among prostitutes. many of the girls
feign resistance, and desire to be conquered by a brave arm. this is
the way, they say, among the beautiful sex in filipinas. in manila no
woman makes the least sign or even calls out to a man on the street, or
from the windows, as happens in europa; and this does not result from
fear of the police, for there is complete freedom in this point, as in
many others. but in the midst of this delicacy of intercourse there are
very few filipino girls who do not relent to their gallants and to
their presents. it appears that there are very few young women who
marry as virgins and very many have had children before marriage. no
great importance is attached to these slips, however much the curas
endeavor to make them do so. some curas have assured me that not only
do the girls not consider it dishonorable, but think, on the contrary,
that they can prove by this means that they have had lovers. if this is
so, then we shall have another proof that these filipinos preserve not
a little of their character and primitive customs; since, according to
the account of father juan francisco de san antonio, it was a [n]shame for any woman, whether married or
single, before the arrival of the spaniards, not to have a lover,
although it was at the same time a settled thing that no one would give
her affection freely.
“that they are more affectionate than men is
also a fact, but this is common to the sex in all countries....
“that they rarely love any spaniards is also
true. the beard, and especially the mustache, causes them a
disagreeable impression, and he who believes the contrary is much
mistaken. besides, our education, our tastes, and our rank place a very
high wall between the two persons. the basis of love is confidence; and
a rude filipino girl acquires with great difficulty confidence toward
an european who is accustomed to operas and society. they may place
themselves in the arms of europeans through interest or persuasion; but
after the moment of illusion is over, they do not know what to say and
one gets tired of the other. the filipino girl does not grow weary of
her filipino, for the attainments, inclinations, and acquaintances of
both are the same. notwithstanding the filipinos live, as i am told,
convinced that not one of their beauties has the slightest affection
for us, and that they bestow their smiles upon us only for reasons of
convenience, yet i imagine that sometimes the joke is turned upon
themselves—especially if the spaniard is very young, has but
little beard, and is of a low class, or can lower himself to the level
of the poor filipino girl.” (mas, pp. –.)
 m. reads
“fishing.”
 d. reads
“gloomily.”
 m. reads “for to
define them categorically, with an essential and real
definition.” d. reads ”for to define them categorically,
with an essential and real substantial definition, awaits
another.”
 m. omits the remainder of
this paragraph; and the last sentence in d. reads: “but it they
had undertaken the task of defining the indians, they would not have
been so successful.”
 this was the french poet
and theologian john barclay, who was born at pont-à-mousson, in
, and died at rome, august , . he refused to enter the
society of jesus, and followed his father to england where he published
a poem at the coronation of james i, which found considerable favor.
while in london he was accused of heresy, and was summoned to rome by
paul v. in london he published a continuation of his euphormion,
the first part of which had appeared in . this consists of a latin
satire in two books. his argenis was published in paris in ,
and there was a leyden edition in . it is a story, written in prose
and poetry, of the vices of the court. it was very popular and was
translated into many languages. see hoefer’s 
nouvelle biographie générale.
 probably joannes
rodenborgh, who wrote the fifth part of logicæ
compendiosæ (utrecht, ).
 see ante, p. ,
note .
 see ante, p. ,
note .
 i.e., “passion
does not come from custom.” this is lacking in m.
 i.e., “and
infamous need.” this is from the aeneid, book, vi, line .
 st. antony of thebes was
the founder of monachism. he is said to have been born at koma, egypt,
near heraklea, a. d. , and to have died a. d. . in early life he
retired to the wilderness, and lived in seclusion until , when he
founded the monastery of fayum, near memphis and arsinoë. he is
the patron of hospitallers, and his day is celebrated on january .
his life was written by st. athanasius, a condensed translation of
which is given by s. baring-gould in his lives of the saints
(london, , ), i, pp. –. see also addis and
arnold’s catholic dictionary, p. ; and new
international encyclopædia.
 formerly called thebaica
regio, one of the three great divisions of ancient egypt, and
equivalent to upper egypt. this district was famous for its deserts,
which became the habitation of many of the early christians, among them
both sts. antony and arsenius. see larousse’s grand
dictionnaire.
 st. arsenius was a roman of
a noble and wealthy family, who became the tutor of the two sons of
theodosius at constantinople. he fled to egypt after the death of
theodosius, in shame at the poor results of his teaching. there he
lived in the desert, where he was called “the father of the
emperors.” he died [n]about , after a long life of seclusion.
he figures in kingsley’s story of hypatia. his day is
celebrated on july , and he is especially revered in france and
belgium. see baring-gould (ut supra), viii, pp.
 d. reads wrongly
“theodorico.”
 d. reads
“gético.”
 in the first line of
the above citation, which is from the epistolarum ex
ponto, book i, epistle  (to rufinus) read “littore” in
place of “frigore.” the translation
of the two lines is as follows: “what is better than rome? what
is worse than the scythian shore? yet the barbarian flees thither from
that city.”
 i.e., “though
composed of many, it draws to itself the nature of the more worthy
simple form.”
 “among the filipino
indians there are many who are very good, and are very capable of being
directed and taught in good and holy customs; and because there are
many bad ones, who govern themselves not by reason, but by the pressure
of public opinion, it cannot be said rightly and conscientiously that
all are bad.” (delgado, p. .)
“this paragraph appears admirable to me, and
a more exact idea of the filipino cannot be given in so few
words—at least such as he is at present, either because of
circumstances, or because of his physical constitution, or of the two
things together.” (mas, p. .)
 m. and d. add “it is
in favor of their comfort, and they commit other greater acts of
insolence, for.”
 i.e., “they
enter into the joy of their lord;” a reference to matthew xxv, , .
 i.e., “not as
to the cause, but as the effect.” d. reverses the position of the
negative.
 heliogabalus the roman
emperor, who ascended the throne in  a. d., at the age of fourteen,
and was assassinated after three years. he is known chiefly for his
acts of madness and bestiality, and his cruelty.
 san agustin has quoted
these lines incorrectly. they are found in ll. – of marcus
annæus lucanus’s pharsalia, and are as follows:
... o vitæ tuta facultas pauperis angustique
lares!
o munera nondum intellecta deum! quibus hoc
contingere templis aut potuit muris nullo
trepidare tumultu cæsarea pulsante manu?...
the translation of this passage is as follows:
“o secure opportunity of life, and lares of the needy poor man! o
gifts not yet recognized as a god! what temples could enjoy this
blessing, or what walls be in confusion in any tumult, if the hand of
cæsar move?”
 “all religious agree
that they die with the utmost indifference, and that when they come to
the bedside of the dying one, in order to comfort him, they remain cold
upon seeing how little those people are changed by the words that their
approaching peril inspires in them. confessions at such a time are
generally somewhat more sincere, but always very short and stupid. the
relatives are not at all careful about talking of his death [n]in
the presence of the sick person—as, for example, one of them
remarking to the cura in a very natural and quiet voice in his
uncle’s presence (who still fully retained his feeling and
hearing): ‘see, father, it would be wise for you to consecrate
the winding-sheet, for i think that he is about to die soon.’ the
same indifference is to be observed in a criminal condemned to any
punishment. he is seated on his heels on a bamboo bench, smoking. every
few moments the religious enters to give him a christian word, to which
the criminal generally answers: ‘yes, father, i know quite well
that i have to die; what am i to do about it? i am an evil man; god so
decrees; such was my fate;’ and other things of this sort. he
eats regularly, and sleeps as on any other day.... [this] is only one
additional proof, and in my opinion, a not slight one, that the
filipino race is inferior, at least in spiritual matters, to our
race.” (mas, pp. , .)
 the location of the above
quotation is not given in the ayer ms., but is given in both m. and
 d. reads
“chatcere.”
 possibly a reference to
proverbs ii instead of xx (where there is nothing that corresponds to
this passage). the translation of the above is: “i walk in the
ways of justice, in the midst of the paths of judgment, so that i may
call myself diligent.”
 this is not quoted
correctly, but should be: venite ad me omnes, qui
laboratis et onerati estis, et ego reficiam vos. the editor of d.
has emended this passage.
 this is the wrong
reference. in the king james version, it is lxxii, , and in the douay
version, lxxi, .
 i.e., “for to
him that is little, mercy is granted.” this is not in m.
 the remainder of this
paragraph, and all the next, are lacking in m.
 i.e., “no
sacrifice is more acceptable to god than the zeal for souls.”
 i.e., “ye
therefore, my friends who are in the world, proceed with security, and
cry out and announce my will. i will dwell in your heart and in your
mouth: i will be your leader on the way, and you consolation at death.
i will not leave you. proceed with eagerness, for glory increases from
the labor.” d. reads “audacter,” “boldly,” instead of
“alacriter.” m. gives but a portion
of the citation.
 this quotation is not
exact, the correct version being as follows: patientia
enim vobis necessaria est: ut voluntatem dei facientis, reportetis
promissionem. it is not in m.
 in d.
“placing.”
 m. is the only one of the
three versions of this letter that locates this citation correctly. we
adopt the reading of the latin vulgate, as san agustin has not quoted
exactly.
 m. and d. omit these last
four words.
 m. and d. read
“variety of combinations of.”
 of the remainder of the
letter, delgado says (p. ): “in regard to all the rest that
the reverend writer adds, concerning the manner in which those who live
with the indians ought to comport themselves, i have nothing more to
say or to add. for it is all well written and noted, and those who come
new to these islands will do very well to read it and to do as the
reverend father prescribes, teaching the indians to read and write and
other knowledge, for they have great capacity for all and at the same
time, civilization, which is very necessary to them; and where they
fail and sin, punish them as children, and not as slaves. by so doing
they will obtain from them whatever they wish.”
mas says (pp. , ) of the advice given by san
agustin “i would be very glad, and it would be very advantageous
for them, if all the spaniards would adopt this system which is both
wise and unique. but quite to the contrary, many persons think that the
filipinos ought to understand them at the slightest insinuation and
very readily. for any fault they become impatient and call the
filipinos brutes, and carabaos, and express themselves in the presence
of the filipinos in the most violent manner, and in the most insulting
terms about the race in general, even to the point of wishing to
destroy them and other barbarous and sanguinary ideas of which their
heart is not capable. and they do not take note that such outbreaks of
wrath only serve the purpose of confusing the filipinos, rendering them
more stupid, and rousing up hatred against them and all the
spaniards.”
 in m.
“mildly.”
 m. gives the reference
wrongly as the nineteenth verse.
 i.e., “care
must, in fact, be taken that the teacher and the father and the mother
give discipline to their subjects.”
 not in m.
 in d. “and the merit
lies in the patience.”
 i.e., “help
the poor because of the commandment; and send him not away empty-handed
because of his poverty, etc.” m. and d. add the thirteenth verse,
as follows: perde pecuniam propter fratrem et amicum tuum,
et non abscondas illam sub lapide in perditionem. the english of
this is: “lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend: and hide
it not under a stone to be lost.” to the above paragraph m. and
d. add the following: “for the merit becomes greater in
proportion to their ingratitude if we fulfil our obligation and if they
act according to their disposition. for, as says the royal prophet
david (psalm xxxvi, ), mutuabitur peccator, et non
solvet: justus autem miseretur et tribuet.”
 this paragraph is divided
into two paragraphs in m. and d. and is very much abridged. it is as
follows: “it is necessary that those indians who are taken as
servants, be shown no love if they are children, but always
uprightness, for one must consider it as most certain that in
proportion as they are better clothed and caressed, the worse they will
become when they grow up. this is the teaching of the holy spirit: [the
verse from proverbs as above follows]. they must be treated with great
uprightness and prudence, for otherwise they will gradually lose their
respect to the character that god presents to them in the spaniard.
[the fable of king log follows as above.]”
 i.e., “he who
blows his nose too violently generally draws forth blood.”
 m. and d. make two
paragraphs of the above, and read as follows: “one must not press
them to give more of themselves than they can, as we do with the lemon,
for that which will be expressed will be bitter, and, as says the
proverb [in d.—“and as says a law commentary”] qui nimis emungit solet extorquere cruorem. we must
remember in all this the teaching of the holy council of trent, session
 [in d.—“”] de reformat, chapter
i, whose words, although they are very well worth reading, i omit on
account of their length. it is not proper to go up into their houses,
except when necessity requires it, keeping therein the evangelical
precept (luke x,  [wrongly cited as xx]): nolite transire
de domo in domum. for one will lose much in estimation, while their
vices [in d.—“coldness”] do not make this a desirable
diversion.”
 m. and d. add:
“anything is entrusted to them.” the remainder of san
agustin’s letter is omitted in d.
 m. and d. add here:
“for thus does the holy spirit advise us.”
“one day a friend of mine ordered a servant
in my presence to go to a certain house to ask in his name for the last
gazettes from europa. i advised my friend to give the servant a note,
since the latter would doubtless give expression to some bit of
nonsense. he took no notice of me, and sent the servant. in fact, the
man understood “aceite”
[i.e., “olive oil”], for “gaceta” [i.e., “gazette”], and
returned with a bottle of olive oil. his master was very much put out,
while i burst into a roar of laughter. a peculiar thing is often
observed in servants, namely, when one of them is ordered, ‘go to
the house of don antonio,’ before the message is finished the
servant begins to go; and one has to call him back and say to him,
‘but, man alive, where are you going?’ and, if he is
allowed to go, he reaches his destination and says that he has been
sent there, and then returns whence he came, or utters some foolish
remark.” (mas, p. .)
 in the vulgate, the last
word of the latin in this citation is eum.
 i.e., “at
least in passing.” this is not in m.
 m. reads “denude
themselves of their customs.”
 m. reads: “for the
indian who is ordained does not give himself a trade because of the
more perfect estate.”
 m. has instead of
“from the oar,” “from handling a bolo.”
 spanish, la
cuña del mismo palo; another application of an old spanish
proverb.
 m. adds “and those
farthest from manila, where also the remedy is very far
away.”
 spanish, sobre
quítame allá esas pajas—literally,
“regarding ‘carry away these straws from me,’”
defined by the academy’s dictionary as, “about a thing of
little importance or value.”
 picota: “a
column [the insignia of jurisdiction] or gibbet of stone, which is
usually placed at the entrances of towns or villages; on which are
ignominiously exposed the heads of persons executed or of
criminals” (bárcia, dicc.
etimológico).
 m. adds “to the
father cura.” the reason for this letter may be found possibly in
this paragraph, in the hostility of the religious orders to admitting
the filipinos to the priesthood.
 m. reads “how well it
could be subdued and composed.”
 m. adds “in his
happiness.”
 m. reads: “and while
they were all gallantly seated in the hall, and she was, very finely
adorned with jewels, in the room, surrounded by many ladies.”
 m. reads: “the bride
spied the mouse from a long distance, and, not being able to restrain
herself out of respect for that function, she arose and began to run
the length of the hall. she overthrew the people, and they were unable
to restrain the fair bride, and cause her to desist from her
undertaking. the angry groom said to them.”
 the rest of this sentence
reads in m., “even though they should become bishops.”
 matthew xxv, .
 i.e., “the
priesthood is the apex of all good things which exist among
men.”
st. ignatius the martyr was born about the middle
of the first century of the christian era, and is said to have been
baptized by the apostle john. he was bishop of antioch for forty years.
arrested by the roman authorities because of his preaching, he was sent
to rome, where he was killed by wild beasts in the arena, probably
about  a. d. he met the famous polycarp while on his way to rome.
many epistles exist which are said to have been written by him,
although some of them are probably spurious. his day is celebrated on
february . see s. baring-gould (ut supra), ii, pp.
–, and new international encyclopædia.
 i.e.,
“concerning the dignity of the priesthood.” m. adds:
”nihil est in hoc secula excelentius
sacerdotibus [i.e., ‘there is nothing more excellent
in this world than the priesthood’]; and above, 
horur igitur, et sublimitas sacerdotalis nullis poterit compurationibus
adequari si regum fulgori compares, et principum diademati longe erit
inferius, quam si plumbi metallum aduri fugorem compares.
[i.e., “therefore the priestly reverence and height can be
equaled by no comparisons. if it be compared to the splendor of kings
and the diadem of princes, the comparison is far more inferior than if
the metal lead were compared to gleaming gold.”] and of this
father don antonio molina speaks at length in his admirable
book.”
 st. ambrose was one of the
four doctors of the western church. he was born at trèves about
 a. d., and received a good education in rome, and entered into the
roman civil service. elected to the office of bishop of milan, in what
was regarded as a miraculous manner, he soon became one of the great
strongholds of the young religion of christianity. to him was due the
honor of receiving the great augustine into the church. his death
occurred in  a. d. his day is celebrated on december ; and in milan
he is regarded as a patron saint. the ambrosian library of that city is
named for him. see s. baring-gould (ut supra), xv, pp.
–; and new international encyclopædia.
 antonio de molina was a
spanish theologian, who was born at villa-nueva-de-los-infantes
(castilla). entering the augustinian order, he taught theology, until
he later retired to the house at miradores, where he died september ,
. he wrote a book called instruccion de
sacerdotes, which was published in various places in spain, and
later translated into various languages, among them the latin. see
hoefer’s nouvelle biographie
générale, xxxv, col. .
 paulo segneri, s.j. was one
of the most illustrious men that the jesuit order has produced. he was
a native of nettuno, italy, being born march , , and entered the
society december , . he early became deaf through his excessive
study. after teaching the humanities and rhetoric, he became a preacher
and missionary, traversing italy on his missionary journeys during the
years –. in  he was called to rome by innocent xii,
to take the place of his preacher-in-ordinary. his death occurred at
rome, december , . his influence on italy is ranked by some only
second to that of savonarola. his style in writing is regarded as of
chief rank in purity and accuracy for his [n]century. his writings were
numerous, and have been translated into many languages, some of them
into greek and arabian. the book mentioned in the text is 
il parroco instruito: opera in cui si dimostra a qualsisia curato
novello il debito che lo strigne, e la via da tenerse nell’
adempirlo (firenze, ). see sommervogel’s 
bibliothèque; and hoefer (ut supra), xliii, cols.
 the dignity of patriarch in
the catholic church (leaving aside the papal rank) is the highest grade
in the hierarchy of jurisdiction. antioch early occupied a high place
among the patriarchates, although with the lapse of time it lost its
high position; and finally, after the schism between the eastern and
western churches, the appointee to that dignity did not actually assume
the office. see addis and arnold’s catholic dictionary,
pp. , , and . the patriarch mentioned in the text was the famous
cardinal charles thomas millard de tournon. see vol. xxviii, p. , and note ; concepción,
ix, pp. –; and crétineau-joly, v, pp. –.
 these last two sentences
are missing in m.
 at this point the letter
proper in m. ends with the words: “may god preserve you for many
years,” and no signature follows. this is followed by the
questions for men and women of murillo velarde.
 in the text, 
legitimos; probably a transcriber’s error for 
ilegitimos (“of illegitimate birth”).
other papal letters give leave to dispense with the
above classes, who could not, otherwise, be promoted to holy orders.
both classes could, also, be raised to church dignities, but only to
minor dignities, and not to high ones as bishoprics, etc. the
distinction between espurios and 
[i]legitimos seems merely to have been a legal one, as both terms
mean the same in effect.—rev. t. c.
middleton, o.s.a.
 i.e., “it was
lately related to us.”
 in the copy of this
letter conserved in the collection of fray eduardo navarro of the
colegio de filipinas, valladolid, spain (of which we have the
transcription of a few pages at the end), this word reads 
divina.
 antonio (not pedro)
urceo, who was also called codrus, [n]was an erudite italian, who
was born august ,  at rubiera, and died at bologna in . he
was a good educator of youth, but of choleric temper. while acting as
tutor in one of the noble italian families, a fire destroyed most of
his papers, which so worked upon him that he retired into almost
complete seclusion for six months. in  he went to bologna, where he
taught grammar and eloquence. although during his life he gave doubts
of his orthodoxy, his death was all that could have been wished. his
works were published in four editions, the first being at bologna in
, under the title in hoc codri volumine hæc
continentur orationes, seu sermones ut ipse appelabat epistolae.
silvae. satyrae. eglogae. epigrammata. the translation of the above
citation is as follows:
“although thou be freeborn and sprung from noble
parents;
still even yet thou mayst be a base beast.
add that thou art an honor to thy country, and claim
the noblest kin;
still even yet thou mayst be a base beast.
thou mayst have wealth, thou mayst have abundance of
elegant furniture;
still even yet thou mayst be a base beast.
in short, whatever thou shalt be, unless thou have
prudence,
i declare that thou wilt ever be a base
beast.”
of the native priests of the philippines, delgado
says (pp. –): “i know some seculars in the islands,
who although indians, can serve as an example and confusion to the
european priests. i shall only bring forward two examples: one, the
bachelor don eugenio de santa cruz, judge-provisor of this bishopric of
santísimo nombre de jesús, and
calificador of the holy office, a full blooded indian and a native of
pampanga. and inasmuch as the author of this letter confesses that the
pampangos are a different people, i shall name another, namely, the
bachelor don bartolomé saguinsin, a tagálog, a cura of
the district of quiape (outside the walls of manila), an indian, and a
native of the village of antipolo. i knew his parents, and had friendly
relations with them while i was minister in that village. both men were
esteemed for their abilities and venerated for their virtues, in
tagalos and visayas.” in addition, “those reared in any of
the four colleges in manila, for the clerical estate are all the sons
of chiefs, people of distinction among the indians themselves, and not
of the timaua, or of the class of olipon, as the visayan
says, or maharlica or alipin, as the tagálog calls
the slaves and freedmen. the reverend fathers of st. dominic or of the
society rear these boys and instruct them in virtue and learning; and
if they have any [n]of the vices of indians, these are
corrected and suppressed by the teaching and conversation of the
fathers. furthermore, when the most illustrious bishops promote any of
these men to holy orders, they do not proceed blindly, ordering any one
whomever to be advanced—but only with great consideration and
prudence, and after informing themselves of his birth and his morals,
and examining and testing him first before the ministry of souls is
entrusted to him; and to say the contrary is to censure the most
illustrious prelates, to whom we owe so much veneration and reverence.
furthermore, there are among these indians, many (and perhaps most of
them) who are as noble, in their line of descent as indians, as is any
spaniard; and some of them much more than many spaniards who esteem
themselves as nobles in this land. for, although their fate keeps them,
in the present order of things, in an almost abject condition, many of
them are seigniors of vassals. their seigniory has not been suppressed
by the king, nor can it be suppressed. such we call 
cabezas de barangay in tagálog, and ginhaopan in
visayan. they and their children and relatives lose nothing of their
nobility because they serve the king in cutting timber, in the fleets,
or in other personal services which are necessary in this land. as they
lose nothing, it is also much honor for them that the king be served by
them. accordingly, there are sargentos-mayor, masters-of-camp,
captains, governors of the villages, and lieutenants, and all are
indians of distinction. these would not go to row in a banca, and their
hands would certainly be freed from handling a bolo or an ax in the
cutting of timber, and their mothers, wives, and daughters would not
have become spinners, if it were not for españa. and although
all the indians seem of one color to the father, this color is well
distinguished among them; and they are very respectful to their chiefs
and much more so to their priests, even though these be indians like
themselves.” delgado continues by saying that, although some of
the native priests have turned out badly, that is not sufficient to
condemn them all. it is arbitrary to declare that the indian enters the
priesthood solely for his own comfort, and because of the respect shown
him, and not because of the spiritual blessings. many spaniards also
enter the ecclesiastical estate merely for a living. there are examples
of negro, japanese, and chinese priests. “consequently, it is not
to be wondered at that the most illustrious prelates and bishops should
ordain indians here and in nueva españa, and in other parts of
the indias.”
 the date of the navarro
copy is wrongly given as .
 pedro murillo velarde was
born august , , at villa laujar, granada, and entered the jesuit
novitiate at the age of . having entered the philippine missions, he
was long a professor in the university of manila; and later was rector
at antipolo, visitor to the mindanao missions, and procurator at rome
and madrid. he died at the hospital of puerto santa maria, [n]november
, . murillo velarde is one of the more noted among jesuit
writers. his principal works are the following: cursus
juris canonici, hispani et indici (madrid, ); 
historia de la provincia de philipinas de la compañia de
jesus (manila, ); and geographica historica
(madrid, ), in ten volumes. in the historia (which
work we have used freely in the present series, as material for
annotation) was published his noted map of the philippine islands, the
first detailed map of the archipelago; it was made by order of the
governor of the island, valdes tamón, in .
 a kind of sausage composed
of lean pork, almonds, pineapple kernels, and honey.
 this sentence is missing in
father navarro’s copy.
 literally “lose a
foothold.”
 delgado here refers to the
“opinion” by murillo velarde which is prefixed to vol. i of
san antonio’s chronicas; this is dated at san
miguel, may , , and contains a detailed description of the
products of the islands—vegetable, animal, and mineral—from
which we extract his description of the peoples therein, as
follows:
“the natives of these islands are generally
called indians, because these islands are included in the demarcation
of the western indias—although properly they are in the eastern
hemisphere, because, as they are distant from españa more than a
hundred and eighty degrees of longitude, which makes the half-circuit
[of the globe], it necessarily follows that they must be on the side of
the east. all the indians resemble one another, especially in the
yellowish-brown color and the flattened nose; and [n]there is
little difference between the individuals. in the island of negros,
between cavitan and sipalay, i encountered heathen blacks with crinkled
hair, as if they were from guinea. the people who are here called
creoles are of a swarthy brown color, with withered skin, and are quite
civilized and capable. as for the origin of the indians, i am inclined
to think that they originate from malayos, on account of the similarity
of their language; for by examining on various occasions a malay (a
native of maláca) who could speak several languages fluently,
and a ternatan, and lutaos and subanos, i have ascertained the
following: in the malay, “sky” is called languit,
and the same in tagálog, in lutáo, and subáno;
“man” [varon] is lalaqui in malay, as in the
tagálog and bisayan; “tongue” is dila in
malay, as in tagálog; “white” is puti in
malay, as in tagálog, subáno, and lutáo. in other
words the difference is but slight; thus, in malay “land”
is nigri, in tagálog lupa, in lutáo 
tana, in boholan yuta; and “man” [hombre] is in malay oran, in tagálog 
tavo, in lutáo aa, in subáno gatao. the
indians are exceedingly clever in every kind of handiwork, not for
inventing, but for imitating what they see. they write beautifully;
many of them are tailors and barbers, for they learn both these trades
with little effort; and there are among them excellent embroiderers,
painters, and silversmiths; and engravers whose work has no equal in
all the indias—and i was even going to place it far ahead of all
the rest, if shame had not restrained me—as is very obvious in
the many and excellent engravings which they are all the time
producing. they are good carvers, gilders, and carpenters. they build
vessels for these islands—galleys, galliots, pataches, and ships
for the acapulco trade-route. they are good seamen, artillerists, and
divers—for there is hardly an indian who does not know how to
swim very well. they are the pilots of these seas. they excel in making
bejuquillos, which are golden chains of delicate and
exquisite workmanship. from palm-leaves, rattan, and nito they
make hats, and petates or rugs, and mats, that are
very handsome, and wrought with various kinds of flowers and other
figures. they are noted as mechanics and puppet-players, and make
complicated mechanisms which, by means of figures, go through various
motions with propriety and accuracy. some are watchmakers. they make
gunpowder, and cast mortars, cannon, and bells. i have seen them make
guns, as handsomely constructed as those made in europe, although i do
not think that they would be as substantial and reliable as those.
there are in manila three printing-houses, and all keep indian workmen;
and the errors that they make are not [n]numerous. they have
remarkable skill in music; and there is no village, however small, that
has not a very respectable musician to officiate in the church. among
them are excellent voices—trebles, contraltos, tenors, and
basses; almost all can play on the harp, and there are many violinists,
and players on the oboe and flute. it is especially noticeable that not
only those whose trade it is to make these instruments do so, but
various indians, through love [for such work], make guitars, harps,
flutes, and violins, with their bolos or machetes; and they learn to
play these instruments by only seeing them played, and without any
special instruction. almost the same thing occurs in other matters; and
on this account it is said that the indians have their understanding in
their eyes, since they so closely imitate what they see. such are the
indians, when observed on the outside surface of their aspect; but when
one penetrates into the interior of their dispositions, peculiarities,
and customs, they are a labyrinth, in which the most sagacious man
loses his way. they appear ingenious and simple in countenance and
words, but they are masters eminent in deceit and feigning; under an
apparent simplicity they conceal an artful and crafty dissimulation. i
believe that the indian never fails to deceive, unless when his own
interests are hindered. in their lawsuits and business dealings they
are like flies, which never quit what they are seeking, no matter how
much they are brushed away; and thus they surpass and conquer us. the
chinese say that the spaniard is fire, and the indian is water, and
that water quenches fire. they neither resent an injury nor thank one
for a kindness. if you give them anything, they immediately ask for
another. there is no fixed rule for construing them; for each one is
needed a new syntax, because they are anomalous. with them the argument
is not concluded by induction, since no indian resembles another, nor
even is one like himself; for in the short round of one day he changes
his colors oftener than a chameleon, takes more shapes than a proteus,
and has more movements than a euripus. he who deals with them most
knows them least. they are, in fine, a union of contrarieties, which
the greatest logician could not reconcile; they are an obscure and
confused chaos, in which species cannot be perceived or formal
qualities distinguished; and if i had to define them i would say:
“obstabatque alijs aliud, quia corpore in vno
frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis,
mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia
pondus.”
 alluding to the irregular
tides in the straits of euripus, between eubœa and greece; during
a large part of the month these tides occur as often as eleven to
fourteen times during the twenty-four hours. their irregularity
occasioned among the greeks a proverb, which delgado here uses.
 a name given by the
inhabitants of cuba to the natives of mexico, and in vera cruz to those
of the interior. the name is also applied to shrewd and brusque
persons. (new velázquez dictionary.)
 these two rules are
respectively: “evil once, evil is always presupposed;” and
“evil [may spring] from any failing.”
 these chains were also of
chinese manufacture; apparently the filipinos took up this industry
through their tendency to imitate.
 the lygodium
scandens, also called gnito and nitongputi, a
climbing fern found throughout the philippines. blanco gives the name
of the genus as ugena. the glossy, wiry stems are used in the
making of fine hats, mats, cigarette and cigar cases, etc. see 
census of philippines, iv, p. .
 the balate is an echinoderm
found abundantly in the visayas, of which delgado describes three
varieties (p. ): namely the holothuria scabra (jager), which
is white; the holothuria atra (jager), which is black; and the
bacongan or synapta similis (semper), which is of larger
size. the second variety is most esteemed. it was sold dry in the
visayas or taken to manila and sold, where they were worth thirty-five
or forty or even more silver pesos per pico. the chinese especially
esteemed them (and do so yet) and large sums were paid for them in that
country. the filipinos occasionally ate them fresh, but only in the
absence of fish.
 [contents]
the native peoples and their customs
[san antonio, in his cronicas (manila, –), i,
pp. –, has the following ethnological matter. we omit the
side heads.]
chapter xxxix
of the origin of the indians
[after a brief allusion to the creation of man at the beginning of
the world, the writer continues:]
. now, then, i have said as much as there is to say of the origin
of the indians, if we speak of the first and most remote. for to
endeavor to determine the first settlers of these lands, whence and how
they came, whether they were carthaginians, jews, spaniards,
phœnicians, greeks, chinese, tartars, etc., is reserved for god,
who knows everything; and this task exceeds all human endeavor. and if
such study obtain anything, it will amount only to a []few fallible
conjectures—with danger of the judgment, and without any advance
of the truth or of reputation. and such is the notion (omitting many
other absurdities that have been written), that the indians were
produced ex putre like unclean animals, or like the wild plants
of the field. others showing them great favor, assign the sun as their
father, which produced them from some noble material. others say [that
they were produced] by the ingenious art of chemists or magicians;
others that there were two adams in the world, one in asia, and another
in the western indias, and that our indians proceeded from one of them;
others, that there were already people in the world before the creation
of adam; and that from them came the heathen, and from adam, the
hebrews. all of the above, being so erroneous nonsense, and blindness
from the devil, is already refuted, and is well refuted with
contempt.
. the only conjecture that can be made with some more visible
foundation is the origin of our indians, considering those who were
found in these islands at the time of the conquest by the spanish arms.
in accordance with this, i shall relate what written records i have
found (which is very little), and what i have carefully investigated,
which will not be much, for the natives are not very capable of forming
adequate accounts of this subject, and what we europeans are reducing
to treatises.
. father colin (both learned and curious in the
investigation of the matter which we are treating) reduces the people
found in this land by our first conquistadors into three different
classes. the first class consisted of those who ruled and governed as
absolute masters; and these were civilized after 
[]their own fashion. the
second consisted of black and barbarous mountaineers who inhabited the
tops of the mountains, like brutes. the third consisted of men neither
so barbaric nor so civilized as the other two classes; for, although
they lived in retirement, they did not hate civilization and human
intercourse.
. this third class still remains in the same ancient condition.
they live, as a rule, on the plateaus of the mountains, and at the
mouths of rivers, and maintain themselves by hunting and fishing, and
some agriculture. most of them trade, and barter wax with the villages.
these people are called zimarrònes, zambals, ylàgas,
tìngues, tagabaloòyes, manòbos, mangyànes, and various
other names, according to the difference of the sites where they live.
some or others of these have become christians, through the efforts of
the near-by evangelical ministers. the rest are heathen, but they have
no determined rites, and are governed only by the customs of their
ancestors, and those customs are mostly barbaric. some of these people
are accustomed to pay some sort of recognition or feudal due to our
catholic monarch, who is thereby bound to defend them from the
invasions of their neighboring enemies. such is done by the
tagabaloòyes in the province of caràga, who pay their
annual feudal due in guinàras []and medriñaques (textiles
of abacá), in order to be defended from the moros their
neighbors. likewise the mangyànes of mindôro (who number
about seven thousand), who pay fifty-two arrobas and a half of wax
annually, or  tributes; and some of the manòbos in the
mountains of caràga (who are heathen and without number,
although some are christians—a people civilized and well inclined
to work, who have [fixed] habitation and excellent houses)—pay
tribute.
. the origin of all these people (who are scattered throughout
these islands) is inferred to be either the many civilized indians who
have retreated to the mountains in order not to pay tribute, or in
order not to be chastised for any crime; or the many different nations
immediate to this archipelago. for some bear traces of being japanese
mestizos, as do the tagabaloòyes, as i am well informed by
religious who have had intercourse with them. some are known to proceed
from the chinese; some from pure indians, and some from other nations,
as is declared by the circumstances of face, body, color, hair,
customs, manner, and behavior—according to the experience of
various religious, who agree that they are not of the pure race of the
indians, but mestizos as above stated. and even in five clans of
mangyànes who are said to exist in the island of mindòro,
there is one which has a little tail, as do the monkeys; and many
religious who have assured me of it, as []witnesses. in valèr, on the
coast opposite us, a woman was found not long ago who had a long tail,
as was told me by the present missionary; and he was unable to be sure
of the origin of that race, unless it was a race of jews.
. i do not know whether those people who are found only in the
environs of manila, and are called criollos morenos
[i.e., creole blacks], can be put in this mestizo class. the
former are all oldtime christians, docile, well inclined, and of
sufficient understanding. they serve the king in personal duties, and
always have their regiment of soldiers, with their master-of-camp,
captains, and other leaders; and in this way they are outside the
reckoning as indians. it is difficult to assign their true origin to
them. for some make them the descendants of those blacks, of whom we
shall speak later, who were the primitive lords of these domains. but i
do not see how this can be so, for they do not resemble those negrillos
either in their hair or in the members of their bodies, or in the
qualities of their minds, in which these creoles have the complete
advantage. and although it might be said that they have been bettered
in all ways with the lapse of time, and the change of location to one
more civilized and temperate, it is not credible that they would not
retain some of their old vices, as is the case with various other races
here, and as has been experienced in nueva españa. some people
make them the descendants of those slaves who were formerly held here
by the petty rulers, brought by foreign traders in exchange for the
drugs that formed their commerce and with whose price they made a good
profit. even yet they bring to our settlements a considerable
number—so []many, that it is necessary for one of the
auditors to be judge of the slaves, and his duty costs him his time and
patience. the creoles refuse to confess this origin, and it does not
seem to me that they would be so well received and so well regarded if
they had so vile an origin. some believe that they descend from the
free malabars who come to these islands under pretext of trade. i
incline more to this view, paying heed to the physiognomies and
intellect of them all, for they are almost all alike in their clear
dark color, aquiline noses, animated eyes, lank hair, docile
disposition, and good manners, by which we may infer that those that
there are now are malabar and indian mestizos.
. at the present time, all this archipelago, and especially these
islands of the tagálogs, are full of another race of mestizos,
who were not found at the first discovery, whom we call sangley
mestizos, who
are descended from indian women and chinese men. for since trade with
them [i.e., the sangleys] has been, and is, so frequent, and so
many remain in these islands under pretext of trade, and they are the
ones who supply these islands with clothing, food, and other products,
those who have mixed with the indian women in marriage are numerous;
and for this purpose they become christians, and from them have
resulted so many mestizos that one cannot count 
[]them. they are all
christians, and quite commonly well disposed, and very industrious and
civilized. they take pride in imitating the europeans in everything,
but their imitation is only a copy. they inhabit the same villages with
the tagálogs, but are not reckoned with them; since for the
reckoning of the king they belong to a different body. the women are
more like the sangleys or chinese, but the men not so much; however,
these inherit from them ambition, in their continual industry.
. there is also another kind of mestizo—the
japanese—who result from the japanese who were shipwrecked on
these islands in former years. they are of better conduct than the
others, since they have a better origin. they are more esteemed here
and have more privileges, for they only pay half as much tribute as do
the others.
. it is tradition that the negrillos, who belong to the second
class of people whom our first conquistadors found, were the first
owners of the islands of this archipelago; and that, the civilized
nations of other kingdoms having conquered them, they fled to the
mountains and settled there, and from there it has never been possible
to exterminate them, because their sites are impenetrable. there they
have lived and brought forth children until the present. in former
times they were so elated with their primitive power that, although
their forces were not able to cope with those of foreigners in the
open, they were very powerful in the thickets, mountains, and mouths of
the rivers; and were accustomed to burst like an avalanche upon the
villages, and compel their inhabitants to pay them tribute, as if they
were the lords of the land, who were inhabiting it. and if []the people
refused to give it willingly, they killed right and left, collecting
the tribute in the heads of those who were decapitated; as was written
by one of our oldtime religious in the following words: “even in
my time, it happens,” he says, “that they descended to the
settlements and sought tribute from the tagálogs, and at times
took some heads for this purpose. thus did it happen in
sinilòan, which refused tribute at the approach of the
spaniards. the mountain indians, having revolted, attacked the village;
and they took three heads, and badly wounded a spaniard who was
defending them.” thus far the religious. at other times those
people did not allow the indians to make use of the wood and game of
the mountains, and the fish of the rivers. for being very skilful in
the use of the bow and arrow, and very swift and experienced in the
fastnesses of the mountains and thickets, they inhumanly shot with
arrows as many as approached their territories, without anyone catching
sight or sound of them. for that reason, the inhabitants of the
villages consider it wise to make an agreement with the negrillos to
pay them a certain tribute, provided that the latter leave the rivers
and fields free. and although this pact is not so apparent at present,
i believe that it is practiced secretly because of the fear that the
indians have of them, and because of their dependence on them; since
the negrillos are the lords of the mountains which contain the most
virgin forests, with woods of the greatest value. it is a fact, too,
that those of the present day are as barbarous as their ancestors.
. all of these people are black negroes, most of whom have kinky
hair, and very few have lank. []they are flat-nosed, and almost all of
them have thick, projecting lips. they go totally naked, and only have
their privies covered with some coverings resembling linen cloths,
which they draw on from the back forward, and which are called 
bahaques. they make those bahaques from the bark of trees, pounded
with heavy blows, so that there are some that look like fine linen.
wrapping a rattan around the waist, they fasten the bahaque to it by
the two ends. as ornaments they wear certain bracelets of rattan of
various colors, curiously wrought; and garlands on their heads and on
the fleshy parts of their arms, composed of various flowers and
branches; and as a means of greater distinction for some one person, a
cock’s feather or the feather of some other bird, as a plume.
their food consists of fruits, and roots of the mountain; and if they
find, perchance, some deer, they eat it in that place where they kill
it. that night they make their abode there, and after they grow tired
of dancing, they sleep there—all helter-skelter, like brutes.
next day the same thing happens, and they sleep in another
stopping-place. all their customs are the savage and brutish ones
characteristic of barbarians; and they recognize no other laws,
letters, or government than those of the heads of their families, at
the most. they only care about defending their own territories, upon
which they have lively wars, some negrillos against others, with great
mortality on both sides. at such times no natives dare enter the
mountains, for the negrillos kill them all, whether friend or enemy.
their most common arms are shield, bow, and arrow. if by a miracle any
christian is found among these people, and if perhaps the religious
have reared some of []them in christianity from childhood, it very
rarely occurs that he does not flee to the mountains whence he
originated, when he becomes grown.
. one of the islands of this archipelago which has a name, is the
one called the island of negros, because of the abundance of those
people. it is located between the two islands of zebú and
panày, and in it is established a christian and civilized
government. but at one point of this island, which lies toward the
west, and is called the point of sojotòn, there is a great
number of the said blacks, and not one christian. in the center of the
island is a much greater number; therefore, it is along the beach where
the jesuit fathers and the seculars administer, and where the visayans
or pintados are settled.
. the origin of these negrillos is thought to have been interior
india, or citra gangen, which was called etyopia; for it was
settled by ethiopian negroes, whence went out the settlers to african
etyopia, as father colin proves in detail. consequently, there being on
the mainland of india nations of negroes, and even in nueva guinea so
many that their first discoverers gave the island that name because of
the multitude of these people; and since the distance from those places
to these islands and the philippine archipelago is not great; nor was
the land [of nueva guinea] which was five hundred leguas in length,
entirely settled with blacks—whom the ships of viceroy don
antonio de mendoza found in one of the capes of the strait of
magallanes: those blacks could very easily pass from one island to
another, and their chief abode with their own name might be the island
of negros, as we have remarked. thence they could extend afterward to
dominate and settle []the rest of the islands, without any opposition
from other people, until the opposition came through other men more
rational and civilized than they, who dispossessed them.
. the third kind of people whom our spaniards found in this
archipelago were the civilized nations, who maintained their government
or seigniory on the river banks, on the seashores, and in the other
sites with the best locations in these regions, and in the locations
most fit for healthful and safe dwelling-places. among them there was
another remarkable class of people, and their domination, scattered
throughout the many islands of this archipelago, the chief of whom are
the tagálogs, pampangos, visayans, and mindanaos. other peoples
are reduced to these, although they have various distinguishing marks.
the tagálogs, who are the natives of manila and its
archbishopric, with but little distance between their villages, were
malays, who came from a district called malàyo; that is the
origin of all the malays, who are scattered throughout the most and the
better parts of all these archipelagoes. they are located on the
mainland of malâca, and as that district is not far distant from
the great island of bornèy, it is inferred (and this tradition
has been handed down from father to son), that the malays went to
bornèy, and from bornèy to settle manila and its
district; taking the name of tagàlog—which is the
same as taga ylog, which signifies, in their own language,
“those who live on the rivers;” for the tagálogs
have always lived on the shores of the rivers.
. that the tagálogs originated directly from the malays,
is proved (in the opinion of []all) by their language, which differs but
little from that of the real malays; by their color, and the shape of
their faces and their bodies; by the clothes and vesture in which the
spanish conquistadors found them; by their customs and ceremonies, all
of which resemble those of the malays—of whom the tagálogs
themselves said, and say always, that they are the true descendants.
the coming of the malays to this archipelago is not incredible, as we
have so many examples of various accidents in these seas which have
originated from the weather, by which we have seen brought to these
islands unknown peoples, who spoke languages which no one could
understand. for instance, a boat driven from its course, landed in the
year  on the opposite coast of valèr and casigùran,
where our religious were in charge; it contained more than twenty men,
whose language or garb had not been known until that time. but it is
much more easily credible that the malays came to these islands led by
greed for their commercial profits—as, one reads in the histories
of the portuguese, happened in the regions of india with the persians
and arab moros, who, having entered under the pretext of trade,
afterwards became masters of everything. the same thing is said here of
the entrance of the moro malays.
. the pampangos (according to tradition) originated from the
largest island of the orient, which is that of sumàtra or
trapobàna (although some apply the latter name to
zeilàn), which is located below the line. that island is seven
hundred leguas in circumference, and is near the land of malâca
and malâyo, and for that reason it is included in the aurea
chersonesus. in the midst of that great []island of sumàtra there is
a large lake, on whose surrounding marge many different peoples have
their abodes. according to father colin (who himself examined him), a
pampango who had lost his way reached that place; and, having
discovered that there were men there of his own build, language, and
clothing, approached, and entered into conversation with them in his
own elegant pampango tongue. they answered him in the same speech, and
one of their old men said: “you are descendants of the lost
people who, in former times, left here to settle other lands, and have
never been heard of since.” from this it appears that one may
infer the origin of the pampangos. but it is not easy to determine
whether they came from sumàtra direct, or settled first in
bornèy, because of the nearness of its lands and domains, and
thence passed on to settle the islands of this archipelago; although it
appears from the statements of some who have been in bornèy for
a time that they even find there sufficient indications that the
pampangos originated, some from sumàtra and others from
malâyo. it is certain that if the island of bornèy was not
a land continuous with that of these islands in past centuries (and
arguments are not lacking for this), at least many islets are found
lying in a row and near one another, with which bornèy is
closely connected. such a one is paragua, which extends in a northerly
direction. toward the east, bornèy is extended by
mindanào. with this continuation and the short distances between
these regions, one can see the little difficulty in changing their
abodes from one to the other; and []it is believable that the tagálogs,
pampangos, and other civilized races who were found in this
archipelago, and who were almost alike in language, customs, bodily
proportions, and clothing, as now we see them, came immediately from
bornèy, some from some provinces and some from others. that may
account for the little difference that is found among them.
. it is argued that the visayans and pintados—who are the
ones found in the camàrines, lèyte, samàr,
panày, zebù, and other neighboring territories—came
from the large island of macasàr, which is very powerful and
densely populated. it has its emperor, who is called sumbanco,
and many petty rulers. the basis of this argument lies, not only in the
short distance from that island to this archipelago, for it is only
distant about sixty leguas from the point of samboànga; but also
because in macasàr, as is reported, there are indians who adorn
and tattoo the body as do the visayans (who are called pintados on that
account). but it is not known with certainty where one and the other
originated. we only know of a relation written by the chief pilot,
pedro fernandez de quiròs, of his voyage to the salomon islands
and their discovery by albaro de mendaña de neyra in the year
. that relation is addressed to doctor antonio de morga,
lieutenant-general for his majesty of the philipinas. the said
quiròs says in it that, finding themselves in ten long degrees
south latitude, they sighted an island to which general don albaro gave
the name of la magdalena; and that from its port there came to receive
them, he says, “with seventy ships, more than four hundred white
indians, of a very fine symmetry, []tall, lusty, and robust, and so well built
that they far surpassed us. they had fine teeth, eyes, mouth, the most
beautiful hands and feet, and long hair. many of them were very fair;
and among them were the must handsome youths, all naked, and without
covering over any part; and all their bodies, legs, arms, hands, and in
some the faces, were adorned as among these visayans.” from this
it is evident that they are pintados indians; and that they were not
conquered, like those whom we call here pintados visayans. they live in
south latitude, in the same parallel as that of the north, from ten to
twelve degrees. but it is not easy to determine what might be the
origin of the others; since, although it is known that this custom of
tattooing and making figures on the body is found in brasil, in
florida, among the scythians of asia, and the britons of europa, and
even among the moros of africa, those nations are very remote from our
pintados; and so remote an origin cannot be conceded to the latter.
. the large island of mindanao took its name from a large lake
(which is called danào in the general language of these
islands) which is found in that island, and into which many rivers
flow. the same thing has happened in that island as i have said of the
others, namely, that its first owners and settlers must have been the
ones who are now found on the uplands and in the fastnesses of the
mountains and the crags. since they are inclined to the mountains, they
allowed the foreign traders to settle their seacoasts and rivers, as
they were found uninhabited and defenseless; and when the latter had
taken possession of the best of the territories and districts, the true
owners were unable to expel the []foreigners, since the latter were the more
powerful and civilized.
. from this fact comes the variety of tribes that have been found
in that island of mindanào: such as the caragas, the butuans,
the cagayans, the dapitans, the mindanaos, the malanaos, besides the
tagabaloòyes, manòbos, and lutàos, and a great
number of blacks, like those of whom we have already written. of all of
them, when we consider their first origin, there is no other inference
than that it was in the neighboring islands of bornèy,
macasàr, or the malùcas, considering not only the
mahometan rites and their manner of dressing, but also the bonds of
sympathy existing among them. for to this day they maintain their
friendship and trade, and unite for the protection of one another,
although they are not all mahometans, and most of them are infidels,
atheists, and total barbarians.
. if we consider their more immediate origin, the
caragueños have the first place. they are so called from caraga
or caràghas, which was formerly the name of all that coast which
extended north and south from the point of surigao to that of san
agustin, and then, turning toward the west, extended from surigao and
ran through iligàn and as far as dapitan, until in later times a
division of districts was made. the caragas are the oldest people in
that island, and without the protection of any foreigners have
maintained their location and their valorous courage—which was
well known in former times, by the visayans and even by all the islands
of this archipelago. they have rendered greater their valor by the
character of christians (a fact which they owe to the burning zeal of
the discalced []augustinian fathers, their first
conquistadors), since their aid has been the most efficient and most
formidable in the invasions of the moros, in favor of the church and
its evangelical ministers. these people, if they are not butuans,
differ but little from them, and now they are united; by which we
believe the origin of both to have been common.
. the butuans, worthy of eternal memory and thanks, as they were
the first among whom the catholic arms found shelter, come down from
the village and river of butuàn, the coast which looks to the
north from mindanào. it was the first soil where the famous
magallanes
planted the domination of jesus christ and that of our catholic king.
all these, perchance, have the same origin as the visayans and
pintados, because of their great nearness to them. but they are the
origin of the best blood and nobility of the basilans and joloans, for
the king of xolò even confessed that he was a butuan. but he
gives the lie to that by his barbarous procedure, for he has been the
scourge most disturbing to these islands; while the butuans have ever
remained faithful, and have been vassals to god and to our catholic
monarch, following the example of the caragas throughout.
. the cagayans take their name from cagayàn el chico
[i.e., the little], which is [found by] following the coast from
butuan to the west and southwest. it is a bay with this name, which is
not of ancient usage, but was given from the other cagayàn,
today a province in the upper part of the island of luzòn,
between cape bojeadòr and that of []engaño. these islanders are
reduced and civilized, and differ but little from the previous ones
[i.e., the caragas] from which it is argued that they are not
very different from them in their origin.
. the dapitans were a people who inhabited a closely hemmed-in
strait between the island of bohòl and that of pànglao,
and possessed the two shores of that strait. they conquered the
boholàns in a war, and assumed their name and territory. these
new and triumphant boholans left that island of bohòl (the
country having already been abandoned by the old boholàns), and
went to live in dapitàn, located on the mindanào coast,
almost opposite bohòl and pánglao, whence they took the
name dapitàn. that name has been extended and preserved even to
the present, because of their fortunate progress, and the friendly
reception that our first conquistadors experienced from their noble
loyalty and honorable valor. no other more remote origin is known of
them, but it is conjectured to be like the others.
. the mindanàos and malanàos are moros, but they
seem formerly to have been heathen (from which today they are
considered as newcomers), and took their names from the celebrated
lakes in their territories. father combès says that the
malanàos resemble the visayans in their government, and the same
is inferred of the mindanàos; and, of both, that one must seek
there their true origin. the mindanàos have always remained
mahometans, and have not allowed the light of the gospel to enter. the
malanàos, with the district of bayùg, were reduced to the
yoke of christ at another time, and were for some years constant to
their baptisms by the []discalced augustinian fathers; but later they
grew weary of it. at the present time some of those moros have come to
the governor of manila with the title of ambassadors, from bayùg
and malanào, in order to petition for the discalced augustinian
fathers as ministers of the gospel. this is not the first time when
they have requested them, as well as the franciscan religious, as i
have seen in an original document. since the fathers of the society are
those to whom those places are adjudged for the preaching of the holy
gospel, and since the disposition of that race is so faithless in their
dealings, some suspicions have been aroused by those embassies, and we
are endeavoring to probe their designs in coming.
. the tagabaloòyes take their name from some mountains
which they call baloòy, which are located in the interior of the
jurisdiction of caràga. they are not very far remote from and
trade with the villages [of caraga], and some indeed live in them who
have become christians. others are being converted through the zeal and
care of the discalced augustinian fathers, who regard them as
inhabitants of baslig, which is their headquarters and priorate. those
people, as has been stated above, are the descendants of lately-arrived
japanese. this is the opinion of all the religious who have lived there
and had intercourse with them, and the same is a tradition among
themselves, and they desire to be so considered. and it would seem that
one is convinced of it on seeing them; for they are light-complexioned,
well built, lusty, very reliable in their dealings, respectful, and
very valiant, but not restless. so i am informed by one who has had
much to []do with them; and all the above are qualities
which we find in the japanese.
. the lutàya nation, or the lutaos, do not give much sign
of their first origin, just as they do not evince any particular
inclination for one kingdom or another. for since their natural
disposition is one of self-interest and fickle, and delights in war,
they make alliance now with the joloans, now with the basilans, and now
with the mindanaos—as quickly with one as another, and as quickly
against their allies and with others. they show that they are moros by
the turban, the marlota, their arms, and their ceremonies; but they cannot be
very ancient, since the mahometans have not been very long in india and
in these parts. the lutaos could have come to these islands from the
regions whence it is inferred that the others have come.
. of the mountain people without civilization or government, and
with the life and custom of barbarians, it is inferred that they were
some of these primitive possessors, who fled from the civilized
foreigners. these people have various names in various settlements. in
yligàn and samboàngan, they are called subànos; in
caràga, manòbos; in xolò, guinuànos; in
basilàn, sameacàs. and although some say that it is known that they
are the descendants of the malays, because their language is built on
the general roots of the malay language, there are religious (living
today) who have lived there for many years, who assure me that they
have not heard, in their method of talking with 
[]them, any malay root.
consequently, since the islands are so strung out even as far as the
islands of bornèy and macasàr, and since the crossing is
so easy, it is always inferred that their origin comes from that
direction.
. in the upper and northern part of the great island of
luzòn are the two provinces of cagayàn and ylòcos.
those people, as is inferred by father colin, are descended from
chinese or japanese, because the graves of men of larger stature than
the indians have been found there, as well as some chinese and japanese
jewels which have been preserved among them. if these should be slight
indications—for they can proceed from various other
circumstances, on account of the great nearness of china and
japan—they may aid in the foundation of that inference. but we
cannot get any farther than conjectures, as in everything else, after
so much toil. it serves only as a light, so that others may infer a
truer origin. and the same is true of pangasinàn, which lies
next.
. on this account, and without all the above serving as an
obstacle, one can also conjecture the origin of other nations who are
scattered through the innumerable islets of these archipelagoes; for
they may proceed from all india extra gangen and from its most
renowned kingdoms, such as siàn, cambòja, china,
cochinchina, tunquin, japon, the lequios, etc.—especially when
not few affirm that the chinese dominated all this archipelago, and
that they were the first settlers of the javas, as is mentioned by
barros. in fine, these are the conjectures that i have found. other
conjectures may be made from their customs and ceremonies, in the
comparison of which []the curious will find not a few strong
arguments, if they read thoughtfully. but, at the last, god is the only
one who knows the truth, to which our limited judgments cannot
penetrate.
chapter xl
of the characteristics [genio] and genius [ingenio] of the
filipino indians
[paragraphs , , and a portion of  will be found in our
vol. xxviii, pp. –. the
balance of the chapter follows.]
 ... they are the greatest enemies that the father ministers have.
they are impious in the known necessities of their parents and
relatives, and very charitable to a guest who comes to them and stays
leisurely in their houses, without knowing him and without sending him
away; and they do not even take warning by the experience of great
inconveniences. many other contradictions and contrarieties are found
daily in these indians by those who have communication with them and
know them, so that in them vices are united to their opposed virtues,
as if related. only in the matter of lying there is no contradiction,
for one cannot tell when they are not lying. neither does one know when
they are thankful for any benefits received; for one could write by
thousands the cases of their ingratitude which have been
experienced—either not taking any account of the good that is
shown them, regarding it as a justice due them; or paying with
treachery pure and simple their greatest benefactors. all these are
truths, and although (in the opinion of terence) they gain hate for the
one who states them, it is not right for the []indians who may read this to
hate me; for i know it all by my own experience and that of other
fathers of long standing—which indeed the indians who know them
recognize. in nueva españa and in perû the same thing
occurs, to about the same extent.
. from this result other things, in the same father ministers,
that seem also to be contradictions. for the minister of the indians
who loves them most would like not to have anything to do with them,
but to be very distant from them; and if he succeeds in getting far
away from them, then his love for them will not suffer it and he does
not rest until he is with his indians again. it is a providence of god,
so that instruction may never be lacking to these wretched beings.
this, i believe, appears like the discreet love with which christ loved
judas, for an example to men; loving persons compassionately, and
distinguishing their evil qualities, as things detestable. if all the
above-mentioned contradictions of the indians are malicious, or arise
from their lack of understanding, let him who will examine it, for even
in this have i found new contradictions. for some actions which appear
simple are very doubly acts of malice; and quite the contrary also
occurs at other times. in short, whether malicious or simple, their
mental standpoint [genio] is incomprehensible, and consequently
the merit that belongs to the ministers of instruction very great.
. in regard to the mind [ingenio] and understanding of
these natives, no general rules can be laid down; for there are rude
and clever ones in all parts, although it be even among spaniards and
servants in courts. but speaking generally, all 
[]authors agree, and
experience tells us the same, that the filipinos are more clever than
the indians of other parts. they can learn any art at all with ease,
and imitate with exactness any beautiful production that is placed
before them. consequently, they become so fine writers that the
accounting-rooms are filled with them, as are also the secretariats,
the courts, and the offices of private persons. but very rarely can one
find the copy of an indian which does not need revision, for they
cannot cease lying even in writing; or else because of the little care
with which they do it. this is very mortifying to those who dictate and
correct. some of them have been so capable that they have become
officials in the accounting-rooms, and have served ad interim in
the highest offices. others serve as managers for alcaldes-mayor, and
they have great knowledge of government business; whether with a right
conscience, god knows. there are others who have great cleverness for
the management of a suit between litigants; and are so keen in
entangling the parties that they cannot be disentangled with their
laws, and recourse can be had to god alone. there are at present some
of them who are printers, and they have sufficient intelligence. in
their own political and civil government i have seen many indians who
are very capable, and who can discourse so powerfully, with their
natural logic, that they convince. but as it is natural for them to be
concerned only about the present time, they need some one to direct
them so that they may not make any error in what they discuss. in
short, their understandings are fastened with pins and attached always
to material things, for they do not understand things []with any depth. i
believe that this is the reason why there is so little fruit produced
from the constant repetition of sermons; for they are perplexed with
abundant instruction, or else do not understand it. and although the
sermon be very clear, and preached in their own native language, not
one of them can yet repeat the substance of what he hears, although he
understands it when it is preached. they are, however, very clever at
handiwork, because of their great indifference in everything. on that
account they can play well on all musical instruments; and their
inclination for music is very great, and they make instruments. there
are good singers among them, and these have positions, with a fitting
salary attached, in all the churches, from the cathedral to the poorest
ministry; and thus they are being trained, from the time when they sing
soprano. they are fond of verses and representations. they are
excellent translators, and can translate a spanish comedy with elegance
into verses of their own language. and thus, although all, both men and
women, are fond of reading, they are indefatigable when verses are
concerned, and they will act them out as they read them. accordingly it
results that they are clever for all things, in whatever duty they are
set; and they would be more so if they were less lazy, or if their
greed for temporal possessions were greater. on this account, they have
always been, are, and will be poor, without caring for more than the
food of the present day. i do not know whether this is a special
providence of god for these poor wretches; for when they have a little
wealth, as the vessel is so limited, immediately it swells out and then
they do not know what to do; and, to let it be 
[]known that they are rich,
they immediately waste it in expenses that are at best useless, until
they remain as they were before. thus their inclination [genio]
is opposite to their judgment [ingenio] in this direction; and
although they have sufficient intellect, they yield to their natural
disposition [genio], which dominates them, and in this never
allow themselves to be directed.
chapter xli
of the letters, languages, and civilization of the
filipinos
. just as in italia the tuscan, lombard, and sicilian languages
resemble one another, and in españa the castilian, portuguese,
and valencian—for they all recognize one origin (namely, the
roman), although they are, strictly speaking, quite distinct among
themselves—so it happens in the languages of these philipinas
islands. the principal cultured languages found here at the conquest
were six, namely, the tagálog, the visayan, the pampanga, the
cagayan, the ilocan, and the pangasinan. it is a fact that all the
languages here resemble one another, and he who knows one of them can
easily talk the others, for the structure of them all differs but
little. we trace them all to one origin, which cannot be other than the
malayan language, according to the comparison which has been made of
words, and to the formation and construction of them all. consequently,
although these indians have regarded their origin as distinct from that
of various other nations, in the manner already mentioned, it is
evident that the more immediate generations []must have been malays, since
their letters and languages alone are found in these islands.
. the vowels in the characters proper to their language are three
in number, although they have the same value as our five in use; for
the e and the i form one single letter, as do also the
o and the u. the consonants are thirteen in number, but
they are never used alone, for the vowel is always used with them. thus
by the use of the c and the m alone they write 
cama [i.e., “bed”]. in order to pronounce words
with other vowels, they make use of certain commas, placed either below
or above. consequently, as all the pronunciation of their writing for
the most part makes it necessary for them to supply it at the expense
of commas, the difficulty that was experienced was considerable, even
in the natives themselves. on that account they have applied themselves
so easily and willingly to our letters, in order to write in their own
language.
. their own method of writing was peculiar, by writing the lines
from top to bottom, beginning at the left hand and proceeding to the
right. this bespeaks a very great antiquity; for the ancient custom of
the hebrews is to write lines, from the right to the left, as the
chinese do at the present time. but the latter write them from top to
bottom, as was done in these islands. diodorus siculus, who wrote in
the time of the emperor cæsar augustus, says that in an island of
the torrid zone the people wrote from top to bottom, and employed only
a few letters.
. before the people knew anything of paper in these islands they
wrote on the smooth bark of bamboo, or on leaves of the many palms
which are found in these islands (and even yet this is done, in []districts
where there is no paper, or even that the schoolboys may not waste
paper), the point of a knife or an iron, or some other material,
serving as a pen (and now with birds’ quills and ink). if it were
a missive letter, they wrote it on palm-leaves, and folded it as we
fold our letters. some of them are much given to writing on the ground
in a squatting posture, which is the usual way both men and women
sit.
. the cultured languages, as already stated, are six in
number—for one cannot reckon the languages of the negritos and
mountain people as such, since each settlement has its own distinct
language, which results from the lack of human intercourse. among the
cultured languages, the chief and mother languages are considered the
tagálog, the pampanga, and the visayan; and even among these the
tagálog is considered the most polished and powerful. that is
not [for instance] because it lacks the tu [i.e.,
“thou”]—which is well employed with their primitive
pronoun ycao or ca, even with persons to whom the
greatest respect is due—but on account of the po and po
co, which explains it, and signifies “sir” [señor mio]. the first is used for men, and the second
for women. interwoven with the words, it shows reverence and courtesy;
as, for example, in order to answer “yes” to a woman one
says oo, po co, an expression which without the po co
would be too familiar. in many other phrases in the tagálog
language is shown its seriousness and polish; those who write grammars
of the language will be able to set them forth.
. the natives of these islands employ innumerable other
elegancies and courtesies, now in actions, []now in words, now in names and
titles, which they apply to themselves; these are various according to
the difference of the provinces, and are too numerous to mention, for
they are ceremonial, and they value their ceremonies highly. no one
will pass in front of another, without asking permission, and in order
to pass, he doubles the whole body with the most profound bow, at the
same time lifting one foot in the air, and doubling the knee and
lifting both hands to the face. if one has to talk to any person of
higher rank, he shows all reverence and squats down [pone
en cuclillas], with raised face, and waits thus, until he is asked
his reason for coming; for to speak without being questioned would be a
point of bad breeding. they employ many courteous acts and expressions
in saluting one another when they meet; but these do not seem to me to
be so many as in nueva españa, where people do not cease to use
them until they lose sight of one another in the street. the filipinos
do this here with greater dignity and respect. when they write, they
heighten their style with so many rhetorical phrases, metaphors, and
pictures, that many who think themselves poets would be glad to do as
much; and yet this is only in prose. for, when it comes to poesy, he
who would understand it must be very learned in their language, even
among his own compatriots.
. the names which they impose now are usually high-sounding. i
know a pius v, and a philipe v; and, following this custom, they take
as surnames the most honorable names of españa. this is since
they have known castilians. but, even before, they could rival in this
the kings of españa; for just as the latter have been called
“the wise,” “the prudent,” []“the
chaste,” etc., for the special virtues which have made them
worthy of this glory, so here in the philipinas, they called one
“the strong,” another “the splendid,” and
another “the terrible,” according to his deeds, or to those
of his ancestors, or in accordance with various incidents that happened
at birth. now they are introducing the custom of taking the paternal
name added to the baptismal name. however, when the first-born child
comes to any one, the latter’s christian name is forgotten; for
that instant they call the father by the name of his first-born for the
rest of his life. if the name of the first-born is rosa, the
father is called ama ni rosa, or pan-rosa, which means
“the father of rosa.” one must not then ask for such a man
in any village by his christian name (which is the one entered on the
parish register), for there are many so named, so that he would not be
known by that name. an author is not wanting to call this an instance
of courtesy; but many times it serves as a dishonor, if they know him
and call him, for example, “father of judas.” they employ
many other names and endearing expressions in naming their children,
relatives, and families, although i believe that the affection that
they feel for one another has very little reality.
. the “don” of the castilians is being rapidly
introduced among the indian chiefs, both men and women, of these
islands. in olden times they did not lack a term proper to their own
language by which they expressed it, as lacan or gat for
the men, and dayang for the women. []
chapter xlii
of the physical features and clothing of these indians
. according to the differences in climate we find certain
differences in the lines of the body and faces of the indians, as has
been stated above. but this difference amounts to but little. all of
them are sufficiently corpulent, well-built, and well-featured, except
that they are all flat-nosed; for the cartilage of the bridge of the
nose does not come to a point as among europeans. consequently, there
are no sharp noses among the full-blooded indians. some have tried to
explain the color by saying that it is the color of cooked quinces, or
brown, or an olive color. but it appears much stranger to me, and i
have been unable to find a legitimate color to which to compare it; for
it is a brown color, but flushed with red. it is generally clearer in the
women, and still lighter in all of the visayans. the hair is black and
lank, as is that of the scythians, getas [i.e., getæ], and
turks, and is carefully tended with washings, and very fragrant oils,
as was that of the lycians. they assert that they do this in order to
free it from grease (which is considerable), but a great part of it
consists in vanity. among the tagálogs it is allowed to grow to
the shoulders, among the ilocans somewhat longer, and among the
visayans slightly longer or shorter, and done up; but the cagayans
leave it loose and hanging upon the shoulders. this custom must have
appeared well []to all of them, since everywhere they envy the
one who has the longest and heaviest hair; and the same thing is seen
among the women. it is indeed considered as an affront to cut the hair
for any crime. the zambals alone shave the head from the middle
forward; and from the middle back, as far as the occiput, they wear a
large shock of loose hair. ribbons are never used to tie it, but with
the hair itself men, women, and children make a knot near the crown of
the head or the occiput, as do the turks.
. the eyes of all are very beautiful and large, either gray or
black. the face is broad. the teeth are even and fine; formerly they
covered them with ink or a varnish of a black color. now that is no
longer used except among the tagabaloòyes of caragà, of
whom i have written; their beauty, lightness of complexion, and the
features of their faces might deceive one, and they would be taken for
spaniards if they kept their mouths shut, and one did not see the black
teeth. they also, especially the chief women, adorned the teeth with
gold, with exquisite beauty. i do not know whether they waste the gold
so now. all of the men are beardless in the face, but their bodies are
sufficiently shaggy, as are those of all asiatics. it is attributed to
the temperature of the torrid zone in which we are. who cares to study
this more in detail would better read fray gregorio garcia, the
dominican.
in olden times the indians removed and pulled out, as if it were a
defect, any little hair that appeared on the face, with pincers []of bamboo
made for that very purpose. i have not read that they did this because
they considered it a reproach to have a beard, as did those of
perù—who did the same, as i have read in the above-cited
author.
. the women (and in many parts the men, especially the
mountaineers), have certain large holes in their ears, in which they
place pendants and earrings of gold. they make the greater display of
it according to the greater size and openness of the holes. some women
have two holes in each ear, for two kinds of earrings. this is usual
among the zimarrònes and blacks, for the civilized people have
now adopted the custom of the castilians in this regard.
. in olden times the men wore their heads covered or wrapped
about with a narrow strip of cotton or linen. those who esteemed
themselves as valiant men wore the two ends hanging to the shoulders.
this they called the potong; and some wore this of colored
cloth, to declare their chieftainship. no one could wear a red one
unless he had killed at least one person, and he could not have it
striped until he had killed seven. now they wear neat white and black
hats, which are woven from various materials which they gather in the
field.
. of the mountain people it is already known that their own skin
is their clothing, and that they only use the bahag, which is a
linen or cloth which keeps in the privies. but the clothing of the men
who live in villages is a half-shirt of linen, silk, or some other
material—which, at the most, reaches to the navel; it is open to
the air, and has wide sleeves without wristbands, and this is called
the baro—and []certain garments that they call 
saluàles, which correspond to our small-clothes or
under-drawers. these are also loose and wide, and made of any kind of
linen or other material; they do not open at the front, but at the
side, and they are tied there. they never wear anything on feet or
legs. the above is the whole amount of their clothing, and, at the
most, a cord or belt at the waist, like a girdle, where they hang the
knife. the chiefs and others wear, for church functions and other
meetings of theirs, in addition to the said clothing, a long black
garment reaching to the feet, with sleeves fitted at the wrists. this
they call barong-mahaba, which signifies “long 
baro.” it is an eminently modest and decent garment, and is
worn loose and not girdled. for outside wear, these garments are of
ordinary materials. for gala attire, they are of silk, and much worked
with embroidery, except the long baro, which is always the same.
today the people of highest rank in the villages dress in the spanish
fashion, with coats, trousers, stockings, and shoes, although it is the
most usual practice to wear stockings of natural skin, in the midst of
all these adornments. in former times, their greatest care was
exercised in supplying the lack of clothing with abundance of gold,
with which they adorned all the body. that custom is still preserved,
although not in the abundance of which we read earlier. in what they
wore the full complement of their gala attire was a colored sash drawn
up under the arm, which is no longer worn at the present time. all the
clothing of the filipino indian is reduced to the above, and i believe
that it is so throughout this archipelago, without any difference of
special note. []
. the dress of the women is the baro already mentioned,
but not so long, and only covering the breasts and hanging loose; and a
garment as wide above as below, in which they envelope the body from
the waist down, fastening one of the ends in the girdle in order to
secure it. this garment is called a tàpis. the mestizo
women wear skirts with plaits and seams, with the opening at one side.
the tàpis is the unchangeable costume of the indian women of
this archipelago, and this, at the most, is generally of silk, but of a
modest hue, and of only one color. upon their festival occasions the
women—some for gala attire, or others, because they are more
modest—wear white spanish petticoats. some wear an underskirt,
especially within doors. but when they go abroad, the tàpis is
[preferred] above all. some of them wear garments resembling black
mantillas, which they call cobìjas, with which they cover
the whole body from the head down, in the manner of the mantillas of
españa. with this and the bits of gold that they wear on the
body—in the ears, at the throat, on the wrists and fingers (and
she who does not possess these ornaments must be very poor
indeed)—they appear as indian women in their wealth of gold, and
are indian women in their being and clothing. now when the indian women
go abroad, they wear slippers embroidered with silk and gold; few and
far between are those who wear shoes. formerly, they wore a ribbon, of
wrought gold which covered their foreheads and temples. now, at the
most, they usually wear a chased silver or gold nail, thrust through
the knot of their hair. women of a somewhat more advanced age and
respect wear the long baro, which is made in the same []manner as
that of the men above described. it is certain that an indian woman
appears well in this manner, for there is no more modest dress for
women that one can imagine.
. the chief bodily adornments of the visayans were the tattooing
and designs which gave them the name of pintados. they did this in the
same manner as the moro men and women, and it was the olden custom of
the huns, gelones, and agathyrsos; but the kind of the designs was
according to the deeds and merit of each person. but that barbarous
method of adornment was lost long ago, and has not been seen among them
for many years. perhaps they have erased those pictures with the water
of holy baptism, since they embraced the true catholic ceremonies.
chapter xliii
of the false religion which these indians held in their
heathendom; and of their superstitions and omens.
. the great slothfulness and natural carelessness of these
indians is recognized by its results; for as yet not the slightest
scrap of writing concerning their religion and ceremonies, or their
ancient political government, has been found. only by tradition and old
songs which have been preserved from father to son, and from other
things which they have still in use, has it been possible to trace
somewhat of their antiquity by means of some careful ministers. the
first who took his pen for this purpose, at the instance of the
superior government, was our venerable fray juan de plassencia, one of
the most zealous workers in the vineyard of this archipelago, in []the year
. so
great credence was given to him in this, that his relation of the
customs of the indians, having been received by the royal audiencia,
was imparted to the alcaldes-mayor of the provinces for their
government. later, in the year , with but little difference in
time, doctor don antonio de morga, auditor and lieutenant-governor of
philipinas, wrote his description. in it the same matter is treated,
taken from the other. our fray antonio de la llave, afterward (in the year )
used this in his description. in the year , father colin wrote his
description, adding anew the best form. since this is a matter in which
we cannot exceed the ancients, yet with them all it will be necessary
for me to write something, in order that i may not leave this treatise
of my description faulty.
. these indians had various sorts of adorations: now to animals
and birds, as did the egyptians; []now to the sun and the moon, as did the
assyrians. the tagálogs adored now tigmamanoquìn,
which was a blue bird of the size of a turtledove; now the crow, which
they called meylupa, which signifies “lord of the
soil,” as if he were the god pan, or the goddess ceres of the
ancients; now the crocodile, which they called nono, which
signifies “grandfather,” to which they offered various
sacrifices in order that it might not harm them. sometimes they adored
any old tree, especially the one they call balete, and even
those now living show respect to it; now they adored and offered gifts
to the stones, crags, reefs, and promontories of seas and rivers. all
was the result of their natural fear, so that all these things should
cause them no harm. nevertheless, they had a knowledge of one sole god;
and accordingly they adored him as the principal god, and greater than
all. the visayans called him lauon, which signifies
“ancient;” and the tagálogs bathalà mey
capal, signifying “god, the maker, or creator of all
things.”
. besides these they had other idols, which the visayans called
diuata, and the tagálogs, anito, each of which had
its special object and purpose. for there was one anito for the
mountains and open country; another for the sowed fields; others for
the sea and rivers; another for the house of their dwelling. these
anitos they invoked in their work, according to the functions of each
one. among these they also made anitos of their ancestors, and to these
was due the first adoration of all. the memory of this anito is not
even yet erased. they kept some small badly-made figures of all these,
of gold, stone, ivory, or wood; and they called them 
lic-hà or []laràuan, which means a
“figure” or “image” among them.
. they also venerated as anitos those who came to disastrous
ends, because either the lightning, or the shark, or the sword, killed
them; for they thought that such immediately went to glory, by way of
the rainbow, which they call balangao. with such barbarous
beliefs lived and died the old people, puffed up and vain, considering
themselves as anitos. as such they caused themselves to be respected
and worshiped; and buried after death in places set apart and of
distinction among them all, as they were reverenced there. there are
many cases of this known, and it required all the valor and zeal of the
father ministers to destroy tombs, fell trees, and burn idols. but it
is yet impossible to tear up the blind error of the 
pasingtabì sa nonò, which consists in begging favor
from their aged dead whenever they enter any thicket or mountain or
sowed fields, in order to build houses and for other things. for if
they do not do this, they believe that their nonos will punish
them with some evil result. this is found among an ignorant people
without malice, who do not know why they do this, but only that they do
it because they saw that their aged people do it here. the ministers
labored hard to remove this error, especially in the remote villages;
for in those that are now civilized the people at present laugh at
it.
. for all these adorations and sacrifices it is not evident that
they had any common and public temple. for although these places had
the name of simba or simbahan, which signifies
“place of adoration and sacrifice,” and the people attended
them and resorted thither, they were not like our temples common []to all,
but, as it were, certain private oratories belonging to the houses of
their chiefs, where those of their families, or their dependents, or
those related by marriage, met to make a feast for any special object.
for this purpose they made a bower in the house itself, which they call
sibi, dividing it into three naves and lengthening the fourth.
they adorned it with leaves and flowers on all sides, and many lighted
lamps. in the middle was placed another large lamp, with many
ornaments. such was their simbahan or oratory. this feast was
called pandot; it was their most solemn one, and lasted four
days. during that time they played many musical instruments, and
performed their adorations, which is called nag àanito in
tagálog. when the feast was ended and all the adornment removed,
the place had no longer the name of church or temple, and remained a
house like all the others.
. their sacrifices always redounded to the advantage of their
bodies; for they were reduced to all eating, drinking, and making
merry. in proportion to the motives, so were the ceremonies of their
sacrifices. if it were only for the entertainment of their chief, they
made a bower in front of his house, which they filled with hangings,
according to their moorish custom; and there they all ate, drank,
danced, and sang. for this it was the usual practice to fetch a hog,
which the catalôna or priestess ordered the most graceful girl to
stab with the knife, amid certain dances. that done, and the hog having
been cooked according to their custom it was divided among all the
company, as if it were a relic; and they ate it with great reverence
and respect, with the other food []of their feast. they drank more than they
ate, as they always do. with this was ended the greatness of their
sacrifice, without god to whom to offer it, or altar therefor.
. if the sacrifice was for the health of some sick person, the
priest of the sacrifice ordered a new house to be built at the expense
of the sick one. that done (which took but a very short time, as the
materials are close at hand, and many assemble for that purpose), they
removed the sick person to it, and arranged what was to be sacrificed.
that was sometimes a slave, but most generally some hog or marine
animal; its flesh they set before the sick person, with other food
according to their custom. the catalôna performed her usual
dances, wounded the animal, and with its blood anointed the sick
person, as well as some of the others among the bystanders. then it was
divided and cleaned, in order that it might be eaten. the
catalôna looked at the entrails, and making wry faces and shaking
her feet and hands, acted as if she were out of her
senses—foaming at the mouth, either because she was incarnate as
the devil, or because she so feigned so that credit might be given her.
in this way she prophesied what would happen to the sick man, either
adverse or propitious. if it were propitious, there was great feasting;
and if adverse, means were not lacking to her to evade it—as they
were also not lacking in case that her prophecy was not fulfilled. if
the sick man died, she consoled them all by saying that their gods had
elected him as one of their anitos, because of his prowess and merits;
and she began to commend herself to this saint, and made them all
commend themselves to him, and everything ended in drunkenness and
rejoicing. []then the catalôna took all the gifts,
which all had offered her according to their custom, and returned home,
wealthier, but not with more reputation; for those who exercised that
office among the indians were held in no estimation, for they were
considered lazy persons who lived by the toil of others.
. when the sick person died, he was followed by the lamentation
of his relatives and friends and even by other and hired mourners, who
had that as their trade. in their lamentation they inserted a
melancholy song, with innumerable extravagant things in praise of the
dead. they bathed, smoked, and shrouded the corpse, and some embalmed
it in the manner of the hebrews, with certain aromatic liquors; and
thus did they bury it, with all due respect.
. the grave of the poor was a hole which was dug under the house
itself, and was called sìlong. the rich and influential
were kept unburied for three days, amid the weeping and singing. a box
or coffin was made out of one piece, which was the dug-out trunk of a
tree; and the cover was tightly fitted on, so that no air could enter.
there they buried the deceased, adorned with rich jewels and sheets of
gold, especially upon his mouth. as the coffins were usually of
incorruptible wood, which was used for this purpose, in this way some
bodies have been found uncorrupted after many years.
. the coffin with the body was placed in one of three places,
according to the direction of the deceased: either in the highest story
of the house itself, in a place like a cock-house, where they usually
keep their treasures and other goods; or under the house, which is the
sìlong, elevated from the ground; or if []they place it in
the ground itself, they dig a hole, and enclose it with a small railing
and there they deposit the box with the body without covering over the
hole. they buried others in the fields, and lit fires in the house, and
then set sentinels so that the deceased should not come to take away
the living with him. others had themselves buried in a lofty place on
the seashore, in order that they might be venerated and worshiped; and
sentinels were posted so that no boats should pass there for a certain
time.
. another box, filled with the best clothes of the deceased and
various viands on their dishes, were set near the grave; if the
deceased were a man, various weapons that he used were left there; if a
woman, her loom, or other work-utensils that she had used. if the
deceased had while living been employed in sea-raids, as a pirate, his
coffin was made in the shape of a boat which they call barangay. as
rowers they placed in it two goats, two hogs, two deer, or more, as
they wished, male and female paired, with a slave of the deceased as
pilot in order to take care of them all. some food was put in for their
sustenance, and when that food was consumed, they dried up with hunger
and thirst, and all perished. if the deceased had been a warrior, a
living slave, bound, was placed under him, and was left there to die
with him. after the burial, although the lamentation ceased somewhat,
the revelry in the house of the deceased did not cease. on the
contrary, it lasted a longer or shorter time, according to the rank of
the deceased.
. on the third or fourth day of the funeral, all the relatives
assembled at the house of the deceased, for they said that he returned
that day to visit them. []at the landing of the stairway of the house,
they set water in a basin or tub, so that the deceased might wash his
feet there, and rid himself of the earth of the grave. they kept a
candle lit all that day. they stretched a petate, or
reed mat, on the floor and sprinkled ashes on it, so that the deceased
might leave the marks of his feet there. at meal time they left the
best place at table vacant for the dead guest. they ate and drank, as
at the most splendid banquet; and then spent the balance of the day in
relating and singing the prowess of the deceased; then each one went
home. this ridiculous ceremony is called tibao. the indians even
yet retain the oldtime custom of this assembly, but all superstition
and error have been removed from it, and they unite to pray for the
deceased; but it is not without inconveniences that ought to be
remedied.
. the mourning consisted in fasting, and during the days of
mourning they lived only on vegetables. this fasting or abstinence was
called sipà by the tagálogs. in dress the visayans
wore white, as do the chinese in sign of mourning, and this is even yet
the custom in some villages; but black is the most usual color for
mourning in the rest of the islands. with this kind of mourning they
cover all the body, so that the face may not be seen, especially if
they are women and if the mourning is thorough. during the mourning the
men may not wear a hat; but, instead, a black cloth wound about the
head. they wear mourning for any deceased relative, even though he be
related only very distantly; but the mourning is greater or less
according to the degree of relationship, both in manner and in duration
of time. []
. from the above is inferred the belief of these indians in the
transmigration of the souls of the deceased. in this they agree not
only with the chinese, who believe in this peculiar error, but also
with other indians whom torquemada mentions in his second volume. the
similarity that they might relate in rites, both with the indians of
nueva españa and perû, and with other nations of greater
antiquity, may be compared by the curious reader, by reading the entire
book of the origin of the indians, and by tracing there that of
these indians.
. it is an assured fact that the oldtime heathen of these islands
knew that after this life there was another one of rest, or let us say
paradise (for bathàla maycapàl alone in their
belief lived in the sky); and that only the just and valiant, those who
had moral virtues and lived without harming anyone, went thither to
that place as a reward. in the same way, as all of them believed in the
immortality of the soul in the other life, they believed in a place of
punishment, pain, and sorrow which they called casanàan,
where the wicked went, and where, they said, the devils dwelt.
consequently, the transmigration of the souls of their deceased to
other living bodies was a sign of rest to them. since no one desired
his relatives to be numbered among the condemned in 
casanàan, the error of the chinese found in them an easier
entrance, for it was built upon the foundation of their own errors.
. the superstitions and omens of these filipinos are so many, and
so different are those which yet prevail in many of them, especially in
the districts more remote from intercourse with the religious, []that it
would take a great space to mention them. they merit tears, although
they are all laughable. they are being continually preached against,
but we have not succeeded in extinguishing them; and the people obey
the customs of their barbarous ancestors rather than the christian
prudence which the ministers teach them. and although i do not at this
time consider it as an explicit error, ut in plurimum,
yet the error implied in the tenacity with which these people follow
the errors of their ancestors is dangerous.
. now they ask permission of the nonos for any task, with
the pasingtabi sa nono. now they have innumerable fears if the
owl which they call covàgo hoots; if they find a snake in
a new house, or on a journey that they have undertaken; if they hear
anyone sneeze; if any rat squeals, or if the lizard sings, or if any
dog howls; and other things like these. there must be no talk of fish
in the house of the hunter, nor of hunting nor dogs in that of the
fisherman; while in neither the one nor the other house must there be
any mention of new implements for work, unless they have already been
used. sailors must name nothing of the land, nor landsmen anything of
the sea: for all these were omens.
. pregnant women could not cut their hair, for they said that the
children that they would bear would have no hair. when a woman is about
to give birth, some men undress until they are stark naked. then taking
shields and catans, one takes his stand in the silong, and another on
the ridge of the house, and they continually fence with the wind with
their catans as long as the parturition lasts. i have removed some from
this performance by force []of punishment. they say that it is to keep the
patiànac and the osuàng away from the
woman. these are witches among them who come to obstruct the success of
the childbirth, and to suck out the souls of children; and the people
act thus in order to prevent them. he who does not wish to have this
observed in public, through fear of punishment, removes his wife to
another house for the parturition, if he thinks that the witch is in
his. the procurer of this witch they say is the bird tictic, and that this
bird, by flying and singing, shows the witch or osuàng
the house where there is a parturition, and even guides him to work
other misfortunes. consequently, whenever they see or hear the tictic,
they all grow melancholy, in their fear lest some harm come to
them.
. they greatly fear and reverence the tigbàlang or
bibit. this is a ghost, goblin, or devil; and as it knows the
cowardice of these indians, it has been wont to appear to them in the
mountains—now in the guise of an old man, telling them that he is
their nono; now as a horse; and now as a monster. consequently, the
indians in their terror make various pacts with it, and trade their
rosaries for various articles of superstitious value, such as hairs,
grass, stones, and other things, in order to obtain all their intents
and free themselves from all the dangers. thus do they live in delusion
until god wills that the evangelical ministers undeceive them, which
costs no little [effort], because of the very great fear with which
they are filled. []
. in order to discover any theft, they generally burn fresh
rock-alum, and after it has vaporized and then crystallized they say
that the figure which those crystals form is the living picture of
so-and-so, and that he is the author of the theft. since they believe
such nonsense as easily as it is difficult to make them believe the
divine mysteries, they all agree to that statement, even though the
face should be that of a dog; and they make a charge in court against
so-and-so, and impute the theft to him. sometimes they take a screen or
sieve (which they call bilào), in which they fasten some
scissors in form of a cross, to which a rosary is hung. then they
proceed to call the name of each one who is present at this exercise.
if the bilào shakes when the name of pedro is called,
then that poor pedro is the robber, and pays for the theft, without
having perhaps eaten or drunk of it. sometimes they light a candle to the saint of
miracles, my st. anthony of padua, misapplying his peculiar protection
for all lost things; they believe that if the flame of the candle
should flare up in the direction of any of those present at this act,
he is thus shown to be the robber. for these and like deceitful
artifices, there are not wanting masters, indian impostors, both men
and women, who, in order to gain money, deceive the simple-minded in
this manner, without paying any heed to the claims of conscience in
these wrongs.
. the different kinds of these ministers of the devil in the
olden days, so far as i have examined them, are twelve, and they are as
follows, according []to their own old names for them: 
sònat, catalònan, mangagávay,
manyisalàt, mancocòlam, 
hoclòban, silàgan, magtatangàl,
osuàng, mangagayoma, pangatahòan,
and bayòguin.
. the sònat was equivalent to a bishop among them;
and they all reverenced him as one who pardoned sins, and ordained
others as priests and priestesses. they expected salvation through him,
and he could condemn them all. this office was general throughout these
islands, but it was held only by the chiefest and most honored, as it
was of great esteem among them. it is said that this office came from
the borneans. some try to make out that he was the master of a kind of
exercise that is not decent, but i have found nothing certain among the
much that i have examined.
. the catalònan (as remarked above) was the priest
or priestess of their sacrifices; and although his office was an
honorable one, it was only while the sacrifice was pending, for after
that they paid but scant attention to him.
. the mangagàvay were the sorcerers who gave and
took away health and life by their sorceries. it was an office general
throughout this archipelago.
. the manyisalàt was the sorcerer appointed for
lovers. the mancocòlam was the sorcerer or witch who
belched forth fire from himself, which could not be extinguished with
any application except by his rolling himself in the ordure and filth
that falls from the houses into the silong; and the master of the house
where he rolled himself died and there was no remedy. the 
hoclòban was another kind of sorcerer more efficacious than
the []others, since without any medicine he could
kill, overturn houses, and work other destruction. this is in
catanduanes, but the two preceding ones are general.
. the silàgan’s duty was to draw out the
entrails and eat them, from all persons whom he saw dressed in white.
that happened toward catanduanes; and it is not fable, since our fray
juan de mérida buried a spanish clerk in calilàya to whom
this misfortune had happened. the magtatàngal is said to
have been a man who left his body without head and intestines, and that
the head wandered about hither and thither during the night in
different parts of the world, and in the morning reunited with his
body, leaving him alive as before. this story is current in
catanduànes, but it is regarded as a fable, although the natives
assert that they have seen it.
. we have already spoken of the osuàng. it is only
added that human flesh is his usual food. they all saw this one flying,
but this is told in the visayas and not in tagalos.
. the mangagayòma was the sorcerer who made use of
the natural remedies in his sorceries; but those remedies were often
corrupted by pacts with the devil. the pangatahòan is the
same as the soothsayer, who prognosticated the future; and this notion
was general throughout this archipelago. the bayòguin was
an effeminate man [hombre maricon], inclined to be a
woman and to all the duties of the feminine sex.
. this is sufficient as an index of innumerable other errors,
superstitions, and omens, in which their ancients were submerged, and
some of their descendants []now follow their footsteps. however, i am of
the opinion that it is born rather of their simplicity than of their
malice, ut in plurimum. yet i would not be so bold as
to assert that there are not some who make their contracts with the
devil; and, with or without contracts, it is certain that many
enchantments are found here, whence follow deaths to some and
extraordinary accidents to others. and although that can be attributed
to the multitude of herbs of which they have good knowledge, they
always leave suspicion of some diabolical art.
. the oaths which were and are most usual in these indians are
execratory. since they lie so much, i do not know why they are not
brought to confusion in the promissory notes that are always furnished
with curses. in the oath of allegiance which the people of manila and
tondo took to our catholic monarchs in the year , they confirmed
that promise of their obedience in this manner: “may the sun
split us through the middle; may we be devoured by crocodiles; may our
women not show us favor or affection”—if they should fail
to keep their oath. sometimes they took the pasambahan, which
was, to draw the figure of any wild and monstrous animal, and ask to be
torn to pieces by that animal if they broke their contract or
agreement. sometimes they lit a candle, and declared that, just as the
candle, so might they be melted, if they did not fulfil their promise.
now this is somewhat better, but not, their perjuries; for with great
ease and frequency one catches them in false oaths in legal
instruments. this is well known, and therefore should be well punished.
chapter xliv
of the former government and social customs of these
indians
. i have already said that our brother and venerable father fray
juan de plassencia wrote in the convent of nagcarlàn and signed
(october , ) a relation describing all the old customs of these
indians, in obedience to a request and charge of the superior
government. that relation appeared to all a very truthful statement,
as, in order to make it, his examination and vigilance were
rigorous.
. of this relation i have already used what i thought ought to be
set down in their fitting places. now i shall say in substance what he
tells when speaking of the social customs of the indians and their
old-time government, with some additions which serve for the better
understanding of the matter.
