custard pudding
derby pudding
macaroni pudding
new year tartlets
pancakes
queen of puddings
rice pudding
sago pudding
sweet omelet
tapioca pudding
trifle (cheap)
yorkshire pudding
breakfast dishes.
cauliflower au gratin
chocolate
cocoa
viiicocoa nibs
coffee
eggs, boiled, see coddled
eggs, coddled
eggs, fried
eggs, hard-boiled
eggs, poached
eggs, savoury
eggs, stewed with peas
eggs, stirred or buttered
hominy
macaroni cheese
mushrooms
peas stewed with eggs
porridge
risotto
salmagundy
savoury omelet
tea
toast
tomatoes, fried
welsh rarebit
bread and biscuits.
african shoots
bola
bread
bread unfermented
buns
butter cakes
candied peel drops
chocolate cake
chocolate drops
cocoanut drops
cornflower cake
dough cake
hanucah cakes
lemon cheese-cake mixture
oatmeal biscuits
orange cake
plum loaf
scones
shrewsbury biscuits
spanish biscuits
spice cakes
vinegar cake
yorkshire tea-cakes
sweetmeats.
chocolate caramels
cocoanut candy
ginger lee
toffee
invalid cookery.
arrowroot, cup of
barley water
beef tea, raw
beef tea, strongest
beef tea, whole
calf’s foot jelly
chicken, boiled
chicken, broth
chicken, roasted
cornflower, cup of
cornflower, blanc mange
gruel
lait de poule
lemonade
mutton broth
toast water
passover dishes.
batter pudding
cocoanut custard
fish, fried
fish, stewed
grimslichs
motza kleis
motza pudding, baked
motza pudding, boiled
potato pastry
potato pudding
sassafras
swiss roll
lightning cakes
appendix.
formation of cookery classes
list of utensils for classes
hints on cleaning kitchen utensils
ix
. in making soups or gravies which require colouring
the outer skins of the onion should be left on.
mushroom skins are also useful for this purpose, and
impart a pleasant flavour.
. when thickening soups, gravies, etc., mix the flour,
cornflour, arrowroot, etc., to a smooth cream with cold
liquid first, then stir continually from the bottom and
against the sides of the saucepan or other vessel to
prevent lumps.
. the dripping from roast mutton, when used for
making pastry, sometimes has an unpleasant flavour. if
a few drops of vinegar and of oil be beaten up with it, it
will be found quite as good as beef dripping.
. home-dried herbs are much cheaper than bought
ones. about june buy the herbs, rinse them slightly in
cold water, strip off the leaves, place the various kinds of
herbs on separate pieces of white paper, in the oven or
on top of it. when the leaves are quite crisp, rub them
through a wire sieve, and bottle them up tight.
. when chopping onions, let cold water run on the
wrists for a minute. this will prevent the eyes from
watering.
. when the juice of lemons is required, and the
lemons are hard, place them on a baking sheet in the
oven for a few minutes; they will become quite soft. to
keep them from getting mouldy, wrap each one in tissue
paper, and keep separate.
x. stale scraps of bread should be put in a tin in the
oven, and baked a nice brown. when quite crisp, they
should be pounded and bottled. these “raspings” will
be found very useful.
. bread should be kept in a glazed earthenware
pan, which should have a cover, and must be cleaned
frequently.
. to disguise the disagreeable odours which often
ascend from the kitchen during the process of cooking,
throw a handful of cedar dust on the top of the grate.
(this—called “dust of lebanon”—may be obtained of
most stationers at about d. per packet.)
. milk is the best thing for removing fresh ink
stains, but it must be applied immediately, and the
stained part washed.
. a little powdered sugar sprinkled on a fire, which
is almost out, will invariably revive it. salt sprinkled on
a fire clears it for grilling, roasting, etc.
. house flannels should be herringboned all round
before they are used. this ensures their lasting longer,
and prevents sinks being stopped up by the ravellings.
. it is a decided economy to order soap in large
quantities. it should be cut up when new, and stored
for several weeks in a warm place to dry. candles also
last longer if kept some weeks.
. all stores should be kept in air-tight tins or glazed
jars.
. liquid browning, for colouring soups and gravies,
should be made as follows, and kept in a bottle for
use:—put  oz. pounded loaf sugar in a small iron
saucepan; let it melt, stirring with an iron spoon; when
very dark (but not black), add ½ pint hot water; let it
boil up, and when cool, bottle it. a few drops are
sufficient to colour a quart of liquid.
xi
leviticus, ch. xvii. , :—“and whatsoever man
there be of the house of israel, or of the strangers that
sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood;
i will even set my face against that soul that eateth
blood, and will cut him off from among his people. for
the life of the flesh is in the blood.”
when purchasing meat, care must be taken to see
that all veins of blood, forbidden fat, and the prohibited
sinew have been removed. it is the custom in london
to affix a label marked “porged” on joints from the
hind-quarters, which have been prepared in accordance
with our ordinances.
the following are the jewish regulations for koshering
meat and poultry:—
the meat is put into a pan, specially reserved for the
purpose, and is then entirely covered with cold water,
and left in it for half-an-hour. before removing the meat
from the water, every clot of blood must be washed off.
it should then be put upon the salting board (a wooden
board perforated with holes), or a basket lid, placed in a
slanting position, so that the water may run off. finely
powdered salt is then sprinkled profusely over every part
of the meat. the meat must remain in salt for one
hour. it is then removed, held over a sink or pan, and
well rinsed with cold water three times, so that all the
salt is washed off. then it is placed in a clean cloth,
and thoroughly dried.
xiithe heart and the lungs must be cut open before
being soaked, so that the blood may flow out. the liver
must be prepared apart from other meat. it must be cut
open, washed in cold water, fried over the fire on a
shovel, and, whilst frying, it must be salted. when fried
the blood must be well washed from it.
the head and feet of an animal may be koshered with
the hair or skin adhering thereto. the head should,
however, be cut open, the brain removed and koshered
separately. the ends of the claws and hoofs must be
cut off before the feet are koshered.
poultry is koshered in the same way as meat, taking
care that previous to the soaking in water the whole of
the inside be completely removed.
hints on making soups and stock.
every housewife should bear in mind that a stock-pot
always on the fire is a great aid to economy. any odd
pieces, trimmings, cooked bones, the liquor in which
meat or poultry has been boiled (commonly known as
pot-liquor), should be thrown in, and the pot kept about
three parts full of water. when soup or gravy is required
the stock should be well skimmed, and poured into a
clean saucepan. the pot may be of brown earthenware
with a cover and must be cleaned frequently. it should
often be looked over, soft bones removed and fresh ones
added.
in preparing soups:—
. allow plenty of time, so that all the goodness of
the ingredients may be thoroughly extracted. to do this
effectually always put soup-meat into cold water, so that
the outside may not be hardened, and the flow of the
juices may not be checked.
. make the stock the day before the soup is wanted.
. let the stock boil once; remove the scum, and
draw the saucepan to the side of the fire to simmer
only.
. when the stock is made pour it at once into a clean
basin and leave it uncovered. remove the fat from the
top next morning.
. bread fried in boiling oil or fat, and cut into small
squares, should be served with all thick soups.
to make fresh stock. time— hours.
order a melt (cost d.) from the butcher. after
koshering, skin it, and notch it across several times;
add  quarts of cold water,  carrot,  turnip,  onion
stuffed with whole peppers and cloves, salt, and simmer
about  hours. this will make about  pints of good
stock, and is more economical than any other soup-meat.
another way of making fresh stock. time— hours.
 lbs. shin of beef,  turnip,  carrot,  onion, ½ head
celery,  teaspoonful salt, ½ teaspoonful pepper,  quarts
cold water.
cut the meat into pieces, break up the bones, add the
cold water and the salt. bring to the boil and skim well.
prepare the vegetables, cut them into pieces, and add
them. simmer  hours. this will make about  pints
of good stock.
white stock.
same as above, using knuckle of veal and poultry-bones
instead of beef.
to clear soup. time— hour.
 pints stock, ½ lb. gravy beef,  carrot,  turnip, 
onion.
chop up the beef fine; clean the vegetables and cut
them into small pieces. after removing all the fat from
the stock, which should now be in the form of jelly, place
it in a stew-pan with the meat and vegetables. whisk it
over the fire until just on boiling point, when it should
be left to boil up well. it should now be clear. fix a
clean kitchen-cloth on the legs of a chair, placed with its
seat on a table; pour boiling water several times through
the cloth into a basin, and then let the soup run twice
slowly through the cloth.
another way.—use  whites of eggs whisked in
½ pint cold water, instead of the gravy beef.
green pea soup. time— hour.
 pint green peas,  quart stock, a few sprigs parsley,
a small bunch of mint, salt and pepper to taste,  tablespoonful
flour.
put the stock on, and when it boils add the salt, peas
and other ingredients. when the vegetables are tender
pass them through a sieve with the stock they were
boiled in; boil it up again in a clean stew-pan; thicken
it carefully with flour, and cook  minutes.
julienne soup. time— hours.
 large carrot,  small turnip,  leeks,  onion,
½ head celery,  oz. dripping,  cabbage-lettuce, a little
tarragon and chervil,  teaspoonful sugar, salt to taste,
 pints stock.
shred all the vegetables to the same length and size;
fry all except the lettuce, tarragon and chervil, a light
brown in the dripping in the stew-pan. clear the stock as
directed on page ; boil it and add it with the sugar
and salt to the vegetables; skim well until all grease is
removed, add the lettuce, tarragon, and chervil; let it
boil a few minutes, and serve.
kugel.
 pint dried green peas,  quart large haricot beans,
both soaked over-night;  lbs. clod,  large onion stuffed
with cloves,  tablespoonful flour; salt and pepper to
taste.
pudding.
 eggs, ¼ lb. suet, ½ lb. flour, ¼ lb. brown sugar, ¼ lb.
currants, ¼ lb. raisins or sultanas,  oz. candied peel: spice
to taste.
shred the suet and candied peel, wash and dry the
currants, stone the raisins, mix all the dry ingredients together,
add the eggs, well-beaten, place in a greased basin
and tie a cloth over. put the basin at the bottom of a
large earthenware pan; place a plate on the top of the
basin and the meat on this. throw the peas, beans,
onion, pepper, salt and flour into the pan, cover all with
water, and tie a piece of brown paper over the pan.
put it in the oven when the cooking is finished on
friday, and dish up when required on saturday, serving
the soup, meat, and pudding as separate courses.
liver soup. time— hours.
 quart pot-liquor,  oz. liver,  egg,  oz. dripping,
 tablespoonfuls flour, half small roll; pepper and salt to
taste.
brown the flour in the dripping; add the liver cut in
small pieces, the egg and bread, and let all brown in the
pan until thoroughly done a good dark colour. pound it,
and return to the saucepan with the pepper, salt, and
pot-liquor, to simmer about  hour.
mock turtle soup. time—½ hour.
 bullock’s foot,  lbs. shin of beef,  carrots,  turnips,
 small head celery,  leek,  onion,  oz. dripping,
½ lb. flour; bay-leaves, cloves, cayenne, and ground
mace;  wineglassful sherry.
the day before the soup is required cut up the foot and
put it in a saucepan with  quarts of cold water; simmer
 hours, then strain; cut all the flesh off the bones and
chop it up into neat pieces. put on the shin separately
in  quarts of cold water, and simmer  or  hours. prepare
the vegetables, cut them up, fry them in the fat in a
large stew-pan; when soft add the flour, and stir till
rather brown. add the stock from the foot, then that
from the shin, the bay-leaves and all the other ingredients.
when it boils pass it all through a sieve, add the pieces
of bullock’s foot, and simmer ½ hour. a little soy may
be added if required. before serving pour the wine into
the bottom of the tureen.
mulligatawny soup. time— hours.
 oz. dripping,  onions,  apples,  or  carrots,  turnip,
a few sticks celery, a bunch of herbs,  quarts stock
or pot-liquor,  tablespoonfuls flour,  tablespoonful curry
powder,  dessertspoonful curry paste,  gill water,  teaspoonful
salt.
prepare the vegetables, fry the onions in hot dripping
in the stew-pan; when brown add the apples cut up and
cored, carrots, turnip, celery, herbs and salt. boil these
in the stock. mix the flour, curry paste and powder into a
smooth paste with the water, pour into the soup, and stir
till it boils. the fat should be skimmed off as it rises.
boil at least  hour, and then strain through a sieve.
serve with well-boiled rice (see page ).
mutton broth. time—½ to  hours.
 lbs. scrag of mutton,  oz. pearl barley or rice,  turnip,
 onion,  carrot,  leek,  teaspoonful chopped parsley,
 teaspoonful salt,  quart water.
cut the meat into small pieces (removing the fat), and
put it into a saucepan with the bones, cold water and salt;
bring to the boil. draw to the side of the fire as soon as
the broth boils, skim well. simmer for ½ hour, skimming
occasionally. prepare the vegetables and rice, add them
and let all simmer ½ hour till the vegetables are tender.
add the parsley just before serving.
ox-tail soup. time— hours.
 ox-tail,  oz. dripping,  carrot,  small turnip, 
onions,  shalots,  tooth garlic or  leek, a bunch of herbs,
a few sticks celery, a little mace, cinnamon, and  cloves,
 quarts water or pot-liquor, salt,  or  mushrooms,
 gill sherry or chablis.
prepare the vegetables, cut them up, wash and wipe the
ox-tail, cut it in pieces and fry all in hot dripping in a
large stew pan. add the herbs, spice, seasoning and
water. when boiling skim off the fat and then stew
gently for  hours; strain it into a basin, putting the
pieces of ox-tail into the tureen with the sherry or chablis.
pour the soup into a stew-pan, stir till it boils. add the
mushrooms, and cook from  to  minutes, skimming
off any scum; strain the soup and pour over the ox-tail.
tomato soup. time—½ hour.
 quarts stock,  lbs. tomatoes or  tin tomatoes,
 leeks,  carrots,  turnips; pepper and salt to taste;
thyme, and half a bay-leaf,  teaspoonful chopped parsley,
 oz. dripping,  tablespoonfuls flour.
prepare and cut up the vegetables, boil all for half
an hour in ½ pint water, and then pulp through a sieve.
warm the dripping in a stew-pan, stir the flour in
smoothly, pour the pulped vegetables and stock on to it
slowly, and let all thicken over the fire.
vermicelli, macaroni, sago, italian paste, or semolina,
may be thrown into any clear soup, when boiling, about
¼ hour before it is served.
frimsels. time—¾ hour.
 egg, salt, flour.
beat up the egg well, add a pinch of salt, then, with a
knife, work in as much flour as possible. flour the board
thoroughly, roll out the paste very thin, cut into three,
and roll out each piece till nearly transparent; then fold
into three, let it dry for ¼ of an hour, and with a sharp
knife shave off extremely fine strips. let these dry, and
add them to the soup when boiling ¼ of an hour before
serving.
drop dumplings. time—½ hour.
 tablespoonful beef dripping,  egg,  tablespoonfuls
flour, nutmeg,  dessertspoonful chopped parsley, salt and
pepper to taste.
beat up the dripping till quite white; pour some
boiling water over the egg, then break it into the
dripping; stir these together, then add the flour, seasoning,
a little grated nutmeg, and the parsley. drop pieces
the size of a large walnut, into the boiling soup, and
cook about  minutes.
savoury custard. time— minutes.
 yolks of eggs,  whites of eggs,  gill of stock, a little
salt.
beat up the eggs with the stock and salt; strain into a
well-greased gallipot, cover it with a piece of greased
paper, stand it in a saucepan of boiling water and steam
very gently for  minutes (the custard would be full of
holes if steamed quickly). when the custard is set, take
the gallipot out of the saucepan, let it get cool, turn the
custard out and cut it up into fancy shapes.
artichoke or turnip soup. time— hour.
½ lb. sliced artichokes or turnips,  oz. butter,  tablespoonful
flour, ½ pint hot milk, ½ pint hot water, a little
cream or good butter, salt, pepper, and a little sugar.
heat the butter in a stew-pan, put in the vegetables,
turn them about, add the salt, flour, milk and water,
stirring them in slowly. when the vegetables are done
rub them through a sieve, put them back into a clean
stew-pan, add sugar and more seasoning if required and
heat thoroughly. a little cream or good butter may be
put into the tureen, and the soup stirred into it.
cabbage soup. time— hour.
 cabbage,  tablespoonful parsley,  oz. butter, 
shalot or onion,  pint milk, ¼ pint boiling water, 
tablespoonfuls semolina,  teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful
pepper.
put on a large saucepan of water to boil; shred the
cabbage and put it into the boiling water to blanch for
 minutes. strain the cabbage, return it to the saucepan
with ¼ pint boiling water, the milk, onion, chopped parsley,
butter, and seasoning. bring this to the boil and
cook  minutes; then shake in the semolina and boil
 minutes.
celery soup. time— hours.
 heads celery,  small onion,  pint water,  pint milk,
 yolk of egg. pepper and salt to taste.
stew the celery and onion in the water for  to  hours,
pulp it through a sieve, add ¾ pint milk and the seasoning
and let it boil once. draw it to the side of the fire
and add the yolk beaten up in  gill cold milk; stir, but
do not let it boil, and serve when hot.
haricot soup. time—½ hours.
 pint haricot beans,  pint milk,  quarts water, 
onion; pepper and salt to taste.
soak the beans in water all night. next morning put
them in a saucepan with the water, pepper, salt, and
sliced onion. boil gently  hours. then mash all
through a sieve into a basin, stir in the milk, and return
to the saucepan to get hot.
potato soup. time—½ hour.
 lb. potatoes (weighed after they are peeled), ½ oz.
butter,  onion,  pint hot water, ½ pint milk; salt and
pepper to taste.
cut up the potatoes, put them in a stew-pan with the
butter and the onion cut in slices. stir over the fire for 
minutes. add the water, and simmer for  hour. pass
all through a sieve, and return to the stew-pan. add the
milk, salt, and pepper, and serve when hot.
barley soup. time— hours.
 quarts water or pot-liquor, ¼ lb. pearl barley,  onions,
 carrots, a little chopped parsley; salt and pepper to
taste.
prepare the vegetables, put them with the other ingredients
into a saucepan, and simmer gently for  or 
hours.
brown onion soup. time—½ hour.
 onions,  oz. dripping,  teaspoonful flour, ½ pint
water or pot-liquor; pepper, salt and soy to taste.
skin the onions, cut them into small dice, heat the
dripping, and throw in the onions, shaking them about
over the fire till they are golden brown (they must be
coloured very slowly or some pieces will get too dark).
when they are brown stir in the flour carefully, and add
the water or pot-liquor. simmer for an hour, then rub
through a sieve, return to the saucepan, add a little soy,
pepper and salt to taste, and boil for  minutes before
serving.
if these directions are carefully followed this soup is
equal to one made from good stock.
carrot soup. time—½ hour.
 quart water or pot-liquor, ½ lb. carrots,  onions,
 oz. dripping; salt and pepper to taste.
prepare the vegetables, slice them, then fry them in
the dripping. add the water or pot-liquor, salt and
pepper. boil till the vegetables are tender, then pulp
through a sieve into a basin. heat again and serve
with fried bread.
lentil soup. time— or  hours.
 pints water,  pint red lentils,  onion,  sticks of
celery or some celery seed,  oz. dripping; pepper and
salt to taste.
the lentils must be soaked all night in cold water.
melt the dripping in a saucepan, fry the lentils, sliced
onion, and celery cut in small pieces. stir over the fire
for  minutes. then add the water and boil gently,
stirring occasionally, till the lentils are quite soft. pass
all through a sieve, return to the saucepan, add the
pepper and salt, and heat again.
pea soup. time—½ hours.
 pint split peas,  onions,  carrot,  turnip,  sticks
celery,  quarts water or pot-liquor; salt and pepper to
taste. bones or trimmings from meat are a great improvement.
soak the peas over-night; next morning put them on
in the cold water or pot-liquor. bring to the boil, and
then add the prepared vegetables, bones, and seasoning.
skim well, and boil for ½ hour, stirring occasionally.
remove the bones, and pulp the soup through a sieve.
heat it again, and serve with dried mint and fried bread.
spinach soup. time— hours.
 lbs. spinach,  quart water or stock, salt and pepper
to taste,  tablespoonful flour.
wash the spinach in several waters, strip off the
leaves and place them in a saucepan of cold water with
a little salt, and boil till tender (about ½ hour). pulp
through a hair sieve with the water in which it was
boiled; boil it up again in a clean stew-pan, thicken
carefully with the flour, cook for  minutes, and serve
with poached eggs.
vegetable soup. time—½ hour.
 quart water or pot-liquor,  carrots,  turnips, 
potatoes,  onions,  sticks celery, a few sifted herbs,
 oz. dripping,  tablespoonful flour,  teaspoonful mustard;
salt and pepper to taste.
prepare the vegetables, cut them into slices, fry them
in the dripping, add the water or pot-liquor, the salt,
pepper, and herbs. boil till quite tender, mix the flour
and mustard to a cream with the cold water, and add to
the soup. simmer for half an hour longer and then
serve.
fresh fish may be known by its stiffness, firmness,
bright eyes, and bright red gills.
the cheaper kinds of fish, such as herrings, mackerel,
haddocks, and plaice, contain more nourishment than
most of the more expensive kinds. all fish must be
thoroughly cleansed in salt and water, two waters at
least being allowed. it must then be very carefully
dried in a coarse cloth kept specially for this purpose.
to bake fish.
clean and dry the fish very thoroughly, put it on a
baking tin, greased with a little oil or butter, sprinkling
pepper and salt over it. cover with a well-greased sheet
of paper, bake from  minutes to ½ an hour, according
to the size of the fish. remove the paper, and serve the
fish with chopped parsley and the strained liquor from
the tin.
to boil fish.
when the fish is thoroughly cleaned, put it on a
strainer or dish, place it in a saucepan with boiling water
sufficient to cover it, some salt and a tablespoonful of
vinegar. simmer gently till the skin begins to crack.
some of the liquor in which the fish was boiled can be
used for making a sauce.
to broil fish.
clean and dry the fish thoroughly, split it open, flour
it, sprinkle with chopped parsley, pepper, and salt.
grease a gridiron with oil or butter, and broil the fish
over or in front of a very clear fire from  to  minutes.
sprinkle with small pieces of butter before serving.
before broiling mackerel or herrings lay them in a
mixture of salad oil and tarragon vinegar for an hour.
hints on frying.
this method of cooking fish requires the utmost care.
it is most important that the fish should be very carefully
dried, and that the oil should be at the right temperature.
to test this throw in a small piece of bread,
and if it brown in less than a minute the oil has reached
the correct heat. when the oil is perfectly still, and a
blue smoke rises, the temperature may also be considered
right. the fish must be well covered in oil, and the
pieces must not come in contact with one another.
to fry fish.
clean the fish, then cut it as required, and dry it very
thoroughly. beat up an egg, mix some flour, pepper and
salt on a plate, dip the fish first into this seasoning, then
into the egg, and when the oil has reached the right
temperature, fry the fish a golden brown. place it on soft
paper on a basket lid to drain. when the oil has cooled,
strain it, pour it into a jar, cover it and it will be ready for
use another time. it can be used again for fish only.
to economise the eggs mix a little water with them.
to utilise any scraps of fried fish, heat them in melted
butter (page ), flavoured to taste.
to steam fish.
fish should rather be steamed than boiled, for though
more time is required the result is more satisfactory. if
a fish-kettle is not to hand, place a pie-dish upside down
in a large saucepan, and put the fish on it. let boiling
water always reach half way up the dish, so that the fish
cooks in the steam. add more boiling water when required.
anchovy butter. time—½ hour.
 large anchovies,  hard boiled egg,  oz. butter, a
little pepper.
pound all together and pass through a sieve.
savoury cod. time—½ hour.
 or more lbs. of fresh cod,  tablespoonful vinegar, 
dessertspoonful flour,  teaspoonful chopped parsley, ½
teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful pepper,  oz. butter,  egg.
clean the fish and dry it, then cut it into nice sized
pieces. boil as directed (page ), then cover and keep
hot. put the flour into a basin, and add pepper, salt,
and butter (melted); mix well, and make into a paste
with the vinegar. stir this into ½ pint of the liquor in
which the fish has been boiled, and cook  minutes, stirring
continually. while this sauce cools beat up an egg;
then stir it carefully into the sauce, add the chopped
parsley, and pour it over the fish. if preferred the egg
may be boiled hard and chopped.
baked haddock. time—¾ hour.
 haddock,  tablespoonfuls bread crumbs,  dessertspoonful
chopped parsley,  teaspoonful chopped herbs,
 egg (well beaten);  oz. butter or  tablespoonful oil;
pepper and salt to taste.
wash and dry the fish well. mix nearly all the bread
crumbs with the herbs, parsley, pepper, salt, half the egg,
and ½ oz. of butter. stuff the stomach of the fish with
this mixture, and sew or skewer it up. egg and bread-crumb
the fish, place it on a greased tin in the shape of
an s, with the oil and pieces of butter; bake for half-an-hour,
basting it frequently. take out the cotton with
which the fish was sewn before serving.
dried haddock. time— minutes.
place the dried haddock in a frying-pan and cover with
cold water. bring to the boil, then take out the haddock,
place it on a dish in the oven, with bits of butter over it,
for  minutes, and then serve.
baked plaice and tomatoes. time—¾ hour.
 plaice,  onion,  tomatoes,  tablespoonfuls oil,  lb.
potatoes, pepper and salt to taste, the juice of a lemon,
chopped parsley.
slice the onion and tomatoes, heat them in a tin with
the oil, salt and pepper. wash the plaice and dry it
well, put it in the tin, season it, dredge it with flour, and
baste it with the oil. parboil the potatoes and put them
round the plaice to get brown. when dishing up,
squeeze the lemon-juice over the plaice and sprinkle with
the chopped parsley.
haddocks may also be cooked in this way.
soused herrings. time—½ hour.
 herrings, ½ pint vinegar,  bay-leaves, whole peppers,
salt, and cloves to taste.
split and halve the herrings, roll and tie them up. place
them in a pie-dish, half cover with vinegar, add whole
peppers, salt, cloves, and bay-leaves, and bake in a slow
oven until they feel soft (about  minutes).
sole à la maître d’hôtel. time—½ hour.
 sole filleted,  oz. butter, ¾ oz. flour, juice of 
lemon, salt and pepper to taste,  teaspoonful chopped
parsley, ½ pint water, ½ gill cream.
put the bones and fins of the sole into a saucepan with
the water, and put it on to boil. place the fillets folded
loosely on a greased tin, and sprinkle them with lemon-juice,
pepper and salt. cover with a greased paper, and
cook in a moderate oven, about  minutes. melt the
butter in a clean saucepan, drop the flour in gradually,
and mix well. add the fish liquor and boil  minutes.
then add salt, pepper, cream, lemon-juice, and parsley.
arrange the fillets on a dish with the sauce poured over
them.
sole au gratin. time—½ hour.
 sole, ½ shalot,  mushrooms,  teaspoonful chopped
parsley, juice of a lemon,  oz. butter, raspings (see
page x.); salt and pepper to taste.
skin the sole, cut off the fins and nick it on both sides
with a knife, dry it well. chop the shalot, mushrooms
and parsley, mix them together, and sprinkle half of them
on to a dish. lay the sole on this seasoning, and sprinkle
the rest of it over the sole. squeeze lemon-juice over,
sprinkle with salt, pepper and raspings. put little bits
of butter on the fish, bake in a moderate oven for 
minutes.
soles stewed with tomatoes. time—¾ hour.
a pair of soles,  small onion,  tablespoonfuls oil, or 
oz. butter,  tomatoes, the juice of  lemon, pepper, salt,
a little cayenne and nutmeg.
heat the oil or butter in a stew-pan, add chopped
onion, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. when the onion is
tender, put in the soles, slice the tomatoes on to them,
cook for  minutes, or ½ hour if the soles are large.
take out the soles carefully, put them on a hot dish, rub
the liquor through a sieve, add the lemon-juice, and a
very little cayenne and nutmeg, return to the saucepan to
get hot, and pour over the soles.
gurnets and shad may also be cooked in this way, and
can be eaten hot or cold.
brown stewed fish.(salmon and other rich fish.) time— hour.for  mackerel or herrings.
¾ pint porter,  spanish onions, ground ginger, nutmeg,
allspice, ground cloves, pepper and salt to taste,
juice of three lemons,  dessertspoonful vinegar, ½ lb. real
black treacle.
stew a crust of bread and the onions in the porter.
when tender, take out the crust, and put in the fish with
the spice, lemon-juice, vinegar, pepper and salt. when
the fish is nearly cooked, add the treacle gradually, cook
 minutes, and serve cold with slices of lemon between
bunches of scraped horse-radish.
brown stewed fish.(fresh water fish, etc.) time— minutes.
 to  lbs. fish, ½ pint water,  onion,  tablespoonful
oil,  tablespoonful vinegar, two-pennyworth ginger-bread,
one-pennyworth golden syrup,  lemon; pepper and salt
to taste.
peel and cut up the onion, brown it in the oil, put it in
the stew-pan with the fish and water, and cook for half an
hour. soak the ginger-bread in the golden syrup and
vinegar; when soft, beat it up and add the lemon-juice,
pepper and salt. ten minutes before the fish is ready,
pour this sauce on to it, and tilt the stew-pan well backwards
and forwards. serve cold.
white stewed fish with balls. time—½ hour.
 lbs. fish,  small onions,  tablespoonfuls sweet
oil,  pint cold water, nutmeg and ginger, pepper and
salt to taste, a pinch of powdered saffron, juice of 
lemons,  tablespoonful flour,  eggs; (for the balls) a
piece of cod’s-liver, chopped parsley, bread-crumbs.
chop the onions, stew till tender in the oil in a
stew-pan, take out one-third for balls, add the fish and
water, season with salt, pepper, ginger and nutmeg.
when the liquor boils, place the balls (see below) on
the top of the fish and cook ¼ hour, then draw
the stew-pan to the side of the fire. mix the flour to a
smooth paste with a little cold water in a separate basin,
add the lemon-juice,  whole egg and  yolk beaten,
the saffron, and mix all well together. take a pint of
the fish-liquor from the stew-pan, add this gradually to
the contents of the basin, stirring all the time. when
thoroughly mixed, pour it back into the stew pan, from
which must previously be taken some of the fish-liquor, if
there seem too much. tilt the stew-pan backwards and
forwards till the sauce has thickened sufficiently. serve
hot or cold, with the sauce poured over the fish and balls,
and garnish with parsley and slices of lemon.
to make the balls: chop the cod’s-liver very fine; add
the remainder of the onion chopped fine, parsley,
white of egg beaten, pepper, salt, nutmeg, ginger, and
sufficient bread-crumbs to make them the right stiffness.
curried fish. time— hour.
 lb. cold cooked fish,  apple or stick of rhubarb,  oz.
butter,  onions,  pint water or fish liquor,  tablespoonful
curry powder,  tablespoonful flour,  teaspoonful
lemon-juice or vinegar; salt and pepper to
taste.
peel and cut up the onions and apple, or rhubarb; fry
till brown in hot butter. add the curry powder, flour,
salt and pepper, and stir the water or fish-liquor in
gradually; boil this all up and simmer gently for half-an-hour,
then add the lemon-juice or vinegar; strain, and
return to the saucepan with the fish cut into neat pieces
to get thoroughly hot. serve the curry in a border of
boiled rice (see page ).
a fish cake. time— hour.
½ lb. cold cooked fish,  oz. bread-crumbs,  onion, ½ oz.
butter; pepper and salt to taste; ½ gill milk or fish-liquor,
 teaspoonful chopped parsley,  egg, raspings
(see page x.).
cover a greased cake-tin with raspings; melt the butter
in a saucepan; fry the minced onions and parsley in the
butter; mince the fish and stir into the fried onion and
parsley. remove the saucepan from the fire, stir in the
bread-crumbs, the milk or liquor, the beaten egg and
seasoning; pour all into the cake-tin and bake in a
moderate oven three-quarters of an hour. turn out and
serve with melted butter (see page ).
fish cakes. time—½ hour.
 lb. cold cooked fish, ½ lb. potatoes,  oz butter,  eggs;
pepper and salt to taste.
use any remains of cold fish, or boil some fish as on
page . cold potatoes may also be used instead of
boiling fresh ones. mash the potatoes, add the pieces
of fish broken up small, the yolk of one egg, the butter
melted, and salt and pepper to taste. form the mixture
into balls with a tablespoon, flatten them into cakes
brush over with beaten egg, toss them in bread-crumbs,
and fry in oil. this mixture may also be made into a
large fish-cake, by putting it into a greased tin and
baking it in the oven about ¼ hour.
fish pie. time— minutes.
cold cooked fish of any kind, bread-crumbs,  oz.
butter; pepper and salt to taste, fish-liquor or water.
butter a pie-dish, sprinkle on it a layer of bread-crumbs,
then a layer of fish broken up into pieces; some
pepper, salt, and bits of butter; cover this with more
bread-crumbs and bits of butter; pour on a little fish-liquor
or water, and bake  minutes.
fish quenelles. time—¾ hour.
 teacupful bread-crumbs, ½ gill milk or cream,  teacupful
cold cooked fish,  oz. fresh butter,  egg; salt
and pepper to taste.
soak the bread-crumbs in the milk, pound the fish,
melt the butter, beat up the egg, yolk and white
separately, mix all together, season to taste; ¾ fill six
small buttered moulds with the mixture and steam for
½ hour; turn out and serve with white or lemon sauce
(see page ).
fish soufflée. time—½ hour.
½ lb. cold cooked fish,  eggs,  oz. butter, pepper and
salt to taste; anchovy sauce if liked.
pound up the fish, melt the butter, add it to the fish
with the beaten yolks of eggs and seasoning. beat up the
whites of eggs to a stiff froth, add them lightly to the
other mixture in a pie-dish and bake in a quick oven
about  minutes.
halibut crême. time—¾ hour.
 lb. cold cooked fish (halibut preferred),  oz. butter,
½ oz. flour, ½ pint milk,  oz. grated cheese; pepper, salt
and nutmeg to taste.
remove the skin and bone from the fish, mash it up with
a fork, then place it in a vegetable dish; melt the butter
in a small saucepan, stir in the flour carefully, then add
the milk by degrees. when it boils remove from the fire
add the salt, pepper, and nutmeg, spread this mixture
over the fish and sprinkle with grated cheese, or if
preferred with bread-crumbs. bake in the oven till
brown.
kedgeree. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. boiled fish, ¼ lb. boiled rice,  eggs,  oz. butter,
salt, cayenne pepper, and nutmeg to taste.
boil the eggs hard, break the fish into small pieces,
chop the white of egg and grate the yolks. when the
boiled rice is dry, melt the butter in a stew-pan and add
the rice, fish, white of egg, cayenne pepper, grated nutmeg,
and salt. mix well and serve on a hot dish, with
the grated yolks sprinkled over.
good meat should be firm to the touch, adhere closely
to the bones, be streaked with fat, and should have a
slight but not unpleasant odour.
meat becomes much more tender if it can be hung a
day or two before it is cooked.
to bake meat.
baking closely resembles roasting. it is more economical,
as the joint loses less weight, and if carefully
attended to cannot be distinguished from roast meat. a
double tin which holds hot water should be used, so that
the steam from the water may prevent the dripping from
burning. place the meat on a trivet in the tin, flour the
meat, sprinkle it with salt, put it in the hottest part of the
oven for the first few minutes, then remove it to a cooler
part, baste well, and turn it over occasionally. (for time
and gravy see roast meat.)
to boil meat.
weigh the meat, allow twenty minutes to each pound,
and twenty minutes extra for dishing up. put the meat
into boiling water, boil five minutes, then draw the saucepan
to the side of the fire, and simmer; keep the meat
well covered with water; serve with a teacupful of its
own liquor. never throw away the liquor in which meat
has been boiled; it makes excellent soup.
to roast meat.
have a bright and clear fire; weigh the meat, allow
twenty minutes to each pound, and twenty minutes extra
for dishing up; flour the joint well, and sprinkle it with salt;
let it roast quickly the first ten minutes, then put it farther
from the fire, and let it cook more slowly, basting often;
flour occasionally. when dishing up, pour the dripping
out of the pan, and set it aside. add one pint or more of
boiling water to the brown lumps under the dripping,
and put it in the hottest part of the oven. pour this
gravy over the meat and serve.
beef à la mode. time— hours.
 lbs. lean brisket,  quart water, ½ gill vinegar, 
spanish onions,  oz. mustard seed,  oz. long pepper,
½ teaspoonful ground ginger; salt to taste; a thickening
of flour, sugar, and browning.
put the beef on in cold water, bring it to the boil, then
simmer for three hours, reducing the water to one pint.
add the vinegar, onions, and other ingredients. stew in
the oven (if possible) for two hours, but if the saucepan is
too large for the oven, let the meat continue to simmer on
the stove. half an hour before serving, thicken the gravy
with flour, sugar, and browning (see page x.).
smoked beef.
soak over-night in cold water; next morning place it
in cold water, and simmer till quite tender, reckoning
½ hour to the pound.
beef steak. time— minutes.
heat the gridiron, put in the steak, turn the gridiron
four times at intervals of  minutes, then eight times at
intervals of  minute. sprinkle with pepper and salt,
and serve on a hot plate.
chops are done in the same way, turning the gridiron
twice at intervals of  minutes, and six times at intervals
of  minute.
to make steak tender: beat it well, and rub into it a
small pinch of carbonate of soda.
beef steak pie. time—½ hours.
½ lb. beef steak, ¾ lb. flour, ¼ lb. clarified dripping, 
teaspoonful salt, ½ teaspoonful pepper.
beat the steak well, cut it up into neat pieces. mix
 tablespoonful flour, salt, and pepper on a plate, and dip
each piece of meat into the mixture. put the pieces in a
stew-pan, cover with cold water, and simmer gently
about ½ hour, then turn the meat and gravy into a pie-dish.
put the flour into a large basin with half a saltspoonful
of salt, rub the dripping into it, and add by degrees
enough cold water to make a stiff paste. flour a board,
roll the pastry out rather larger than the pie-dish, about
one-third of an inch thick, cut a strip off, wet the edge of
the dish, place the strip round it, wet the strip, and press
the rest of the pastry on to it, trimming off the rough
edges with a sharp knife. make a hole in the top of the
pie to allow the steam to escape whilst baking; ornament
the top and edges and brush over with beaten egg.
bake for ¾ hour, putting it into the hottest part of the
oven for a few minutes, then remove it to a cooler part.
beef steak pudding. time—½ hours.
 lb. beef,  oz. suet, ¾ lb. flour, ½ gill water,  teaspoonful
baking-powder; salt and pepper to taste.
put on a large saucepan of water to boil. mix on a
plate  dessertspoonful of flour, some pepper and salt.
beat the steak well, cut it into slices, dip each piece in
the mixture, and roll it up. put the flour, baking-powder,
salt, and suet chopped fine, into a basin, and mix to a stiff
paste with cold water. cut off one-third for the top.
grease a basin well, line it with the paste, put in the
meat with a little water or gravy, wet the edges, press
the top on. tie a pudding cloth, dipped in boiling
water and dredged with flour, over the basin, place it in
the saucepan of boiling water, and boil ½ hours.
stewed shin of beef (with dumplings). time—½ hours.
 lb. shin of beef,  onions,  carrots,  turnips,  tablespoonfuls
flour,  oz. dripping or suet; pepper and salt
to taste.
prepare the carrots and turnips and boil them quickly
 minutes in  quart of water. cut the meat into pieces,
fry a light brown in the dripping, then place the pieces in
a saucepan. peel and slice the onions, fry them in the
same dripping, then stir in carefully  tablespoonfuls of
flour to brown. add the carrots and turnips to the meat,
pour the water in which they were boiled into the frying-pan
to brown; then add it with the onions, pepper and
salt to the meat, etc, and stew slowly ½ hour.
dumplings.—½ lb. flour,  oz. dripping,  teaspoonful
baking-powder,  teaspoonful salt.
shred the fat fine and rub it into the flour with the
baking-powder and salt. mix with lukewarm water to a
stiff paste. cut into eight pieces, and roll lightly into
dumplings on a floured board. throw them into a
saucepan of boiling water, and boil till they rise to the
surface ( minutes). add them to the stew  minutes
before serving.
beef stewed with french beans. time— hours.
 lbs. lean brisket,  lbs. french beans,  good-sized
onions,  pint water,  gill vinegar,  tablespoonful flour,
 tablespoonfuls dark moist sugar; pepper and salt to
taste.
stew the beef  hours in the water. string the
beans, cut them in halves, peel and cut up the onions,
and add all to the beef at the end of the first hour.
about  minutes before serving skim off all the fat;
mix smoothly in a separate basin the flour, sugar,
vinegar, pepper and salt, and add the mixture to the
stew.
beef stewed with haricot beans. time— hours.
 lbs. lean brisket,  onion,  tablespoonful moist sugar,
 oz. dripping, ¾ pint haricot beans, ¾ pint cold water, 
tablespoonful flour; pepper, salt and ground ginger to
taste.
the beans must be put in soak over-night.
chop the onion fine, fry in the dripping, add the flour,
seasoning, sugar, beans and water. stew the meat and
vegetables, etc., very gently  or  hours.
brain fritters. time—½ hour.
 set brains,  teaspoonful chopped parsley,  eggs,
 tablespoonfuls bread-crumbs; pepper and salt.
wash the brains in vinegar and water, then put them
into boiling water and boil for  minutes. drain them,
chop them, and put them into a basin with  teaspoonful
chopped parsley, pepper, salt and  egg. add sufficient
bread-crumbs to make them into a stiff paste (not exceeding
two tablespoonfuls). form into flat, round cakes,
dip into egg and bread-crumbs and fry.
brazilian stew. time— hours.
 lb. beef,  carrot,  turnip, herbs, pepper and salt to
taste, ½ gill vinegar.
cut the meat into neat pieces, dip each piece in the
vinegar, and pack closely in a saucepan. sprinkle with
pepper and salt. cut the vegetables into slices, and put
them with the herbs into the saucepan. close the lid,
and steam ½ hours, stirring occasionally.
braised beef. time— hours.
 lbs. topside, ½ lb. smoked beef,  oz. dripping, 
medium-sized onion,  small carrot,  turnip,  to  sticks
celery,  pint water, a few whole peppers and allspice, 
tablespoonful vinegar,  tablespoonful flour; salt to taste.
melt the dripping, cut up the smoked beef into thin
wedge-like strips and insert them into the meat with a
knife. brown both sides of the meat in the dripping, add
the vegetables, seasoning and water, and let all stew very
slowly for ½ hours. ¼ hour before serving, take out the
meat, keep it hot; mix the flour, vinegar and  tablespoonful
water to a paste, pour it into the stew-pan and
thicken it, strain gravy over meat and serve.
to clarify dripping.
pour the dripping from the pan into a basin of cold
water. when cool lift off the cake of clarified dripping,
scrape away the sediment from the bottom, and wipe
dry.
to clarify fat.
cut up any scraps of cooked or uncooked fat into
small pieces, place in a saucepan, add just sufficient cold
water to cover them, stir often, and simmer with the lid
off till nothing is left of the pieces of fat but brownish
scraps. strain into a basin, and when cold, a hard
white cake will be formed, which will keep good some
time. this fat makes excellent pastry, and can be used
for frying.
irish stew. time— hours.
½ lb. breast or scrag of mutton,  lbs. of potatoes, 
pint water,  onions,  tablespoonful flour,  teaspoonful
salt, ½ teaspoonful pepper.
cut the meat into neat pieces, removing some of the
fat, peel and slice the potatoes and onions. mix the
flour, pepper and salt on a plate, and dip each piece of
meat into this mixture. put a layer of potatoes at the
bottom of the saucepan, then one of meat, then one of
onion, covering with a layer of potatoes. pour the
water over the whole and stew slowly, or bake in the
oven ½ hour, stirring occasionally.
liver. time—½ hour.
½ lb. liver,  gill water,  tablespoonfuls flour,  oz.
dripping; pepper and salt to taste.
cut the liver into slices about one-third of an inch
thick. dip each piece into one tablespoonful flour mixed
with pepper and salt, and fry in hot fat. take out the
liver, put it on a hot dish. mix one tablespoonful flour
carefully with the water in a separate basin. add this
gradually to the contents of the frying-pan; let it boil
and thicken. pour it over the liver and serve.
liver fritters. time—½ hour.
½ lb. liver,  shalot, sage, bread-crumbs,  slice cold
smoked beef (if liked),  oz. suet; pepper and salt to
taste.
scrape the liver, chop the suet and shalot and mix
all well together with the bread-crumbs and seasoning
till the mixture is firm enough to roll into balls.
flatten into cakes, dip in egg and bread-crumbs and fry
a golden brown in hot fat or oil.
sausage meat can also be made into fritters, but should
be dipped in batter (page ) instead of egg and bread-crumbs.
braised leg of mutton. time— hours.
 lbs. leg of mutton, ¼ lb. smoked beef, ½ pint stock
or water,  lb. brussels sprouts,  carrots,  turnip, 
onion,  sticks celery, a little thyme and parsley; pepper
and salt to taste.
place the mutton in a stew-pan on a layer of slices of
smoked beef, add some pepper and salt, the stock or
water, and simmer gently ½ hours (in the oven, if possible).
prepare and cut up the vegetables, and add all
the ingredients, except the sprouts, to the meat  hour
before serving. boil the sprouts separately and add
them when serving. thicken and brown the gravy if
liked.
mutton cutlets. time—½ hour.
 lbs. best end of a neck of mutton,  egg, bread-crumbs;
pepper and salt to taste.
saw off the upper rib bones, leaving the bones which
will form the cutlets about three inches long. cut off
each cutlet, trim neatly, scraping off the fat. dip each
one in the egg, which has been well beaten, sprinkle with
bread-crumbs, and fry a golden brown in hot fat or oil.
arrange on a hot dish round mashed potatoes or other
vegetables.
the pieces cut off in preparing the cutlets should be
used for irish stew, toad-in-the hole, or any other small
dish.
haricot mutton. time—½ hours.
 lb. scrag of mutton, ¾ pint water or stock,  onion,
 carrot,  turnip,  oz. dripping, ½ oz. flour; pepper and
salt to taste.
cut the mutton into neat pieces, fry them brown in the
dripping, then take them out and brown the flour carefully.
stir in the water or stock, and put back the meat.
cut the vegetables into dice, and add them with the seasoning.
skim well and simmer  hours.
pillau. time—½ hours.
 lb. mutton,  tomatoes,  teacupful rice,  quart water;
salt to taste.
cut up some pieces of raw fat mutton, add a little
water, cover the stew-pan, and place on a slow fire.
the meat must consume the water and stew till it becomes
a light brown colour. wash the tomatoes, put
them into a stew-pan without water, and stew them soft
over a slow fire. strain the pulp through a sieve and add
sufficient water to make ½ pint of liquor. this must be
thrown into the stew-pan over the mutton; add salt and
boil it up. wash and dry the rice well, throw it into the
stew-pan, let it boil  minutes, and then simmer ½ hour.
poor man’s goose. time—½ hour.
 lbs. bola. stuffing.— onion,  teaspoonful sage, a
small piece of soaked bread,  oz. suet; pepper and salt
to taste.
make holes in the meat with a skewer, and fill them up
with the stuffing, made as follows: chop the suet and
onion fine, squeeze the bread dry, and mix all together
with the sage, pepper and salt. flour the meat and roast
it (see p. ). serve with baked potatoes.
sausage rolls. time— hour.
 sausages, ½ lb. flour, ¼ lb. dripping,  egg.
skin the sausages, make flaky pastry (page ), after
the final rolling, cut the pastry into , place a sausage
in the centre of each piece of pastry, egg half-way round
the edges, fold over, press the edges together, trim neatly,
place on a greased baking-tin, brush over with beaten
egg and bake in a hot oven about ½ hour.
sausage and rice. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. choriza (sausage), ¼ lb. rice,  pint boiling water,
a pinch of saffron.
wash and drain the rice well, put it in a saucepan with
the saffron and boiling water. skin the sausage, place it
on the top of the rice, and simmer very gently till the rice
swells and soaks up all the water. serve the sausage in
a ring of rice. sausage cooked alone should simmer
about  minutes.
boiled sheep’s head. time— hours.
 sheep’s head,  onions,  turnips, a small bunch parsley,
 tablespoonful pearl barley,  teaspoonfuls salt,
½ teaspoonful pepper, sufficient cold water to cover the
head, ½ oz. flour,  oz. dripping.
soak the head for one hour in lukewarm water. then
remove the tongue, brains, and all the thin soft bones
from the inside of the head. tie it together put it in a
saucepan, cover with water, adding the salt, and bring it
slowly to the boil; take off the scum. prepare the vegetables,
wash the barley, and add all to the head. let the
whole simmer gently for  hours. about ½ hour before
it is done, tie the brains in a little piece of muslin, and
throw them into the saucepan. boil the tongue
separately. when done, place the head on a hot dish.
mash the turnips with a little dripping, pepper and salt,
form into little balls, and place round the dish alternately
with the carrots. halve the tongue, and lay it across the
head. pour over all a sauce made of the flour browned in
the dripping, half a pint of the stock in which the head
has been boiled, the brains, slightly chopped, and a little
finely-chopped parsley. the broth may be used as it
is, or made into a soup of any kind.
roast sheeps’ hearts. time—¾ hour.
 sheeps’ hearts,  oz. dripping. stuffing— oz. suet,
 tablespoonful herbs,  tablespoonfuls bread-crumbs,
rind of  lemon grated,  egg; pepper and salt to taste.
put the hearts into boiling water for a few minutes.
meanwhile make the stuffing as follows:—chop the suet,
mix with the herbs, bread-crumbs, lemon-rind, pepper,
salt and beaten egg. take the hearts out of the water,
dry them, stuff them, skewer them up, flour them, put
them in a saucepan with a little dripping, baste occasionally,
and turn them over. when done pour a little stock
into the saucepan, stir it well, boil it up, and pour over
the hearts.
stewed steak. time—½ hours.
 lb. beef steak,  onion,  carrot,  turnip, ½ saltspoonful
salt, ¼ saltspoonful pepper,  dessertspoonful chopped
parsley,  oz. dripping,  dessertspoonful flour.
melt the dripping, cut the steak into  pieces, and fry
them. then take out the meat, cut the onion and carrot
into thin slices, the turnip into thick blocks, and fry these
in the dripping. when they are browned, lay the meat
on top of them, add the seasoning and ½ pint of warm
water. close the lid and simmer  hours. thicken
with the flour ¼ hour before serving; add the chopped
parsley at the last minute.
smoked or salt tongue.
smoked tongues must be soaked over-night in cold
water. salt tongues do not require this. tongues must
be placed in boiling water and simmered till tender, then
skinned and replaced in the liquor to get hot again.
toad-in-the-hole. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. scraps of cooked or uncooked meat,  gills water,
½ lb. flour, salt,  eggs.
grease a pie-dish or baking-tin; lay the pieces of meat
in it; make a batter by stirring the water gradually into
the flour and salt, beat in the eggs one at a time, then
beat all together, pressing out any lumps against the sides
of the basin, let it stand two hours if possible, then pour
it over the meat and bake in a quick oven about ½ hour.
stewed knuckle of veal. time—¼ hours.
 lbs. knuckle of veal, ¼ lb. rice,  onion,  teaspoonful
salt, ¼ teaspoonful pepper,  tablespoonful chopped
parsley,  pints water,  oz. flour, juice of  lemon.
simmer the veal for  hours in the salt and water.
after it has simmered  hour add the onion, peeled and
cut up, and the rice well washed. simmer again for 
hour, add the flour mixed to a cream with the lemon-juice,
then add the chopped parsley, cook for  minutes,
and serve the meat in the middle of the rice and gravy.
breast of veal or mutton stuffed. time— hours.
cut breast in half and stuff; or bone, stuff and roll
round. bake for ½ hour, basting well.
forcemeat:  oz. smoked beef, ¼ lb. suet, rind of ½
lemon,  teaspoonful chopped herbs, and parsley, salt,
cayenne and pounded mace to taste,  oz. bread-crumbs,
and  egg.
shred the smoked beef, chop the suet, lemon-rind, and
herbs, mincing all very finely. add seasoning to taste,
and mix well with the bread-crumbs before wetting with
the egg. work all together and use.
curry. time—¼ hour.
 lb. pieces of cold cooked meat,  oz. clarified dripping,
 apple,  onion,  dessertspoonful curry powder, 
dessertspoonful flour; salt and pepper to taste; ½ pint
cold water.
peel and cut up the onion and apple, and cut the meat
into neat slices; fry the vegetables brown in the dripping,
add the curry powder, flour, salt and pepper, and
stir the water into it gradually. let it boil, and then
simmer for ½ hour with the lid off. add the meat,
heat it through, but do not let it boil. serve in a ring of
boiled rice (see page ).
hash. time— hours.
 lb. cold cooked meat and bones,  onions,  carrot,
a small bunch of herbs, ½ oz. dripping,  tablespoonful
flour,  dessertspoonful ketchup,  saltspoonful salt, ½
saltspoonful pepper.
chop the bones of the meat into small pieces, and put
them into a saucepan with enough cold water to cover
them. add to them the herbs, chopped onion, and the
carrot, washed, scraped and cut into slices. simmer ½
hour, strain, and add the seasoning. cut the other
onion into thin slices, fry it brown in the dripping, add it
to the stock, and thicken with the flour. stir well till it
boils, then add the ketchup, the meat cut into neat slices,
and heat thoroughly without boiling. serve with small
pieces of toast, or in a ring of mashed potatoes.
macaroni mutton. time—¼ hours.
 lb. cold cooked mutton,  large onion,  oz. dripping,
 pint of stock or pot-liquor,  tablespoonful sauce of any
kind, ¼ lb. macaroni; pepper and salt to taste.
fry (in a saucepan) some slices of mutton (underdone
is best) in the dripping, with the onion cut in pieces, then
add the stock or pot-liquor, worcester, harvey or other
sauce, pepper, salt and macaroni. simmer for  hours
and serve.
meat croquettes. time— hour.
¼ lb. cold meat; pepper and salt to taste; ½ lb. cold
boiled potatoes, ¼ lb. flour,  oz. dripping, bread-crumbs
or vermicelli,  egg.
rub the potatoes through a sieve, add the flour and
salt and rub in the dripping. mix to a stiff paste with
cold water, roll it out and cut in into rounds. put a little
chopped meat in each round, egg half the round, press
the edges together and nick them. roll each croquette
first in egg and then in bread-crumbs or vermicelli, and
fry in boiling fat or oil.
cold meat patties. time— hour.
½ lb. cold cooked meat, ¾ lb. flour, ¼ lb. dripping, 
teaspoonful baking-powder, pepper and salt to taste, ½
teaspoonful mixed herbs,  gill stock or gravy.
rub the fat into the flour, add the baking-powder, mix
to a stiff paste with a little cold water, roll it out ¼
inch thick, and cut  rounds. grease  patty pans, and
line them with  rounds of paste. mince the cold meat,
season with pepper, salt, and half a teaspoonful mixed
herbs, moisten with stock or gravy. fill the patty pans
with the mixture, press on the remaining  rounds of
paste, trim the edges neatly, decorate, brush over with
beaten egg, and bake ½ hour.
potato pie. time— hour.
 lb. cold cooked meat, ½ lb. boiled potatoes,  oz.
dripping,  tablespoonful gravy or water, ½ teaspoonful
herbs or  onion,  teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful pepper.
cut the meat into small pieces, or mince it, sprinkle
with the seasoning and put in a pie-dish, add the water
or gravy. melt the dripping, add to it the mashed
potatoes, pepper and salt, stir well and spread over the
meat to form a crust. smooth neatly with a knife dipped
in hot water, and mark with a fork. bake in a hot oven
about ¾ hour.
potato surprise. time—½ hour.
 oz. lean cooked mutton,  potato, pepper and salt.
choose a large potato, parboil it without peeling, cut a
small piece off the end and scoop out the inside. mince
the meat fine, flavour with pepper and salt, mix with a
little gravy and fill the potato. cork up the end with the
piece cut off and bake about  minutes.
ragout of beef. time—½ hours.
 lb. pieces of beef, raw or cooked, ½ pint cold water,
 large onions,  teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful pepper,
 teaspoonful chopped parsley, ½ teaspoonful chopped
herbs, ½ oz. rice or pearl barley.
peel and cut the onions into rings, cut the pieces of
meat into squares, put them in a stew-pan, add all the
other ingredients and then the water. simmer for  hours,
stirring occasionally to prevent burning.
rissoles. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. cold cooked meat, ½ gill stock or gravy,  dessertspoonful
flour,  oz. dripping, ½ teaspoonful mixed herbs,
or  slice cold smoked beef, ½ teaspoonful chopped
parsley, pepper and salt to taste,  egg, bread-crumbs.
melt the dripping, stir in the flour and stock, the
seasoning, and lastly the meat, chopped fine. heat
thoroughly, then turn on to a plate to cool; form into
balls, dip into egg and bread-crumbs, and fry a golden
brown in hot fat or oil.
salt meat salad. time—¼ hour.
cut up into neat pieces any scraps of cold salt meat.
to a small quantity, add  tablespoonful capers,  tablespoonful
mustard pickles, and small pieces of watercress
chopped fine. mix well together, heap on to a dish and
garnish, if liked, with the white and yolk of a hard boiled
egg rubbed through a sieve, strips of beetroot and small
bunches of watercress.
tomato pie. time—¾ hour.
 lb. cold mutton, ½ lb. potatoes,  lb. tomatoes,  gill
stock, ½ onion, pepper and salt to taste.
cut the meat into neat pieces, add the potatoes and
onion sliced, and cover with sliced tomato. add the stock
and seasoning, make a short crust (see page ) and
bake about ½ hour.
stuffed tomatoes.
 lbs. round tomatoes,  oz. chopped smoked beef, 
chopped shalot,  to  mushrooms,  teaspoonful chopped
parsley,  tablespoonful bread-crumbs.
cut a small piece off the top of each tomato and squeeze
them slightly. mix the other ingredients over the fire
for a few minutes, then stuff each tomato with some of the
mixture, replace the top pieces, sprinkle with bread-crumbs
and bake  minutes.
stuffed vegetable marrow. time—½ hour.
 marrow,  lb. cold meat, pepper and salt to taste, ½
teaspoonful herbs, ½ gill stock or gravy.
cut a small piece off the end of the marrow, scoop out
the seeds, and replace them with the meat, chopped fine
and seasoned, and moistened with stock. cork up the
end with the piece cut off, roll up in a pudding cloth,
cover with boiling water, and cook about twenty minutes.
serve with gravy. this dish may also be baked, but
must be basted occasionally with dripping.
walnut stew. time— hours.
proceed as for hash (page ), but when heating the
meat, add  pickled walnuts cut up small, and a little of
the liquor, and garnish with  or  walnuts instead of
toast.
hints on preparing vegetables.
. vegetables keep best on a stone floor.
. all green vegetables should be laid in cold salt
and water for  hour before they are cooked. this
draws out all the insects they contain. carrots should
be scraped, then cut up and thrown into cold water till
they are cooked. turnips must be peeled thickly, then
cut up and thrown into cold water till they are cooked.
onions must be peeled, then, as a rule, sliced or chopped.
. green vegetables should be thrown into boiling
water with a little salt and small piece of soda, boiled
quickly for a few minutes and then simmered until
tender.
. a crust of bread should be boiled with cabbages,
greens, etc. this takes off the disagreeable smell.
. vegetables must never be left over-night in saucepans,
for a poison would be produced.
. all the waste part of vegetables should be dried
under the grate, then burnt at once, never thrown into
the dust-bin. by this means all unwholesome smells are
avoided.
baked beetroot. time— hours.
boil a large beetroot about  hours, be careful not to
pierce it. when cold mash it very smooth, add a little
dripping, pepper, salt and stock. place in a greased basin
and bake for  hour.
broad beans. time—¾ hour.
shell, wash and drain them. throw into cold water
with a little salt and a bunch of parsley. boil until soft
( to  minutes), then drain them. serve either with
melted butter or gravy.
french beans. time—¾ hour.
string the beans, cut each slantwise into  or  pieces,
wash them well in cold salt and water, drain them, and
throw them into boiling water with a little salt and a
small piece of soda in it. let them boil very fast with
the lid off, until tender. drain the water off and serve.
french beans, à la maître d’hôtel are boiled as above,
then rinsed in cold water, dried and put into a stew-pan
on the fire with a little dripping, chopped parsley, pepper,
salt, nutmeg and lemon-juice, till thoroughly heated
through.
haricot beans. time— hours.
 pint haricot beans,  tablespoonful vinegar,  teaspoonful
brown sugar; pepper and salt to taste.
soak the beans over-night. next day boil them for 
or  hours in plenty of water. one hour before serving,
mix the vinegar, sugar, pepper and salt well together,
pour away some of the water from the beans, and add the
mixture to them.
cabbages, cauliflowers, greens, and savoys. time—½ hour.
cut off the faded outside leaves and hard part of the
stalk, and wash the vegetables well. cook in plenty of
boiling water, with a tablespoonful of salt to every half-gallon.
if the water is very hard, add sufficient carbonate
of soda to cover a threepenny piece. boil with the lid
off till the stalk is soft.
stewed carrots. time—½ hour.
scrape carrots carefully and cut in thick pieces. place
them in sufficient water to cover them and stew till tender.
then evaporate water till only half remains. add a little
dripping, flour and pepper and toss carrots gently in pan
till they are coated with their own juice, and serve.
stewed celery. time—¾ hour.
boil some heads of celery, cut into pieces about 
inches long, in some good stock, add salt, pepper, and a
little lemon-juice. thicken the stock with flour and
serve.
colcannon. time—¼ hour
equal quantities of cooked cabbage and potatoes,
chopped, mixed together, seasoned with pepper and salt,
and fried in a little dripping.
boiled green peas. time— to  minutes.
shell and pick them over, wash them in cold water, drain
them. throw them into boiling water, add a teaspoonful
brown sugar, a little mint and salt. boil until quite tender,
drain off the water, and serve in a hot dish with the
mint.
dried green peas. time— hours.
soak over-night; next morning put them in a jar in the
oven with plenty of water, salt and a spoonful of sugar.
stew gently for  or  hours, until quite tender. a pinch of
carbonate of soda may be added to the water, to improve
the colour of the peas. serve either with gravy, or a little
butter, pepper and salt.
jerusalem artichokes. time—½ hour.
peel and wash them, place in cold water with a little
salt and lemon-juice, and cook till soft. they can be
served either with gravy or butter sauce.
baked potatoes. time—½ hour.
choose potatoes of equal size. brush them very clean,
drop them into a basin of cold salt and water, then dry
them. place them on a baking sheet, and bake in a
moderate oven. when a fork will pierce them easily
they are baked. the skins should never be eaten.
another way.—brush the potatoes, peel them very thin,
parboil them, then brown them under the meat.
boiled potatoes. time—¾ hour.
potatoes should be well brushed, dropped into a basin
of cold salt and water, and when a saucepan of water boils
they should be placed in it. when a fork will pierce them
easily, they are done. the water must then be strained
off, the saucepan drawn to the side of the fire, a clean
cloth folded over the top of the saucepan, and the lid
pressed down on to it. this dries the potatoes, and
makes them a good colour. they should be held in a
cloth and peeled, then re-heated for a minute. new
potatoes, if well brushed or scraped, do not require
peeling.
fried potatoes. time—½ hour.
brush the potatoes, peel them very thin, slice them,
dry them, and fry them a light brown in hot fat.
mashed potatoes. time— hour.
boil the potatoes, mash them through a sieve, or beat
them with a fork. add a little dripping or butter, and
brown in the oven.
boiled rice. time—½ hour.
½ lb. rice, ¼ teaspoonful salt,  quarts boiling water.
well wash the rice in cold water, then put it into the
boiling water with the salt, and let it boil fast  to 
minutes. when it is quite tender, strain it into a colander,
turn the cold water tap on to it for  or  seconds. then
place it in a dry saucepan by the side of the fire, with the
lid half on, to dry and get hot. shake it occasionally to
prevent it burning, and serve.
spanish onions. time—¾ hour.
wash them, throw them into boiling water with their
skins on, and boil until tender. remove the outer skin.
serve with pepper, salt, gravy or butter.
turnip tops or spinach. time—¾ hour.
 lbs. turnip tops,  oz. clarified fat, pepper and salt.
wash well in several waters, strip off the leaves and
place them in a saucepan of cold water with a little salt,
and boil till tender. strain and squeeze them as much as
possible, chop very fine on a board, put back in the saucepan
with the dripping, pepper and salt, and mix well till
thoroughly hot. serve decorated with hard-boiled eggs
cut in quarters.
fried vegetable marrow. time—¾ hour.
 vegetable marrow,  oz. flour, ½ gill tepid water, 
dessertspoonful salad oil, salt, white of  egg.
put the flour into a basin with a pinch of salt, add the
oil and tepid water gradually, then the white of egg, well
beaten. peel the marrow, put it into boiling water, and
boil until tender. cut it into slices, remove the seeds,
dip each piece in the batter, and fry in hot fat or oil a
golden brown.
bean salad. time—¾ hour.
 lb. cold boiled french beans, or  lb. cold boiled
haricot beans,  tablespoonfuls salad oil,  tablespoonfuls
vinegar, ½ teaspoonful ground ginger; pepper and salt to
taste.
boil the beans, strain and allow them to get cold
(haricot beans must be soaked  hours before boiling).
mix the ginger, pepper, salt, oil and vinegar carefully
together, and pour this dressing over the beans. cauliflowers
and cabbages can also be treated this way.
german celery or celeriac. time— hour.
 root german celery, ½ gill white wine vinegar; pepper
and salt to taste.
wash the celery well, and boil it off cold; peel it, cut
it into rather thick slices, pour the vinegar over it, and
sprinkle with pepper and salt.
lettuce salad. time—½ hour.
 lettuce, ¼ beetroot,  bunch cress, ½ bunch radishes,
 egg, pepper and salt to taste, ¼ teaspoonful made mustard,
 tablespoonfuls salad oil,  tablespoonfuls vinegar.
wash the lettuce thoroughly, pull it to pieces with the
fingers, dry it in a coarse cloth. wash the radishes, halve
them; wash and pick the cress. boil the egg hard, cut
the white into pieces, and mix it with the salading. pass
the yolk through a sieve, and mix carefully with it the
pepper, salt, mustard, oil and vinegar. this dressing
should be poured over the salad and very thoroughly
mixed with it. ornament with small pieces of beetroot.
if preferred, use  tablespoonfuls of oil to  of vinegar.
pickled onions. time— hour.
 quart onions,  pint vinegar, ⅛ oz. peppercorns, salt
and water, ½ oz. ginger.
peel the onions, and when some water with plenty of
salt in it is boiling pour it over them, and let them remain
in it  hours. keep them close covered till all the steam
has evaporated. after  hours wipe them dry. boil the
vinegar, pepper, and ginger together, and pour this over
the onions. cover tightly, and keep them several weeks
before using.
potato salad. time—¾ hour.
 large waxy potatoes,  small onion or shalot,  tablespoonfuls
chopped parsley,  yolk of egg,  gill of salad
oil,  tablespoonfuls vinegar, pepper and salt to taste, 
lettuce.
boil the potatoes off cold, slice them into a salad bowl,
and sprinkle the chopped onion, parsley, and seasoning
over them. beat up the yolk, and stir the oil and vinegar
gradually into it. pour this dressing over the potatoes;
mix with a fork, and garnish with lettuce.
red cabbage, pickled.
 red cabbage,  quart vinegar, whole peppers, whole
ginger (bruised), whole allspice, cloves,  slices beetroot,
salt.
shred the cabbage very fine, spread it over some flat
surface, sprinkle with salt, and leave  hours, then rub
the cabbage in a clean cloth. add the spice, tied up in a
muslin bag, to the vinegar, and let it come to the boil.
meanwhile, place the cabbage in a jar which has a cover,
with the slices of beetroot on top. when the vinegar
boils, pour it over the cabbage, and cover close when it
has become quite cold. this pickle will be ready for use
in a few days.
russian salad. time—½ hour.
take equal quantities of carrots, turnips, french beans,
haricot beans, cauliflower, green peas, potatoes, beetroot,
and celery, or any other vegetables that may be in season.
boil till tender: the carrots and turnips together, the
french beans and green peas together, the haricot beans
(which must have been soaked over-night), cauliflower
and potatoes all separately. when cold, cut all the vegetables
into neat pieces. mix all well together, with some
mayonnaise sauce (see page ), turn into a basin or
mould. when required, turn the salad on to a dish, and
pour mayonnaise sauce over it.
salad cream. time— minutes.
 tablespoonful raw mustard,  tablespoonfuls salad oil
(¼ lb. brown sugar, if liked), a few drops anchovy sauce, a
few drops soy or worcester sauce,  egg, ½ pint vinegar.
mix the mustard quite smooth with the oil, add the
sugar, the anchovy and worcester sauces. beat up the
egg thoroughly, and add it and the vinegar to the other
ingredients. beat all well together for  minutes. pour
it into a bottle; it will keep well some time in a cool
place.
almond milk. time—¾ hour.
¼ lb. ground almonds,  pint water.
put the ground almonds in a saucepan with the water,
and stew slowly about ¾ hour, stirring occasionally. strain
the milk through a piece of muslin.
bread sauce. time—½ hour.
 roll (stale), ½ pint clear stock; pepper, salt, ground
mace to taste.
soak the crumb of the roll in water, then strain away
the water thoroughly; beat the bread to a cream, put it
in a saucepan with the stock and seasoning. bring it
to the boil, then stir  or  minutes longer.
caper sauce (for boiled mutton). time—½ hour.
½ pint liquor,  tablespoonful flour, pepper, salt, 
teaspoonfuls chopped capers.
boil ½ pint of the liquor in which the meat has been
cooked, then stir the flour in carefully (as on page ix.,
hint ). add the seasoning and capers. if required for
fish, this sauce must be made with fish-liquor or milk,
instead of the liquor from the meat.
cheap sauce for boiled fish. time— minutes.
 dessertspoonful cornflour,  tablespoonfuls milk,
½ pint fish-liquor,  tablespoonful chopped parsley; salt
to taste.
mix the cornflour to a smooth paste with the milk, then
add the fish-liquor; stir over the fire till the sauce boils,
then add the chopped parsley and salt.
clarified sugar. time—¼ hour.
¼ lb. lump sugar,  gill water, egg-shells.
put the sugar into the cold water with the egg-shells,
and stir frequently over the fire till all the sugar is dissolved
and a thick syrup formed; strain well and boil
up again.
egg sauce.
 hard-boiled eggs,  oz. butter, ½ oz. flour, ½ gill
milk, pepper and salt.
melt the butter in a stew-pan, mix in the flour, and add
the milk, and cook  minutes after it boils, stirring it all
the time. add the finely chopped whites of eggs, pepper
and salt. the sieved yolk to be used for decorating.
german sauce. time—¼ hour.
 yolks of eggs,  wineglassful brandy,  dessertspoonful
castor sugar.
put the yolks into a stew-pan with the brandy and
sugar; whisk this over the fire until it becomes a thick
froth; do not let it boil, or the eggs will curdle.
jam or marmalade sauce. time—¼ hour.
 gill water,  oz. lump sugar,  tablespoonfuls jam or
marmalade, a few drops of lemon-juice.
reduce the sugar and water by boiling to half the
quantity, add the lemon-juice and jam, and heat all
thoroughly.
lemon sauce. time—¼ hour.
 tablespoonfuls flour,  or  eggs, ½ pint boiling water,
juice of  lemon.
mix the flour, lemon-juice and eggs together, stir in
the water; stir over the fire till the sauce has thickened.
add salt or sugar as required.
mayonnaise sauce. time—½ hour.
 yolk of egg, pepper and salt to taste,  gill sweet oil,
tarragon vinegar.
beat up yolk and seasoning; drop in the oil very
gradually, stirring all the time, so that the paste gradually
thickens. mix to a thick cream with tarragon
vinegar.
tartare sauce is made by the addition of  dessertspoonful
chopped capers,  teaspoonful finely chopped
parsley,  teaspoonful made mustard, or a pinch of
cayenne.
melted butter. time— minutes.
 oz. butter, ½ oz. flour, ½ gill cold water.
melt the butter in a saucepan, stir in the flour gradually,
then add the water, stirring all the time; let it boil
well and thicken.
anchovy sauce or chopped parsley can be added to
taste.
mint sauce. time—½ hour.
 dessertspoonfuls chopped mint,  dessertspoonfuls
brown sugar,  teacupful vinegar.
wash the mint, pick it from the stalk, and chop it
fine; dissolve the sugar in the vinegar, then add the
chopped mint.
onion sauce. time— hour.
 onions, ½ pint liquor,  oz. flour,  oz. dripping, pepper
and salt.
peel the onions, chop them up, boil till tender with a
little salt, strain them; place them in a saucepan with
the liquor, the flour and dripping mixed to a paste,
the pepper and salt; stir well till the sauce is quite
thick.
piquant or sharp sauce.
½ gill vinegar, ½ pint white stock or pot-liquor,  oz.
dripping, ¾ oz. flour,  shalot,  gherkin. pepper and
salt.
melt the dripping in a stew-pan, add the vegetables
cut up small, and fry them brown, then add the vinegar
and boil. stir in the flour and stock and cook
 minutes after it boils. add the seasoning, strain and
serve.
hints on making pastry.
. have everything particularly clean and dry.
. pass the flour through a wire sieve, and rub in the
butter or fat with the tips of the fingers only.
. keep everything cool. always mix the paste with
cold water. to prevent hot hands wash them in hot
water.
. roll out a short crust once only. if baking-powder
be used, make and bake the pastry as quickly as
possible.
. test the oven by placing a small piece of bread on
the shelf. if it brown in half a minute the heat is
correct.
. bake in the hottest part of the oven for the first five
minutes, then remove to a cooler part.
. warm jam separately, and place it in the tart at the
last minute. to keep the shape of the tart, place a piece
of bread in the centre whilst baking.
pastry.—short crusts.
 lb. flour to ¾ lb. butter or fat, or  lb. flour to ½ lb.
butter or fat, and the yolk of one egg; or  lb. flour to ½ lb.
butter or fat, and  teaspoonful baking-powder; or  lb.
flour to ¼ lb. butter or fat, and  teaspoonful baking-powder.
flaky pastry.
½ lb. flour, ¼ lb. butter or fat.
divide the fat into three equal portions, rub one part
into the flour in the usual way, add a pinch of salt and
mix to a stiff paste with cold water. roll out into a long
narrow strip, rolling backwards and forwards only.
spread the second portion of fat evenly over the paste,
fold into three and turn with the rough edges towards you.
roll out again and proceed in the same way. fold over
and roll to required shape.
rough puff paste.
 lb. flour to ¾ lb. butter or fat, or  lb. flour to ½ lb.
butter or fat.
break the butter or fat into the flour in lumps, and
mix to a paste with a little cold water. roll out, fold
in three, turn the rough edges towards you, and roll out
again. do this four or six times till the paste is no longer
streaky.
to bake puddings.
all puddings containing starch, such as rice, sago,
macaroni, etc., must be baked slowly in a moderate
oven, so that the starch globules may have time to swell,
burst, and absorb the milk. custards must also bake
very slowly. puddings containing flour must bake longer
than those made with bread, etc.
to boil puddings.
. always place these puddings in boiling water; keep
them well covered, and on the boil, adding more boiling
water as required.
. all puddings containing flour must boil longer than
those made with bread, etc.
. puddings boiled in basins must boil longer than
those put only in cloths.
. the basin must always be quite full, and must be
tied up in a cloth which has been dredged with flour.
to steam puddings.
. puddings cooked in this way are lighter than those
that are boiled, but take longer to cook.
. the water in the saucepan must only reach half-way
up the basin, and must simmer all the time. more
boiling water must be added when required.
. the basin need not be quite full.
almond pudding. time— hour.
 eggs,  oz. castor sugar,  oz. ground almonds.
beat the yolks and whites separately—the whites to a
stiff froth—then whisk them together, and stir in gradually
the sugar, and ground almonds. beat well for 
minutes, then pour the mixture into well-greased shallow
dishes, and bake in a moderate oven. if a knife when
inserted come out clean, the puddings are done.
baked apples. time—½ hour.
 lb. apples,  oz. brown sugar, ground cinnamon, 
tablespoonful cold water, rind and juice of a lemon.
wash the apples (if an apple corer be handy core
them), notch them across the top, place them in a yorkshire
pudding tin, with the sugar, lemon-rind, lemon-juice,
water, and cinnamon. bake till tender; serve hot or
cold. for apple snow, pass through a sieve and beat in
lightly whites of  eggs and  oz. castor sugar, then pile
roughly on a dish, and decorate to taste.
baked apple dumplings. time— hour.
½ lb. flour,  oz. dripping, ½ teaspoonful baking-powder,
 apples, cloves or lemon-rind,  oz. brown sugar.
peel and core the apples, and fill the centre of each
with moist sugar and  cloves or  pieces lemon-rind.
rub the dripping into the flour, add the baking-powder
and enough cold water to form a stiff paste, divide it into
four, and roll each piece out. place an apple in the
centre of each piece of paste, and work it well round the
apple. grease a tin, place the dumplings on it, and bake
about ¼ hour.
apple fritters. time—¾ hours.
 large apples (½ wineglassful brandy, if liked),  oz.
powdered loaf sugar. batter— tablespoonfuls flour, 
tablespoonful salad oil, a pinch of salt, tepid water, white
of  egg.
peel and core  large apples, cut them into slices
half an inch thick, put them in a dish with the sugar and
brandy, cover with another dish, and leave them 
hours.
batter.—in a separate basin mix the flour with the oil,
salt, and sufficient tepid water to make a batter the thickness
of cream, avoiding lumps. cover the basin, and let
the batter stand  hours. then add the well-beaten
white of egg to the batter, dry the slices of apple on a
cloth, dip each piece in the batter, so that it is quite
covered, and fry in hot fat or oil. serve with powdered
sugar.
apples in custard. time—¾ hour.
 lb. apples,  oz. brown sugar,  eggs,  gill water,  oz.
ground almonds.
beat the eggs well, add the water, sugar and almonds.
peel the apples, core them, place them in a pie-dish
which has been thoroughly greased and sugared, pour the
custard over them, and bake about ½ hour.
apple jelly. time— hours.
 lb. apples,  lb. brown sugar,  gill water, juice and
peel of  lemon.
peel and core the apples, put them into a stew-pan with
the sugar, water, juice of the lemon, and the peel chopped
fine. boil over a slow fire, stirring occasionally, until
quite stiff and of a deep brown colour. dip a small
mould into cold water, put the jelly in, and let it set. turn
out when cold.
bread pudding. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. scraps of bread,  oz. suet,  oz. candied peel, ¼ lb.
currants, raisins, or sultanas, ¼ lb. brown sugar,  egg.
soak the scraps of bread in cold water, then squeeze
very dry, put into a basin and beat out the lumps; chop
the suet fine, clean the fruit, shred the peel, and beat the
egg. mix all the dry ingredients, then add the egg and a
little water, if required. grease and sugar a pie-dish or
tin, fill with the mixture, and bake about  hour.
if preferred, the fruit and peel can be replaced by
chocolate, or ground ginger and golden syrup. bread-crumbs
can be used instead of soaked bread if liked.
cocoanut pudding. time—¼ hour.
 lb. soaked bread, ¼ lb. grated or desiccated cocoanut,
 oz. ground almonds,  tablespoonfuls brown sugar, 
eggs.
when the bread has been thoroughly soaked, squeeze
it very dry, and beat out all the lumps. mix the dry ingredients
well together, then add the eggs well beaten.
grease and sugar a pie-dish, fill with the mixture, and
bake about three-quarters of an hour. turn out on to a
hot dish.
ebony jelly. time— hours.
 lb. french plums, ½ pint water, ½ lb. lump dust, ½ oz.
vegetable isinglass, rind of ½ lemon.
soak the plums over-night. next morning stew them
gently with the water and sugar for  hour or longer
till quite tender; pour the juice off on to the isinglass to
dissolve it. stone the plums and pulp them through a
wire sieve. crack the stones, blanch and pound the
kernels, add them with the strips of lemon peel and the
isinglass to the plums, mix and pour into a wetted
mould.
eve pudding. time—½ hours.
 lb. suet, ¼ lb. currants, ¼ lb. brown sugar, ¼ lb. chopped
apples, ¼ lb. bread-crumbs,  eggs.
chop the suet fine, wash and dry the currants, mix with
the sugar, chopped apples, bread-crumbs, and eggs well
beaten. grease a mould, pour in the mixture, and boil
or steam two hours. the eggs may be left out.
fig pudding. time—½ hours.
½ lb. dried figs, ¼ lb. brown sugar, ¼ lb. suet or dripping,
 oz. flour,  oz. bread-crumbs, a pinch of salt and mixed
spice,  eggs,  tablespoonful golden syrup.
cut the figs up small, chop the suet and mix all the
dry ingredients together, add the golden syrup and beaten
eggs, turn into a greased basin; dredge a pudding cloth
with flour, tie it over the basin and boil for  to  hours.
for date pudding proceed in the same manner, but
omit the golden syrup.
fruit pie. time— hour.
 oz. flour,  oz. clarified fat or dripping,  lb. fruit, ½
teaspoonful baking-powder,  oz. brown sugar.
prepare the fruit, and half fill the pie-dish with it; add
the sugar, then the remainder of the fruit, and a little
water. rub the fat into the flour, add the baking-powder,
salt, and sufficient water to make a stiff paste. roll this
out to the shape of the dish, but larger; cut off a strip,
wet the edge of the dish, put the strip round it, wet the
strip, and press the rest of the pastry on to it. trim
neatly, ornament, and bake about ½ hour. when half
done brush over with cold water.
fruit pudding. time— hours.
½ lb. flour,  oz. suet,  lb. fruit,  oz. brown sugar,
salt.
chop the suet fine, add the salt; rub these well into the
flour; mix with cold water to a stiff paste. cut off one-third
of the paste for the top; roll out the remainder into
a round, twice the size of the top of the basin. grease
the basin very thoroughly, line it with the paste, cut up
the fruit, and half fill the basin with it, add the sugar and
a little water, then the remainder of the fruit. roll out
the top piece, wet the edges of the paste, put on the top,
press the edges together. dredge a pudding cloth and
tie it over the basin. boil in plenty of water about ½
hour.
baked fruit pudding must be made the same way,
but the basin must be sugared as well as greased. bake
about ¾ hour.
gooseberry jelly. time—½ hour.
 quart green gooseberries,  quart cold water, ½ lb.
brown sugar,  oz. vegetable isinglass.
stew the gooseberries in the water with ¼ lb. sugar,
allow them to get cold, then heat them again, this process
gives the juice a pink colour. dissolve the isinglass in a
little water, add to it ¼ lb. sugar and place it in the juice
of the fruit, which should have been carefully strained and
cleared; mix all gently together, pour into a wetted mould,
and serve when cold.
homœopathic pudding. time—½ hour.
 lb. black currants, bread, ½ lb. brown sugar, ½ pint
water.
stew the currants with the sugar and water, when soft
pour them boiling into a pudding basin, which has been
lined with slices of bread, about half an inch thick. cover
the basin with a plate, on which place a heavy weight.
turn out when cold; the bread should then have become
soaked with juice.
stewed fruit.
cherries, currants, raspberries or plums, white sugar,
water.
all these fruits require picking, and washing in cold
water. place the fruit in the stew-pan with the sugar and
sufficient water to cover it, and simmer till tender.
cherries, red currants and raspberries stewed together
and poured over a slice of bread or a penny sponge cake,
make a delicious summer sweet.
lemon creams. time—½ hour.
 pint water,  eggs, rind and juice of  lemons,  oz.
loaf sugar.
add the sugar and lemon-rinds to the water, and when
this boils, strain away the rinds, add the lemon-juice and
pour on to the eggs, which have been well beaten. place
this mixture in a jar, stand it in a saucepan of boiling
water, and stir till it begins to thicken.
lemon dumplings. time—¼ hour.
½ lb. bread-crumbs, ¼ lb. chopped suet, ¼ lb. brown
sugar,  eggs, grated rind and juice of one large lemon.
mix all the dry ingredients well together, then add the
lemon-juice, and eggs well beaten. grease small cups,
fill them with the mixture, cover with greased paper, and
steam  hour, or bake ½ hour. serve with sweet
sauce.
madeira cake pudding. time—½ hours.
 eggs, weight of the eggs in flour, dripping, and castor
sugar; nutmeg, and lemon-rind.
rub the dripping into the flour, add the sugar, well-beaten
eggs, and flavouring, and beat all well together.
ornament the top of a greased mould with slices of candied
peel, put in the mixture, and steam for  hours.
serve with lemon sauce (see page ).
marmalade pudding. time—½ hours.
¼ lb. bread-crumbs, ¼ lb. suet or dripping,  oz. candied
peel,  lemon,  egg,  tablespoonfuls marmalade.
chop the suet very fine (or rub the dripping into the
bread-crumbs), shred the candied peel, grate the rind of
the lemon. put all the dry ingredients into a basin, and
mix with them the marmalade and egg. grease a basin
or mould well, fill with the mixture, cover with greased
paper, and steam  hours. serve with marmalade sauce
(see page ).
mince meat.
½ lb. suet, ½ lb. sultanas, ½ lb. raisins, ½ lb. currants, ½ lb.
brown sugar, ½ lb. apples, ½ lb. candied peel, grated rind
of  lemon,  oz. ratafias soaked in brandy.
stone and chop the raisins, wash and dry the currants,
chop all the other ingredients, mix them well together,
and cover close for a month.
pancakes.
 oz. flour,  egg, ½ pint water, fat or oil, salt, sugar.
put the flour into a basin, beat the egg, add it with a
little of the water to the flour. beat it well, then add the
remainder of the water, and let the batter stand. melt a
small piece of fat, or heat the oil, in a frying-pan the size
of the pancake required; pour in just enough batter to
cover the bottom, and fry it a light brown on both sides,
either tossing it, or turning it with a fork. sprinkle each
pancake with lemon-juice and castor sugar, and serve on
a hot dish.
stewed pears. time— hours.
 large pears, ½ lb. brown sugar, ½ pint water, rind of 
lemon, a few cloves.
peel the pears, cut them in halves, and core them.
lay them in a stew-pan with the sugar, water, lemon-rind,
and cloves. cover tightly, first with brown paper, then
with lid of stew-pan. stew gently  or  hours.
pears can also be stewed in a stone jar in the oven, but
must always be well covered up.
economical plum pudding. time— hours.
 lb. raisins, ½ lb. currants, ½ lb. suet, ½ lb. flour, ¼ lb.
bread-crumbs,  oz. brown sugar, ¼ lb. almonds, ¼ lb.
candied peel, grated rind of  lemon, ¼ of a nutmeg grated,
½ teaspoonful mixed spice, golden syrup and beer from
¼ pint upwards.
stone the raisins, wash and dry the currants, shred the
suet fine, prepare the bread-crumbs, chop the candied
peel, blanch and chop the almonds. mix these all well
together with the flour, sugar, grated lemon-rind and nutmeg,
mixed spice, and enough golden syrup and beer to
form a stiff mixture. boil in basins or moulds for ten
hours.
scotch plum pudding. time— hours.
½ lb. flour, ½ lb. carrots, ½ lb. potatoes, ½ lb. suet, ½ lb.
currants, ½ lb. raisins or sultanas,  oz. candied peel, ¼ lb.
golden syrup.
peel the potatoes, scrape the carrots, boil both till tender,
then mash them. add to these the flour, currants, raisins
or sultanas, suet and peel chopped fine, and lastly the
golden syrup. boil in a greased basin for  hours.
silk pudding. time— hours.
 lb. red currants, ½ lb. raspberries, ¼ lb. tapioca, 
teacupful water, ¼ lb. castor sugar.
soak the tapioca in the water over-night, next morning
stew all gently together for at least  to  hours. turn
into a wetted mould and serve cold.
any other fresh fruit can be used.
stewed prunes. time— hours.
 lb. prunes, ½ lb. white sugar, ½ pint water, stick cinnamon
or lemon-rind to taste.
soak the prunes over-night in cold water. next morning
put them in a stew-pan with the sugar, water and
flavouring, and stew slowly about  hours.
stewed rhubarb and rhubarb fool. time—½ hour.
rhubarb, lemon-rind, loaf sugar.
wash the rhubarb, peel it, cut into pieces about three
inches long, put it with the sugar, lemon-rind and enough
water to cover it, either in a stew-pan, or in an earthenware
jar in the oven, for about  hour. if liked, it may
then be passed through a sieve, and well mixed with the
beaten yolk of an egg, while the white should be beaten
to a stiff froth, and used to ornament the dish.
gooseberry fool can be made the same way.
roly poly or suet pudding. time— hours.
¾ lb. flour, ¼ lb. suet, ½ lb. jam, ½ teaspoonful baking-powder,
¼ teaspoonful salt.
chop the suet fine, rub it well into the flour, add the
salt, baking-powder, and sufficient cold water to make a
stiff paste. turn on to a floured board, roll into a long
thin piece, spread with jam, not too near the edge, roll up,
pressing the edges together. dredge a pudding cloth
with flour, place the pudding on it with the join downwards,
roll up in the cloth, and tie up the ends. place in
boiling water, and boil about ½ hour.
suet pudding is made the same way, the jam being
left out, or replaced by treacle, currants, or sultanas.
swiss fritters. time—½ hour.
 french roll,  egg, a little nutmeg, cinnamon and
sugar.
cut the crumb of the roll into square slices half an
inch thick. beat up the egg, mix the nutmeg, cinnamon
and sugar with it and soak the slices of roll in the mixture.
fry in hot oil till they become a golden brown,
drain on paper, serve with clarified sugar or jam.
swiss roll. time—½ hour.
 eggs, ½ teacupful castor sugar, ½ teacupful flour, 
teaspoonful baking-powder, jam.
beat the sugar and yolks of the eggs well together,
then add the flour gradually, then the whites of the eggs
beaten to a stiff froth and lastly the baking-powder.
grease a baking-tin well, pour the mixture into it and
bake in rather a quick oven about  minutes. sugar a
pastry board, loosen the edges of the cake with a knife
and turn it on to the board. spread the cake with jam
and roll it up.
treacle and ginger pudding. time—¼ hours.
¼ lb. flour,  oz. suet,  good teaspoonful ground ginger,
 teaspoonful baking powder,  teacupful golden syrup,
 egg,  oz. candied peel.
chop the suet fine, put it into a basin with the flour,
peel, ginger and baking-powder. beat up the egg, mix
the treacle with it, and stir into the mixture in the basin,
adding more treacle if the pudding is not moist enough.
grease a basin or mould well, put the pudding into it,
and cover with a greased paper. steam for  hours.
serve with lemon sauce (see page ) to which some preserved
ginger has been added.
treacle pie. time—½ hour.
¾ lb. flour, ¼ lb. dripping, ½ lb. golden syrup,  oz.
ground ginger,  oz. bread-crumbs.
rub the dripping into the flour and mix to a stiff paste
with cold water, roll out very thin, and line a greased pie-dish
with it. cover with golden syrup as for a roly poly
pudding, sprinkle with ginger and bread-crumbs, and
continue alternate layers of paste and golden syrup, etc.,
till the dish is full, finishing with paste. bake in a moderate
oven, and turn out on to a hot dish.
yorkshire pudding. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. flour,  pint water,  eggs, salt.
make a batter as for pancakes (see page ). let it
stand  hours, then pour into a greased tin and bake about
½ hour.
batter pudding is made the same way, but must be
steamed for two hours in a greased basin or mould,
instead of being baked, and must be served with a sweet
sauce.
bread-and-butter pudding. time—¾ hour.
 slices bread-and-butter, ½ oz. butter,  oz. currants,
 oz. sultanas,  oz. candied peel,  oz. brown sugar,  egg,
½ pint milk; nutmeg or cinnamon to taste.
butter a pie-dish, lay the slices of bread-and-butter in
it, sprinkle the currants, sultanas and candied peel between
each slice. beat the egg, add to it the sugar and
milk, stir well together, and pour over the bread-and-butter.
put little bits of butter over the top, and grate
some nutmeg over. bake in a moderate oven about
½ hour.
a good pudding can be made with bread-and-jam
instead of bread-and-butter, leaving out the currants,
sultanas and candied peel.
apples in custard
see page , but use milk instead of water.
cocoa mould. time— minutes.
½ tablespoonful cornflour,  tablespoonful sugar, 
dessertspoonful cocoa,  pint milk.
mix the dry ingredients well together with a little cold
milk, then boil the rest of the milk, and add gradually,
stirring all the time to prevent lumps. boil all for 
minutes, stirring well all the time. dip a basin or mould
in cold water, pour the mixture into it, and let it stand
till cold. turn out carefully.
cocoanut custard. time—½ hour.
 sponge cakes,  egg,  gill milk,  oz. grated or desiccated
cocoanut,  teaspoonful castor sugar.
butter a small pie-dish, cut the sponge cakes in slices,
make two layers of them, strewing cocoanut between.
beat up the yolk of the egg with the milk, pour it over
the sponge cakes, and strew the rest of the cocoanut over.
beat the white of the egg to a stiff froth, add the castor
sugar, and spread over the pudding. bake in a moderate
oven till the white of egg has become a pale brown.
boiled custards. time—½ hour.
 pint milk,  eggs,  bay leaf or ½ vanilla bean,  lumps
sugar.
put the milk on to boil with the vanilla bean and sugar
in it; meanwhile beat up the eggs, taking out the treads
(little white lumps). pour the boiling milk on to the eggs.
pour the mixture into a jug, stand this in a saucepan
of boiling water over the fire, and stir the custard
till it has thickened.
custard pudding. time—¼ hour.
 eggs,  pint milk, bay leaf or vanilla.
beat up the eggs, taking out the treads (little white
lumps). pour the milk over the eggs, sweeten and
flavour to taste, place in a greased pie-dish, and bake
about  hour. if liked, a penny sponge cake cut in
halves may be placed in the bottom of the pie-dish.
derby pudding. time—½ hours.
 eggs, their weight in flour, weight of one egg in
castor sugar,  oz. butter,  tablespoonful jam, small
½-teaspoonful carbonate of soda,  oz. glacé cherries or
candied peel.
butter a pudding-mould and ornament it with the
cherries or candied peel. cream the butter and sugar
together, add the well-beaten eggs, mix the carbonate of
soda and flour together and stir into the other ingredients;
lastly add the jam and mix all together. pour into the
prepared mould and cover with a sheet of greased paper.
steam for  hours and serve hot with a sweet sauce
over it.
macaroni pudding. time— hour.
¼ lb. naples macaroni,  oz. brown sugar, flavouring to
taste,  pint milk,  egg, salt.
break up the macaroni into small pieces, throw them
into boiling water with plenty of salt. boil about ½ hour,
strain off the water, and put the macaroni into a greased
pie-dish. beat up the egg, add the sugar, flavouring and
milk. pour this on to the macaroni, mix all together, and
bake about  minutes.
new year tartlets. time— hour.
enough rough puff pastry to line twelve patty-pans,
 tablespoonfuls jam,  eggs, weight of  egg in butter,
sugar and flour, ½ teaspoonful baking-powder, few drops
flavouring.
icing.—½ lb. loaf sugar,  gill water, few drops rose-water.
line the patty-pans with pastry, put into each a little
jam without stones; cream the butter and sugar together,
add the eggs, then the flour, baking-powder and flavouring,
beat for  minutes. place a layer of this mixture
over the jam, bake in a hot oven from  to  minutes.
boil the loaf sugar with the water for  minutes, add
the rose-water, turn into a basin, and when cool stir the
syrup round and round until it looks milky white. spread
it over the top of the tartlets, smooth it flat with a knife
dipped in hot water, then put the tartlets in a cool oven
for a few minutes for the icing to harden.
pancakes.
see page , but use milk instead of water.
queen of puddings. time—½ hours.
 oz. bread-crumbs,  oz. castor sugar,  oz. butter,
½ pint milk,  lemon, jam,  yolks,  whites of egg.
beat the yolks of the eggs well, and add to them the
bread-crumbs,  oz. sugar, the butter melted, milk and
grated lemon-peel. fill a pie-dish three-parts full with
these ingredients and bake  hour. when nearly cold,
spread a layer of jam on the top; beat the whites of
the eggs to a very stiff froth, add  oz. sugar and the
lemon-juice, pour over the top of the jam, and slightly
brown it in a cool oven. serve hot or cold.
rice pudding. time—¼ hours.
½ oz. rice,  pint milk,  tablespoonful brown sugar,
 oz. butter, grated nutmeg or cinnamon to taste.
grease a pie-dish, wash the rice and put it into the
dish with the sugar. pour  gills of milk over it, sprinkle
the top with the nutmeg or cinnamon and small pieces
of butter, and bake in a moderate oven about  hours.
add the remaining gill of milk by degrees, as the rice
swells.
tapioca and sago puddings are made in the same way,
but the grain should be soaked in cold water first.
sweet omelet. time— minutes.
 yolks of eggs,  or  whites of eggs,  dessertspoonful
castor sugar, flavouring, ½ oz. butter.
cream the yolks with the sugar, then add the whites
beaten to a stiff froth, melt the butter in a small frying-pan.
add the flavouring (vanilla, lemon, etc.) to the
eggs, mix well, pour into the frying-pan, cook for  to 
minutes, double it and shake it off on to a hot plate.
while the omelet is cooking, pass a knife round the edges
of it and shake the pan to keep it from sticking.
cheap trifle. time—½ hour.
 sponge cakes, jam, juice of  lemon, ½ pint of milk,
 egg,  dessertspoonful cornflour,  oz. loaf sugar.
cut the sponge cakes in halves, spread them with jam,
place them on a dish and sprinkle the lemon juice over
them (sherry may be used if preferred). put the milk
and sugar on to boil, beat the egg and cornflour up together,
and pour the boiling milk on to them; then stir
the mixture over the fire till it thickens, but do not let it
boil. when the custard is thick enough, pour it over the
sponge cakes, and set the dish aside to cool. decorate
if liked with preserved fruit.
yorkshire pudding.
this can be made with milk instead of water, as on
page , and eaten with sugar or treacle. the same
applies to batter pudding.
cauliflower au gratin. time—¾ hour.
 cauliflower,  oz. butter,  oz. flour,  gill water,
 or  tablespoonfuls cream or ½ pint milk,  oz. grated
cheese; pepper, salt, and a little cayenne to taste.
boil the cauliflower, remove all the green leaves, put it
in a pudding-basin which has been greased and sprinkled
with raspings, with the flower upwards, and press it
into shape. melt the butter, mix the flour in smoothly,
add the water and stir well over the fire for  minutes,
then add the cream or milk, the seasoning and half the
grated cheese, and heat the sauce. pour the sauce over
the cauliflower, and sprinkle the rest of the cheese over
the top. brown it in a quick oven.
chocolate. time—½ hour.
 oz. chocolate,  gills water,  pint milk.
grate the chocolate, put it in the saucepan with the
water, set it on the fire and stir with a wooden spoon till
the mixture becomes rather thick, then work it very
quickly for a few minutes with the spoon. stir in the
boiling milk gradually and serve.
cocoa. time— minutes.
 teaspoonfuls cocoa,  teaspoonful cold water or
milk,  teacupful boiling water or milk.
mix the cocoa to a smooth paste with the cold water,
pour the boiling water gradually over it, and boil it for 
minutes.
cocoa nibs. time— hours.
½ lb. cocoa nibs,  quarts water.
crush the nibs with a rolling pin, then place them in a
saucepan with the cold water, and bring to the boil.
draw to the side of the fire, and simmer gently about 
hours, occasionally skimming off the oil which rises to
the top. strain, add about an equal quantity of milk,
re-heat and serve.
coffee in a jug.
 pint boiling water,  heaped tablespoonfuls ground
coffee.
scald a jug, which has a lid, with hot water, then put
in the coffee, and pour the boiling water on to it. put on
the lid, and let the coffee draw  minutes close to the fire.
clear it, by pouring a little into a cup and pouring it
back  times, or by adding a small teacupful of cold
water. then let the jug stand  minutes in a hot place,
where it will almost simmer. serve with boiling milk,
and sugar to taste.
coffee in a coffee-pot.
scald the coffee-pot with hot water. put the coffee in
above the strainer, pour the boiling water over it very
gradually, and while it is running through, place the pot
where it will keep very hot. as soon as all the water has
run through, serve with boiling milk, and sugar to taste.
use  heaped teaspoonful for each person and  extra.
coddled eggs. time— minutes.
eggs should not be boiled, because this process hardens
the outside quickly, before cooking the yolk thoroughly.
carefully put the egg into boiling water with a spoon,
place the saucepan near the fire, where the water cannot
boil, but is near to boiling point. take it out after 
minutes.
hard-boiled eggs: place the eggs in a saucepan in
cold water, bring to the boil and let them cook 
minutes; then put them immediately into a basin of cold
water to keep them a good colour.
fried eggs. time— minutes.
 eggs,  oz. butter; pepper and salt to taste.
make the butter hot in a frying-pan, break the eggs
into a cup and slip them carefully in without breaking the
yolks, and fry  or  minutes. take them out with a
slice and serve hot.
poached eggs. time— minutes.
 egg, buttered toast, salt, ½ pint water,  teaspoonful
vinegar.
put the water with salt and vinegar into a shallow
saucepan where the water cannot boil, but is near to
boiling point. break the egg into a cup, and slip it gently
into the water. let it remain till the white is set. take
it out carefully with a small slice, trim the edges, and place
it on a piece of buttered toast, with pepper and salt to
taste.
savoury eggs. time—½ hour.
 eggs,  oz. butter, ½ teaspoonful anchovy sauce, a little
cayenne pepper.
boil the eggs hard, when cold shell them, halve them,
take out the yolks. beat the yolks up smooth with the
butter, anchovy sauce and pinch of cayenne. fill the
white halves with this paste, cut off the ends, stand each
half on a round of bread-and-butter, and ornament with
cress or parsley.
another way.— hard-boiled eggs,  oz. butter,  teaspoonful
chopped tarragon, beetroot cut into fancy shapes,
mustard and cress.
halve the eggs, take out the yolks, mix these smoothly
with the butter and tarragon. fill the whites with the
mixture, ornament with beetroot, and arrange on a dish
with the cress round.
stewed peas and eggs. time—¾ hour.
¼ peck peas,  dessertspoonful oil,  small onion,  teacupful
boiling water,  lumps sugar, a little fresh mint,
 eggs; salt and pepper to taste.
fry the onion in the oil, with some salt and pepper.
pick the peas over carefully, wash and drain them, put
them in the saucepan with the oil and onion, add the
water, sugar and mint. cook till the peas are tender
(about ½ hour), then break the eggs into a cup, and slip
them carefully on to the peas. cook till they are set,
and dish up.
stirred or buttered eggs. time— minutes.
 eggs,  oz. butter, salt and pepper to taste,  slices
hot buttered toast.
break the eggs into a small stew-pan, add the salt, pepper
and butter. put the stew-pan over a moderate fire,
and stir with a wooden spoon, keeping every particle in
motion, until the whole has become a smooth and delicate
thickish paste. pour the eggs on to the toast, and serve
at once.
hominy. time—¼ hours.
the day before it is required, place half a teacupful
of hominy in a basin with  pint of water and a good
pinch of salt. put it in a moderate oven to soak for 
hours, adding more water if required. next morning
warm it up with about ½ pint of milk, and add sugar to
taste.
macaroni cheese—¾ hour.
¼ lb. macaroni, ½ pint milk,  oz. grated cheese,  oz.
butter, ½ oz. flour; salt and a little cayenne pepper to taste.
put the macaroni with one teaspoonful salt into boiling
water and boil till tender, about  minutes; take it out,
cut it up into lengths of about  inches, and throw the
water away; melt the butter, stir in the flour, add the milk
and seasoning. boil well, put in the macaroni, let it cool
a little, then add half the cheese. place in a pie-dish,
sprinkle with the rest of the cheese and bake  minutes.
mushrooms. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. mushrooms, ½ pint milk,  oz. butter,  tablespoonful
flour,  tablespoonful mushroom ketchup, pepper
and salt to taste.
wash and peel the mushrooms and cut them into pieces.
stew them about ½ hour in the milk, add the flour, the
butter melted, ketchup, pepper and salt, and serve on
toast.
another way.—peel the mushrooms, put them in a
pie-dish with  oz. butter, pepper and salt, and bake about
 minutes.
risotto.
½ pint water, ¼ lb. carolina rice,  gill tomato purée,
 oz. grated cheese, salt and pepper to taste,  oz. butter.
bring the water to the boil in a large stew-pan, shower
the rice in, replace the lid without stirring the rice and
put it where it will keep boiling for ½ hour. then mix
the tomato purée and butter into it and  oz. of the cheese,
season with pepper and salt, and serve very hot with
cheese sprinkled over the top.
porridge. time— minutes.
 oz. coarse oatmeal, ¼ teaspoonful salt,  pint water,
milk and sugar.
when the water boils fast, add the salt, then sprinkle
in the oatmeal. boil gently  minutes, stirring constantly.
then let it simmer  minutes more, stirring
often. turn into hot soup-plates, and serve with milk
and sugar, or with golden syrup.
salmagundy. time—½ hour.
 dutch herring,  onion, ½ pint vinegar, a little allspice,
ginger, and pepper.
wash the herring, remove the flesh from the bones, lay
it in a dish, and put a few slices of onion on it. boil the
vinegar with the spice, and when cold, pour it over the
herring.
savoury omelet. time— minutes.
 eggs,  oz. butter, a pinch of salt and of pepper, ½
teaspoonful chopped parsley, ½ teaspoonful chopped herbs.
melt the butter in a small frying-pan, beat up the eggs
in a basin with the parsley, herbs, pepper and salt. pour
the mixture into the pan, allow it to cook for  or 
minutes; double it and shake it off on to a hot plate.
while the omelet is cooking, pass a knife round the edges
of it, and shake the pan to keep it from sticking.
tea.
scald the tea-pot. allow  teaspoonful of tea to each
person, and one extra. when the water boils, pour off
the water with which the pot was scalded, put in the tea,
and pour boiling water over it. let it draw  minutes.
tea should never be allowed to remain on the leaves. if
not drunk as soon as it is drawn, it should be poured off
into another hot tea-pot, or into a hot jug, which should
stand in hot water.
toast.
cut a slice of stale bread about ⅓ inch thick. dry
each side ½ minute before the fire, then toast quickly
before a clear fire. put small pieces of butter all over
the slice of toast, and when these are melted, smooth
them over it. this will leave the toast deliciously crisp,
as none of the surface will have been scraped off.
fried tomatoes. time— minutes.
 lb. tomatoes,  oz. butter.
cut the tomatoes in halves. heat the butter in the
frying-pan, and fry the tomatoes till tender. place them
on a hot dish, and pour the liquor over them.
welsh rarebit. time— minutes.
 oz. grated cheese,  oz. butter,  teaspoonful made
mustard,  slices buttered toast.
melt the cheese, butter, and mustard together in a
stew-pan, stirring well with a wooden spoon; pour over
the hot buttered toast. serve very hot.
african shoots or shrewsbury biscuits. time—½ hour.
¼ lb. butter, ¼ lb. castor sugar, ½ lb. flour,  egg, a few
drops flavouring (essence of lemon, vanilla, &c.).
beat the butter and sugar to a cream, add to them the
flavouring and the egg, well beaten, mix all well together,
then stir the flour in smoothly. pass the paste through
a biscuit-forcer on to a greased tin, or turn it on to a
floured board, roll it out as thin as possible, and cut it
into rounds with a cutter or tumbler. place the biscuits
on a greased tin, and bake  minutes.
bola. time—½ hours.
crust:  lb. dough, ½ lb. butter,  oz. brown sugar.
inside:  oz. ground almonds, ½ oz. ground cinnamon,
½ lb. brown sugar, ½ lb. candied peel,  egg.
shred the peel, and mix in the sugar, spice, almonds,
and egg. rub the butter well into the dough, sweeten it,
roll it out thin, cut off a strip, and line the inside of a
greased tin with it. spread the inside mixture smoothly
over the remainder of the dough with a knife, roll up like
a roly-poly pudding; cut it into four pieces, and fill the
tin, placing the cut ends upwards. bake about ¼ hour
in a hot oven, then ¼ hour in a cooler part of the oven.
when nearly baked, make holes, and pour in clarified
sugar.
bread. time— hours.
½ lbs. flour,  oz. yeast,  teaspoonful salt,  teaspoonful
castor sugar, ½ pint tepid water.
put the yeast and sugar into a basin, and cream them
together with a wooden spoon till liquid, then add the
tepid water. pass the flour through a sieve, put it in a
large basin, make a well in the centre, pour in the yeast
and water, work in a little flour from the sides, cover with
paper, and set it in a warm place (on the fender) to rise
 minutes. then work in the remainder of the flour
with the hand, till the dough is smooth, and set to rise 
hours. then turn on to a floured board, and knead for a
¼ hour. divide the dough into two pieces. for tin loaves,
flour the tins, put in the dough, prick the top, and set to
rise once more ¼ hour. for cottage loaves, cut each
piece again into two, one piece twice as large as the
other, form into balls with the hand, put the small one on
the top of the large one, and make a hole in the top
with the finger. bake in the hottest part of the oven ¼
hour, then remove to a cooler part for ½ hour. if the
loaf sound hollow when tapped, it is done.
unfermented bread. time— minutes.
½ lb. flour, good teaspoonful of baking-powder, a good
pinch of salt.
mix the powder with the flour, then add sufficient
water to make a dough, knead for  minutes, and bake 
minutes in a quick oven.
buns. time—¼ hours.
 pint milk,  oz. yeast, ½ lb. flour,  teaspoonful castor
sugar.
rub the flour through a sieve, cream the yeast and
sugar together and add lukewarm milk. strain this
mixture into the flour, and beat well. cover the basin
with paper and set in a warm place (on the fender) to rise
for  hour.
in another basin put: ¼ lb. flour, ¼ lb. butter,  oz.
candied peel,  eggs, ¼ lb. sultanas or currants, ¼ lb.
sugar.
when the sponge in the first basin has risen, beat in
all the dry ingredients from the second basin with  eggs.
thoroughly mix and beat them for about  minutes. set
this sponge to rise again for about ½ hour. then shape
the mixture into buns and bake on a greased tin for ½
hour. when cooked and while still hot, brush them over
with a little milk and sugar to glaze them.
butter cakes. time—½ hour.
¾ lb. flour, ½ lb. butter, ½ lb. brown sugar; cinnamon to
taste;  eggs.
rub the butter into the flour, add the sugar and cinnamon;
beat up the eggs, and form the whole into a paste;
roll out rather thin, cut into rounds with a cutter or a
tumbler, and bake till crisp on a greased tin.
candied peel drops. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. flour,  oz. butter,  oz. brown sugar,  oz. candied
peel,  egg, ½ teaspoonful baking-powder, ½ gill milk.
pass the flour through a sieve, rub in the butter, add
the sugar, the peel cut up fine, and the baking-powder.
beat up the egg with the milk, and mix with the flour to
a stiff paste. with two forks drop small pieces on to a
greased tin, and bake about ¼ hour.
light chocolate cake. time—¼ hour.
 oz. grated chocolate,  or  oz. fine flour,  eggs,  oz.
sifted sugar, a few drops vanilla; raspings.
beat the yolks of the eggs with the vanilla, whisk the
whites to a stiff froth, drop the yolks slowly into the whites,
beating all the time; then add gradually the sugar,
chocolate, and lastly the flour, and only beat till they
are well-mixed. grease a cake-tin, sprinkle it with
raspings (see page x.), turn the mixture into it, and bake
at once in a well-heated oven for  hour; turn the cake
on to a sieve, and stand on its side to cool.
cocoanut drops. time— minutes.
 tablespoonful sifted sugar, white of  egg,  grated
cocoanut, a few drops of rose-water.
beat the white of an egg to a stiff froth, then add the
sugar, rose-water, and sufficient cocoanut to form a thick
paste. shape into little sugar-loaves, and bake a few
minutes till crisp outside. the cocoanut may be replaced
by grated chocolate.
cornflour cake. time— hour.
 oz. flour, ¼ lb. cornflour, ¼ lb. castor sugar,  oz. butter,
 eggs,  teaspoonful baking-powder.
beat the butter to a cream, add the sugar, and mix
well; add the eggs, and beat all well together; stir in
lightly the flour, cornflour, and baking-powder and
beat all well for  minutes. half-fill a greased cake-tin
with the mixture, and place it at once in a hot oven to
bake for ½ hour. turn the cake on to a sieve, and stand
on its side to cool.
dough cake. time—¼ hour.
 lb. dough, ¼ lb. sugar, ¼ lb. currants or sultanas,  oz.
butter,  oz. candied peel,  egg.
wash and dry the currants, chop the peel, then mix
these well into the dough; beat the egg, add the butter
to it, and beat all the ingredients well together. grease
a tin, turn the mixture into it, and bake about 
minutes.
hanucah cakes. time—½ hour.
¼ lb. butter, ¼ lb. brown sugar, ½ lb. flour,  eggs, ¼ lb.
loaf sugar, crushed.
pass the flour through a sieve, rub in the butter, then
add the brown sugar and  whole egg, well beaten. roll
out ¼ inch thick, cut rings, brush over with egg, toss in
the crushed sugar, and bake on a greased tin about ¼ hour
in a quick oven.
lemon cheese-cake mixture. time—¼ hour.
 eggs,  oz. butter,  oz. castor sugar, rind of one and
juice of  lemons.
beat up the eggs, add to them the sugar, lemon-juice
and rind; melt the butter in a saucepan, add the other
ingredients to it, and simmer gently till the mixture
thickens, stirring all the time. this mixture can be used
like jam, and will keep some time.
oatmeal biscuits. time—¾ hour.
 oz. flour,  oz. oatmeal,  oz. castor sugar,  oz. butter,
¼ teaspoonful baking-powder,  egg.
melt the butter, mix the flour, sugar, oatmeal, and baking-powder,
together; stir in the melted butter. break
the egg into a teacup, beat it up with a little water, and
stir it into the other ingredients to form a paste. turn
the paste on to a board, and roll it out very thin, cut it
into rounds with a cutter or tumbler, place the biscuits on
a greased tin and bake  minutes.
orange cake. time— hour.
the weight of  eggs in butter, sugar and flour; part
of the juice and all the rind of  orange and a little
baking-powder.
cream the butter and sugar together about  minutes,
add the orange-peel and  egg, and part of the flour.
use part of the juice for the cake, and the rest for the
icing. stir in the juice and baking-powder, add the
rest of the ingredients, grease and sugar the tin, fill it ⅓
and bake ½ hour.
icing,  tablespoonful water to ¼ lb. best icing sugar
and orange juice. stand this in a cup of warm water,
and when liquid pour over the cake.
plum loaf. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. flour,  tablespoonful of baking-powder, salt,  oz.
currants, milk.
wash and dry the currants, mix the dry ingredients
well together, add sufficient milk to make a stiff paste,
then knead well on a floured board. form into shapes,
brush over with milk, flour a tin, and bake in a hot oven
½ hour. if the rolls sound hollow when tapped, they are
done.
scones. time—¾ hour.
 lb. flour, ½ pint milk,  oz. butter,  teaspoonfuls
baking-powder,  oz. sugar.
rub the butter into the flour, add the baking-powder
and sugar, and form into a smooth paste with lukewarm
milk. roll the paste out ½ inch thick, cut it into triangles,
and bake on a greased tin ½ hour. when half
done, brush over with milk.
spanish biscuits. time—½ hour.
 lb. flour,  oz. sifted sugar,  tablespoonful baking-powder,
 dessertspoonfuls salad oil,  dessertspoonful
orange-flower water. enough cold water to make it into
a stiff paste.
mix the ingredients, break off small pieces, shape
them into rings, notching out all round with a
sharp knife, place them on a hot tin and bake them in
a hot oven.
spice cakes. time—½ hour.
 oz. flour,  oz. castor sugar,  oz. butter,  teaspoonful
baking-powder,  teaspoonful nutmeg or cinnamon, ½ gill
water,  egg.
whisk the egg and sugar to a stiff batter, and add the
water. mix the flour, baking-powder and spice together,
and stir lightly into the batter, then add the butter melted.
half fill small greased patty-pans, and bake in a sharp
oven.
vinegar cake. time— hours.
½ lb. flour,  oz. butter, ¼ lb. brown sugar, ¼ lb. currants,
¼ teaspoonful carbonate of soda,  dessertspoonful vinegar,
 gill milk, ½ teaspoonful baking-powder,  teaspoonful
cinnamon.
mix the flour and butter together, then add the sugar,
currants (washed and dried), cinnamon, and baking-powder.
mix together smoothly in a basin the carbonate
of soda and the milk, then add the vinegar, and while it
is effervescing, mix it quickly with the dry ingredients.
turn all into a greased cake-tin, and bake in a moderate
oven about ½ hour.
yorkshire tea cakes. time— hours.
¾ lb. flour, ½ gill milk,  egg,  teaspoonful castor
sugar,  oz. german yeast,  oz. butter, salt.
pass the flour through a sieve, and add a pinch of salt.
melt the butter in a stew-pan, add the milk, and let it become
lukewarm. cream the yeast with the castor sugar,
add the milk, butter and egg, mix well, then strain into
the middle of the flour, work in all the flour from the sides,
then turn on to a floured board, and knead with the
hand. cut into two pieces, place in floured tins, cover
and leave in a warm place to rise  hour. bake from 
to  minutes in a hot oven.
chocolate caramels. time—¾ hour.
½ lb. grated chocolate,  breakfastcupful brown sugar,
¾ breakfastcupful milk,  oz. butter,  dessertspoonfuls
golden syrup.
stir all the ingredients over the fire until thick (from
 to  minutes). when a little of the mixture, poured
into cold water, becomes crisp and hard, the caramels
are ready. pour the mixture on to well-greased dishes,
mark it into squares, and cut up as soon as possible.
cocoanut candy. time— hour.
 large cocoanut,  tablespoonful cocoanut milk,  lb.
brown sugar.
cut the cocoanut into small thin strips about half an
inch long. boil with the sugar and the milk from the
nut, stirring all the time. drop a little on to a wet board,
and if it be sufficiently cooked, it will harden. when
ready, form the mixture into round cakes with a tablespoon,
and drop them on to a wet board as fast as
possible.
ginger lee. time— hour.
¼ lb. ginger lee seed,  lb. castor sugar,  lb. honey,
¼ lb. almonds.
blanch the almonds and ginger lee seed the day before
they are required. pick the seed over well, put it into
the oven until it is a light brown. mix the sugar and
honey well together, put them in a saucepan on the fire,
let them remain till clear (about  minutes). drop in
the ginger lee seed and almonds, and stir well. drop a
spoonful on to a plate to see if it sets; when ready,
thoroughly wet a board and rolling pin, roll out the mixture
about one inch thick, cut it up, and put on a dish to
cool.
toffee. time—½ hour.
 lb. brown sugar, ½ lb. butter, ½ gill water,  dessertspoonful
vinegar ( oz. almonds, if liked).
melt the sugar and butter together, then add the water
and vinegar, and stir over a slow fire, till a little of the
mixture, poured into cold water, becomes quite crisp and
hard. blanch the almonds, cut them up, sprinkle them
into the toffee at the last moment, then pour it on to well-greased
dishes, mark it into squares, and cut up as soon
as possible.
cup of arrowroot. time—¼ hour.
 dessertspoonful arrowroot,  pint milk.
boil the milk, and meanwhile mix the arrowroot to a
smooth paste with a little cold milk, then pour the boiling
milk on to it and stir till smooth. if not thick enough,
return it to the saucepan and stir for  or  minutes over
the fire. serve with sugar or salt.
a cup of cornflour can be made in the same way.
barley water. time— minutes.
 dessertspoonfuls prepared barley,  pint milk or water.
put the barley into a basin and mix to a smooth paste
with a little cold milk or water, then add to it gradually
the boiling milk or water, stirring carefully with a wooden
spoon all the time. boil  minutes, stir continually
and avoid lumps. sweeten, and if made with water
serve with lemon-juice.
raw beef tea (for typhoid fever). time—¾ hour.
scrape a small piece of very lean gravy beef, put it in
a tumbler, add a pinch of salt, and just cover with cold
water. let it stand ½ hour, then strain, and add  or 
drops of lemon-juice to turn it brown, if permitted by the
doctor.
beef tea (strongest). time— hours.
 pint of water to  lb. gravy beef.
cut the beef into pieces about half an inch square, removing
all fat and skin, and soak for  hour in the water.
then add  teaspoonful of salt, and place in a covered
jar, which must stand in a saucepan of boiling water for
 hour. keep the saucepan well filled, and the water
boiling, but be careful not to let it enter the jar. strain
and serve.
whole beef tea. time—½ hours.
½ lb. gravy beef to  pint water.
cut the beef into pieces ½ inch square, removing all the
skin and fat, and let the beef soak in ½ pint cold water.
when the juices have been extracted (the pieces should
soak all night) take out the beef and place it in a jar with
the remainder of the cold water. let this simmer 
hours, then add the liquor to the cold raw juice, take
out the pieces of meat, pound them, return them to the
liquor, and heat all together. flavour with green celery
stalk, or a little worcester sauce.
calf’s foot jelly.
 calf’s foot,  quarts water, rind of  and juice of 
lemons, ¼ lb. loaf sugar,  whites and shells of eggs, spice.
cut the foot into  pieces, put them in a saucepan and
add the cold water, simmer gently  hours then strain
into a basin. when the jelly is cold, carefully skim off
the fat, dip a clean cloth into boiling water, and wipe any
remaining fat off the surface with the cloth. melt the
jelly in a saucepan, then add the sugar, lemon-juice, and
rind, whites of eggs well beaten, the shells and spice.
whisk over the fire till the jelly boils, then simmer, with
the lid off  minutes. fix a cloth, thoroughly rinsed in
boiling water, on to a chair (as for clearing soup, see page ),
strain the jelly through it, and cover with a blanket
while it is running through. pour into a mould, which
has been rinsed in cold water.
to boil a chicken. time— hours.
 fowl, ½ lemon, mace; pepper and salt to taste.
boil enough water to well cover the fowl, add salt,
pepper and mace. rub the fowl with the lemon-juice,
put it into the saucepan. boil gently ½ hour. serve
with lemon sauce (see page ), and if liked, garnish with
slices of tongue, smoked beef, or worsht.
chicken broth.
cut up an old fowl, cover with water, and stew it with
 onions till it goes to pieces. season with pepper and salt,
skim well, strain, and serve very hot with sippets of toast.
chickens’ necks stewed in the same way make very
good broth.
to roast a chicken. time— hour.
 fowl (smoked beef fat). stuffing:  tablespoonful
chopped suet,  tablespoonful bread-crumbs, ½ tablespoonful
chopped parsley, ½ tablespoonful chopped
herbs, grated nutmeg, pepper and salt to taste, grated
lemon-rind,  egg.
dry the fowl well; prepare the stuffing as below, put
it in at the breast, and sew or skewer it up. (if liked,
lard the fowl with the smoked beef fat.) rub with a
little pepper and salt, dredge lightly with flour, and leave
a little while. then put a piece of greased paper over
the breast, and put down to roast. remove the paper
¼ hour before the fowl is done.
for the stuffing: chop the suet and parsley fine, add
to them the bread-crumbs, herbs, pepper, and salt, nutmeg,
lemon-rind, and lastly the egg, well beaten. mix all
well together.
cornflour blanc-mange. time— minutes.
 tablespoonfuls cornflour,  pint milk,  tablespoonful
loaf sugar, stick cinnamon.
put the sugar, cinnamon, and nearly all the milk, in a
saucepan to boil. meanwhile mix the cornflour in a
basin to a smooth paste, with the remainder of the milk.
when the milk boils, add to it the cornflour, return all to
the saucepan, and boil quickly  minutes, stirring all the
time. dip a mould in cold water, pour in the cornflour
after the cinnamon has been taken out. when cold turn
out, and serve with jam.
gruel. time—¾ hour.
 dessertspoonfuls oatmeal (fine or scotch),  tablespoonfuls
milk, ½ saltspoonful salt,  gills boiling water.
mix the oatmeal and salt to a smooth paste with the
milk. when the water boils add it gradually, stirring all
the time. let it stand ½ minute, then pour it into the
saucepan, letting the grits remain in the basin. stir
the gruel till it boils, then simmer  minutes more if
fine, ½ hour more if scotch oatmeal. sweeten to taste.
lait de poule. time— minutes.
 gill boiling water, ¾ wineglassful sherry,  egg,
(nutmeg if liked), sugar.
beat up the egg, pour the nearly boiling water over it,
add the sherry and nutmeg, and sweeten. this drink is
very good for a cold, when no milk is handy.
lemonade.
 lemons,  quart water; loaf sugar to taste.
shave off the yellow rind of the lemon, place the sugar
in a jug, put the rind in a strainer, and pour  pint of
boiling water over it on to the sugar. squeeze the lemons
through a strainer, add to them  pint of cold water, then
mix all together.
mutton broth.
this broth is made just like that on page , but no
rice or barley should be thrown in. the broth should be
strained through a sieve, and served with sippets of toast.
special care should be taken to have it entirely free from
fat.
toast water.
toast a crust of bread carefully all over, but do not
burn it black. fill a jug with boiling water, then put in
the toast. a bright liquid the colour of sherry will be
the result.
batter pudding. time— hour.
 teacupful motza meal,  pint milk,  eggs,  oz. brown
sugar,  oz. butter, rind of  lemon (tablespoonful rum, if
liked).
mix the meal into a batter with the milk and eggs, add
the sugar, butter (melted), grated rind of lemon, and rum.
pour the mixture into a greased basin or mould, and boil
for  hour, or bake ½ hour.
cocoanut custard. time—½ hour.
see page , but use prelatoes instead of sponge
cakes.
to fry fish.
see page , but use motza meal instead of flour.
to stew fish.
see page , but use motza meal instead of flour.
grimslichs. time—¾ hour.
 motzas, ¼ lb. motza meal.
inside:  oz. ground almonds,  oz. raisins,  oz. sultanas,
¼ lb. currants, ground cinnamon, nutmeg, ¼ lb.
brown sugar,  eggs.
mix the fruit, sugar, spice, almonds together with 
egg. soak the motzas till quite soft, squeeze very dry,
make into a crust with the meal and the other egg. shape
a piece of this into an oval on the hand, place some of the
inside mixture on it, cover with a top piece, shape carefully,
and sprinkle with meal. fry in hot fat or oil. serve
with clarified sugar.
motza kleis. time—¾ hour.
 motzas, ½ lb. motza meal,  oz. suet,  tablespoonful
chopped parsley,  chopped onions,  eggs, marjoram,
pepper and salt to taste.
soak the motzas in cold water till they are soft, then
squeeze them very dry. chop the onions, brown them
with a few drops of oil. add them to the motza, with the
suet chopped fine, nearly all the meal, parsley, marjoram,
pepper, salt, and lastly, the eggs well beaten. roll into
balls with the remainder of the meal, and throw into the
boiling soup ½ hour before serving.
motza pudding (baked).
 motzas,  tablespoonfuls meal,  oz. dripping, ½ lb.
dried fruit,  eggs,  oz. brown sugar, spice to taste.
soak the motzas in cold water, then squeeze them very
dry. prepare the fruit, mix all the dry ingredients together,
then add the eggs, well beaten. grease a pie-dish
well, sugar it, fill it with the mixture, and bake about ½
hour. serve with clarified sugar (see page ).
boiled motza pudding is made in the same way, but
chopped suet must be used instead of the dripping.
potato pastry. time— hour.
¼ lb. cold boiled potatoes,  oz. potato flour,  oz. dripping,
a pinch of salt, a very little water.
mash the potatoes through a sieve, then add the salt
and potato flour, and rub in the fat. mix to a paste with
a very little cold water. proceed as in fruit pie, page .
this paste may be used for meat pie, tartlets, &c., and
will be found very light.
potato pudding. time ¼ hour.
 large mealy potatoes,  oz. butter, ½ gill milk,  eggs,
 tablespoonful brown sugar; nutmeg and salt to taste.
boil the potatoes, mash them smooth with the milk,
butter, well-beaten eggs, sugar, nutmeg, and salt. bake
in a greased dish ½ hour, and serve hot.
sassafras.
sassafras, aniseed, stick liquorice.
tie up the liquorice and aniseed in a muslin bag, put
this in a jug with the sassafras, and pour boiling water
over it.
swiss roll. time—½ hour.
½ oz. potato flour,  oz. castor sugar,  eggs, lemon
cheese-cake mixture (see page ).
see page , but use ½ oz. potato flour or  oz. motza
meal instead of flour, and lemon cheese-cake mixture
instead of jam.
lightning cakes.
 oz. butter,  oz. castor sugar,  oz. potato flour,  oz.
ground almonds,  egg.
cream the butter and sugar together, add the egg,
well beaten, the potato flour, and ground almonds.
grease a tin liberally, spread the mixture smoothly on
it with a knife, bake in a quick oven  minutes, and cut
into shapes while hot.
in these few pages it is our object to give, as clearly and
concisely as possible, directions for the formation and
conduct of the jewish cookery classes which are now
increasing among us. several years’ experience at the
bayswater jewish schools and at the portuguese jews’
schools has enabled us to ascertain accurately the cost of
starting and maintaining such a class, and we have
endeavoured to give a clear statement of the necessary
expenditure, together with a list of the requisite utensils.
“in schools in which the inspector reports that special
and appropriate provision is made for the practical teaching
of cookery, a grant of four shillings is made on account
of any girl (over twelve years of age before the conclusion
of the course) who has attended not less than forty hours
during the school year at the cookery class, and is presented
for examination in the elementary subjects in any
standard.”[]—(new code of regulations, .)
a class-room can easily be adapted as the kitchen by
the introduction of a good-sized cupboard and a simple
open range. a kitchen table should be procured with
screw legs, so that it can conveniently be taken to pieces,
and removed after the lesson.
two or three demonstration lessons, at which a large
number of girls may attend, given at the commencement
of the course, will enable the girls to set about the practice
lessons with some degree of facility. no demonstration
should last longer than an hour and a half, so that
the teacher may secure the entire attention of the pupils.
these lessons will afford an opportunity for dwelling on
the value of foods, both from an economical and medical
point of view.
the practice lessons should last two hours, so that
there may be plenty of time for the pupils to thoroughly
cleanse and put away every article used, scrub the floor
and table and tidy the hearth. in these two hours the
luncheon hour might easily be included.
the number of girls at a practice lesson should never
exceed twelve, and they should work two together at one
board. they should be shown how to weigh carefully
each ingredient, and should themselves regulate, by a
clock, the cooking of their own dishes. perfect order
must be maintained, and it is very necessary that neatness
should be insisted on throughout every stage, and that
special attention should be paid to personal cleanliness.
the girls should be made to read through the recipe to
be prepared, and to collect all the ingredients required
before they actually commence to cook.
it is desirable that the various processes should be
carried on with the simplest means, so that every girl
may be fairly expected to find in her own home all such
utensils as are employed during the lesson. it is, therefore,
better to avoid the expense of a mincing-machine,
knife-machine, and other labour-saving appliances.
s.
d.
 iron saucepans (various sizes)
 gridiron (reversible)
 frying-pans (meat and butter)
 strainer (conical)
 colander
 pepper-box
 salt-cellar
 grater
 tin mould
 meat-stand
 dripping-tin
 set skewers
 basting-ladle
 toast-fork
 wooden spoons (various sizes)
 knife-board
 galvanised pail
 pint measure
 gill measure
 yorkshire pudding tin
 iron spoons (various sizes)
 teaspoons
 potato-knife
 onion knife
 wash-hand bowl
 zinc bath (for washing-up)
 zinc bath (for koshering)
 wire sieve
 funnel
½ doz. kitchen knives
 kitchen forks
 blacklead brush
 stove brush
 nail brush
 potato brush
 scrubbing brush
