inſieme q̃ pareuano vna yſola.
i saw many kinds of birds, among them one that had no
anus; and another, [which] when the female []wishes
to lay its eggs, it does so on the back of the male and there they are
hatched. the latter bird has no feet, and always lives in the sea.
[there is] another kind which live on the ordure of the other birds,
and in no other manner; for i often saw this bird, which is called
cagassela, fly behind the other birds, until they are constrained to
drop their ordure, which the former seizes immediately and abandons the
latter bird. i also saw many flying fish, and many others collected
together, so that they resembled an island.
paſſato q̃ haueſſemo la linea
equinotiale in verſo el meridianno ꝓ deſſemo la
tramontana et coſi ſe nauego tra el meſo jorno et garbin
fino en vna tera che se diſe la tera del verzin in  gradi
½ al polo antãtico q̃ e tera del capo de
sto auguſtino q̃ ſta in  gradi al
medeſimo polo do ue pigliaſſemo grã
refreſcho de galine batate pigne molte dolci fruto in vero piu
gentil que ſia carne de anta como vaca canne dolci et altre
coſe infinite q̃ laſcio ꝓ non eſſere
ꝓlixo ꝓ vno amo da peſcare o vno cortello dauano .
ho . galinne  ꝓ vno petine vno paro de occati
 ꝓ vno ſpequio ho vna forfice tanto peſce
q̃ hauerebe baſtato a x homini  ꝓ vno
ſonaglio o vna ſtringa vno ceſto de batate. 
qʒſte batate ſonno al mangiare como caſtagnie et
longo como napi  et ꝓ vno re de danari q̃ e vna
carta de jocare me deteno . galine et penſauano anchora hauernj
inganati jntraſſemo in que ſto porto il giorno de
ſancta lucia []et in qel di haueſſemo
el ſolle p zenit et patiſſemo piu caldo. qel
giorno et li alti quãdo haueuão el ſolle
ꝓ zenit che quando eramo ſoto la linea equinotialle.
after we had passed the equinoctial line going south,
we lost the north star, and hence we sailed south
south-west until
[we reached] a land called the land of verzin which lies in ½ degrees of the
antarctic pole [i.e., south latitude]. it is the land extending
from the cape of santo augustino, which lies in  degrees of the same
pole. there we got a plentiful refreshment of fowls, potatoes
[batate], many sweet pine-apples—in truth the most
delicious fruit that can be found—the flesh of the
anta, which
resembles beef, sugarcane, and innumerable other things, which i shall
not mention in order not to be prolix. for one fishhook or one knife,
those people gave  or  chickens; for one comb, a brace of geese; for
one mirror or one pair of scissors, as many fish as would be sufficient
for x men; for a bell or one leather lace, one basketful of potatoes
[batate]. these potatoes resemble chestnuts in taste, and are as
long as turnips.
for a king of diamonds [danari], which is a playing card, they gave me
 fowls and thought
that they had even cheated me. we entered that port on st. lucy’s
day, []and on that day had the sun on the
zenith; and we were
subjected to greater heat on that day and on the other days when we had
the sun on the zenith, than when we were under the equinoctial
line.
queſta tera del verzin e abondantissa
et piu grande q̃ ſpagnia franſa et jtalia tute
inſieme.  e del re de portugalo  li populi
de queſta tera nõ ſonno chriſtiani et nõ
adorano coſa alguna viueno ſecõdo lo vzo de la natura
et viueno cento vinticinque anny et cẽto et quaranta. vano nudi
coſſi homini como femine habitano in certe caſe longue
che le chiamano boij et dormeno in rete de bã baſo chiamate
amache ligade ne le medeme caſe da vno capo et da lalto
a legni groſſi  fanno foco infra eſſi
in tera  in ogni vno de queſti boij ſtano cento
homini cõ le ſue moglie et figlioli facendo grã
romore  anno barche duno ſolo arburo maſchize
quiamate ca noe cauate cõ menare de pietra 
queſti populi adoperão le pietre como nui el fero ꝓ
nõ hauere  ſtanno trenta et quaranta homini in
vna de queſte.  vogano cõ palle como da forno
et cuſſi negri nubi et tosi asimigliano quando vogano
aqelli de laſtigie palude. sono diſpoſti
homini et femine como noi  mangiano carne humana de li
ſui nemici non ꝓ bonna ma ꝓ vna certa vzanſa
queſta vzanſa lo vno con laltro.  fu principio
vna vequia laqalle haueua ſolamente vno figliolo
q̃ fu amazato dali suoi nemici ꝓ il q̃
paſſati alguni giorni li ſui pigliorono vno de la
compagnia q̃ haueua morto []suo figliolo et lo condusero
doue ſtaua queſta vequia ela vedendo et ricordandoſe del
ſuo
figliolo como cagnia rabiata li corſe adoſſo et lo
mordete in vna ſpala coſtui deli a pocho fugi neli ſoi
et diſſe como lo volſero mangiare moſtrandoli el
ſegnialle de la ſpala.  qñ queſti
pigliarono poi de qelli li mangiorono et qelli de
queſti ſiche ꝓ queſto he venuta tal vzanſa.
non ſe mangiano ſubito ma ogni vno taglia vno pezo et lo
porta in caſa metendola al fumo poi ogni . jorni taglia vno
pezeto mangiandolo bruto lado cõ le altre cose p memoria degli
ſui nemici queſto me diſſe johane carnagio piloto
q̃ veniua cõ nuy el qalle era ſtato in
queſta tera quatro anny  queſta gente ſe
depingeno marauiglioſamẽte tuto il corpo et il volto con
foco in diuerſi a maniere ancho le done ſono [sono:
doublet in original ms.] toſi et ſenſa barba
perche ſe la pelanno. se veſteno de veſtitur̃ de
piume de papagalo cõ rode grande al cullo de le penne magiore
cosa ridicula caſi tuti li homini eccepto le femine et fanciuli
hano tre buſi ne lauro deſoto oue portano pietre rotonde et
longue vno dito et piu et meno de fora pendente. nõ ſonno
del tuto negri ma oliuaſtri  portano deſcoperte
le parte vergonioſe il suo corpo e ſenza peli et
coſſi homini qal donne sempre vano nudi il suo re
e chiamato cacich  anno infinitiſſimi papagali et
ne danno  ho  ꝓ vno ſpecho et gati []maimoni
picoli fati como leoni ma jalli coſa belissima  fano
panne rotondo biancho de medola de arbore non molto bonno q̃
naſce fra larbore et la ſcorſa et he como recotta.
 hanno porci q̃ ſopa la ſquena
teneno el suo lombelico et vcceli grandi q̃ anno el becho como vn
cuquiaro ſenſa linga  ne dauano ꝓ vno
acceta ho cortello grãde vna ho due dele ſue figliole
giouane ꝓ fchiaue ma ſua mogliere nõ darianno
ꝓ coſa alguna  elle nõ farebenno
vergonia a suoi mariti ꝓ ogni grã coſa come ne
ſtate referito  de giorno nõ conſenteno a
li loro mariti ma ſolamẽte de nocte. esse lauorano et
portano tuto el mãgiar̃ suo da li monti in zerli ho vero
caneſtri ſul capo ho atacati al capo pero eſſendo
ſempre ſeco ſui mariti ſolamẽte cõ vno
archo de verzin o de palma negra et vno mazo de freze di canna et
queſto fano per che ſonno geloſi  le femine
portano ſui figlioli tacadi al colo in vna rete de banbazo.
laſcio altre coſe ꝓ nõ eſſere piu
longo. se diſſe due volte meſſa in tera ꝓ il
que queſti ſtauano cõ tanto contrictiõe in
genoquionj alſando le mano giunte q̃ era grandisso
piacere vederli  edificareno vna caſa per nui
penſando doueſſemo ſtar ſeco algun tempo et
taglia rono molto verſin per darnela a la noſtra partida
 era ſtato forſe duy meſi nõ haueua
pioueſto in queſta terra et quando []ajongeſemo al porto per caſo piouete
ꝓ queſto deceuano noi vegnire dal cielo et hauer̃
monato noſco la piogia  queſti populi facilmente
se conuerterebenno a la fede de jeſu xpõ.
that land of verzin is wealthier and larger than
spagnia, fransa, and italia, put together, and belongs to the king of portugalo.
the people of that land are not christians, and have no manner of
worship. they live according to the dictates of nature, and reach an age of one hundred
and twenty-five and one hundred and forty years. they go naked, both men and women. they
live in certain long houses which they call boii and sleep in cotton hammocks
called amache, which are fastened in those houses by each end to
large beams. a fire is built on the ground under those hammocks. in
each one of those boii, there are one hundred men with their
wives and children,
and they make a great racket. they have boats called canoes made of one
single huge tree,
hollowed out by the use of stone hatchets. those people employ stones
as we do iron, as they have no iron. thirty or forty men occupy one of
those boats. they paddle with blades like the shovels of a furnace, and
thus, black, naked, and shaven, they resemble, when paddling, the
inhabitants of the stygian marsh. men and women are as well proportioned as we. they
eat the human flesh of their enemies, not because it is good, but
because it is a certain established custom. that custom, which is
mutual, was begun by an old woman, who had but one son who was killed by his enemies.
in return some days later, that old woman’s friends captured one
of the company who had killed her []son, and brought him to the
place of her abode. she seeing him, and remembering her son, ran upon
him like an infuriated bitch, and bit him on one shoulder. shortly
afterward he escaped to his own people, whom he told that they had
tried to eat him, showing them [in proof] the marks on his shoulder.
whomever the latter captured afterward at any time from the former they
ate, and the former did the same to the latter, so that such a custom
has sprung up in this way. they do not eat the bodies all at once, but
every one cuts off a piece, and carries it to his house, where he
smokes it. then every week, he cuts off a small bit, which he eats thus smoked
with his other food to remind him of his enemies. the above was told me
by the pilot, johane carnagio, who came with us, and who had lived in that land for
four years. those people paint the whole body and the face in a
wonderful manner with fire in various fashions, as do the women also.
the men are [are: doublet in original manuscript] smooth shaven
and have no beard, for they pull it out. they clothe themselves in a
dress made of parrot feathers, with large round arrangements at their
buttocks made from the largest feathers, and it is a ridiculous sight.
almost all the people, except the women and children, have three holes pierced in the
lower lip, where they carry round stones, one finger or thereabouts in
length and hanging down outside. those people are not entirely black,
but of a dark brown color. they keep the privies uncovered, and the
body is without hair, while both men and women always go naked. their king
is called cacich [i.e., cacique]. they have an infinite number
of parrots, []and gave us  or  for one mirror: and little
monkeys that look like lions, only [they are] yellow, and very
beautiful. they
make round white [loaves of] bread from the marrowy substance of trees,
which is not very good, and is found between the wood and the bark and
resembles buttermilk curds. they have swine which have their navels
[lombelico] on their backs, and large birds with beaks like spoons and no
tongues. the men
gave us one or two of their young daughters as slaves for one hatchet
or one large knife, but they would not give us their wives in exchange
for anything at all. the women will not shame their husbands under any
considerations whatever, and as was told us, refuse to consent to their
husbands by day, but only by night. the women cultivate the fields, and carry all their
food from the mountains in panniers or baskets on the head or fastened
to the head. but
they are always accompanied by their husbands, who are armed only with
a bow of brazil-wood or of black palm-wood, and a bundle of cane
arrows, doing this because they are jealous [of their wives]. the women
carry their children hanging in a cotton net from their necks. i omit
other particulars, in order not to be tedious. mass was said twice on
shore, during which those people remained on their knees with so great
contrition and with clasped hands raised aloft, that it was an
exceeding great pleasure to behold them. they built us a house as they
thought that we were going to stay with them for some time, and at our
departure they cut a great quantity of brazil-wood [verzin] to
give us. it had
been about two months since it had rained in []that
land, and when we reached that port, it happened to rain, whereupon
they said that we came from the sky and that we had brought the rain
with us. those
people could be converted easily to the faith of jesus christ.
jmprima coſtoro penſauano li batelli
foſſero figlioli de le naue et que elle li
purturiſſeno quando ſe butauano fora di naue in mare et
ſtando coſi al coſta do como he vzanſa credeuano le
naue li nutriſſeno  vna jouene bella vene vn di
nela naue capitania, houe yo ſtaua non ꝓ alto
ſenon ꝓ trouar̃ alguno recapito 
ſtando coſi et aſpectando buto lo ochio supa
la camera del maiſto et victe vno quiodo longo piu de
vn dito il que pigliando cõ grande gentileſſa et
galantaria se lo fico aparte aparte de li labri della ſua natura
et subito baſſa baſsa se partite. vedendo queſto il
capo. generale et yo.
at first those people thought that the small boats
were the children of the ships, and that the latter gave birth to them
when they were lowered into the sea from the ships, and when they were
lying so alongside the ships (as is the custom), they believed that the
ships were nursing them. one day a beautiful young woman came to the
flagship, where i was, for no other purpose than to seek what chance
might offer. while there and waiting, she cast her eyes upon the
master’s room, and saw a nail longer than one’s finger.
picking it up very delightedly and neatly, she thrust it through the
lips of her vagina [natura], and bending down low immediately
departed, the captain-general and i having seen that
action.
alguni vocabuli de qʒſti populi del
verzin.
al miglio.
maiz
alla farina.
hui
al hamo.
pinda
al cortello
tacse
al petine
chigap
alla forfice
pirame
al ſonaglio
jtanmaracz
buono piu q̃ bono
tum maragathum
some words of those people of verzin
for millet
maiz
for flour
hui
for fishhook
pinda
for knife
tacse
for comb
chigap
for scissors
pirame
for bell
itanmaraca
good, better
tum maragathum
steſſemo . giorni in queſta tera
 ſeguendo poi il nr̃o camino andaſemo fin a
 gradi et vno terſo al polo antarticho doue trouaſſemo
in vno fiume de []acqua dolce homini q̃ ſe chiamano
canibali et mangiano la carne humana vene vno de la ſtatura
caſi como vno gigante nella ñaue capitania ꝓ
asigurare li alti suoi  haueua vna voce
ſimille a vno toro in tanto que queſto ſtete ne la naue
li alti portoronno via le ſue robe dal loco doue
habitauão dento nella terra ꝓ paura de noi
 vedendo queſto ſaltaſſimo in terra
cento homini ꝓ hauer̃ linga et parlare ſecho ho vero
ꝓ forſa pigliarne alguno  fugiteno et
fugẽdo face uano tanto grã paſſo q̃ noi
ſaltando nõ poteuamo avanſare li sui paſſi.
 in queſto fiume ſtanno ſette jzolle.
 ne la maior de queſte ſe troua pietre
precioſe qui se chiama capo de sta maria gia ſe
penſaua q̃ de qui ſe paſaſſe al mare de
sur cioe mezo di ne may piu altra fu diſcouerto adeſſo
nõ he capo ſinon fiume et a larga la boca  legue. altre
volte in queſto fiume fu mangiado da questi canibali per tropo
fidarſe vno capitanio spagniolo q̃ ſe chiamaua
johã de solis et ſesanta homini q̃ andauano a
diſcourire terra como nui.
we remained in that land for  days. then proceeding,
on our way, we went as far as  and one-third degrees toward the antarctic pole,
[]where we found people at a freshwater river,
called canibali [i.e., cannibals], who eat human flesh. one of
them, in stature almost a giant, came to the flagship in order to
assure [the safety of] the others his friends. he had a voice like a bull. while he was
in the ship, the others carried away their possessions from the place
where they were living into the interior, for fear of us. seeing that,
we landed one hundred men in order to have speech and converse with
them, or to capture one of them by force. they fled, and in fleeing
they took so large a step that we although running could not gain on
their steps. there are seven islands in that river, in the largest of
which precious gems are found. that place is called the cape of santa
maria, and it was formerly thought that one passed thence to the sea of
sur, that is to say the south sea, but nothing further was ever
discovered. now the name is not [given to] a cape, but [to] a river,
with a mouth  leguas in width. a spanish captain, called johan de solis and sixty
men, who were going to discover lands like us, were formerly eaten at
that river by those cannibals because of too great
confidence.
po ſeguendo el medeſimo camino
ꝟſo el polo antarticho acoſto de terra
veniſſimo adare in due jſolle pienni de occati et loui
marini veramente non ſe porla narare il grã numero de
queſti occati in vna hora cargaſſimo le cinque naue
 queſti occati ſenno negri et anno tute le penne
aduno modo coſsi nel corpo como nelle ale.  nõ
volano et viueno de peſe  eranno tanti
graſſi q̃ non biſogniaua pelarli ma ſcor
tiglarli anno lo beco como vno coruo queſti loui marini ſonno
de diuerſi colori et groſſi []como
viteli et el capo como loro cõ le orechie picole et tõde
et denti grandi  nõ anno gambe ſenon piedi
tacade al corpo ſimille a le nr̃e mani cõ onguie
picolle et fra li diti anno qella pele.  le
ochie ſarebenno fe rociſſime ſe
poteſſeno corere nodano et viueno de peſcie 
qui hebenno li naue grandiſſima fortuna ꝓ il que ne
aparſeno molte volte li tre corpi ſancti çioe
sto. elmo sto. nicolo et sta chiara et
ſubito ſeſſaua la fortuna.
then proceeding on the same course toward the
antarctic pole, coasting along the land, we came to anchor at two
islands full of geese and sea-wolves. truly, the great number of those geese cannot be
reckoned; in one hour we loaded the five ships [with them]. those geese
are black and have all their feathers alike both on body and wings.
they do not fly, and live on fish. they were so fat that it was not
necessary to pluck them but to skin them. their beak is like that of a
crow. those sea-wolves are of various colors, and as large as a calf,
[]with a head like that of a calf, ears small and
round, and large teeth. they have no legs but only feet with small
nails attached to the body, which resemble our hands, and between their
fingers the same kind of skin as the geese. they would be very fierce
if they could run. they swim, and live on fish. at that place the ships
suffered a very great storm, during which the three holy bodies
appeared to us many times, that is to say, st. elmo, st. nicholas, and
st. clara, whereupon the storm quickly ceased.
partendone de qi ariuaſſemo fin a
 gradi et mezo al antarticho eſsendo linuerno le naui introrono
in vno bon porto ꝓ inuernarſe  quiui
ſteſemo dui meſi ſenza vedere ꝓſonna
alguna. vndi a linprouiſo vedeſſemo vno homo de
ſtatura de gigante q̃ ſtaua nudo nella riua del porto
balando cantando et butandoſe poluere soura la teſta. jl
capitanio gñale mando vno deli nr̃i a lui acio
faceſſe li medeſimi acti in ſegno de pace et fati
lo conduce in vna jzolleta dinanzi al capo gñalle
 quando fo nella ſua et nr̃a preſentia molto
ſe marauiglio et faceua ſegni cõ vno dito alzato
credendo veniſſemo dal ciello  queſto erra
tanto grande q̃ li dauamo a la cintura et ben diſpoſto
haueua la faza grande et depinta intorno de roſſo et jntorno
li ochi de jallo cõ dui cori depinti in mezo de le galte. li
pocqi capili q̃ haueua erano tinti de biancho.
 era veſtito de pelle de animale coſi de
sotilmente inſieme  el qualle animalle a el capo et
orechie grande como vna mula il colo et il corpo como vno camello, le
[]gambe de ceruo et la coda de caualo et
nitriſſe como lui  ge ne ſonno aſaysimi
in queſta tera haueua a li piedi albarghe de le medeſme pelle
q̃ copreno li piedi a vzo de ſcarpe et nella mano vno archo
curto et groſſo. la corda alquando piu groſſa di
qelle del lauto fata de le budelle del medemo animale
cõ vno mazo de frece de canna non molto longue inpenade como le
noſtre ꝓ fore põte de pietra de fuoca biancha et
negra amodo de freze turqueſque facendole cõ vn
alta pietra. lo capo genneralle li fece dare da
mangiare et bere et fra le altre coſe q̃ li moſtrete li
moſtro vno ſpequio grande de azalle. quando el vide ſua
figura grandamente ſe ſpauento et ſalto in drieto et
buto tre o quato de li noſti homini ꝓ
terra  da poy li dete suonagli vno ſpequio vno petine
et certi pater noſti et mando lo in tera cõ 
homini armati  vno ſuo compagnio q̃ may
volſe venire a le naue quando el vite venire coſtui cõ
li noſti corſe doue ſtauano li
alti  se miſſeno in fila tuti nudi
 ariuando li noſti a eſſi
comenſorono abalare et cantare leuando vno dito al ciello et
moſtrandoli poluere bianca de radice de erba poſta in
pigniate de tera q̃ la mangiaſſeno ꝓche non
haueuano altra coſa  li noſti li
feceno ſegnio doueſſeno vegnire a le naui et que li
ajuterebenno portare le ſue robe ꝓ il que queſti
homini subito pigliorono solamente li ſui archi et le ſue
femine cargate como asine portorono il tuto.  queſte
nõ ſonno tanti grandi ma molto piu groſſe quando
le []vedeſſimo grandamẽte
ſteſſemo ſtupefati  anno le tete longue
mozo brazo.  ſonno depinte et veſtite como loro
mariti ſinon dinanzi a la natura anno vna peleſſina
q̃ la copre  menavano quato de
qʒſti animali picoli ligadi cõ ligami amodo de caueza.
queſta gente quanto voleno pigliare de queſti animale ligano
vno de queſti picoli a vno ſpino  poi veneno li
grandi ꝓ jocare cõ li picoli et eſſi
ſtando aſconſi li amazano cõ le freze.
 li noſti ne canduſſero a le naui
dizidoto tra homini et femine et foreno repartiti de due parte del
porto açio pigliaſſeno de li dicti animalj.
leaving that place, we finally reached  and one-half
degrees toward the antarctic pole. as it was winter, the ships entered
a safe port to winter. we passed two months in that place without seeing
anyone. one day we suddenly saw a naked man of giant stature on the
shore of the port, dancing, singing, and throwing dust on his head. the
captain-general sent one of our men to the giant so that he might
perform the same, actions as a sign of peace. having done that, the man
led the giant to an islet into the presence of the captain-general.
when the giant was in the captain-general’s and our presence, he
marveled greatly,
and made signs with one finger raised upward, believing that we had
come from the sky. he was so tall that we reached only to his waist,
and he was well proportioned. his face was large and painted red all
over while about his eyes he was painted yellow; and he had two hearts
painted on the middle of his cheeks. his scanty hair was painted
white. he was
dressed in the skins of animals skilfully sewn together. that animal
has a head and ears as large as those of a []mule, a
neck and body like those of a camel, the legs of a deer, and the tail
of a horse, like which it neighs, and that land has very many of
them. his feet were
shod with the same kind of skins which covered his feet in the manner
of shoes. in his
hand he carried a short, heavy bow, with a cord somewhat thicker than
those of the lute,
and made from the intestines of the same animal, and a bundle of rather
short cane arrows feathered like ours, and with points of white and
black flint stones in the manner of turkish arrows, instead of iron.
those points were fashioned by means of another stone. the captain-general had the
giant given something to eat and drink, and among other things which
were shown to him was a large steel mirror. when he saw his face, he
was greatly terrified, and jumped back throwing three or
four of our men to
the ground. after that he was given some bells, a mirror, a comb, and
certain pater nosters. the captain-general sent him ashore with  armed
men. when one of his companions, who would never come to the ships, saw
him coming with our men, he ran to the place where the others were, who
came [down to the shore] all naked one after the other. when our men
reached them, they began to dance and to sing, lifting one finger to
the sky. they showed our men some white powder made from the roots of
an herb, which they kept in earthen pots, and which they ate because
they had nothing else. our men made signs inviting them to the ships,
and that they would help them carry their possessions. thereupon, those
men quickly took only their bows, while their women laden like asses
carried everything. the latter are []not so tall as the men but are
very much fatter. when we saw them we were greatly surprised. their
breasts are one-half braza long, and they are painted and clothed like
their husbands, except that before their privies [natura] they
have a small skin which covers them. they led four of those young
animals, fastened with thongs like a halter. when those people wish to
catch some of those animals, they tie one of these young ones to a
thornbush. thereupon, the large ones come to play with the little ones;
and those people kill them with their arrows from their place of
concealment. our men led eighteen of those people, counting men and
women, to the ships, and they were distributed on the two sides of the
port so that they might catch some of the said animals.
deli a . jorni fu viſto vno gigante depinto et
veſtito de la mediſima ſorta de alguni q̃ faceuano
legnia  haueua in mano vno archo et freze
acoſtandoſe a li noſti pima
ſe tocaua el capo el volto et el corpo et il ſimile faceua
ali noſti et dapoy leuaua li mani al ciello. quando el
capo gñale lo ſepe. lo mando atore cõ
loſquifo et menolo in qella jzola che era nel porto
doue haueuano facta vna caſa ꝓ li fabri et ꝓ meter
li alcune coſe de le naue. coſtui era piu grande et meglio
diſpoſti de li alti et tanto trata bile et
gratioſo.  ſaltando balaua et quando balaua ogni
volta cazaua li piedi soto tera vno palmo. stete molti giorni cõ
nui tanto qel batiſaſſemo chiamandolo johannj
cos chiaro prenuntiaua jeſu pater noſter aue maria et jouani
[]como nui ſe non cõ voce
grociſſima.  poi el capo gñale
li dono vna camiza vna camiſota de panno bragueſſe di
pano vn bonet vn ſpequio vno petine ſonagli et altre
coſe et mandolo da li sui  ge li ando molto alegro et
cõtento el giorno ſeguente coſtui porto vno de quelli
animali grandi al capo gñale ꝓ il que li dete
molte coſe acio ne portaſſe de li alti ma piu
nol vedeſemo penſaſemo li suoi lo haueſſero
amazato ꝓ hauer̃ conuerſato cõ nuy.
six days after the above, a giant painted and clothed in the same manner
was seen by some [of our men] who were cutting wood. he had a bow and
arrows in his hand. when our men approached him, he first touched his
head, face, and
body, and then did the same to our men, afterward lifting his hands
toward the sky. when the captain-general was informed of it, he ordered
him to be brought in the small boat. he was taken to that island in the
port where our men had built a house for the smiths and for the storage of some things
from the ships. that man was even taller and better built than the
others and as tractable and amiable. jumping up and down, he danced,
and when he danced, at every leap, his feet sank a palmo into the
earth. he remained with us for a considerable number of days, so long
that we baptized him, calling him johanni. []he
uttered [the words] “jesu,” “pater
noster,” “ave maria” and
“jovani” [i.e., john as
distinctly as we, but with an exceedingly loud voice. then the
captain-general gave him a shirt, a woolen jerkin [camisota de panno], cloth breeches, a cap, a mirror, a comb,
bells, and other things, and sent him away like his companions. he left
us very joyous and happy. the following day he brought one of those
large animals to the captain-general, in return for which many things
were given to him, so that he might bring some more to us; but we did
not see him again. we thought that his companions had killed him
because he had conversed with us.
paſſati  giorni vedeſſemo
quato de queſti giganti ſenza le ſue arme
ꝓ che le aueuano aſcoſſe in certi ſpini poi
li dui che pigliaſſemo ne li inſegniaro ogni vno era
depinto diferentiatamente  jl capo genneralle
retenne duy li piu joueni et piu diſpoſti cõ grande
aſtutia ꝓ condurli in ſpagnia se alta mente
haueſſe facto facilmente hauerebenno morto alguni de nui. la
stutia q̃ vzo in retenerli fo queſta  ge dete
molti cortelli forfice ſpeqi ſonagli et
chriſtalino hauendo queſti dui li mani pienne de le detti
coſe il capo gñale fece portare dui para de feri
q̃ ſe meteno a li piedi moſtrando de donnarli et elli
ꝓ eſſere fero li piaceuão molto ma non
ſapeuano como portarli et li rincreſceua laſsarli
nõ haueuano oue meter̃ qelle merce; et
beſogniauali tenerli co le mani la pelle q̃ haueuão
intorno li alti duy voleuano ajutarli  ma il
capo nõ volſe vedendo q̃ li
rincreſciua []laſsiare qelli feri li fece
ſegnio li farebe ali piedi et queli portarebenno via
eſſi riſpoſero cõ la teſta de ſi
 subito aduno medeſimo tempo li fece metere a tucti
dui et quando linquiauão cõ lo fero q̃ trauerſa
dubitauano ma ſigurandoli il capo pur ſteteno
fermi a vedendoſe poi de lingano sbufauano como tori quiamando
fortemente setebos q̃ li ajutaſſe agli alti
dui apena poteſimo ligarli li mani li mandaſſemo a terra
cõ noue homine açio guidaſſeno li
noſti doue ſtaua la moglie de vno de
qelli haueuano preſi perche fortemẽte cõ
ſegni la lamentaua açio ella intendeſſemo.
andando vno ſe deſligo li mani et corſe via cõ
tanta velocita q̃ li nr̃i lo perſeno de viſta ando
doue ſtaua la ſua brigata et nõ trouo vno de li
ſoi q̃ era rimaſto cõ le femine ꝓ che era
andato a la caza  ſubito lo ando atrouare et contoli
tuto el fatto  lalto tanto ſe
ſforſaua ꝓ deſligarſe q̃ li
noſti lo ferirono vn pocho ſopa la
teſta et sbufando conduce li nr̃i doue ſtauão le
loro donne. gioan cauagio piloto capo de queſti nõ
volſe tore la donna qella ſera ma dormite yui
ꝓ che se faceua nocte li alti duy veneno et vedendo
coſtui ferito se dubitauão et nõ diſero niente
alhora  ma ne lalba parloro a []le donne ſubito
fugiteno via et coreuão piu li picoli q̃ li grandi lassando
tute le sue robe dui ſe traſſeno da parte tirã do
ali nr̃i frece.  lalto menaua via
qelli ſoi animaleti ꝓ cazare et coſi
cõba tendo vno de qelli paſſo la
coſſa cõ vna freza a vno deli nr̃i il
qalle ſubito mori  quando viſteno
queſto ſubito corſeno via  li nr̃i
haueuano ſquiopeti et baleſtre et may nõ li poterono
ferire  quando queſti combateuão may
ſtauano fermi ma ſaltando de qua et della.  li
noſti ſe pelirono lo morto et braſarono tute
le robe q̃ haueuano laſſata  certamente
queſti giganti coreno piu cauali et sonno
geloſiſſimi de loro mogliere.
a fortnight later we saw four of those giants without
their arms for they had hidden them in certain bushes as the two whom
we captured showed us. each one was painted differently. the
captain-general kept two of them—the youngest and best
proportioned—by means of a very cunning trick, in order to take
them to spagnia.
had he used any other means [than those he employed], they could easily
have killed some of us. the trick that he employed in keeping them was as
follows. he gave them many knives, scissors, mirrors, bells, and glass
beads; and those two having their hands filled with the said articles,
the captain-general had two pairs of iron manacles brought, such as are
fastened on the feet. he made motions that he would give them to the
giants, whereat they were very pleased since those manacles were of
iron, but they did not know how to carry them. they were grieved at
leaving them behind, but they had no place to put those gifts; for they
had to hold the skin wrapped []about them with their
hands. the
other two giants wished to help them, but the captain refused. seeing
that they were loth to leave those manacles behind, the captain made
them a sign that he would put them on their feet, and that they could
carry them away. they nodded assent with the head. immediately, the
captain had the manacles put on both of them at the same time. when our
men were driving home the cross bolt, the giants began to suspect
something, but the captain assuring them, however, they stood still.
when they saw later that they were tricked, they raged like bulls,
calling loudly for setebos to aid them. with difficulty could we bind the
hands of the other two, whom we sent ashore with nine of our men, in
order that the giants might guide them to the place where the wife of
one of the two whom we had captured was; for the latter expressed his great grief at
leaving her by signs so that we understood [that he meant] her. while
they were on their way, one of the giants freed his hands, and took to
his heels with such swiftness that our men lost sight of him. he went
to the place where his associates were, but he did not find [there] one
of his companions, who had remained behind with the women, and who had
gone hunting. he immediately went in search of the latter, and told him
all that had happened. the other giant endeavored so hard to free himself
from his bonds, that our men struck him, wounding him slightly on the
head, whereat he raging led them to where the women were. gioan
cavagio, the pilot and commander of those men, refused to bring back
the woman that
night, but determined to sleep there, []for night was
approaching. the other two giants came, and seeing their companion
wounded, hesitated, but said nothing then. but with the dawn, they
spoke to the
women, [whereupon] they immediately ran away (and the smaller ones ran
faster than the taller), leaving all their possessions behind them. two
of them turned aside to shoot their arrows at our men. the other was
leading away those small animals of theirs in order to
hunt. thus
fighting, one of them pierced the thigh of one of our men with an
arrow, and the latter died immediately. when the giants saw that, they
ran away quickly. our men had muskets and crossbows, but they could
never hit any of the giants, [for] when the latter fought, they never
stood still, but leaped hither and thither. our men buried their dead
companion, and burned all the possessions left behind by the giants. of
a truth those giants run swifter than horses and are exceedingly
jealous of their wives.
quando queſta gente ſe sente malle al
ſtomacho in loco de purgarſe se metẽo nela golia dui
palmi et piu duna firza et gomitano coloro ꝟde miſquiade
cõ ſangue ꝓq̃ mangiano certi cardi 
quando li dole el capo se danno nel fronte vna tagiatura nel
trauerſo et cuſſi nele brace ne le gambe et in
ciaſcuno locho del corpo cauandoſſe molta ſangue.
vno de qelli hauiuão pre ſi q̃ ſtaua
nela nr̃a naue diceua como qel ſangue nõ
voleua ſtare iui et ꝓ qello li daua
paſſione  anno li capeli tagliati cõ la
quierega amodo de frati ma piu longui cõ vno cordonne
[]di bambaso intorno lo capo nel qalle
ficano le freze quando vano ala caza ligano el suo membro dentro del
corpo ꝓ lo grandiſsimo fredo.  quando more vno
de queſti apareno x ho dudice demonj balando molto alegri in torno
del morto tucti depinti  ne vedeno vno ſoura altri
asay piu grande gridando et facendo piu grã feſta cosi como
el demonio li apare de pinto de qella sorte ſe
depingeno  quiamano el demonio magior ſetebos ali
alti cheleulle anchora coſtui ne diſſe
cõ ſegni hauere viſto li demonj con dui corni in
teſta et peli longui q̃ copriuano li piedi getare focho
ꝓ la boca et ꝓ il culo  jl capo
gñale nomino queſti populi patagoni  tutti
ſe veſtino de la pelle de qello animale gia deto
 nõ anno case ſenon trabacque de la pelle del
medeſimo animale et cõ qelli vano mo di qua mo
di la como fanno li cingani viueno de carne cruda et de vna radice
dolce q̃ la quiamão chapae  ogni vno de li dui
q̃ pigliaſſemo mangiaua vna ſporta de biſcoto
et beueua in vna fiata mezo ſechio de hacqua et mangiauão
li ſorgi ſenza ſcorti carli.
when those people feel sick at the stomach, instead of
purging themselves, they thrust an arrow down their throat for two
palmos or more
and vomit [substance of a] green color mixed with blood, for they eat a
certain kind of thistle. when they have a headache, they cut themselves
across the forehead; and they do the same on the arms or on the legs
and in any part of the body, letting a quantity of blood. one of those
whom we had captured, and whom we kept in our ship, said that the blood
refused to stay there [i.e., in the place of the pain], and
consequently causes them suffering. they wear their hair cut with the
tonsure, like friars, but it is []left longer; and they have a cotton cord wrapped
about the head, to which they fasten their arrows when they go hunting.
they bind their privies close to their bodies because of the exceeding
great cold.
when one of those people die, x or twelve demons all painted appear to
them and dance very joyfully about the corpse. they notice that one of
those demons is much taller than the others, and he cries out and
rejoices more.
they paint themselves exactly in the same manner as the demon appears
to them painted. they call the larger demon setebos, and the others cheleulle.
that giant also told us by signs that he had seen the demons with two
horns on their heads, and long hair which hung to the feet belching
forth fire from mouth and buttocks. the captain-general called those
people patagoni. they all clothe themselves in the skins of that
animal above mentioned; and they have no houses except those made from
the skin of the same animal, and they wander hither and thither with
those houses just as the cingani do. they live on raw flesh and on a sweet root
which they call chapae. each of the two whom we captured ate a basketful
of biscuit, and drank one-half pailful of water at a gulp. they also
ate rats without skinning them.
steſſemo in queſto porto el
qal chiamaſſemo porto de sto. julianno
cirqua de cinque mesi doue acadetenno molte coſe. açio
q̃ vr̃a illma sa ne ſapia algune
fu q̃ ſubito entrati nel porto li capitani de le altre
quato naue ordinorono vno tradimẽto ꝓ amazare
il capo genneralle et queſti erano el vehadore
[]de larmata q̃ ſe chiamaua johan de
cartegena el theſorero alouise de mendoſa el contadore
anthonio cocha et gaſpar de cazada et ſquartato el veador de
li homini fo amazato lo theſorʒ apognialade eſendo
deſcoperto lo tradimento  de li alquantj giornj
gaſpar de caſada ꝓ voler fare vno alto
tradimẽto fo ſbandito cõ vno prete in queſta
tera patagonia.  el capo generale nõ
volſe far lo amazare perche lo imperator̃ don carlo lo haueua
facto capo  vna naue chiamata ſancto jacobo
ꝓ andare a deſcourire la coſta se perſe
 tucti li homini si ſaluarono ꝓ miracolo
nõ bagniandoſſe apenna  dui de queſti
venirono ali naui et ne diſcero el tuto ꝓ il que el
capo gñale ge mando alguni homini cõ
ſacqi pienny de biſcoto ꝓ dui meſi ne
fu forſa portarli el viuere ꝓ che ogni giorno trouauano
qalque coſa de la naue el viagio ad andare era longuo
 legue q̃ ſonno cento millia la via
aſpriſſima et pienna de ſpini ſtauano  giorni
in viagio le nocte dormiuano in machioni nõ trouauano hacqua da
beuere ſenon giaçio il que ne era grandisima fatiga.
 jn queſto porto era aſayſſime cape
longue q̃ le chiamano missiglioni  haueuano perle nel
mezo ma picole q̃ non le poteuano mangiare  ancho
ſe trouaua jnſenſo ſtruzi volpe paſſare
et conigli piu picoli aſſay de li noſtri 
qui in cima del piu alto monte drizaſſemo vna croce in
ſigno de queſta terra, q̃ err del re de ſpagnia et
chiamaſſemo queſto monte monte de xo.
in that port which we called the port of santo
julianno, we remained about five months. many things happened there. in order that
your most illustrious lordship may know some of them, it happened that
as soon as we had entered the port, the captains of the other four
ships plotted treason in order that they might kill the
captain-general. those conspirators consisted of the overseer of the
[]fleet, one johan de cartagena, the treasurer,
alouise de mendosa, the accountant, anthonio cocha, and gaspar de
cazada. the overseer of the men having been quartered, the treasurer
was killed by dagger blows, for the treason was discovered. some days
after that, gaspar de casada, was banished with a priest in that land
of patagonia. the captain-general did not wish to have him killed,
because the emperor, don carlo, had appointed him captain. a ship called “sancto
jacobo” was wrecked in an expedition made to explore the coast.
all the men were saved as by a miracle, not even getting wet. two of
them came to the ships after suffering great hardships, and reported
the whole occurrence to us. consequently, the captain-general sent some
men with bags full of biscuits [sufficient to last] for two months. it
was necessary for us to carry them the food, for daily pieces of the
ship [that was wrecked] were found. the way thither was long, [being]
 leguas, or
one hundred millas, and the path was very rough and full of thorns. the
men were  days on the road, sleeping at night in the bushes. they
found no drinking water, but only ice, which caused them the greatest
hardship. there
were very many long shellfish which are called
missiglioni in that port [of santo julianno]. they have
pearls, although small ones in the middle, but could not be eaten.
incense, ostriches, foxes, sparrows, and rabbits much smaller than
ours were also found. we erected a cross on the top of the highest
summit there, as a sign in that land that it belonged to the king of
spagnia; and we called that summit monte de christo [i.e., mount
of christ]. []
partendone de qui in  grado mancho vno terſo al
antartico trouaſemo vno fiome de hacqua dolce nel qalle
le naui quasi ꝓſenno ꝓ li venti teri bili ma dio et
li corpi ſancti le ajutarono  jn queſto fiume
tardaſſemo circa duy meſi ꝓ fornirne de hacqua
legnia et peſcie longho vno braſo et piu cõ
ſquame.  era molto bonno ma pocho et inanſi
ſe partiſſemo de qui el capo genneralle et
tuti nuy se confeſſasemo et comunicaſsemo como veri
chriſtianni.
leaving that place, we found, in  degrees less
one-third
degree, toward the antarctic pole, a river of fresh water. there the
ships almost perished because of the furious winds; but god and the
holy bodies
aided them. we stayed about two months in that river in order to supply
the ships with water, wood, and fish, [the latter being] one braccio in
length and more, and covered with scales. they were very good although
small. before
leaving that river, the captain-general and all of us confessed and
received communion as true christians.
poi andando a cinquanta dui gradi al medeſimo
polo trouaſſemo nel giorno delle vndici millia vergine vno
ſtreto el capo del qalle chiamão capo dele
vndici millia vergine ꝓ grandiſsimo miracolo queſto
ſtreto e longo cento et diece legue q̃ ſonno  millia
et largo piu et mancho de meza legua q̃ va a referire in vno
alto mare chiamato mar pacificho circundato da
mõtagnie altiſſime caricate de neue nõ li
poteuamo tro uare fondo ſinon con lo proiſe in tera in  et
 braza et ſe non era el capitanio gennerale nõ trouauamo
queſto ſtrecto perch̃ tuti penſauamo et diceuamo
como era ſerato tuto intorno.  ma il capitano
gñale q̃ ſapeua de douer fare la ſua
nauigatiõe ꝓ vno ſtreto molto aſcoſo como
vite nela theſoraria del re de portugal in vna carta fata ꝓ
qella exelentiſſimo huomo martin de boemia mando
due naui sto. anthonio et la conceptiõe q̃
coſſi le quiamauano auedere q̃ era nel capo de la baia
noi cõ le altre due naue la capitania se chiamaua trinitade
laltra la victoria ſteſſemo ad []aſpectarle dento ne la baya
 la nocte ne souravenne vna grande fortuna q̃ duro
fino al alto mezo jorno ꝓ il que ne fu forza leuare
lanchore et laſsiare andare de qua et dela per la baia
 a le altre due naui li era trauerſia et nõ
poteuão caualcare vno capo q̃ faceua la baya quaſi in
fine ꝓ voler venir̃ a noi ſi que li era forſa
adare in ſeco pur acoſtandoſe al fine de la baya
penſando de eſſere perſi viteno vna boca picola
q̃ no [paſaua: crossed out in original ms.] pariua
boca ma vno cantone et como abandonadi ſe cazaronno dentro ſi
que perforza diſco perſeno el ſtreto et vedendo q̃
nõ era cantone ma vno ſtreto de tera andarono piu inanzi et
trouoro no vna baya. poi andando piu oltra trouorono vno
alto ſtretto et vnalta baya piu grande
q̃ le due pime  molto alegri subito
voltor̃o jndrieto ꝓ dirlo al capitanio gñale noi
penſauamo foſſeno perſe prima ꝓ la fortuna
grande. lalta perche eranno paſſati dui giorni et
nõ aparauão et ancho per certi fumi q̃ faceuano duy
deli ſui mandati in tera ꝓ auiſarne et coſi
ſtando ſuſpeſi vedemo venire due naui cõ le
velle pienne et cõ le bã dere ſpiegate verſo de
noi.  eſſendo coſi vicine subito
ſcaricorono molte bom barde et gridi  poy tuti
inſieme rengratiando ydio et la vergine maria anda ſemo
acercare piu inanzi. []
then going to fifty-two degrees toward the same
pole, we found
a strait on the day of the [feast of the] eleven thousand virgins [i.e. october ],
whose head is called capo de le undici millia vergine [i.e.,
cape of the eleven thousand virgins] because of that very great
miracle. that strait is one hundred and ten leguas or  millas long,
and it is one-half legua broad, more or less. it leads to another sea called the
pacific sea, and is surrounded by very lofty mountains laden with snow.
there it was impossible to find bottom [for anchoring], but [it was
necessary to fasten] the moorings on land  or  brazas away. had it not been for
the captain-general, we would not have found that strait, for we all
thought and said that it was closed on all sides. but the
captain-general who knew where to sail to find a well-hidden strait,
which he saw depicted on a map in the treasury of the king of portugal,
which was made by that excellent man, martin de boemia, sent two ships,
the “santo anthonio” and the “conceptione” (for
thus they were called), to discover what was inside the cape de la
[]baia [i.e., of the bay]. we, with the other two
ships, [namely], the flagship, called “trinitade,” and the
other the “victoria,” stayed inside the bay to await
them. a great
storm struck us that night, which lasted until the middle of next day,
which necessitated our lifting anchor, and letting ourselves drift
hither and thither about the bay. the other two ships suffered a
headwind and could not double a cape formed by the bay almost at its end, as they
were trying to return to join us; so that they thought that they would
have to run aground. but on approaching the end of the bay, and
thinking that they were lost, they saw a small opening which did not
[exceed: crossed out in original ms.] appear to be an opening,
but a sharp turn [cantone]. like desperate men they hauled into it, and thus
they discovered the strait by chance. seeing that it was not a sharp
turn, but a strait with land, they proceeded farther, and found a
bay. and then
farther on they found another strait and another bay larger than the
first two. very
joyful they immediately turned back to inform the captain-general. we
thought that they had been wrecked, first, by reason of the violent
storm, and second, because two days had passed and they had not
appeared, and also because of certain [signals with] smoke made by two
of their men who had been sent ashore to advise us. and so, while in suspense, we saw
the two ships with sails full and banners flying to the wind, coming
toward us. when they neared us in this manner, they suddenly discharged
a number of mortars, and burst into cheers. then all together thanking god and the
virgin mary, we went to seek [the strait] farther on. []
essendo entrati in queſto ſtreto
trouaſſemo due bocque vna al siroco laltra al garbino il
capitanio gñale mando la naue ſancto anthonio insieme
cõ la concitione ꝓ vedere ſe qella boca
q̃ era ꝟſo ſirocho haueua exito nel mare pacifico
 la naue ſancto anthonio nol volſe aſpectare
la conceptiõe ꝓ q̃ voleua fugire ꝓ retornare
in spagnia como fece il piloto de queſta naue se chiamaua
ſtefan gomes loqalle hodiaua molto lo capo
gennerale ꝓq̃ inanzi se faceſſe queſta
armata coſtui era andato da lo imperator̃ ꝓ farſe
dare algune carauele ꝓ diſcourire terra ma ꝓ la
venuta del capo gennerale ſua mageſta nõ le
li dete ꝓ queſto ſe acordo cõ certi
ſpagniolli et nella nocte ſeguente pigliarono lo
capo de la ſua naue el qalle era germano del
capo gñale et haueua nome aluaro de meſchita
 lo ferirono et lo meſſeno in feri et coſi
lo conduſſero in spagnia in queſto naue. era
lalto gigante q̃ haueuamo prezo ma quanto entro nel
caldo morse. la conceptiõe ꝓ nõ potere
ſeguire queſta la aſpectaua andando fugi ꝓ lo
medeſimo [porto: crossed out in original diqua
et dela sto. anto a la nocte torno indrieto et
ſe ms.] ſtrecto  nuy eramo andati a
deſcourire lalta bocha verſo el garbin trouando
pur ogni hora el medeſimo [porto: crossed out in
original ms.] ſtreto ariuaſſemo a vno fiume
qel chiamaſſemo el fiume delle ſardine
ꝓche apreſſo de queſto ne eranno molte et
coſi quiuy tardaſſemo quatro jorni ꝓ
aſpectare le due naue  in queſti giorni
mãdaſemo []vno batello ben fornito ꝓ
deſcoprire el capo de lalto mare venne in termi ne de
tre jorni et diſſero como haueuano [haueuano: doublet in original ms.] veduto el capo et el mare amplo el
capitanio gennerale lagrimo ꝓ allegreza et nomino qel
capo capo dezeado perche laueuano ja grã tempo diſiderato.
tornaſemo indrieto ꝓ sercar le due naue et nõ
trouaſſemo ſinõ la conceptiõe et
domandandoli doue era lalta. riſpoſe johan
ſeranno q̃ era capo et piloto de queſta et
ancho de qella q̃ ſe perſe q̃ nõ
ſapeua et q̃ may nõ laueua veduta dapoy que ella entro
ne la boca la cercaſſemo ꝓ tuto lo ſtreto fin in
qella boca doue ella fugite.  il capo
gennerale mando indrieto la naue victoria fina al principio del
ſtreto auedere ſe ella era iui et non trouandola
meteſſe vna bandera in cima de alguno mõticello
cõ vna letera in vna pigniatella ficada in tera
apreſſo la bandera acio vedendola trouaſſeno la
lr̃a et ſapaſſeno lo viagio q̃ faceuamo
ꝓ che cuſſi era dato le ordine fra noi quando ſe
ſmariuamo le naue vna de lalta. ſe miſſe
due bandere cõ le lr̃e luna avno mõticello nela
prima baya lalta in vna jzoleta nella terza baya doue eranno
molti loui marini et vcceli grandi. jl capo gñale
leſpeto cõ lalta naue apreſſo el fiume
jsleo et fece metere vna croce in vna jzoleta zirca de queſto
fiume el qalle era fra alte montagnie caricate de neue et
deſcendenel mare apreſſo lo fiume de le ſardine. se
nõ trouauamo queſto ſtreto el capo.
gñale haueua deliberato andare fino a ſetanta cinqʒ
gradi al polo artãticho [sic] doue in tal altura al
[]tempo de la eſtate nõ ge e nocte et
ſe glie ne he poche et coſſi nel inuerno jorno.
 açio q̃ vr̃a illma.
sa il creda quando eramo in queſto ſtrecto le
nocte eranno ſolamẽte de tre hore et era nel meſe
doctobr̃ la terra de queſto ſtrecto amã mancha
era voltata al ſiroco et era baſſa chiamaſſemo
aqueſto ſtreto el ſtreto patagoni cho ĩ lo
qal ſe troua ogni meza lega seguriſſimi porti
hacque exelentiſſime legnia ſinon di cedro peſchie
ſardine miſſiglioni et appio erba dolce ma gene anche de
amare naſce atorno le fontane del qalle
mangiaſſimo aſſay jorni ꝓ nõ
hauer̃ alto credo nõ ſia al mondo el piu
bello et meglior̃ ſtreto como equeſto. jn queſto
mar occeanno se vede vna molto delecteuol caza de peſci ſonno
tre ſorte de peſſi longui vno brazo et piu q̃
ſe chiamano doradi, albacore et bonniti, li qalli
ſequitano peſci q̃ volanno chiamattj colondrini longui
vno palmo et piu et ſonno obtini al mangiare. quando
qelle tre ſorte trouão alguni de queſti
volanti subito li volanti ſaltanno fora de lacqua et volano fin
q̃ anno le alle bagniate piu de vno trar de baleſtra in tanto
q̃ queſti volano li alti li corenno indrieto
ſocta hacqua a la ſua ombra nõ ſonno
cuſſi preſto caſcati ne lacqua q̃ queſti
ſubito li piglianno et mangiano coſa in vero
beliſſima de vedere. []
after entering that strait, we found two openings, one
to the southeast, and the other to the southwest. the captain-general sent the ship
“sancto anthonio” together with the
“concitione” to ascertain whether that opening which was
toward the southeast had an exit into the pacific sea. the ship
“sancto anthonio” would not await the
“conceptione,” because it intended to flee and return to
spagnia—which it did. the pilot of that ship was one stefan
gomes, and he
hated the captain-general exceedingly, because before that fleet was
fitted out, the emperor had ordered that he be given some caravels with
which to discover lands, but his majesty did not give them to him
because of the coming of the captain-general. on that account he
conspired with certain spaniards, and next night they captured the
captain of their ship, a cousin of the captain-general, one alvaro de meschita,
whom they wounded and put in irons, and in this condition took to
spagnia. the other giant whom we had captured was in that ship, but he
died when the heat came on. the “conceptione,” as it could
not follow that ship, waited for it, sailing about hither and thither.
the “sancto anthonio” turned back at night and fled along
the same [port: crossed out in original ms.]
strait. we had
gone to explore the other opening toward the southwest. finding,
however, the same [port: crossed out in original ms.] strait
continuously, we came upon a river which we called the river of sardine
[i.e., sardines], because there were many sardines near
it. so we
stayed there for four days in order to await the two ships. during that
period we sent a well-equipped boat to explore the []cape of
the other sea. the men returned within three days, and reported that
they had seen the cape and the open sea. the captain-general wept for
joy, and called that cape, cape dezeado [i.e.,
desire], for we
had been desiring it for a long time. we turned back to look for the
two ships, but
we found only the “conceptione.” upon asking them where the
other one was, johan seranno, who was captain and pilot of the former ship (and
also of that ship that had been wrecked) replied that he did not know,
and that he had never seen it after it had entered the opening. we
sought it in all parts of the strait, as far as that opening whence it
had fled, and the captain-general sent the ship “victoria”
back to the entrance of the strait to ascertain whether the ship was
there. orders were given them, if they did not find it, to plant a
banner on the summit of some small hill with a letter in an earthen pot
buried in the earth near the banner, so that if the banner were seen
the letter might be found, and the ship might learn the course that we
were sailing. for this was the arrangement made between us in case that
we went astray one from the other. two banners were planted with their
letters—one on a little eminence in the first bay, and the other
in an islet in the third bay where there were many sea-wolves and large birds.
the captain-general waited for the ship with his other ship near he
river of isleo,
and he had a cross set up in an islet near that river, which flowed
between high mountains covered with snow and emptied into the sea near
the river of sardine. had we not discovered that strait, the
captain-general had determined to go as far as seventy-five
[]degrees toward the antarctic pole. there in that
latitude, during the summer season, there is no night, or if there is
any night it is but short, and so in the winter with the day. in order
that your most illustrious lordship may believe it, when we were in
that strait, the nights were only three hours long, and it was then the
month of october. the land on the left-hand side of that strait
turned toward the southeast and was low. we called that strait the strait of
patagonia. one finds the safest of ports every half legua in
it, water, the
finest of wood (but not of cedar), fish, sardines, and missiglioni,
while smallage,
a sweet herb (although there is also some that is bitter) grows around
the springs. we ate of it for many days as we had nothing else. i
believe that there is not a more beautiful or better strait in the
world than that one. in that ocean sea one sees a very amusing fish
hunt. the fish [that hunt] are of three sorts, and are one braza and
more in length, and are called dorado, albicore, and
bonito. those
fish follow the flying fish called colondrini, which are one palmo and
more in length
and very good to eat. when the above three kinds [of fish] find any of
those flying fish, the latter immediately leap from the water and fly
as long as their wings are wet—more than a crossbow’s
flight. while they are flying, the others run along back of them under
the water following the shadow of the flying fish. the latter have no
sooner fallen into the water than the others immediately seize and eat
them. it is in fine a very amusing thing to watch. []
vocabuli de li giganti pataghoni
al capo
her.
al ochio.
other.
al nazo
or
alle cillie
occhechel
ale palpebre
sechechiel
ali bussi del nazo
oresche
ala boca
xiam
ali labri
schiahame
ali denti
phor.
ala linga
schial
al mento
sechen
a li pelli
archiz
al volto
cogechel
ala golo
ohumez
ala copa
schialeschin
ale ſpalle
pelles.
al gomedo
cotel
ala man
chene
ala palma de laman
caimeghin
al dito
cori
ale orechie
sane
soto el broço
salischin
ala mamela
othen
al peto
ochij
al corpo
gechel
al menbro
ſachet
ali teſticuli
sacancas
ala natura de le donne
jsse
al vzar cõ eſſe
jo hoi
ale coſſe
chiane
al genochio
tepin []
al chulo
schiaguen
ale culate
hoij
al brazo
maz
al polso
holion
a le gambe
coss
al piede
thee
al calcagno
tere
ala chauequie del pie
perchi
ala ſola del pie
caotſcheni
ale onguie
colim
al core
thol
al gratare
gechare
al homo ſguerco
calischen
al giuane
calemi
al hacqua
holi
al fuoco
ghialeme
al fumo
giaiche
al no
ehen
al si
rey
al oro
pelpeli
ale petre lazure
secheg
al solle
calexcheni
alle ſtelle
ſettere.
al mare
aro
al vento
oni
ala fortuna
ohone
al peſse
hoi
al mangiare
mechiere
ala ſcutella
elo
ala pigniata
aschanie
al demandare
ghelhe
vien qui
hai si
al gardar
chonne []
al andar
rey
al combater
oamaghce
ale freze
sethe
al cane
holl
al lupo
ani
al andare longi
schien
ala guida
anti
ala neue
theu
al courire
hiani
al seruzo ucelo
hoihoi
a li sui oui
jani
ala poluere derba che mangião
capac.
al odorare
os
al papagalo
cheche
ala gabiota ucelo
cleo
al misiglioni
siameni.
al panno roſso
terechae.
al bonet
aichel
al colore nego.
ainel
al roſso
taiche
al gialo
peperi
al coçinare
yrocoles
ala cintura
catechin
al ocha
cache
al diauolo grande
setebos
ali picoli
cheleule.
words of the patagonian giants
for head
her
for eye
other
for nose
or
for eyebrows
occhechel
for eyelids
sechechiel
for nostrils
oresche
for mouth
xiam
for lips
schiahame
for teeth
phor
for tongue
schial
for chin
sechen
for hair
archiz
for face
cogechel
for throat
ohumez
for occiput
schialeschin
for shoulders
pelles
for elbow
cotel
for hand
chene
for palm of the hand
caimeghin
for finger
cori
for ears
sane
armpit
salischin
for teat
othen
for bosom
ochij
for body
gechel
for penis
sachet
for testicles
sacancas
for vagina
isse
for communication with women
jo hoi
for thighs
chiane
for knee
tepin []
for rump
schiaguen
for buttocks
hoij
for arm
maz
for pulse
holion
for legs
coss
for foot
thee
for heel
tere
for ankle
perchi
for sole of the foot
caotscheni
for fingernails
colim
for heart
thol
for to scratch
gechare
for cross-eyed man
calischen
for young man
calemi
for water
holi
for fire
ghialeme
for smoke
giaiche
for no
ehen
for yes
rey
for gold
pelpeli
for lapis lazuli
secheg
for sun
calexcheni
for stars
settere
for sea
aro
for wind
oni
for storm
ohone
for fish
hoi
for to eat
mechiere
for bowl
elo
for pot
aschanie
for to ask
ghelhe
come here
hai si
for to look
chonne []
for to walk
rey
for to fight
oamaghce
for arrows
sethe
for dog
holl
for wolf
ani
for to go a long distance
schien
for guide
anti
for snow
theu
for to cover
hiani
for ostrich, a bird
hoihoi
for its eggs
jani
for the powder of the herb which they eat
capac
for to smell
os
for parrot
cheche
for birdcage
cleo
for misiglioni
siameni
for red cloth
terechae
for cap
aichel
for black
ainel
for red
taiche
for yellow
peperi
for to cook
yrocoles
for belt
catechin
for goose
cache
for their big devil
setebos
for their small devils
cheleule
tucti queſti vocabuli ſe prenuntiano in
gorgha ꝓche cuſſi li prenũtiauão loro.
all the above words are pronounced in the throat, for
such is their method of pronunciation.
me diſſe queſti vocabuli quel gigante
q̃ haueuamo nella naue per q̃ domandandome capac çioe
[]pane che chusi chiamano quela radice q̃
vzanno loro ꝓ panne et oli çioe hacqua 
quando el me vite ſcriuer queſti nomi domandandoli poi de li
alti cõ la penna in mano me jntendeua 
vna volta feci la croce et la basai moſtrandoglila 
subito grido ſetebos et fecemi ſegno se piu faceſſe
la croce me intrarebe nel corpo et farebe crepare  quando
queſto gigante ſtaua male domando la croce abraſsandola
et baſandola molto se volse far xp̃iano inanzi la ſua
morte  el chiamaſemo paulo queſta gente quando
voleno far fuoco fregano vno legnio pontino cõ vno
alto in fine q̃ fanno lo fuocho in vna certa medola
darbore q̃ fra queſti dui legni.
that giant whom we had in our ship told me those
words; for when he, upon asking me for capac, []that is
to say, bread, as they call that root which they use as bread, and
oli, that is to say, water, saw me write those words quickly,
and afterward when i, with pen in hand, asked him for other words, he
understood me. once i made the sign of the cross, and, showing it to
him, kissed it. he immediately cried out “setebos,” and
made me a sign that if i made the sign of the cross again, setebos
would enter into my body and cause it to burst. when that giant was
sick, he asked for the cross, and embracing it and kissing it many
times, desired to become a christian before his death. we called him
paulo. when those people wish to make a fire, they rub a sharpened
piece of wood against another piece until the fire catches in the pith
of a certain tree, which is placed between those two
sticks.
mercore a  de nouembre  ne diſbucaſemo
da queſto ſtrecto ingolfandone nel mare pacifico
ſteſſemo tre mesi et vinti jorni senſa pigliare
refrigerio de coſa alguna mangiauamo biſcoto non piu
biſcoto ma poluere de qello cõ vermi apugnate
ꝓ che eſſi haueuano mãgiato il buono
 puzaua grã damẽte de orina de sorzi
 et beueuamo hacqua jalla gia putrifata per molti giorni et
mangiauamo certe pelle de boue q̃ erano ſopa
lantena mangiore açio q̃ lantena nõ
rompeſſe la ſarzia duriſſime ꝓ il solle
piogia et vento le laſciauamo ꝓ quato ho cinque
giorni nel mare et poi le meteua vno pocho ſopa le
braze et cosi le mangiauamo et ancora aſſay volte
ſegature de aſe  li sorgi ſe vendeuano mezo
ducato lo vno et ſe pur ne haueſſemo potuto hauer̃
ma ſoura tute le alti ſquiagu re queſta era
la []pegiore.  creſsiuano le gengiue
ad alguni ſopa li denti cosi de soto como de ſoura
q̃ ꝓ modo alguno nõ poteuamo mãgiare et
coſſi moriuano  ꝓ queſta infirmita
morirono . homini et il gigãte cõ vno jndio de la terra
del verzin  vinti cinque ho trenta homini ſe
infirmorono q̃ neli brazi neli gambe o in alto loco
ſicque poqi reſta rono ſani 
ꝓ la gratia de dio yo nõ hebi algunna infirmitade.
 jn queſti tre meſi et vinti giorni andaſemo
circa de quatro millia legue in vn golfo ꝓ queſto mar
pacifico in vero he benne pacifico ꝓ q̃ in qʒſto
tempo nõ haueſsemo fortuna senſa vedere tera alcuna
sinõ due yſolete deſhabitate nelle qal
nõ trouaſſemo alto ſenon vcelli et
arbori la chiamaſſemo yſolle infortunate 
sono longi luna da lalta ducento legue nõ trouauamo
fondo apreſſo de loro ſe nõ vedeuamo molti ti
buroni la pima jzolla ſta in quindiſi gradi de
latitudine al hauſtralle, et lalta in noue 
ogni jorno faceuamo cinquanta ſesanta et ſetanta legue a la
catena ho apopa et ſe ydio et ſala ſua madre bennedeta
nõ ne daua cosi bõ tempo moriuamo tucti de fame in
queſto mare grandiſſimo  credo
certamẽte nõ ſi fara may piu tal viagio.
wednesday, november , , we debouched from that
strait, engulfing ourselves in the pacific sea. we were three months and twenty days
without getting any kind of fresh food. we ate biscuit, which was no
longer biscuit, but powder of biscuits swarming with worms, for they
had eaten the good. it stank strongly of the urine of
rats. we drank
yellow water that had been putrid for many days. we also ate some ox
hides that covered the top of the mainyard to prevent the yard from
chafing the shrouds, and which had become exceedingly hard because of
the sun, rain, and wind. we left them in the sea for four or five days, and
then placed them for a few moments on top of the embers, and so ate
them; and often we ate sawdust from boards. rats were sold for one-half
ducado apiece, and even then we could not get them. but above all the other
[]misfortunes the following was the worst. the gums
of both the lower and upper teeth of some of our men swelled, so that
they could not eat under any circumstances and therefore
died. nineteen
men died from that sickness, and the giant together with an indian from
the country of verzin. twenty-five or thirty men fell sick [during that
time], in the arms, legs, or in another place, so that but few remained
well. however, i, by the grace of god, suffered no sickness. we sailed
about four thousand leguas during those three months and twenty days
through an open stretch in that pacific sea. in truth it is very
pacific, for
during that time we did not suffer any storm. we saw no land except two
desert islets, where we found nothing but birds and trees, for which we
called them the ysolle infortunate [i.e., the unfortunate
isles]. they are two hundred leguas apart. we found no anchorage, [but]
near them saw many sharks. the first islet lies in fifteen degrees of south
latitude, and the other in nine. daily we made runs of fifty, sixty, or
seventy leguas at the catena or at the stern. had not god and his blessed mother
given us so good weather we would all have died of hunger in that
exceeding vast sea. of a verity i believe no such voyage will ever be
made [again].
quando fuſſimi vſciti da queſto
ſtrecto se haueſſemo nauigato sempre al ponẽte
hauereſſemo dato vna volta al mondo ſenza trouare terra
niuna se nõ el capo deli xjos vergine che he capo de
queſto ſtrecto al mare occeanno leuante ponẽte
cõ lo capo deſeado del mare pacifico liqalli dui
capi ſtanno in cinquãta duy gradi di latitudine
puntualmente al polo antarticho. []
when we left that strait, if we had sailed
continuously westward we would have circumnavigated the world without
finding other land than the cape of the xi thousand
virgins. the
latter is a cape of that strait at the ocean sea, straight east and
west with cape deseado of the pacific sea. both of those capes lie in a
latitude of exactly fifty-two degrees toward the antarctic pole.
jl polo antartico no ne cosi ſtellato como lo
artico ſe vede molto ſtelle picolle congregate inſieme
q̃ fanno in guiza de due nebulle poco ſeparate luna de
lalta et vno poco ofuſche in mezo de leqalle
ſtanno due ſtelle molto grandi ne molto relucenti et poco
ſe moueno.  queſte due ſtelle ſonno il
polo antarticho  la calamita noſtra zauariando vno
sempre tiraua al suo polo artico niente de meno non haueua tanta forza
como de la banda sua. et pero quando eramo in queſto golfo il
capo generalle domando a tucti li piloti andando ſempre
a la vela ꝓ qal camino nauigando pontasemo nele carte
riſpoſero tucti ꝓ la sua via puntalmẽte datta li
riſpoſi q̃ pontauano falso cosi como era et che
conueniua agiutare la guchia del nauegare ꝓ che nõ
receueua tanta forza da la parte ſua. quando eramo in mezo di
queſto golpho vedessemo vna croce de cinque ſtelle
lucidiſſime drito al ponente, et suono
iuſtiſſime luna cõ lalta.
the antarctic pole is not so starry as the arctic.
many small stars clustered together are seen, which have the appearance
of two clouds of mist. there is but little distance between them, and
they are somewhat dim. in the midst of them are two large and not very
luminous stars, which move only slightly. those two stars are the
antarctic pole. our loadstone, although it moved hither and thither,
always pointed toward its own arctic pole, although it did not have so
much strength as on its own side. and on that account when we were in
that open expanse, the captain-general, asking all the pilots whether
they were always sailing forward in the course which we had laid down
on the maps, all replied: “by your course exactly as laid
down.” he answered them that they were pointing
wrongly—which was a fact—and that it would be fitting to
adjust the needle of navigation, for it was not receiving so much force
from its side. when we were in the midst of that open expanse, we saw a
cross with five extremely bright stars straight toward the west, those
stars being exactly placed with regard to one another.
jn queſti giorni mauigaſſemo fra il
ponente et il maeſtralle et a la quarta del maeſtralle in
verſo ponente et al maeſtralle fin p̃
ajungeſſemo a la linea equinoti alle longi da la linea de la
ripartitiõe cento et vinti dui gradi  la linea de la
ripartitiõe e trenta gradi longi dal meridionale  el
meridionale e tre gradi al leuante longi de capo verde  jn
queſto camino paſaſſemo poco longi da due jzolle
richisie vna in vinti gradi de latitudine al polo antarticho q̃ se
chiama cipangu lalta in quindici []gradi
chiamata sũbdit pradit paſſata la linea equinotialle
nauigaſſemo tra ponente et maiſtralle et a la carta del
ponente verſo el maeſtralle poi duzente legue al ponente
mudando el viago. a la quarta in verſo garbin fin in
tredici gradi al polo articho ꝓ apropinquarſe piu a la tera
del capo de gaticara il qal capo cõ perdon de li
coſmo grafi ꝓ q̃ nõ lo viſteno nõ
ſi troua doue loro il penſauão ma al ſetentrione
in dodeci gradj poco piu o mancho.
during those days we sailed west northwest, northwest by west, and
northwest, until we reached the equinoctial line at the distance of one
hundred and twenty-two degrees from the line of demarcation. the line
of demarcation is thirty degrees from the meridian, and the meridian is
three degrees eastward from capo verde. we passed while on that course, a short
distance from two exceedingly rich islands, one in twenty degrees of
the latitude of the antarctic pole, by name cipangu, and the other in
[]fifteen degrees, by name sumbdit
pradit. after
we had passed the equinoctial line we sailed west northwest, and west
by north, and then for two hundred leguas toward the west, changing our
course to west by south until we reached thirteen degrees toward the
arctic pole in order that we might approach nearer to the land of cape
gaticara. that cape (with the pardon of cosmographers, for they have
not seen it), is not found where it is imagined to be, but to the north
in twelve degrees or thereabouts.
circa de setanta legue a la detta via in dodeci gradi
di latitudine et  de longitudine mercore a  de marſo
diſcopreſſemo vna yſola al maiſtralle picola
et due alte al garbino  vna era piu alta et piu
granda de laltre due  il capo generale voleua
firmarſe nella grande ꝓ pigliare qalque
refrigerio ma nõ puote perche la gente de queſta jzolla
entrauano nele naui et robauano qi vna coſa
qi lalta talmente q̃ non poteuamo
gardarſi. voleuano calare le vele acio andaſemo in tera
 ne roborono lo ſquifo q̃ eſtaua ligato a la
popa de la naue capa cõ grandissa
preſteza ꝓ il que corozato el capo generalle
ando in tera con quaranta huomini armati et bruzarono da quaranta o
cinquanta caze cõ­­ molti barquiti et amazorono
ſette huomini et rehebe lo ſquifo subito ne parti ſemo
ſequendo lo medeſimo camino.  jnanzi q̃
diſmontaſemo in tera alguni noſti infermi ne
pregorono ſe amazauamo huomo o donna li portaſemo ly
interiori ꝓ che subito ſarebenno ſani. []
about seventy leguas on the above course, and lying in twelve
degrees of latitude and  in longitude, we discovered on wednesday,
march , a small island to the northwest, and two others toward the
southwest, one of which was higher and larger than the other two. the
captain-general wished to stop at the large island and get some fresh
food, but he was unable to do so because the inhabitants of that island
entered the ships and stole whatever they could lay their hands on, so
that we could not protect ourselves. the men were about to strike the
sails so that we could go ashore, but the natives very deftly stole
from us the small boat that was fastened to the poop of the flagship.
thereupon, the captain-general in wrath went ashore with forty armed
men, who burned some forty or fifty houses together with many boats,
and killed seven men. he recovered the small boat, and we departed
immediately pursuing the same course. before we landed, some of our
sick men begged us if we should kill any man or woman to bring the
entrails to them, as they would recover immediately. []
quando feriuamo alguni de queſti cõ li
veretuni q̃ li paſſauano li fianqi da luna
banda alaltra tirauano il veretone mo diqua mo dila gardandolo poi lo
tirauano fuora marauigliandoſe molto et cuſſi moriuano
 et alti q̃ erano feriti nel peto faceuano
el simille ne moſſeno agrã compaſione
coſtoro vedendõe partire ne ſeguitorono cõ piu
de cento barchiti piu de vna legua  se acoſtauano ale
naui moſſtrandone peſce cõ ſimulatiõe
de darnello ma traheuano ſaxi et poi fugiuano andando le naue
cõ velle piene paſa vano fra loro et li batelli con
qelli ſui barcheti molto deſtriſſimi
vedeſemo algune femine in li barqueti gridare et
ſcapigliarſe credo ꝓ amore de li suoi morti.
when we wounded any of those people with our
crossbow-shafts, which passed completely through their loins from one
side to the other, they, looking at it, pulled on the shaft now on this
and now on that side, and then drew it out, with great astonishment, and
so died. others who were wounded in the breast did the same, which
moved us to great compassion. those people seeing us departing followed
us with more than one hundred boats for more than one legua. they approached the
ships showing us fish, feigning that they would give them to us; but
then threw stones at us and fled. and although the ships were under
full sail, they passed between them and the small boats [fastened
astern], very adroitly in those small boats of theirs. we saw some
women in their boats who were crying out and tearing their hair, for
love, i believe, of those whom we had killed.
ognuno de queſti vive ſecondo la sua volonta
non anno ſignori  vano nudi et alguni barbati con li
capeli negri fino a lo cinta ingropati  portano capeleti de
palma como li albanezi  ſonno grandi como nui et ben
diſpoſti  nõ adorão niente
ſonno aliuaſtri ma naſcono bianqi
 anno li denti roſſi et negri ꝓ che la
reputano beliſſima coſa  le femine vano nude
ſenon q̃ dinanzi a la ſua natura portano vna
ſcorſa ſtreta ſotille come la carta q̃
naſce fra larbore et la ſcorza de la palma 
ſonno belle delicate et bianque piu que li huomini cõ li
capilli ſparſi []et longui negriſſimi fino
in tera  queſte nõ lauorano ma ſtanno in
caſa teſſendo ſtore casse de palma et altre
coſe neceſſarie acaſa ſua 
mangiano cochi batate vcceli figui longui vno palmo canne dolci et
peſci volatori cõ altre coſe  ſe
ongieno el corpo et li capili cõ oleo de cocho et de giongioli
 le ſue caſe tute ſonno facte di legnio
coperte de taule cõ foglie defigaro de ſopa
longue due braza con ſolari et cõ feneſtre li camare
et li lecti tucti forniti di ſtore beliſſime de palma
 dormeno ſoura paglia di palma molto mole et menuta
 nõ anno arme senon certe aſte cõ vno
oſſo pontino de peſce ne la cima queſta gente e
pouera ma ingenioſa et molto ladra ꝓ queſto
chiamaſſemo queſte tre jſole le yſole de li
ladroni  el ſuo ſpaſo e andare cõ le
donne ꝓ mare cõ qelle ſue barquete
 sono como le fucelere ma piu ſtrecti alguni negri
bianqi et alti roſſi anno da
lalta parte dela vella vno legno groſſo pontino
nele cime cõ pali atrauerſadi qel
ſuſtentano nel acqua ꝓ andare piu ſeguri ala vela
 la vela e di foglie de palma cosite inſieme et facta
amodo de latina  ꝓ timone anno certe pale como da
for no cõ vno legnio in cima  fanno de la popa proua
et de la proua popa et ſonno como delfini ſaltar a lacqua de
onda in onda  queſti ladroni penſauano ali
[]ſegni q̃ faceuão nõ
fuſero alti homini al mondo ſenon loro.
each one of those people lives according to his own
will, for they have no seignior. they go naked, and some are bearded and have black
hair that reaches to the waist. they wear small palmleaf hats, as do
the albanians. they are as tall as we, and well built. they have no
worship. they are tawny, but are born white. their teeth are red and
black, for they think that is most beautiful. the women go naked except
that they wear a narrow strip of bark as thin as paper, which grows
between the tree and the bark of the palm, before their privies. they
are goodlooking and delicately formed, and lighter complexioned than
the men; and wear their hair which is exceedingly black, loose and
hanging quite down to the ground. the women []do not
work in the fields but stay in the house, weaving mats, baskets [casse:
literally boxes], and other things needed in their houses, from palm
leaves. they eat cocoanuts, camotes [batate], birds, figs one palmo in
length [i.e., bananas], sugarcane, and flying fish, besides
other things. they anoint the body and the hair with cocoanut and
beneseed oil. their houses are all built of wood covered with planks
and thatched with leaves of the fig-tree [i.e., banana-tree] two
brazas long; and they have floors and windows. the rooms and the beds
are all furnished with the most beautiful palmleaf mats. they sleep on palm straw
which is very soft and fine. they use no weapons, except a kind of a
spear pointed with a fishbone at the end. those people are poor, but
ingenious and very thievish, on account of which we called those three
islands the islands of ladroni [i.e., of thieves]. their amusement, men and
women, is to plough the seas with those small boats of
theirs. those
boats resemble fucelere, but are narrower, and some are black, [some]
white, and others red. at the side opposite the sail, they have a large
piece of wood pointed at the top, with poles laid across it and resting
on the water, in order that the boats may sail more safely. the sail is
made from palmleaves sewn together and is shaped like a lateen sail.
for rudders they use a certain blade resembling a hearth shovel which
have a piece of wood at the end. they can change stern and bow at will
[literally: they make the stern, bow, and the bow, stern], and those boats resemble
the dolphins which leap in the water from wave to wave. those ladroni
[i.e., robbers] []thought, according to the signs
which they made, that there were no other people in the world but
themselves.
sabato a ſedize de marſo 
deſſemo nela aurora soura vna tera alta lõgi trecento
legue delle yſolle de li latroni laqal e yſola et
ſe chiama zamal el capo gñale nel giorno
ſeguente volſe diſmontare in vnalta
yſola deſhabitata ꝓ eſſere piu seguro
q̃ era di dietro de queſta ꝓ pigliare hacqua et
qalque diporto fece fare due tende in terra ꝓ li
infermi et feceli amazare vna porcha  luni a . de
marſo vedeſſemo dapoi diſnare venire
ꝟſo de nui vna barca cõ noue homini ꝓ ilque
lo capo generale comando q̃ niuno si moueſſe
ne diceſſe parolla alguna ſenza ſua liſentia
 quando ariuorono queſti in terra ſubito lo
ſuo principalle ando al capo gñale
moſtrandoſe alegro ꝓ la nr̃a venuta 
reſtarono cinqʒ de queſti piu ornati cõ nuy li
alti andorono a leuare alguni alti q̃
peſcauano et cuſſi venirono tucti vedendo lo
capo gñale que queſti erano homini cõ
ragionne li fece dare da mangiare et li donno bonneti roſſi
spequi petini ſonagli auorio bocaſſini et
alte coſe  quando viſtenno la
corteſia del capo li preſentorono peſci vno
vaſo de vino de palma q̃ lo chiamano vraca figui piu longui
dun palmo et altri piu picoli piu ſaporiti et dui cochi alhora
nõ haueuano alto ne fecoro ſegni cõ la
mano q̃ in fino aquatro giorni portarebenno vmay q̃ e
riſo cochi et molta altra victuuaglia. []
at dawn on saturday, march sixteen, , we came upon a high
land at a distance of three hundred leguas from the islands of
latroni—an island named zamal [i.e., samar]. the following
day, the captain-general desired to land on another island which was
uninhabited and lay to the right of the abovementioned island, in order
to be more secure, and to get water and have some rest. he had two
tents set up on the shore for the sick and had a sow killed for them.
on monday afternoon, march , we saw a boat coming toward us with nine
men in it. therefore, the captain-general ordered that no one should
move or say a word without his permission. when those men reached the
shore, their chief went immediately to the captain-general, giving
signs of joy because of our arrival. five of the most ornately adorned
of them remained with us, while the rest went to get some others who
were fishing, and so they all came. the captain-general seeing that
they were reasonable men, ordered food to be set before them, and gave
them red caps, mirrors, combs, bells, ivory, bocasine, and other things. when they
saw the captain’s courtesy, they presented fish, a jar of palm
wine, which they call uraca [i.e., arrack], figs more
than one palmo long [i.e., bananas], and others which were smaller and more
delicate, and two cocoanuts. they had nothing else then, but made us
signs with their hands that they would bring umay or
rice, and
cocoanuts and many other articles of food within four days.
li coqi ſonno fructi dela palma
 coſi como nui hauemo il panne il vino lo oleo et
lacetto coſi anno queſti populi ogni coſa da queſti
arbori  anno el vino in queſto modo forano la dicta
palma in cima nel coreſino de to palmito dalqalle
ſtilla vna lichore como e moſto biancho dolce ma vn pocho
bruſqueto in canne groſſe come la gamba et piu
 latacano alarbor̃ la ſera ꝓ la matina et
la matina ꝓ la ſera queſta palma fa vno fructo il
qalle he lo cocho queſto cocho e grande como il capo et
piu et meno la ſua pima ſcorſa e ꝟde
et groſſa piu de dui diti nelaqalle trouano certi
filittj q̃ fanno le corde q̃ liganno le ſue barque
 ſoto di queſta ne he vna dura et molto piu
groſſa di quella de la noce  queſta la
bruſano et fano poluere bonna ꝓ loro ſoto di
queſto e vna medola biancha groſſa come vn dito
laqal mangiano freſca cõ la carne et
peſſi como nui lo panne et de qel ſapore
q̃ he la mandola qui la ſecaſſe ſe farebe
panne  in mezo di queſta medola e vna hacqua quiara
dolce et molto cordialle et quando queſta hacqua ſta vn pocho
acolta ſe congella et diuenta como vno pomo  quando
voleno fare oglio piglianno queſto cocho et laſſano
putrefare qella medola cõ lacqua et poi la fanno
buglire et vene oleo como butiro  quando voleno far aceto
laſanno putrefare lacqua ſolamente poi lameteno al ſolle
et e aceto como de vino biancho  ſi po fare ancho
[]latte como nui faceuamo  gratauamo
qʒſta medola poi la miſquiauamo cō lacqua ſua
medeſima ſtrucandola in vno panno et coſi era late como
di capra. queſte palme ſonno como palme deli datali ma non
coſi nodoſe ſe non liſce. vna famiglia de x
perſonne cō dui de queſte ſe manteneno fruando octo
giorni luna et octo giorni la alta ꝓ lo vino ꝓ
che ſe altramenti faceſſeno se ſecharebenno et
durano cento anny.
cocoanuts are the fruit of the palmtree. just as we have bread,
wine, oil, and milk, so those people get everything from that tree.
they get wine in the following manner. they bore a hole into the heart
of the said palm at the top called palmito [i.e., stalk], from
which distils a liquor which resembles white must. that liquor is sweet
but somewhat tart, and [is gathered] in canes [of bamboo] as thick as
the leg and thicker. they fasten the bamboo to the tree at evening for
the morning, and in the morning for the evening. that palm bears a
fruit, namely, the cocoanut, which is as large as the head or
thereabouts. its outside husk is green and thicker than two fingers.
certain filaments are found in that husk, whence is made cord for
binding together their boats. under that husk there is a hard shell,
much thicker than the shell of the walnut, which they burn and make
therefrom a powder that is useful to them. under that shell there is a white
marrowy substance one finger in thickness, which they eat fresh with
meat and fish as we do bread; and it has a taste resembling the almond.
it could be dried and made into bread. there is a clear, sweet water in
the middle of that marrowy substance which is very refreshing. when
that water stands for a while after having been collected, it congeals
and becomes like an apple. when the natives wish to make oil, they take
that cocoanut, and allow the marrowy substance and the water to
putrefy. then they boil it and it becomes oil like butter. when they
wish to make vinegar, they allow only the water to putrefy, and then
place it in the sun, and a vinegar results like [that made from] white
wine. []milk can also be made from it for we made some.
we scraped that marrowy substance and then mixed the scrapings with its
own water which we strained through a cloth, and so obtained milk like
goat’s milk. those palms resemble date-palms, but although not
smooth they are less knotty than the latter. a family of x persons can
be supported on two trees, by utilizing them week about for the wine;
for if they did otherwise, the trees would dry up. they last a
century.
grande familliaritade pigliarono cō nui
queſti populi  ne diſcero molte coſe como le
chiamauano et li nomi de algune yſole q̃ ſe vedeuano de
qi  la ſua ſe chiama zuluan
laqalle non etropo grande pigliaſcemo grā piacere
cā queſti perche eranno aſay piaceuoli et
conuerſabili  il capo gñale ꝓ
farli piu honnore li meno ala ſua naue et li moſtro tuta la
ſua mercadanſia garofoli cannella peuere gengero noſce
moſcade matia oro et tute le coſe q̃ eranno nella naue
fece deſcaricare algune bombarde hebero grā paura et
volſero ſaltar fuora de la naue ne fecero ſegni que li
doue nuj andauamo naſceſſeuano coſe ja dete
 quando ſi volſero partire pigliarono
liſentia con molta gratia et gentileza dicendo q̃ tornarebeno
ſegondo la ſua ꝓmeſſa  la
yſola doue eramo ſe chiama humunu ma noy ꝓ trouarli
due fondana de hacqua chiariſſima la chiameſſemo
lacquada dali buoni ſe gnialli ꝓ che fu il pimo
ſegnio de oro q̃ trouaſſemo in queſta
[]parte. qiui ſi troua grā cantitade de
coralli biancho et arbori grandi q̃ fanno fructi pocho menori de
la mandola et ſonno como li pignioli et ancho molte palme algune
bonne et algune altre catiue  in queſto locho
ſonno molte yſole. ꝓ ilque lo chiamaſſemo
larcipelago de s. lazaro deſcourendo lo nella ſua dominicha
il quale ſta in x gradi de latitudine al polo articho et cento e
ſesanta vno di longitudine della linea dela
repartitiõe.
those people became very familiar with us. they told
us many things, their names and those of some of the islands that could
be seen from that place. their own island was called zuluan and it is
not very large.
we took great pleasure with them, for they were very pleasant and
conversable. in order to show them greater honor, the
captain-general
took them to his ship and showed them all his merchandise—cloves,
cinnamon, pepper, ginger, nutmeg, mace, gold, and all the things in the
ship. he had some mortars fired for them, whereat they exhibited great
fear, and tried to jump out of the ship. they made signs to us that the abovesaid
articles grew in that place where we were going. when they were about
to retire they took their leave very gracefully and neatly, saying that
they would return according to their promise. the island where we were
is called humunu; but inasmuch as we found two springs there of the
clearest water, we called it acquada da li buoni segnialli
[i.e., “the watering-place of good signs”], for
there were the first signs of gold which we found in those
districts.
[]we found a great quantity of white coral there,
and large trees with fruit a trifle smaller than the almond and
resembling pine seeds. there are also many palms, some of them good and
others bad. there are many islands in that district, and therefore we
called them the archipelago of san lazaro, as they were discovered on
the sabbath of st. lazurus. they lie in x degrees of latitude toward the
arctic pole, and in a longitude of one hundred and sixty-one degrees
from the line of demarcation.
vennere a  de marzo venirono in mezo di
qelli homini secondo ne haueuano ꝓmeſſo in
due barcque cõ cochi naranſi dolci vno vaſo de vino de
palma et vno galo ꝓ dimoſtrare que in queſte parte
eranno galine se moſtrarono molto alegri verſo de noi
compraſſemo tute qelle ſue coſe il
ſuo sor era vechio et de pinto portaua due schione de
oro a le oreqie li altri molte maniglie de oro ali brazi
cõ fazoli in torno lo capo steſemo quiui octo [giorni]
neliqalli el nr̃o capo andaua ogni di in
terra auiſitare ly infirmi et ogni matina li daua cõ le
ſue mani acqua del cocho q̃ molto li confortaua di dietro de
queſta yſola ſtanno homini q̃ anno tanto grandi li
picheti de lorechie q̃ portanno le braci ficati in loro
 queſti popoli ſonno caphri çioe gentili
vanno nudi cõ tella de ſcorſa darbore intorno le
ſue vergonie se nõ alguni principali cõ telle de
banbazo lauorate neli capi cõ ſeda aguchia sonno
oliuaſti graſſi de pinti et ſe ongeno
cõ olio de cocho et de giongioli ꝓ lo ſolle et
ꝓ il vento  anno []li capili
negriſſimi fina a la cinta et anno dague cortelli lanſe
fornite de oro targoni facine arponi et rete da peſcare come
rizali  le ſue barche ſonno corno le
noſte
at noon on friday, march , those men came as they
had promised us in two boats with cocoanuts, sweet oranges, a jar of
palm-wine, and a cock, in order to show us that there were fowls in that
district. they exhibited great signs of pleasure at seeing
us. we
purchased all those articles from them. their seignior was an old man
who was painted [i.e., tattooed]. he wore two gold earrings
[schione] in his ears, and the others many gold armlets on their arms and
kerchiefs about their heads. we stayed there one week, and during that
time our captain went ashore daily to visit the sick, and every morning gave them
cocoanut water from his own hand, which comforted them greatly. there
are people living near that island who have holes in their ears so large that they
can pass their arms through them. those people are caphri, that is to say, heathen.
they go naked, with a cloth woven from the bark of a tree about their
privies, except some of the chiefs who wear cotton cloth embroidered
with silk at the ends by means of a needle. they are dark, fat, and
painted. they anoint themselves with cocoanut and with beneseed oil, as
a protection []against sun and wind. they have very black hair
that falls to the waist, and use daggers, knives, and
spears
ornamented with gold, large shields, fascines, javelins, and fishing nets that
resemble rizali; and their boats are like ours.
nel luni ſancto a vinticinqʒ de marſo
giorno de la nr̃a donna paſſato mezo di
eſſendo de hora in ora ꝓ leuarſi anday abordo de
la naue ꝓ peſcare et metendo li piedi ſopra vna antena
ꝓ deſcedere nela mesa degarni tiõe me slizegarono
ꝓ che era pioueſto et coſi caſtai nel mare
q̃ ninguno me viſte et eſſendo quaſi
ſumerſo me venne ne la mano siniſtra la ſcota de la
vella magiore q̃ era aſcoſa ne lacqua me teni forte et
comenſai agridare tanto q̃ fui ajutato cõ lo batelo
 nõ credo ja per mey meriti ma ꝓ la
miſericordia di qella fonte de pieta foſſe
ajutato. nel medeſimo jorno pigliaſſemo tra il ponente
et garbĩ infra quato yſolle çioe cenalo
hiunanghan jbusson et abarien
on the afternoon of holy monday, the day of our lady,
march twenty-five, while we were on the point of weighing anchor, i
went to the side of the ship to fish, and putting my feet upon a yard
leading down into the storeroom, they slipped, for it was rainy, and
consequently i fell into the sea, so that no one saw me. when i was all
but under, my left hand happened to catch hold of the clew-garnet of
the mainsail, which was dangling [ascosa] in the
water. i held on tightly, and began to cry out so lustily that i was
rescued by the small boat. i was aided, not, i believe, indeed, through
my merits, but through the mercy of that font of charity [i.e.,
of the virgin]. that same day we shaped our course toward the west
southwest between four small islands, namely, cenalo,
hiunanghan,
ibusson, and abarien.
joue a vinti octo de marzo ꝓ hauere viſto
la nocte paſſata fuocho in vna yſola ne la matina
ſurgiſſemo apreſſo de queſta
vedeſemo vna barcha picola q̃ la chiamano boloto cõ
octo nomini de dento aꝓpincarſe nela naue ca
pitanea  vno ſchiauo del capo gñale
q̃ era de zamatra gia chiamata traprobana li parlo
ilqalle ſubito inteſeno venero nel bordo de la
naue nõ volendo intrare dento, ma ſtauano vno
pocho diſcoſti vedendo el capo q̃ nõ
voleuano fidarſi de nui li buto vn bonnet roſſo et altre
coſe ligate ſupa vn pezo de taula  la
piglioronno molto alegri et []subito se partirono ꝓ
auiſare el ſuo re deli circa due hore vedeſſemo
vegnire due balanghai ſonno barche grande et cuſſe le
chiamano pienni de huomini nel magior̃ era lo suo re sedendo
ſoto vno coperto de ſtore  quando el giunſe
ap̃ſſo la capitania il schiauo li parlo il re lo
inteſe ꝓ che in queſte parte li re ſanno piu
linguagij q̃ li alti  comando q̃
alguni ſoi intraſſeno nele naue  luy
ſempre ſtete nel ſuo balanghai poco longi de la naue fin
che li ſuoi tornoronno et ſubito tornati ſe parti. il
capo gñalle fece grande honnore aqelli
q̃ venirono nela naue et donnoli algune coſe per ilche il re
inanzi la ſua partita volſe donnare al capo vna
bava de oro grande et vna ſporta piena de gengero ma luj
rengratiandol molto nõ volce acceptarle  nel tardi
andaſemo cõ le naue apreſſo la habitatiõe
del re.
on thursday morning, march twenty-eight, as we had
seen a fire on an island the night before, we anchored near
it. we saw a
small boat which the natives call boloto with eight men in it,
approaching the flagship. a slave belonging to the captain-general, who
was a native of zamatra [i.e., sumatra], which was formerly
called traprobana, spoke to them. they immediately understood him, came
alongside the ship, unwilling to enter but taking a position at some
little distance. the captain seeing that they would not trust us,
threw them out a red cap and other things tied to a bit of wood. they
[]received them very gladly, and went away quickly
to advise their king. about two hours later we saw two balanghai
coming. they are large boats and are so called [by those people]. they
were full of men, and their king was in the larger of them, being
seated under an awning of mats. when the king came near the flagship,
the slave spoke to him. the king understood him, for in those districts
the kings know more languages than the other people. he ordered some of
his men to enter the ships, but he always remained in his balanghai, at
some little distance from the ship until his own men returned; and as
soon as they returned he departed. the captain-general showed great
honor to the men who entered the ship, and gave them some presents, for
which the king wished before his departure to give the captain a large
bar of gold and
a basketful of ginger. the latter, however, thanked the king heartily
but would not accept it. in the afternoon we went in the ships [and
anchored] near the dwellings of the king.
jl giorno ſeguente q̃ era el venerdi
ſancto el capo gñale mando lo ſquia ua
q̃ era lo interprete nr̃o in tera in vno batello adire al re
ſe haueua alguna coſa da mangiare la faceſſe
portar̃ in naue q̃ reſtariano bene ſatiſfati
da noi et como amici et nõ como nimici era venuti a laſua
yſola el re venne cõ ſey vero octo homini nel
medeſimo batello et entro nela naue abrazandoſi col
capo gñale et donoli tre vazi di porcelanna coperti
de foglie pienne de rizo crudo et due orade molto grande cõ
altre coſe  el capo dete al re vna
veſte de panno roſſo et giallo fato a la torcheſca
et vno bonnet roſſo fino ali alti sui
aqi []cortelli et aqi
ſpecqi poy le fece dare la colatiõe et ꝓ
il chiauo li fece dire q̃ voleua eſſere cun lui
caſi caſi cioe fratello  riſpoſe
q̃ coſſi voleua eſſere ꝟſo de lui
dapoy lo capo ge moſtro panno de diverſi colori
tela corali et molta alta mercantia et tuta lartigliaria
facendola deſcargare alguni molto ſi ſpauentorno poi
fece armare vno homo cõ vno homo darme et li meſſe
atorno tre cõ ſpade et pugniale q̃ li dauano ꝓ
tuto il corpo ꝓ laqal coſa el re reſto
caſi fora diſe li diſſe ꝓ il schiauo q̃
vno de queſti armati valeua ꝓ cento de li suoi
reſpoſe q̃ era cuſſi et q̃ in ogni naue
ne menaua duzento q̃ ſe armauano de qella
ſorte li moſtro corazine ſpade et rodelle et fece fare a
vno vna leuata poi lo conduſſe ſupa la tolda
dela naue q̃ he in cima de la popa et fece portare la ſua
carta de nauigare et la buſſola et li diſſe
ꝓ linterprete como trouo lo ſtreto ꝓ vegnire alui et
quante lune ſonno ſtati ſenza vedere terra 
se marauiglio in vltimo li diſce q̃ voleua ſe li
piaceſſe mandare ſeco dui homini acio li
moſtraſſe algune de le ſue coſe
reſpoſe q̃ era contento yo ge anday cõ vno
alto
next day, holy friday, the captain-general sent his
slave, who acted as our interpreter, ashore in a small boat to ask the
king if he had any food to have it carried to the ships; and to say that they would
be well satisfied with us, for he [and his men] had come to the island
as friends and not as enemies. the king came with six or eight
men in the same
boat and entered the ship. he embraced the captain-general to whom he
gave three porcelain jars covered with leaves and full of raw rice, two
very large orade, and other things. the captain-general gave the
king a garment of red and yellow cloth made in the turkish fashion, and
a fine red cap; and to the others (the king’s men), to some
knives and to others mirrors. then the captain-general []had
a collation spread for them, and had the king told through the slave
that he desired to be casi casi with him, that is to say, brother. the king
replied that he also wished to enter the same relations with the
captain-general. then the captain showed him cloth of various colors,
linen, coral [ornaments], and many other articles of merchandise, and
all the artillery, some of which he had discharged for him, whereat the
natives were greatly frightened. then the captain-general had a man
armed as a soldier, and placed him in the midst of three men armed
with swords and daggers, who struck him on all parts of the body.
thereby was the king rendered almost speechless. the captain-general
told him through the slave that one of those armed men was worth one
hundred of his own men. the king answered that that was a fact. the
captain-general said that he had two hundred men in each ship who were
armed in that manner. he showed the king cuirasses, swords, and
bucklers, and had a review made for him. then he led the king to the deck of the ship,
that is located above at the stern; and had his sea-chart and compass
brought. he
told the king through the interpreter how he had found the strait in
order to voyage thither, and how many moons he had been without seeing
land, whereat the king was astonished. lastly, he told the king that he
would like, if it were pleasing to him, to send two of his men with him
so that he might show them some of his things. the king replied that he
was agreeable, and i went in company with one of the other
men.
quando fui in tera il re leuo le mani al ciello et
[]poi ſe volta conta nuy dui
 faceſſemo lo ſimille verſo de lui
coſi tuti li alti fecero il re me piglio ꝓ la
mano vno ſuo principale piglio lalto compago
et cuſſi ne menorõ ſoto vno coperto de cane doue
era vno balanghai longo octanta palmi deli mey simille a vna fuſta
ne sedeſſemo ſopa la popa de queſto
ſempre parlando con ſegni li suoi ne ſtauano in piedi
atorno atorno cõ ſpade dague lanze et targoni fece portare
vno piato de carne de porco cõ vño vazo grande pienno de
vino  beueuamo adogni boconne vna taſſa de vino
 lo vino q̃ li auanſaua qalque volta
ben q̃ foſceno poche ſe meteua in vno vazo da ꝓ
ſi la ſua taſa ſempre ſtaua coperta
 ninguno alto li beueua se nõ il re et yo
 jnanzi q̃ lo re pigliaſſe la
taſſa ꝓ bere alzaua li mani giunte al çielo et
ꝟſo de nui et quando voleua bere extendeua lo pugnio dela
mano sini ſtra verſo dime prima penſaua me
voleſſe dare vn pognio et poi beueua faceua coſi yo
verſo il re  queſti ſegni fanno tuti luno
verſo de laltro quando beueno  cõ queſte
cerimonie et alti ſegni de amiſitia merenda
ſemo  mangiay nel vennere ſancto carne ꝓ
nõ potere fare alto  jnanzi q̃
veniſſe lora de cenare donay molte coſe al re q̃
haueua portati ſcriſſe aſai coſſe como le
chiamanão quanto lo re et li alti me viſtenno
fcriuere et li diceua qelle ſue parolle tutti
reſtorono atoniti  in queſto mezo venne lora de
cenare  portoronno duy plati grandi de porcelanna vno
pienno de rizo et lalto de carne de porcho cõ
ſuo brodo  cenaſſemo []cõ li medeſimj ſegni et
cerimonie poi andaſſemo al palatio del re elqalle
era facto como vna teza da fienno coperto de foglie de figaro et de
palma era edificato ſoura legni groſſi alti de terra
qel ſe conuiene andare cõ ſcalle ne fece
ſedere ſopa vna ſtora de canne tenendo le
gambe atracte como li sarti deli ameza ora fo portato vno piato de
peſce bruſtolato in pezi et gengero ꝓ alora colto et
vino el figliolo magiore del re chera il principe  vene
doue eramo  il re li diſſe q̃
ſedeſſe apreſſo noi et coſſi
ſedete  fu portato dui piati vno de peſce
cõ lo ſue brodo et lalto de rizo acio q̃
mangiaſſemo col principe  il nr̃o
compago p̃ tanto bere et mangiare diuento briaco
 vzano ꝓ lume goma de arbore q̃ la
quiamão anime voltata in foglie de palma o de figaro
 el re ne fece ſegno qel voleua andare
adormire  laſſo cõ nui lo principe
cõ qalle dormiſemo ſopa vna
ſtora de canne cõ coſſini de foglie venuto lo
giorno el re venne et me piglio ꝓ la mano coſſi
andaſſemo doue aveuamo cenato ꝓ fare colatiõe
ma il batelle ne venne aleuare  jnanzi la partita el re
molto alegro ne baſo le mani et noi le ſue  venne
cõ nui vno ſuo fratello re dunalta yſola
cõ tre homini  lo capo gñale lo
retenete adiſnare cõ nui et donoli molte coſe.
when i reached shore, the king raised his hands
[]toward the sky and then turned toward us two. we
did the same toward him as did all the others. the king took me by the
hand; one of his chiefs took my companion; and thus they led us under a
bamboo covering, where there was a balanghai, as long as eighty of my palm lengths,
and resembling a fusta. we sat down upon the stern of that balanghai,
constantly conversing with signs. the king’s men stood about us
in a circle with swords, daggers, spears, and bucklers. the king had a plate of
pork brought in and a large jar filled with wine. at every mouthful, we
drank a cup of wine. the wine that was left [in the cup] at any time,
although that happened but rarely, was put into a jar by itself. the
king’s cup was always kept covered and no one else drank from it
but he and i. before the king took the cup to drink, he raised his
clasped hands toward the sky, and then toward me; and when he was about
to drink, he extended the fist of his left hand toward me (at first i
thought that he was about to strike me) and then drank. i did the same
toward the king. they all make those signs one toward another when they
drink. we ate with such ceremonies and with other signs of friendship.
i ate meat on holy friday, for i could not help myself. before the
supper hour i gave the king many things which i had brought. i wrote
down the names of many things in their language. when the king and the
others saw me writing, and when i told them their words, they were all
astonished.
while engaged in that the supper hour was announced. two large
porcelain dishes were brought in, one full of rice and the other of
pork with its gravy. []we ate with the same signs and ceremonies,
after which we went to the palace of the king which was built like a
hayloft and was thatched with fig [i.e., banana] and palm
leaves. it was built up high from the ground on huge posts of wood and
it was necessary to ascend to it by means of ladders. the king made us sit down
there on a bamboo mat with our feet drawn up like tailors. after a
half-hour a platter of roast fish cut in pieces was brought in, and
ginger freshly gathered, and wine. the king’s eldest son, who was
the prince, came over to us, whereupon the king told him to sit down
near us, and he accordingly did so. then two platters were brought in
(one with fish and its sauce, and the other with rice), so that we
might eat with the prince. my companion became intoxicated as a
consequence of so much drinking and eating. they used the gum of a tree
called anime wrapped in palm or fig [i.e., banana] leaves
for lights. the king made us a sign that he was going to go to sleep.
he left the prince with us, and we slept with the latter on a bamboo
mat with pillows made of leaves. when day dawned the king came and took
me by the hand, and in that manner we went to where we had had supper,
in order to partake of refreshments, but the boat came to get us.
before we left, the king kissed our hands with great joy, and we his.
one of his brothers, the king of another island, and three men came
with us. the captain-general kept him to dine with us, and gave him
many things.
nella yſola de queſto re que
conduſſi ale naui ſe troua pezi de oro grandi como noce
et oui criuelando la terra  tutti li vaſo de
queſto re ſonno de oro et []anche alguna parte de
dela caſa ſua coſi ne referite lo medeſimo re
ſe gondo lo ſue coſtume era molto in ordine et lo piu
bello huomo que vedeſſemo fra queſti populi haueua li
capili negriſſimi fin alle ſpalle cõ vno velo de
ſeta ſopa lo capo et due ſquione grande de
horo tacatte ale orechie  portaua vno panno de bombazo tuto
lauorato de ſeta q̃ copriua dala cinta fino al ginoquio al
lato vna daga cõ lo manicho al canto longo tuto de oro il fodro
era de legnio lauorato  in ogni dente haueua tre machie
doro q̃ pareuano foſſeno ligati cõ oro
 oleua de ſtorac et beligioui  era
oliuaſtro et tuto depinto. queſta ſua yſola ſe
chiama butuan et calagan. quando queſti re ſe voleuano vedere
ve neno tuti due ala caza in queſta yſola doue eramo el re
pimo ſe qiama raia colambu il ſegundo
raia siaui.
pieces of gold, of the size of walnuts and eggs are
found by sifting the earth in the island of that king who came to our
ships. all the dishes of that []king are of gold and also
some portion of his house, as we were told by that king himself.
according to their customs he was very grandly decked out [molto in
ordine],
and the finest looking man that we saw among those people. his hair was
exceedingly black, and hung to his shoulders. he had a covering of silk
oh his head, and wore two large golden earrings fastened in his ears.
he wore a cotton cloth all embroidered with silk, which covered him
from the waist to the knees. at his side hung a dagger, the haft of
which was somewhat long and all of gold, and its scabbard of carved
wood. he had three spots of gold on every tooth, and his teeth appeared
as if bound with gold. he was perfumed with storax and benzoin. he was
tawny and painted [i.e., tattooed] all over. that island of his
was called butuan and calagan. when those kings wished to see one another, they
both went to hunt in that island where we were. the name of the first
king is raia colambu, and the second raia siaui.
domenicha vltimo de marſo giorno de paſca
nela matina ꝓ tempo el capo gñale mando il
prete cõ alcanti aparechiare ꝓ douere dire
meſſa cõ lo interprete a dire al re q̃ nõ
voleuamo diſcendere in terra ꝓ diſinar ſecho ma
ꝓ aldire meſſa ꝓ ilque lo re ne mando dui
porqi morti  quando fu hora de meſſa
andaſſemo in terra forſe cinquanta huomini nõ
armati la ꝓſo na ma cõ le altre nr̃e arme et
meglio veſtite q̃ poteſſemo  jnanzi que
aruaſſemo ala riua cõ li bateli forenno ſcaricati
sej pezi de bombarde in ſegnio de pace 
ſaltaſſemo in terra  li dui re []abraſſarono lo capo
gñale et lo meſſeno in mezo de loro
andaſſemo in ordinanza fino al locho conſacrato non
molto longi de la riua  jnanzi ſe
comenſaſſe la meſſa il capo bagno
tuto el corpo de li dui re con hacqua moſta da  se
oferſe ala meſſa  li re andorono
abaſſiare la croce como nuy ma nõ oferſeno
 quando ſe leuaua lo corpo de nr̃o sor
ſtauano in genoquioni et adorauanlo cõ le mane gionte
 le naue tirarono tuta la artigliaria in vno tempo quando
ſe leuo lo corpo de xo dando ge lo ſegnio de la
tera cõ li ſchiopetj  finita la meſſa
alquanti deli noſti ſe comunicorono 
lo capo generale fece fare vno ballo cõ le ſpade
deque le re hebenno grã piacere  poi fece portare
vna croce cõ li quiodi et la coronna alaqal
ſubito fecero reuerentia  li diſſe per lo
interprete como queſto era il vessilo datoli dalo inperator̃
ſuo ſignore açio in ogni parte doue andaſſe
meteſſe queſto ſuo ſegnialle et che voleua
meterlo iui ꝓ ſua vtilita ꝓ che ſe
veneſſeno algune naue dele nr̃e ſaperianno
cõ queſta croce noj eſſere ſtati in
queſto locho et nõ farebenno deſpiacere aloro ne ale
coſe [coſe: doublet in original ms.] et ſe
pigliaſſeno alguno de li ſoi ſubito
moſtrandoli queſto ſegnialle le laſſerianno
andare et q̃ conueniua meter̃ queſta croce in cima del
piu alto monte que foſſe açio vedendola ogni matina la
adoraſſeno et ſeqʒſto faceuano ne troui ne
fulmini ni tempeſta li nocerebe in coſa alguna 
lo ringratiorno molto et q̃ farebenno ogni coſa volentieri
[]ancho li fece dire ſe eranno morj ho
gentili o inque credeuão  riſpoſero
q̃ nõ adorauão alto ſinon
alſauano le mani giunti et la faza al ciello et q̃
chiamauão lo ſua dio abba ꝓ laqal
coſa lo capo hebe grande alegreſſa
 vedendo queſto el pimo re leuo le mani al
ciello et diſſe q̃ voria ſe foſſe
poſſibille farli veder̃ il ſuo amore verſo de
lui lo interprete ge diſſe ꝓ qal
cagiõe haueua quiui coſi pocho da mangiare 
reſpoſe q̃ nõ habitaua in qʒſto locho
ſe nõ quãdo veniua a la caza et a vedere lo ſuo
fratello ma ſtaua in vna alta yſola doue haueua
tuta la ſua famiglia  li fece dire ſe haueua
jnimici lo diceſſe ꝓ cio andarebe cõ
queſte naue adeſtrugerli et faria lo hobedirianno
 lo rengratio et diſſe q̃ haueua benne due
yſolle nemiche maque alhora nõ era tempo de andarui
 lo capo li diſſe ſe dio
faceſſe q̃ vnalta fiatta ritornaſce in
queſte parte conduria tanta gente q̃ farebe ꝓ
forſa eſerli ſugette et que voleua andare adiſnare
et dapoy tornarebe ꝓ far pore la croce in cima del monte
riſpoſero eranno contenti facendoſſe vn bata glione
cõ ſcaricare li ſquiopeti et abraſandoſi lo
capo cõ li due re pigliaſſemo
liſentia.
early on the morning of sunday, the last of march, and
easter-day, the captain-general sent the priest with some men to
prepare the place where mass was to be said; together with the interpreter to tell
the king that we were not going to land in order to dine with him, but
to say mass. therefore the king sent us two swine that he had had
killed. when the hour for mass arrived, we landed with about fifty men,
without our body armor, but carrying our other arms, and dressed in our
best clothes.
before we reached the shore with our boats, six pieces were discharged
as a sign of peace. we []landed; the two kings embraced the
captain-general, and placed him between them. we went in marching order
to the place consecrated, which was not far from the shore. before the
commencement of mass, the captain sprinkled the entire bodies of the
two kings with musk water.” the mass was offered up. the kings went forward to
kiss the cross as we did, but they did not offer the
sacrifice. when
the body of our lord was elevated, they remained on their knees and
worshiped him with clasped hands. the ships fired all their artillery
at once when the body of christ was elevated, the signal having been
given from the shore with muskets. after the conclusion of mass, some
of our men took communion. the captain-general arranged a fencing
tournament, at
which the kings were greatly pleased. then he had a cross carried in
and the nails and a crown, to which immediate reverence was
made. he told
the kings through the interpreter that they were the standards given to
him by the emperor his sovereign, so that wherever he might go he might
set up those his tokens. [he said] that he wished to set it up in that
place for their benefit, for whenever any of our ships
came, they
would know that we had been there by that cross, and would do nothing
to displease them or harm their property [property: doublet in
original ms.]. if any of their men were captured, they would be set
free immediately on that sign being shown. it was necessary to set that
cross on the summit of the highest mountain, so that on seeing it every
morning, they might adore it; and if they did that, neither thunder,
lightning, nor storms would harm them in the least. they []thanked him heartily and [said] that they would
do everything willingly. the captain-general also had them asked
whether they were moros or heathen, or what was their belief. they
replied that they worshiped nothing, but that they raised their clasped
hands and their face to the sky; and that they called their god
“abba.” thereat the captain was very glad, and seeing
that, the first king raised his hands to the sky, and said that he
wished that it were possible for him to make the captain see his love
for him. the interpreter asked the king why there was so little to eat
there. the latter replied that he did not live in that place except
when he went hunting and to see his brother, but that he lived in
another island where all his family were. the captain-general had him
asked to declare whether he had any enemies, so that he might go with
his ships to destroy them and to render them obedient to
him. the king
thanked him and said that he did indeed have two islands hostile to
him, but that it was not then the season to go there. the captain told
him that if god would again allow him to return to those districts, he
would bring so many men that he would make the king’s enemies
subject to him by force. he said that he was about to go to dinner, and
that he would return afterward to have the cross set up on the summit
of the mountain. they replied that they were satisfied, and then
forming in battalion and firing the muskets, and the captain having
embraced the two kings, we took our leave.
dopo diſnare tornaſſemo tucti in
gioponne et andaſsemo inſieme cõ li duy re nel mezo di
in cima []del piu alto monte q̃ foſſe
 quando ariuaſſemo in cima lo capo
genneralle li diſſe como li era caro hauere ſudato
ꝓ loro ꝓ che eſendo iui la croce nõ poteua
ſinon grandamẽte jouarli  et domandoli
qal porto era migliore ꝓ victuuaglie
diceſſero q̃ ne erano tre çioe ceylon zubu et
calaghann ma che zubu era piu grande et de meglior trafico et ſe
proferſenno di darni piloti q̃ ne inſegniarebenno il
viago lo capo gñale li rengratio et
delibero de andarli ꝓ q̃ cuſſi voleua la sua
infelice ſorte. poſta la cruce ognuno dice vno pater
noſter et vna aue maria adorandola coſi li re fecenno
 poy deſcendeſſemo ꝓ li ſui
campi lauorattj et andaſſemo doue era lo balanghai
 li re feceno portare alquanti cochi açio ſe
rinfreſcaſſimo  lo capo li
domando li piloti ꝓ che la matina ſequente voleua
partirſi et q̃ li tratarebe como ſe medeſimo
laſandoli vno de li nr̃j ꝓ oſtagio 
riſpoſero q̃ ogni ora li voleſſe eranno al
ſuo comãdo  ma nela nocte il pimo re
ſe mudo dopigniõe  la matina quando eramo
ꝓ partirſi el re mando adire al capo generalle
q̃ per amore ſuo aſpectaſſe duj giornj fin
q̃ faceſſe coglire el rizo et alti ſui
menuti pregandolo mandaſſe alguni homini ꝓ ajutareli
açio piu preſto ſe ſpazaſſe q̃ luy
medeſimo voleua eſſere lo nr̃o piloto. 
lo capo mandoli alguni homini ma li re []tanto mangiorono et beueteno q̃ dormiteno
tuto il giorno  alguni ꝓ eſcuſarli dicero
q̃ haueuano vno pocho de malle ꝓ qel giorno li
noſti nõ fecero niente ma neli alti
dui ſeguenti lauorono.
after dinner we all returned clad in our doublets, and
that afternoon
went together with the two []kings to the summit of the highest
mountain there. when we reached the summit, the captain-general told
them that he esteemed highly having sweated for them, for since the
cross was there, it could not but be of great use to them. on asking
them which port was the best to get food, they replied that there were
three, namely, ceylon, zubu, and calaghann, but that zubu was the
largest and the one with most trade. they offered of their own accord
to give us pilots to show us the way. the captain-general thanked them,
and determined to go there, for so did his unhappy fate will. after the
cross was erected in position, each of us repeated a pater
noster and an ave maria, and adored the cross; and the kings
did the same. then we descended through their cultivated fields, and
went to the place where the balanghai was. the kings had some cocoanuts brought
in so that we might refresh ourselves. the captain asked the kings for
the pilots for he intended to depart the following morning, and [said]
that he would treat them as if they were the kings themselves, and
would leave one of us as hostage. the kings replied that every hour he
wished the pilots were at his command, but that night the first king
changed his mind, and in the morning when we were about to depart, sent
word to the captain-general, asking him for love of him to wait two
days until he should have his rice harvested, and other trifles
attended to. he asked the captain-general to send him some men to help
him, so that it might be done sooner; and said that he intended to act
as our pilot himself. the captain sent him some men, but the kings ate
and drank so much []that they slept all the day. some said to
excuse them that they were slightly sick. our men did nothing on that
day, but they worked the next two days.
vno de queſti populi ne porte force vna
ſcudela de rizo cõ octo o dieze figue ligaty inſieme
ꝓ baratarli in vno cortello q̃ valeua il piu tre catrini
 el capo vedendo que queſto nõ
voleua alto senon vno cortello lo chiamo ꝓ vedere piu
coſe  miſſe mano a la borſa et li volce
dare ꝓ qelle coſe vno reall lui nol volſi
 lui moſtro vno ducato mancho  lo accepto
 al fine li volce dare vno dopionne de duy ducati
 nõ volce mai alto q̃ vn corte lo et
cuſſi li lo fece dare  andando vno de li
nr̃i in terra ꝓ tore acqua vno de queſti li volce dare
vno coronna pontina de oro maſiçio grãde como vna
colona ꝓ ſey filce de criſtalino ma il capo
non volce q̃ la bara taſſe açio que in
queſto principio ſapeſſero q̃ pritiauamo piu
la nr̃a mercantia q̃ lo ſuo oro.
one of those people brought us about a porringer full
of rice and also eight or ten figs [i.e., bananas] fastened
together to barter them for a knife which at the most was worth three
catrini. the
captain seeing that that native cared for nothing but a knife, called
him to look at other things. he put his hand in his purse and wished to
give him one real for those things, but the native refused it. the
captain showed him a ducado but he would not accept that either.
finally the captain tried to give him a doppione worth two ducados, but he would
take nothing but a knife; and accordingly the captain had one given to
him. when one of our men went ashore for water, one of those people
wanted to give him a pointed crown of massy gold, of the size of a
colona for six
strings of glass beads, but the captain refused to let him barter, so
that the natives should learn at the very beginning that we prized our
merchandise more than their gold.
queſti populi ſonno gentili 
vanno nudi et de pinti  portano vno pezo de tella de arbore
intorno le ſue vergonie  sonno grandiſſimi
beuitori  le ſue femi ne vanno veſtite de tella
de arbore de la cinta in giu cõ li capili negri fina in terra
 anno forate le orechie et pienne de oro. 
queſta gente ſempre maſticanno vno fruto q̃ lo
quiamano areca e como vno pero lo taglianno in quato parti
et poi lo volueno nele foglie del ſuo arburo q̃ le nominano
[]betre ſonno como foglie di moraro cõ
vno poco de calcina et quando le anno bē maſticate le
ſputano fora  fanno diuentare la boca
rociſſima  tucti li populi de queſta parte
del mondo le vzanno ꝓ che rinfreſcali molto el core
 se reſtaſſeno de vzarle morirebenno
 in queſta izolla ſonno cany gati porci galine
capre rizo gengero cochi figui naranzi limoni miglio panizo ſorgo
cera et molto oro  ſta de latitudine in noue gradi et
dui terſi al artico et cento et ſeſanta dui de
longitudine della linea de la ripartitiõe et vinti cinque legue
longi de la acquada et ſe chiama mazaua
those people are heathens, and go naked and painted. they wear a
piece of cloth woven from a tree about their privies. they are very heavy
drinkers. their
women are clad in tree cloth from their waist down, and their hair is
black and reaches to the ground. they have holes pierced in their ears
which are filled with gold. those people are constantly chewing a fruit
which they call areca, and which resembles a pear. they cut that
fruit into four parts, and then wrap it in the leaves []of
their tree which they call betre [i.e., betel]. those
leaves resemble the leaves of the mulberry. they mix it with a little
lime, and when they have chewed it thoroughly, they spit it
out. it makes
the mouth exceedingly red. all the people in those parts of the world
use it, for it is very cooling to the heart, and if they ceased to use
it they would die. there are dogs, cats, swine, fowls, goats, rice,
ginger, cocoanuts, figs [i.e., bananas], oranges, lemons,
millet, panicum, sorgo, wax, and a quantity of gold in that island. it
lies in a latitude of nine and two-thirds degrees toward the arctic
pole, and in a longitude of one hundred and sixty-two degrees from the
line of demarcation. it is twenty-five from the acquada, and is called
mazaua.
steſsemo sette giorni quiui  poi
pigliaſſemo la via del maiſtrale paſſando
fa cinqʒ yſolle cioe ceylon bohol canighan baybai
et gatighan  in queſta yſola de gatigan
ſonno barbaſtili grandi como aquille  ꝓ
q̃ era tardi ne amaçaſſemo vno  era
como vna galina al mangiare ge ſonno colombi tortore papagali et
certi vcelli negri grandi como galine cõ la coda lõga
fanno oui grandi como de ocqua li meteno ſoto la ſabia
ꝓ lo grã caldo li crea quando ſonno naſciuti
alzano la arena et vieneno fora  queſti oui ſonno
bony de mangiare.  de mazaua agatighan ſonno vinti
leghe  partendone da gatighan al ponente il re de mazaua
non ne puote ſeguir̃ ꝓ che lo
eſpectaſſemo circa tre yſolle cioe polo ticobon et
pozon quando el gionſe molte []ſe marauiglio del
nr̃o nauigare lo capo gñale lo fece mõ
tare nela ſua naue cõ alguni ſoi principali dilque
hebero piacere et coſſi andaſſemo in zubu da
gatighan azubu ſonno quindice legue.
we remained there seven days, after which we laid our
course toward the northwest, passing among five islands, namely, ceylon, bohol,
canighan, baybai, and gatighan. in the last-named island of gatigan, there are
bats as large as eagles. as it was late we killed one of
them, which
resembled chicken in taste. there are doves, turtledoves, parrots, and certain black
birds as large as domestic chickens, which have a long tail. the last
mentioned birds lay eggs as large as the goose, and bury them under the
sand, through the great heat of which they hatch out. when the chicks
are born, they push up the sand, and come out. those eggs are good to
eat. there is a distance of twenty leguas from mazaua to gatighan. we
set out westward from gatighan, but the king of mazaua could not follow
us [closely], and consequently, we awaited him near three islands,
namely, polo, ticobon, and []pozon. when he caught up with us he was
greatly astonished at the rapidity with which we sailed. the
captain-general had him come into his ship with several of his chiefs
at which they were pleased. thus did we go to zubu from gatighan, the
distance to zubu being fifteen leguas.
domeniga a sete de apille amezo di
intraſſemo nel porto de zubu paſſando per molti
vilagij vedeuamo molte caze facte ſopra li arbori
apropinquãdone ala cita lo capo gñale comando
le naui sinbanderaſſeno furono calate le velle et poſte
amodo de bataglia et ſcarico tuta lartigliaria ꝓ ilque
queſti populi hebero grandiſſima paura  lo
capo mando vno ſuo alieuo cõ lo interprete
inbaſſiatore al re de zubo.  quando ariuorono
nela cita trouorono jnfiniti huomini inſieme cõ lo re tuti
pauroſi ꝓ le bombarde  linterprete li
diſſe queſto eſere nr̃o coſtume intrando
in ſimili luogui in ſegnio de pace et amiſitia et
ꝓ honnorare lo re del luogo ſcaricauamo tuctele bombarde
 el re et tucti li ſuoi ſe aſegurorono et
fece dire ali noſti ꝓ lo ſuo gouuernatore
q̃ voleuamo  linterprete riſpoſe como el
ſuo ſigniore era capo del magiore re et principe
foſſe nel mondo et q̃ andaua adiſcourir̃
malucho ma ꝓ la ſua bonna fama como haueua jntezo dal re de
mazaua era venuto ſolamente ꝓ vizitarlo et pigliare
victuuaglia cõ la ſua merchadantia li diſſe
q̃ in bonna hora foſſe venuto ma q̃ haueua
queſta vzanſa tutte le naui q̃ intrauano nel porto
ſuo pagauão tributu et q̃ nõ eranno
quato gi che []vno juncho de ciama cargato
doro et de ſchiaui li haueua dato tributo et ꝓ ſegnio
di queſto li moſtro vno mer chadante de çiama que era
reſtato ꝓ merchadantare oro et ſquiaui  lo
interprete li diſſe como el ſuo ſigniore ꝓ
eſſere capo de tanto grã re non pagaua
tributo ad alguno ſigniore del mondo et ſe voleua pace pace
ha uerebe et ſe non guerra guera alhoro el moro merchadante
diſſe al re cata raia chita çioe garba ben
ſigniore queſti ſonno de qelli q̃ anno
conquiſtato calicut malaca et tuta lindia magiore  si
bene ſi li fa ben ſe a ſe male male et pegio como anno
facto a calicut et amalaca  linterprete jnteſo lo tuto
et diſſegli qel re de ſuo ſigniore era
piu potente de gente et de nauj q̃ lo re de portogalo et era re de
ſpagnia et jmperator̃ de tuttj li xp̃iani et ſe
nõ voleua eſſerli amicho li mandaria vnalta
fiata tanta gente qel deſtruerião il moro naro
ogni coſa al re alhora li diſſe ſe
conſigliarebe cõ li ſui et nel di ſeguente li
riſponderebe poy fece portare vna colatiõe de molte
viuãde tute de carne poſte in piati de porcelane cõ
molti vazi di vino  data la colatiõe li
noſti retornoronno et ne diſſero lo tuto
 il re de mazaua q̃ era lo pimo dopo
queſto re et ſigniore de alcante yſolle ando in tera
ꝓ dire al re la grande cortezia del nr̃o capo
genneralle. []
at noon on sunday, april seven, we entered the port of
zubu, passing by many villages, where we saw many houses built upon
logs. on approaching the city, the captain-general ordered the ships to
fling their banners. the sails were lowered and arranged as if for
battle, and all the artillery was fired, an action which caused great
fear to those people. the captain sent a foster-son of his as
ambassador to the king of zubo with the interpreter. when they reached
the city, they found a vast crowd of people together with the king, all
of whom had been frightened by the mortars. the interpreter told
them that that
was our custom when entering into such places, as a sign of peace and
friendship, and that we had discharged all our mortars to honor the
king of the village. the king and all of his men were reassured, and
the king had us asked by his governor what we wanted. the interpreter
replied that his master was a captain of the greatest king and prince
in the world, and that he was going to discover malucho; but that he had come solely
to visit the king because of the good report which he had heard of him
from the king of mazaua, and to buy food with his merchandise. the king
told him that he was welcome [literally: he had come at a good
time], but that it was their custom for all ships that entered their
ports to pay tribute, and that it []was but four days since a
junk from ciama [i.e., siam] laden with gold and slaves had paid
him tribute. as proof of his statement the king pointed out to the
interpreter a merchant from ciama, who had remained to trade the gold
and slaves. the interpreter told the king that, since his master was
the captain of so great a king, he did not pay tribute to any seignior
in the world, and that if the king wished peace he would have peace,
but if war instead, war. thereupon, the moro merchant said to the king
cata raia chita that is to say, “look well, sire.” “these
men are the same who have conquered calicut, malaca, and all india
magiore [i.e., india major]. if they are treated well, they will give good
treatment, but if they are treated evil, evil and worse treatment, as
they have done to calicut and malaca.” the interpreter understood
it all and told the king that his master’s king was more powerful
in men and ships than the king of portogalo, that he was the king of
spagnia and emperor of all the christians, and that if the king did not
care to be his friend he would next time send so many men that they
would destroy him. the moro related everything to the
king, who said
thereupon that he would deliberate with his men, and would answer the
captain on the following day. then he had refreshments of many dishes,
all made from meat and contained in porcelain platters, besides many
jars of wine brought in. after our men had refreshed themselves, they
returned and told us everything. the king of mazaua, who was the most
influential after that king and the seignior of a number of islands,
went ashore to speak to the king of the great courtesy of our
captain-general. []
luni matina il nr̃o ſcriuão
inſieme cõ linterprete andorono in zubu  vene
il re con li ſui principali in piaza et fece ſedere li
noſti apreſſo lui  li diſe
ſe piu duno capo era in qʒſta compania et
ſel voleua lui pagaſſe tributo al imperatore ſuo
sor. riſpoſe de nõ ma voleua ſolamente
merchadantaſe cõ lui et non con alti
 diſſe q̃ era contento et ſe lo
capo nr̃o voleua eſſere ſuo amicho li
mandaſſe von pocho de ſangue del ſuo bracio drito
et coſſi farebe luy ꝓ ſegnio de piu vera
amiſitia  reſpoſe q̃ lo faria
 poy lo re li diſſe como tucti li capi
q̃ veniuão quiui se dauano pñti luno cõ
lalto et ſe lo nr̃o capo olui doueua
comenſare  linterprete li diſſe poy q̃
lui voleua mantegnire queſto coſtume cominciaſſe et
cuſſi comenſo.
monday morning, our notary, together with the
interpreter, went to zubu. the king, accompanied by his chiefs, came to
the open square where he had our men sit down near him. he asked the
notary whether there were more than one captain in that company, and
whether that captain wished him to pay tribute to the emperor his
master. the notary replied in the negative, but that the captain wished
only to trade with him and with no others. the king said that he was
satisfied, and that if the captain wished to become his friend, he
should send him a drop of blood from his right arm, and he himself
would do the same [to him] as a sign of the most sincere
friendship. the
notary answered that the captain would do it. thereupon, the king told
him that all the captains who came to that place, were wont to give
presents one to the other [i.e., mutual presents between the
king and the captain], and asked whether our captain or he ought to
commence. the
interpreter told the king that since he desired to maintain the custom,
he should commence, and so he did.
marti matina il re de mazaua con lo moro venne ale
naui  ſaluto lo capitano gñale da parte dil re
et diſcelli como ilre de zubu faceua adunare piu victuuaglia
poteua ꝓ darnela et como mandarebe dopo diſnare vno
ſuo nepote con dui otre de ſui principali ꝓ fare la
pace.  lo capo gñale fece armare vno de
le ſue ꝓprie arme et feceli dire como tuti nuy combateuamo
de qella ſorta; il moro molto ſi ſpauento
 il capo li diſſe nõ ſi
ſpauentaſſe perche le nr̃e ar me eranno piaceuoli
ali amici et []aſpere ali nemici  et coſi
como li fazoli aſciugano yl ſudore coſi le nr̃e
arme ateranno et deſtrugeno tuti li aduerſarj et maleuoli de
la nr̃a fede fece queſto acio el moro q̃ pareua
eſſere piu aſtuto de li alti lo
diceſſe al re.
tuesday morning the king of mazaua came to the ships
with the moro. he saluted the captain-general in behalf of the king [of
zubu], and said that the king of zubu was collecting as much food as
possible to give to him, and that after dinner he would send one of his
nephews and two others of his chief men to make peace. the
captain-general had one of his men armed with his own arms, and had the
moro told that we all fought in that manner. the moro was greatly
frightened, but the captain told him not to be frightened for our arms
were soft []toward our friends and harsh toward our enemies;
and as handkerchiefs wipe off the sweat so did our arms overthrow and
destroy all our adversaries, and those who hate our faith. the captain did that so
that the moro who seemed more intelligent than the others, might tell
it to the king.
dopo diſnare vene ale naui lo nipote del re
q̃ era principe col re de mazaua il moro il gouuernatore et il
barizello magiore cõ octo principali ꝓ fare la pace con
noi  lo capo gñale ſedendo in vna
cadedra de veluta roſſa li prin cipali in ſedie de
corame et li alti in tera ſoura ſtore li
diſſe ꝓ lo interprete ſe lo ſuo coſtume
era de parlare in ſecreto houero in publico et se queſto
principe col re de mazaua haueuão potere de fare la pace
 riſpoſero q̃ parla vano in publico et
q̃ coſtoro haueuão il potere de far la pace
 lo capo diſſe molte coſe
ſoura la pace et qel pregaua ydio la
confirmaſſe in cielo  diſcero que may
nõ haueuão aldite cotalle parolle et que pigliauão
grã piacere a vdir le  vedendo lo capo
q̃ queſto volenti eri aſcoltauão et
reſpondeuão li comincio dire coſe per indurli ala
fede: domando qal dopo la morte del re
ſuccedeſſe ala sa. riſpoſe q̃
lo re nõ haueua figlioli ma figliole et q̃ queſto
ſuo nipote haueua ꝓ moglie la magiore percio era lo
principe et quando li padri et madri eranno vequi non ſi
honorauão piu mali figlioli li comandauão  lo
capo li diſſe como ydio fece lo ciello la terra lo
mare et tucte le alte coſe et como inpoſſe
ſe []doueſſeno honnorare li padri et madri
et qi altramẽte faceua era condempnato nel fuoco
eterno et como tuti deſcendeuão de adam et eua
noſti primi parenti et como haueuamo lanima in mortalle
et molte altre coſe pertinenti ala fede tuti alegri li
ſuplicorono voleſſe laſarli dui homini ho al meno
vno acio li amayſtraſſe ne la fede et che li
farebẽo grande honnore  gli reſpoſe q̃
alhora nõ poteua laſciarli alguno ma ſe vole
uão eſſere xp̃iano lo prete nr̃o li
baptezarebe et q̃ vnalta fiata menaria preti et frati
queli inſegniarebẽo la fede nr̃a 
riſpoſero que pima voleuão parlare al re et
poy diuentarebenno xp̃iani  lagrimaſſemo
tuti ꝓ la grande alegreza lo capo li diſce
q̃ non ce facero xp̃iani ꝓ paura ne ꝓ
compiacerne ma vo lontariamẽte et acoloro q̃ voleuão
viuere ſecondo la ſua lege nõ li farebe facto
diſpiacer alguno mali xp̃iani ſerianno meglio viſti
et caregiati q̃ li alti  tuti gridaronno
aduna voce q̃ nõ ſe faceuão xp̃iani
ꝓ paura ne ꝓ compiacerne ma ꝓ ſua
ſpontanea volontate  alhora li diſſe q̃
ſi deuentauão xp̃iani gli laſſarebe vna
armatura ꝓ che cuſſi li era ſtato inpoſto
del ſuo re et como nõ poteuão vzare cõ le
ſue donne eſendo gentilli ſenza grandiſſimo
pecato et como li aſeguraua q̃ eſſendo
xiani non li aparerebe piu el domonio ſinon nel ponto
extremo de la ſua morte diceno q̃ no ſapeuano
reſponderli ꝓ le ſue belle parolle ma ſe
rimeteuano nele ſue []manj et faceſſe de loro
como de ſoy fideliſſimi ſeruitori  lo
capo piangendo li abrazo et agiungendo vna mano del principe
et vna del re fra le ſue li diſſe ꝓ la fede
portaua a dio et alimperator̃ ſuo ſigniore et ꝓ
lo habito q̃ haueua li prometeua q̃ li daua la pace
ꝓpe tua col re deſpagnia  reſpoſero
que lo ſimille prometeuão  coneluſa la
pace lo capo fece dare vna colatiõe  poy
lo principe et re preſentarono al capo da parte del
ſuo re alquanti ceſtoni de rizo porci capre et galine et li
diſcero li perdonaſce ꝓ cio tal coſe erano pocque
avno ſimille alui  lo capo dono al principe
vno panno biancho di tella ſotiliſſima vno bonnet rozo
al quante felce de chriſtalino et vno biquier dorato de vetro. li
vetri ſonno molto apreciati in queſte parte.  al
re di mazaua nõ li deto alguno pñte ꝓ che gia li
aueua dato vna veſte de cambaya con altre coſe et ali altri
aqi vna coſa aqi vnalto.
 mando poy al re de zubu ꝓ mi et vnalto
vna veſte de ſeta gialla et morella aguisa turcheſca vno
bonnet roſo fino alquante filce de criſtalino poſto ogni
coſa in vno piato dargento et dui biqui eri dorati in mano
 quando focemo nela cita trouaſſemo lo re in
ſuo palatio cõ molti homini q̃ ſe deua in tera
ſoura vna ſtora di palma  haueua ſola mente
vno panno de tella de bombazo dinanzi ale ſue ꝟgonie vno
velo intorno lo capo lauorato aguchia vna colana al colo de grã
precio due ſquione grande de oro tachate ale orecquie cõ
petre precioſe atorno  era graſſo et picolo
et depinto cõ []lo fuocho a diuerſe maniere mangiaua
in tera ſoura vnalta ſtora oui de bissascutelaza
poſti in dui vazi de porcelañ et haueua dinanzi
quato vazi piennj de vino de palma ſerati con erbe
odiri fere et ficati catro cannuti con ogni vno cõ queſti
beueua. facta la debita reuerentia linterprete li diſſe como
lo ſuo ſigniore lo rengratiaua molto del ſuo pñte
et que li mandaua queſto nõ ꝓ il ſuo ma
ꝓ lo trinſicho amore li portaua  li
veſteſſemo la veſte gli poneſſemo il
bonnet in capo et li deſſemo le altre coſe et poy
baſandoli vetri et ponendoli ſoura lo capo le li
preſentai et facendo lui el ſimilli li accepto poi il re ne
fece mãgiare de qelli oui et bere con
qelli canuti li alti ſui in queſto mezo
gli diſſero lo parlamto del capo
ſopa la pace et lo exortamento ꝓ farli
xp̃iani il re ne volce te ner ſecho acene  li
diceſſemo non poteuamo aloro reſtare pigliata la
liſentia il principe ne meno ſeco a caſa ſua doue
ſonauano catro fanciulle vna de tamburo amodo nr̃o ma era
poſta in tera  vnalta daua vno legnio facto
alcanto groſſo nel capo con tella de palma in due borquia
pichate mo in la vna mo in lalta 
lalta in vna borquia grande col medeſimo modo. la
vltima cõ due brochiete in mão dando luna ne
lalta faceua vno ſuaue ſonno tanto atempo
ſonauão que pareua haueſſeno grã ragion
del canto queſte eranno aſay belle et bian que []caſi como le noſtre et coſi
grande  eranno nude ſinon q̃ haueuão tella
de arbore de la cinta fina al ginoquio et algune tute nude col pichieto
dele orechie grande con vno cerquieto de legnio dentro quelo tene tondo
et largo cõ li capeli grandi et negri et cõ vno velo
picolo atorno il capo et ſempre diſcalce il principe ne fece
balare cõ tre tutte nude  merendaſſemo et
dapoy veniſſemo ale naui  queſte borchie
ſonno de metalo et ſe fanno ne la regiõe del
ſignio magno q̃ e detta la china  quiui le vzanno
como nuy le campane et le chiamano aghon.
after dinner the king’s nephew, who was the
prince, came to the ships with the king of mazaua, the moro, the
governor, the chief constable, and eight chiefs, to make peace with us.
the captain-general was seated in a red velvet chair, the principal
men on leather
chairs, and the others on mats upon the floor. the captain-general
asked them through the interpreter whether it were their custom to
speak in secret or in public, and whether that prince and the king of
mazaua had authority to make peace. they answered that they spoke in public, and that
they were empowered to make peace. the captain-general said many things
concerning peace, and that he prayed god to confirm it in heaven. they
said that they had never heard any one speak such words, but that they
took great pleasure in hearing them. the captain seeing that they
listened and answered willingly, began to advance arguments to induce
them to accept the faith. asking them who would succeed to the
seigniory after the death of the king, he was answered that the king
had no sons but only daughters, the eldest of whom was the wife of that
nephew of his, who therefore was the prince. [they said that] when the
fathers and mothers grew old, they received no further honor, but their
children commanded them. the captain told them that god made the sky,
the earth, the sea, and everything else, []and that he had
commanded us to honor our fathers and mothers, and that whoever did
otherwise was condemned to eternal fire; that we are all descended from
adam and eva, our first parents; that we have an immortal
spirit; and
many other things pertaining to the faith. all joyfully entreated the
captain to leave them two men, or at least one, to instruct them in the faith, and
[said] that they would show them great honor. the captain replied to
them that he could not leave them any men then, but that if they wished
to become christians, our priest would baptize them, and that he would
next time bring priests and friars who would instruct them in our
faith. they answered that they would first speak to their king, and
that then they would become christians, [whereat] we all wept with
great joy. the captain-general told them that they should not become
christians for fear or to please us, but of their own free
wills; and that
he would not cause any displeasure to those who wished to live
according to their own law, but that the christians would be better
regarded and treated than the others. all cried out with one voice that
they were not becoming christians through fear or to please us, but of
their own free will. then the captain told them that if they became
christians, he would leave a suit of armor, for so had his king commanded him;
that we could not have intercourse with their women without committing
a very great, sin, since they were pagans; and that he assured them
that if they became christians, the devil would no longer appear to
them except in the last moment at their death. they said that they could not answer
the beautiful words of the []captain, but that they placed
themselves in his hands, and that he should treat them as his most
faithful servants. the captain embraced them weeping, and clasping one
of the prince’s hands and one of the king’s between his
own, said to them that, by his faith in god and to his sovereign, the
emperor, and by the habit which he wore, he promised them that he would give them
perpetual peace with the king of spagnia. they answered that they
promised the same. after the conclusion of the peace, the captain had
refreshments served to them. then the prince and the king [of mazaua]
presented some baskets of rice, swine, goats, and fowls to the
captain-general on behalf of their king, and asked him to pardon them,
for such things were but little [to give] to one such as he. the
captain gave the prince a white cloth of the finest linen, a red cap,
some strings of glass beads, and a gilded glass drinking cup. those
glasses are greatly appreciated in those districts. he did not give any
present to the king of mazaua, for he had already given him a robe of
cambaya, besides other articles. to the others he gave now one thing and now
another. then he sent to the king of zubu through me and one other a
yellow and violet silk robe, made in turkish style, a fine red cap,
some strings of glass beads, all in a silver dish, and two gilt
drinking cups in our hands. when we reached the city we found the king in his
palace surrounded by many people. he was seated on a palm mat on the
ground, with only a cotton cloth before his privies, and a scarf
embroidered with the needle about his head, a necklace of great value
hanging from his neck, and two large gold earrings fastened in his ears
set round []with precious gems. he was fat and short, and
tattooed with fire in various designs. from another mat on the ground
he was eating turtle eggs which were in two porcelain dishes, and he
had four jars full of palm wine in front of him covered with
sweet-smelling herbs and arranged with four small reeds in each jar by
means of which he drank. having duly made reverence to him, the interpreter
told the king that his master thanked him very warmly for his present,
and that he sent this present not in return for his present but for the
intrinsic love which he bore him. we dressed him in the robe, placed the cap on his
head, and gave him the other things; then kissing the beads and putting
them upon his head, i presented them to him. he doing the same
[i.e., kissing them] accepted them. then the king had us eat
some of those eggs and drink through those slender reeds. the others,
his men, told him in that place, the words of the captain concerning
peace and his exhortation to them to become christians. the king wished
to have us stay to supper with him, but we told him that we could not
stay then. having taken our leave of him, the prince took us with him
to his house, where four young girls were playing
[instruments]—one, on a drum like ours, but resting on the
ground; the second was striking two suspended gongs alternately with a
stick wrapped somewhat thickly at the end with palm cloth; the third,
one large gong in the same manner; and the last, two small gongs held
in her hand, by striking one against the other, which gave forth a
sweet sound. they played so harmoniously that one would believe they
possessed good musical sense. []those girls were very
beautiful and almost as white as our girls and as large. they were
naked except for tree cloth hanging from the waist and reaching to the
knees. some were quite naked and had large holes in their ears with a
small round piece of wood in the hole, which keeps the hole round and
large. they have long black hair, and wear a short cloth about the
head, and are always barefoot. the prince had three quite naked girls
dance for us. we took refreshments and then went to the ships. those
gongs are made of brass [metalo] and are manufactured in the
regions about the signio magno which is called china. they are used in those
regions as we use bells and are called aghon.
mercore matina ꝓ eſſere morto vno
deli noſti nella nocte paſſata linterprete et
yo andaſſemo adomander al re doue lo poteriamo ſe pelire
trouaſſemo lo re acompagniato de molti homini acui facta la
debita reuerenſia li lo diſſe riſpoſe ſe
io et li mey vaſalli ſemo tucti del tuo ſigniore
quãto magiormte debe eſſere la terra et li
dice como voleuamo conſacrare il luoco et meterlj vna croce
 riſpoſe que era molto contento et q̃ la
voleua adorare como nuy alti  fu ſepolto lo
morto nela piaza al meglio poteſſemo ꝓ darli bõ
exempio et poy la conſacraſſemo 
ſultardi ne sepeliſſemo vno alto
portaſſemo molta merchantia in terra et la
meteſſemo in vna caſa qal el re latolſe
ſoura ſua fede et quatro homini q̃ eranno reſtati
per merchadantare in groſſo. queſti populi viueno
cõ juſtitia peſo et mezura  amano la pace
lotio et []laquiete  anno bilancie de legnio
 lo legnio a vna corda nel mezo cõ laqal
ſetiene duno capo e piombo et delalto ſegni como
carti terci et librr̃ quando voleno pezare pigliano la
belanſia ch̃ e cõ tre filli como le nr̃e et la
meteno ſoura li ſegni et cuſi peſano juſto
 anno mezure grandiſſime ſenza fondo
 le jouane jogano de zampognia fate como le nr̃e et le
chiamano subin  le caſe ſonno de legni de taule
et de cane edificate ſopa pali groſſi alti de
terra q̃ biſognia andarui dento cõ
ſcalle et anno camare como le nr̃e ſoto le caſe
teneno li porci capre et galine ſe trouono quiui corniolli grandi
belli al vedere q̃ amazano le balene leqalle le
jnguiotano viui quando loro ſonno nel corpo veneno fuora del
ſuo coperto et li magiano el core  queſta gente
le trouano poi viui apreſſo del core dele ballenne morte
 quenti anno denti la pelle negra il coperto biancho et la
carne  sonno boni da mangiare et le chiamano laghan.
on wednesday morning, as one of our men had died
during the previous night, the interpreter and i went to ask the king where we could
bury him. we found the king surrounded by many men, of whom, after the
due reverence was made, i asked it. he replied, “if i and my vassals all belong
to your sovereign, how much more ought the land.” i told the king
that we would like to consecrate the place, and to set up a cross there. he
replied that he was quite satisfied, and that he wished to adore the
cross as did we. the deceased was buried in the square with as much
pomp as possible, in order to furnish a good example. then we
consecrated the place, and in the evening buried another man. we
carried a quantity of merchandise ashore which we stored in a house.
the king took it under his care as well as four men who were left to
trade the goods by wholesale. those people live in accordance with justice, and
have weights and measures. they love []peace, ease, and
quiet. they have wooden balances, the bar of which has a cord in the
middle by which it is held. at one end is a bit of lead, and at the
other marks like quarter-libras, third-libras, and libras. when they
wish to weigh they take the scales which has three wires like ours, and
place it above the marks, and so weigh accurately. they have very large measures
without any bottom. the youth play on pipes made like ours which they
call subin. their houses are constructed of wood, and are built
of planks and bamboo, raised high from the ground on large logs, and
one must enter them by means of ladders. they have rooms like ours; and
under the house they keep their swine, goats, and fowls. large sea
snails [corniolli], beautiful to the sight, are found there
which kill whales. for the whale swallows them alive, and when they are
in the whale’s body, they come out of their shells and eat the
whale’s heart. those people afterward find them alive near the
dead whale’s heart. those creatures have black teeth and skin and
a white shell, and the flesh is good to eat. they are called
laghan.
vennere li moſtraſſemo vna botega
pienna de le nr̃e merchantie ꝓ ilque reſtoronno molto
admirati ꝓ metalle fero et lalta merchantia
groſſa ne dauano horo ꝓ le altre menute ne
dauão riſo porci et capre cõ altre vi tuualgie
 queſti populi ne dauano x peci de oro ꝓ xiiij
libre de ferro vno pezo e circo duno ducato emezo  lo
capo gñale non volſe ſe pigliaſſe
tropo oro perque ſarebe ſtato alguno marinaro q̃
hauerebe dato tuto lo ſuo ꝓ vno poco de oro []et
haueria diſconciato lo trafigo ꝓ semper  sabato
ꝓ hauer̃ ꝓmeſſo lo re al capo
de farſi xp̃iano ne la dominicha ſe fece ne la piaza
q̃ era ſacrata vno tribunalle adornato de
tapiſſeria et rami de palma ꝓ baptizarlo et mandoli
adire q̃ nella matina nõ haueſe paure dele bombarde
per cio era noſto coſtume ne le feſte magiore
deſcaricar̃ ſenza pietre.
on friday we showed those people a shop full of our
merchandise, at
which they were very much surprised. for metals, iron, and other large
merchandise they gave us gold. for the other smaller articles they gave
us rice, swine, goats, and other food. those people gave us x pieces of
gold for xiiii libras of iron (one piece being worth about one and one-half
ducados). the captain-general did not wish to take too much gold, for
there would have been some sailors who would have given all that they
owned for a small amount of gold, and would have []spoiled the trade for ever. on saturday, as the captain had
promised the king to make him a christian on sunday, a platform was
built in the consecrated square, which was adorned with hangings and
palm branches for his baptism. the captain-general sent men to tell the
king not to be afraid of the pieces that would be discharged in the
morning, for it was our custom to discharge them at our greatest feasts
without loading with stones.
domeniga matina a quatordize de apille
andaſſemo in terra quaranta hõj cõ duy homini
tucti armati denanzi ala bandiera realle  quante
diſmõ taſſemo ſe tira tucta lartigliaria
 queſti populi ſiguião diqua et de la lo
capo et lo re ſe abraciorono li diſſe q̃
la bandera realle nõ ſi portaua in terra ſinon
cõ cinquanta homini como erano li dui armati et cõ
cinquanta ſchiopeteri ma ꝓ lo ſuo grande amore
coſi la haueua portata  poi tuti alegri
andaſſemo preſſo al tribunalle  lo
capo et lo re ſedeuão in cathedre de veluto
roſſo et morello li principalli in cuſſini li
alti ſoura ſtore  lo capo
diſſe al re ꝓ lo interprete ringratiaſſe
ydio ꝓ cio lo haueua inſpirato a farſe xp̃ano et
que vincerebe piu facilmente li ſui nemiſi q̃ prima
 riſpoſe q̃ voleua eſſere
xp̃iano ma alguni ſui principali nõ voleuano ho bedire
ꝓ che diceuano eſſere cuſſi homini como lui
 alhora lo nr̃o capo fece chiamare tucti li
principali del re et diſſeli ſenon hobediuão al
re como ſuo re li farebe amazare et daria la ſua roba al re
 riſpoſeno lo []hebedirebẽo
 diſſe al re ſe andaua in ſpagnia
retornarebe vnalta volta cõ tanto potere q̃ lo
faria lo magior re de qelle parte per che era ſtato
pimo a voler farſe xp̃iano  leuando li
many al ciello lo rengratio et pregolo alguni de ly ſoy
rimaneſſe açio meglio lui et li ſui populi focero
inſtructi nelafede lo capo reſpoſe que
ꝓ contentarlo li laſſarebe duy ma voleua menar
ſeco dui fanciulli deli principalli acio in paraſſeno la
linga nr̃a et poi ala ritornato ſapeſſero dire
aqueſti altri le coſe deſpagnia  ſe
miſſe vna croce grande nel mezo de la piaza  lo
capo li diſſe ſeſi voleuão far
xp̃iani como haueuão deto nelli giornj paſſati li
biſogniaua bru ſare tucti li ſui ydoli et nel luoco loro
metere vna croce et ogni di cõ le mane joncte adorarla et ogni
matina nel vzo farſi lo ſegnio de la croce moſtrandoli
como li faceua et ogni hora al meno de matina doueſſeno veni
re a queſta croce et adorarla in genoquioni et qel
q̃ haueuão ja deto voleſer̃ cõ le bonne
opere confirmarlo  el re cõ tucti li alti
voleuão confirmare lo tucto  lo capo
gñale li diſſe como ſera veſtito tuto de
biancho ꝓ moſtrarli lo ſuo ſincero amore
verſo de loro  riſpoſero ꝓ li
ſui dolci paroli nõ ſaperli reſpondere. con
queſte bonne parolle lo capo conduſſe lo re
ꝓ la mão ſul tribunalle ꝓ baptizarlo et
[]diſſeli ſe chiameria don carlo
como alinperator̃ ſuo ſigniore al principe don fernando
como al fratello delinperator̃ al re de mazaua johanni a vno
principalle fernando como il principalle noſto
çioe lo capo. al moro xoforo poy ali
alti aqi vno nome et aqi vno
alto  forenno baptizati inanzi meſſa
cinque cento hominj  vdita la meſſa lo
capo conuito adiſnar ſeco lo re cõ altri
principali  nõ volſero ne acompagniarono fina
ala riua  le naui ſcaricorono tutte le bombarde et
abrazandoſe preſſero combiatto.
on sunday morning, april fourteen, forty men of us
went ashore, two of whom were completely armed and preceded the royal
banner. when we
reached land all the artillery was fired. those people followed us hither and thither.
the captain and the king embraced. the captain told the king that the
royal banner was not taken ashore except with fifty men armed as were
those two, and with fifty musketeers; but so great was his love for him
that he had thus brought the banner. then we all approached the platform joyfully.
the captain and the king sat down in chairs of red and violet
velvet, the
chiefs on cushions, and the others on mats. the captain told the king through the
interpreter that he thanked god for inspiring him to became a
christian; and that [now] he would more easily conquer his enemies than
before. the king replied that he wished to become a christian, but that
some of his chiefs did not wish to obey, because they said that they
were as good men as he. then our captain had all the chiefs of the king
called, and told them that, unless they obeyed the king as their king,
he would have them killed, and would give their possessions to the
king. they replied that they would []obey him. the captain told
the king that he was going to spagnia, but that he would return again
with so many forces that he would make him the greatest king of those
regions, as he had been the first to express a determination to become
a christian. the king, lifting his hands to the sky, thanked the
captain, and requested him to let some of his men remain [with him], so
that he and his people might be better instructed in the faith. the
captain replied that he would leave two men to satisfy him, but that he
would like to take two of the children of the chiefs with him, so that
they might learn our language, who afterward on their return would be
able to tell the others the wonders [cose] of spagnia. a large
cross was set up in the middle of the square. the captain told them
that if they wished to become christians as they had declared on the
previous days, that they must burn all their idols and set up a cross
in their place. they were to adore that cross daily with clasped hands,
and every morning after their [i.e., the spaniards’]
custom, they were to make the sign of the cross (which the captain
showed them how to make); and they ought to come hourly, at least in
the morning, to that cross, and adore it kneeling. the intention that
they had already declared, they were to confirm with good works. the
king and all the others wished to confirm it thoroughly. the
captain-general told the king that he was clad all in white to
demonstrate his sincere love toward them. they replied that they could
not respond to his sweet words. the captain led the king by the hand to
the platform while speaking these good words in order to baptize him.
he told the king []that he would call him don carlo, after his
sovereign the emperor; the prince, don fernando, after the
emperor’s brother; the king of mazaua, johanni; a chief,
fernando, after our chief, that is to say, the captain; the moro,
christoforo; and then the others, now one name, and now another. five
hundred men were baptized before mass. after the conclusion of mass,
the captain invited the king and some of the other chiefs to dinner,
but they refused, accompanying us, however, to the shore. the ships
discharged all the mortars; and embracing, the king and chiefs and the
captain took leave of one another.
dopo diſnare il prete et alguni altri
andaſſemo in terra ꝓ baptizar la reyna
laqalle venne cõ quaranta dame la
conduceſſemo ſopa lo tribunalle facendola
ſedere ſoura vno coſſino et lalte zirca
ella fin qel prete sapara li moſtray vno jmagine de la
nr̃a donna vno bambino di legnio beliſſimo et vna croce
ꝓ il que li venne vna contrictiõe q̃ piangendo
domando lo bateſimo la nomina ſemo johanna como la madre de
linperator̃ ſua figliola moglie del principe catherina la
reyna de mazaua lizabeta a le altre ognuna lo ſuo nome
 bap tizaſſemo octo cento anime fra homini donne
et fanciulli  la regina era jouene et bella tuta coperta
duno panno biancho et nero haueua la bocha et le onghie
roſiſſime in capo vno capello grande de foglie de palma
amodo de ſolana cõ vna coronna in circa de le medeſme
foglie como qella del papa  ne may va in alguno
locho ſenza vna de queſte  ne demando il banbino
ꝓ []tenerlo in locho de li ſoi ydoli et poy
ſe parti  ſultardi il re et la reyna cõ
aſayſſime perſonne vennerono al lito 
lo capo alhora fece tirare molte trombe de fuocho et
bombarde groſſe ꝓ ilche pigliaronno grandiſimo
piacer̃  el capo et lo re ſe
chiamanão fratelli  queſto re ſe chiamaua
raia humabõ  jnanzi paſaſſeno octo
giorni forenno baptizati tucti de queſta yſola et dele altre
alguni bruſaſſemo vna vila ꝓ nõ vollere
hobedire al re ne a noy la qalle era in vna yſola
vicina aqueſta  poneſſemo quiui la croce
ꝓ que queſti populi eranno gentilli  ſe
foſſero ſtato mori li hauereſſemo poſto
vna colonna in ſegnio de piu dureza ꝓ che li mori
ſonno aſay piu duri ꝓ conuertirli cha li gentilli.
after dinner the priest and some of the others went
ashore to baptize the queen, who came with forty women. we conducted
her to the platform, and she was made to sit down upon a cushion, and
the other women near her, until the priest should be ready. she was
shown an image of our lady, a very beautiful wooden child jesus, and a
cross. thereupon, she was overcome with contrition, and asked for
baptism amid her tears. we named her johanna, after the emperor’s
mother; her daughter, the wife of the prince, catherina; the queen of
mazaua, lisabeta; and the others, each their [distinctive] name.
counting men, women, and children, we baptized eight hundred
souls. the
queen was young and beautiful, and was entirely covered with a white
and black cloth. her mouth and nails were very red, while on her head
she wore a large hat of palm leaves in the manner of a
parasol, with a
crown about it of the same leaves, like the tiara of the pope; and she
never goes any place without such a one. she asked us to give her the little child
[]jesus to keep in place of her
idols; and then
she went away. in the afternoon, the king and queen, accompanied by numerous
persons, came to the shore. thereupon, the captain had many trombs of
fire and large mortars discharged, by which they were most highly
delighted. the
captain and the king called one another brothers. that king’s
name was raia humabon. before that week had gone, all the persons of
that island, and some from the other island, were baptized. we burned
one hamlet which was located in a neighboring island, because it
refused to obey the king or us. we set up the cross there for those
people were heathen. had they been moros, we would have erected a
column there as a token of greater hardness, for the moros are much
harder to convert than the heathen.
jn queſti giorni lo capo gñalle
andaua ogni di in terra ꝓ vdire meſſa et diceua al re
molte coſe de la fede  la regina vene vno giorno
cõ molta pompa ad vdir la meſſa  tre
donzelle li andauão dinanzi con tre de li ſui capelli in
mão ela era veſtita de negro et biancho cõ vno velo
grande de ſeta trauerſato cõ liſte de oro in capo
q̃ li copriua li ſpalle et cõ lo ſuo capello
 aſaiſſime donne la ſeguiuão
leqalle erão tute nude et diſcalce ſenon
jntorno le parte ꝟgonioſe haueuão vno paniocolo de
tella de palma et atorno lo capo vno velo picollo et tucti li capilli
ſparſi  la regina facta la reuerentia al altare
ſedete ſupa vno coſſino lauorato di
ſeta inanzi ſe comenſaſſe la meſſa
il capo la ba gnio cõ alquante ſue dame de
hacqua roza muſchiata molto []ſe delectauão de
talle odore  ſapendo lo capo qel
bambino molto piaceua a la reyna liel dono et li diſſe lo
teneſſe in locho de li ſui ydoli ꝓ che era in
memoria del figlol de dio  ringratiandolo molto lo
accepto.
the captain-general went ashore daily during those
days to hear mass, and told the king many things regarding the
faith. one day
the queen came with great pomp to hear mass. three girls preceded her
with three of her hats in their hands. she was dressed in black and white with a
large silk scarf, crossed with gold stripes thrown over her head, which
covered her shoulders; and she had on her hat. a great number of women
accompanied her, who were all naked and barefoot, except that they had
a small covering of palm-tree cloth before their privies, and a small
scarf upon the head, and all with hair flowing free. the queen, having
made the due reverence to the altar, seated herself on a silk
embroidered cushion. before the commencement of the mass, the captain
sprayed her and some of her women with musk rosewater, for they
delighted exceedingly []in such perfumes. the captain
knowing that the queen was very much pleased with the child jesus, gave
it to her, telling her to keep it in place of her idols, for it was in
memory of the
son of god. thanking him heartily she accepted it.
vno giorno lo capo gñale inanzi
meſſa feſſe venire lo re veſtito cõ la
ſua veſta de ſeta et li principali de la cita il
fradello del re padre del principe se chiamaua bendara vno
alto fratello del re cadaio et alguni simiut ſibuaia
sisacai et maghalibe et molti alti que laſſo
ꝓ non eſſere longo  fece tuti
q̃ſti jurare eſſere hobedienti al ſuo re et li
baſaronno la mano poi fece qel re deſſere
ſempre hobediente et fidelle al re deſpagnia 
coſi lo juro  alhora il capo cauo la
ſua ſpada inanzi la ymagina de nr̃a donna et
diſſe al re quando coſſi ſe juraua piu
preſto doueriaſi morire que aromper vno ſimil
juramẽto ſiquel juraua ꝓ queſta ymagine ꝓ
la vita de limperator̃ ſuo se. et ꝓ il
ſuo habito deſſerle ſempre fidelle 
facto queſto lo capo donno al re vna cathedra de veluta
roſſo dicendoli ounque andaſſe ſemꝓ la
faceſſe portare dinanzi avn ſuo piu porpinque et
moſtroli como la ſi doueua portare reſpoſe lo
farebe volentierj ꝓ amore ſuo et diſce al
capo como faceua far vna joya ꝓ donarlila
laqal era due ſchione doro grande ꝓ tacare ali
oreqie due ꝓ metere ali brazi soura li gomedi et due
altre ꝓ pore ali piedi ſoura le calcagnie et altre petre
precioſe ꝓ []adornare le orechie 
queſti ſonno li piu belli adornamẽti poſſano
vzare li re de queſte bande liqalli ſempre vano
deſcalci con vno panno de tella de la cinta fina al ginochio.
before mass one day, the captain-general had the king
come clad in his silk robe, and the chief men of the city, [to wit],
the king’s brother and prince’s father, whose name was
bendara; another of the king’s brothers, cadaio; and certain ones
called simiut, sibuaia, sisacai, maghalibe, and many others whom i
shall not name in order not to be tedious. the captain made them all swear to be
obedient to their king, and they kissed the latter’s hand. then
the captain had the king declare that he would always be obedient and
faithful to the king of spagnia, and the king so swore. thereupon, the captain drew
his sword before the image of our lady, and told the king that when
anyone so swore, he should prefer to die rather than to break such an
oath, if he
swore by that image, by the life of the emperor his sovereign, and by
his habit to be ever faithful. after the conclusion of that the captain
gave the king a red velvet chair, telling him that wherever he went he
should always have it carried before him by one of his nearest
relatives; and he showed him how it ought to be carried. the king
responded that he would do that willingly for love of him, and he told
the captain that he was making a jewel to give to him, namely, two
large earrings of gold to fasten in his ears, two armlets to put on his arms, above
the elbows, and two other rings for the feet above the ankles, besides
other precious []gems to adorn the ears. those are the most beautiful
ornaments which the kings of those districts can wear. they always go
barefoot, and wear a cloth garment that hangs from the waist to the
knees.
jl capo gñale vno jorno
diſſe al re et ali alti ꝓ qal
cagionne nõ bruzauão li ſoi ydoli como li
haueuão ꝓmeſſo eſendo chriſtiannj et
ꝓ che ſe ly ſacrificaua tanta carne 
riſpoſero qel q̃ faceuão non lo
faceuão ꝓ loro ma ꝓ vno infermo açio li
ydoli li daſſe ſalute laqel non parlaua ja
cato giorni  era fratello del principe et lo piu
valente et sauio de la yſolo lo capo gli
diſſe q̃ bruſſaſero le ydoli et
credeſſeno in chriſto et ſe linfermo ſe
baptiſaſſe ſubito garirebe et ſe cio nõ
foce li tagliaſſero lo capo alhora alhora riſpoſe
lo re lo farebe ꝓ che varamẽte credeua in chriſto
faceſſemo vna ꝓceſſione dela piaza fino ala
caſa de linfermo al meglio poteſſemo oue lo
trouaſſemo que non poteua parlare ne mouerſe
 lo baptizaſſemo cõ due ſue mogliere
et x donzelle poi lo capo li fece dire como ſtaua
ſubito parlo et diſſe como ꝓ la graca
de nr̃o sor. ſtaua aſſay benne
 queſto fu vno manifeſſimo miraculo nelli
tempi noſti  quando lo capo lo
vdi parlare rengratio molto ydio et aloro li fece beuere vna mandolata
q̃ gia laueua facta fare ꝓ lui  poi mandogli
vno matarazo vno paro de lenſoli vna coperta de panno jallo et vno
cuſſino et ogni giorno fin q̃ fo ſanno li
mãdo mandolattj acqua roſa oleo []rozato et algune conſerue de zucaro
nõ ſtete cinque giorni qel comincio a andare
fece bruzare vno ydolo q̃ teniuão aſcoſo certe
vecquie in caſa ſua in p̃ntia del re et tuto lo populo
et fece diſfare molti tabernacoli ꝓ la riua del mare
neliqalli mangiauão la carne conſacrata
 loro medeſimi cridarono caſtiglia caſtiglia
 li rouinauão et diſſeno ſe dio li
preſtaua vita bruſarebenno quanti ydoli poteſſe
trouare et ſe benne fuſſero in caſa del re.
queſti ydoli ſonno de legnio concaui ſenza li parti de
drieto  anno ly brazi aperti et li piedi voltati in
ſuſo con le gambe aperte et lo volto grande cõ
quato denti grandiſſimj como porci cingiari et
ſonno tucti depintj
one day the captain-general asked the king and the
other people why they did not burn their idols as they had promised
when they became christians; and why they sacrificed so much flesh to
them. they replied that what they were doing was not for themselves,
but for a sick man who had not spoken now for four days, so that the
idols might give him health. he was the prince’s brother, and the
bravest and wisest man in the island. the captain told them to burn
their idols and to believe in christ, and that if the sick man were
baptized, he would quickly recover; and if that did not so happen they
could behead him [i.e., the captain] then and there. thereupon,
the king replied that he would do it, for he truly believed in christ.
we made a procession from the square to the house of the sick man with
as much pomp as possible. there we found him in such condition that he
could neither speak nor move. we baptized him and his two wives, and x
girls. then the captain had him asked how he felt. he spoke immediately
and said that by the grace of our lord he felt very well. that was a
most manifest miracle [that happened] in our times. when the captain
heard him speak, he thanked god fervently. then he made the sick man
drink some almond milk, which he had already had made for him.
afterward he sent him a mattress, a pair of sheets, a coverlet of
yellow cloth, and a pillow. until he recovered his health, the captain
sent him almond milk, rosewater, []oil of roses, and some sweet
preserves. before five days the sick man began to walk. he had an idol
that certain old women had concealed in his house burned in the
presence of the king and all the people. he had many shrines along the
seashore destroyed, in which the consecrated meat was eaten. the
people themselves cried out “castiglia! castiglia!” and
destroyed those
shrines. they said that if god would lend them life, they would burn
all the idols that they could find, even if they were in the
king’s house. those idols are made of wood, and are hollow, and
lack the back parts. their arms are open and their feet turned up under
them with the legs open. they have a large face with four huge tusks
like those of the wild boar; and are painted all over.
jn queſta ysola ſonno molte ville li nomi de
leqalle et deli suoi et deli ſui principali ſonno
queſti cinghapola li ſui principali cilaton ciguibucan
cimaningha cimatichat cicanbul vna mandaui il ſuo principalle
apanoaan vna lalan il ſuo principalle theteu vna lalutan il
ſuo principalle tapan vna cilumai et vnalta lubucun
 tucti qʒſti ne hobediuão et ne
dauão victuuaglia et tributo apreſſo queſta yzola
de zubu ne era vna q̃ ſe chiamaua matan laqal
faceua lo porto doue eramo il nome dela ſua villa era matan li
ſui principali zula et cilapulapu  quella villa
q̃ bruzaſſemo era in queſta yzola et se chiama ua
bulaia
there are many villages in that island. their names,
those of their inhabitants, and of their chiefs are as follows:
cinghapola, and its chiefs, cilaton, ciguibucan, cimaningha,
cimatichat, and cicanbul; one, mandaui, and its chief, apanoaan; one
lalan, and its chief, theteu; one, lalutan, and its chief, tapan; one
cilumai; and one, lubucun. all those villages rendered obedience to us, and
gave us food and tribute. near that island of zubu was an island called
matan, which formed the port where we were anchored. the name of its
village was matan, and its chiefs were zula and cilapulapu. that city
which we burned was in that island and was called bulaia.
açio que vr̃a illma
sa ſapia le cerimonie q̃ vzanno coſtoro in
benedire lo porco primamente sonano []qelle
borchie grandi poi ſe porta tre piati grãdj dui cõ
roze et fogace de rizo et miglio cote et riuolte in foglie con peche
bruſtolato. lalto con panne de cambaia et due banderete
di palma  vno pano de cambaia ſe diſtende in
terra  poi veneno duy femine vequiſſime
ciaſcuna con vno tronbonne de cana in mão 
quando ſonno montate ſul panno fanno reuerentia al ſolle
poi ſe veſtenno cõ li pannj vna ſe pone vno
faciollo ne la fronte con dui cornj et piglia vnalto faciolo
ne le manj et balando et ſunando con qello chiama il
ſolle  lalta piglia vna de qelle
banderete et balla et ſuona col ſuo trõbonne
ballõ et chiamão cuſſi vno pocho fra ſe
dicendo molte coſe al ſolle  quella del faciolo
piglia lalta bandereta et laſcio lo faciolo et ambe due
ſonando cõ li trombonj gran pezo balanno intorno lo porco
ligato quella dali corni ſempre parla tacitamẽte al
ſolle et qela alta li riſponde
 poy aqella de li corni li e apreſentato
vna taça de vino et balando et dicendo certe parolle et
lalta reſpondendoli et facendo vista cato ho
cinque volte de beuere el vino ſparge qello ſoura
el core del porcho  poy ſubito torna aballare
 a queſta medeſima vien dato vna lancia ley
vibrandola et dicendo alquante parolle ſempre tute due balando et
moſtrã do cato ho cinque volte de dare [de dare:
doublet in original ms.] cõ la lancia nel core al porcho
con vna ſubbita preſteza lo paſſa da parte aparte
 preſto ſi ſera la ferita con erba
[]qe’lla q̃ amazato il
porcho ponendoſe vna torſa acceſa in boca laſmorza
laqalle ſta ſempre acceſa in queſte
ceremonie lalta col capo del trombonne bagniandolo nel
ſangue de porcho va ſanguinando col ſuo dito la fronte
pima ali ſoi mariti poy ali alti ma
nõ veñeroño may a noi  poy ſe
diſueſteno et vano amangiare quelle coſe q̃
ſonno nelli piati et conuitano senon femine  lo porcho
ſi pella cõ lo fuocho ſique ni ſuno
alto que le vequie conſacrano la carne di porcho et
nõ la magiauão ſe non foſſe morta de
queſta ſorte.
in order that your most illustrious lordship may know
the ceremonies that those people use in consecrating the swine, they
first sound those large []gongs. then three large dishes are brought
in; two with roses and with cakes of rice and millet, baked and wrapped
in leaves, and roast fish; the other with cloth of cambaia and two standards made of
palm-tree cloth. one bit of cloth of cambaia is spread on the ground.
then two very old women come, each of whom has a bamboo trumpet in her
hand. when they have stepped upon the cloth they make obeisance to the
sun. then they wrap the cloths about themselves. one of them puts a
kerchief with two horns on her forehead, and takes another kerchief in
her hands, and dancing and blowing upon her trumpet, she thereby calls
out to the sun. the other takes one of the standards and dances and
blows on her trumpet. they dance and call out thus for a little space,
saying many things between themselves to the sun. she with the kerchief
takes the other standard, and lets the kerchief drop, and both blowing
on their trumpets for a long time, dance about the bound hog. she with
the horns always speaks covertly to the sun, and the other answers her.
a cup of wine is presented to her of the horns, and she dancing and
repeating certain words, while the other answers her, and making
pretense four or five times of drinking the wine, sprinkles it upon the
heart of the hog. then she immediately begins to dance again. a lance
is given to the same woman. she shaking it and repeating certain words,
while both of them continue to dance, and making motions four or five
times of thrusting the lance through the heart of the hog, with a
sudden and quick stroke, thrusts it through from one side to the other.
the wound is quickly stopped with []grass. the one who has killed the
hog, taking in her mouth a lighted torch, which has been lighted
throughout that ceremony, extinguishes it. the other one dipping the end of her
trumpet in the blood of the hog, goes around marking with blood with
her finger first the foreheads of their husbands, and then the others;
but they never came to us. then they divest themselves and go to eat
the contents of those dishes, and they invite only women [to eat with
them]. the hair is removed from the hog by means of fire. thus no one
but old women consecrate the flesh of the hog, and they do not eat it
unless it is killed in this way.
queſti populi vano nudi portano ſolamente
vno pezo de tella de palma otorno le ſue vergonie grandi et picoli
hanno paſſato il ſuo membro circa dela teſta de
luna parte alalta con vno fero de oro houero de ſtanio
groſſo como vna penna de ocha et in vno capo et
lalto del medeſimo fero alguni anno como vna
ſtella con ponte ſoura li capi alti como vna
teſta de chiodo da caro  aſaiſſime
volte lo volſi vedere da molti coſi veqi como
joueni ꝓ che nõ lo potteua credere  nel mezo
dil fero e vn buso ꝓ ilqalle vrinano  il
fero et le ſtelle ſemp̃ ſtanno ferme loro diceno
q̃ le ſue moglie voleno cuſſi et ſe
foſſero de altra ſorte nõ vzariano cõ elli
 quando queſti voleno vzare cõ le femine loro
mediſime lo pigliano nõ in ordine et cominciano pian piano
a meterſi dentoo pimo qella
ſtella de ſoura et poy lalta quanto
edento diuenta in ordine et cuſi ſempre ſta
dento fin que diuenta molle perche altramẽti nõ
lo []porianno cauare fuora.  queſti
populi vzanno queſto ꝓche ſonno de debille natura
 anno quante moglie voleno ma vna principalle 
se vno deli nr̃i andaua in tera coſi dedi como de nocte ogni
uno lo conuitaua que mangiaſſe et qel
beueſſe  le ſue viuande ſonno mezo cote
et molto ſalate beueno ſpeſſo et molto con
qelli ſui cannuti dali valzi et duro cinqʒ
oſey hore vno ſuo mangiare  le donne
amauão aſay piu noy que queſti atucti da ſey anny
in ſu apoco apoco li apreno la natura ꝓ cagion de
qelli ſui membrj.
those people go naked, wearing but one piece of
palm-tree cloth about their privies. the males, large and small, have
their penis pierced from one side to the other near the head, with a
gold or tin bolt as large as a goose quill. in both ends of the same
bolt, some have what resembles a spur, with points upon the ends;
others are like the head of a cart nail. i very often asked many, both
old and young, to see their penis, because i could not credit it. in
the middle of the bolt is a hole, through which they urinate. the bolt
and the spurs always hold firm. they say that their women wish it so,
and that if they did otherwise they would not have communication with
them. when the men wish to have communication with their women, the
latter themselves take the penis not in the regular way and commence
very gently to introduce it [into their vagina], with the spur on top
first, and then the other part. when it is inside it takes its regular
position; and thus the penis always stays inside until it gets soft,
for otherwise []they could not pull it out. those people make
use of that device because they are of a weak nature. they have as many
wives as they wish, but one of them is the principal wife. whenever any of our men
went ashore, both by day and by night, every one invited him to eat and
to drink. their viands are half cooked and very salty. they drink
frequently and copiously from the jars through those small reeds, and one of their
meals lasts for five or six hours. the women loved us very much more
than their own men. all of the women from the age of six years and
upward, have their vaginas [natura] gradually opened because of
the men’s penises.
quando vno deli ſui principali emorto li vzanno
queſte cerimonie  pima mente tutte le donne
principale de la terra vano ala caſa del morte  in
mezo dela caſa ſta lo morto in vna caſa  in
torno la caſa poneno corde a mo do duno ſtecato
neliqali atachano molti ramy de arbore  in mezo
de ogni ramo e vno panno de bonbaſo aguiſa de
pauigliõe soto liqualli ſedeanno le donne piu principali
tute coperte de panne bianqi de bombaſo per vna
donzella ꝓ ogni vna q̃ li faceua vento cõ vno
ſparauentolo di palma  le alte
ſedeanno intorno la camera meſte  poy era vna
q̃ tagliaua apoco apoco cõ vno cortello li capilli al morto
vnalta q̃ era ſtata la moglie principale del morto
giaceua ſoura lui et giungeua la ſua boca le ſue many et
li ſui piedi con qelli del morto.  quando
qella tagliaua li capilj queſta piangeua et quando
reſtaua de tagliarli []queſta cantaua 
atorno la camera erano molti vazi di porcelanna con fuoco et
ſupa qello mira ſtorac et belgioui
q̃ faceuano olere la caſa grandemẽte  lo
teneno in caſa cinque aſey giorni cõ queſte
cerimonie  credo ſia onto de canfora  poi
lo ſepeliſſeno cõ la medeſima caſa
serata con quiodi de legnio in vno legnio coperto et circundato de
legni. ogni nocte in queſta cita circa de la meza nocte veniua vno
vccelo negriſſimo grande como vno coruo et nõ era
cuſſi preſto ne le caſe chel gridaua ꝓ ilque
tucti li canj vrlauão et duraua quato ocinque ore
quel ſuo gridare et vrlare  nõ ne volſeno
may dire la cagiõ de queſto.
they practice the following ceremonies when one of
their chiefs dies. first all the chief women of the place go to the house of the
deceased. the deceased is placed in the middle of the house in a box.
ropes are placed about the box in the manner of a palisade, to which
many branches of trees are attached. in the middle of each branch hangs
a cotton cloth like a curtained canopy. the most principal women sit
under those hangings, and are all covered with white cotton cloth, each
one by a girl who fans her with a palm-leaf fan. the other women sit
about the room sadly. then there is one woman who cuts off the hair of
the deceased very slowly with a knife. another who was the principal
wife of the deceased, lies down upon him, and places her mouth, her
hands, and her feet upon those of the deceased. when the former is
cutting off the hair, the latter weeps; and when the former finishes
the cutting, the latter sings. there are many []porcelain jars containing fire about the room,
and myrrh, storax, and bezoin, which make a strong odor through the
house, are put on the fire. they keep the body in the house for five or
six days during those ceremonies. i believe that the body is anointed
with camphor. then they bury the body and the same box which is shut in
a log by means of wooden nails and covered and enclosed by logs of
wood. every
night about midnight in that city, a jet black bird as large as a crow
was wont to come, and no sooner had it thus reached the houses than it
began to screech, so that all the dogs began to howl; and that
screeching and howling would last for four or five hours, but those people would
never tell us the reason of it.
vennere a vintiſey de aqille zula
principale de qella yſola matan mando vno ſuo
figliolo con due capre apreſentarle al capo
gñale et dicendoli como li mandaua tuta ſua
ꝓmeſſa ma ꝓ cagion de lalto
principalle cilapulapu q̃ nõ voleua hobedire al re
deſpagnia nõ haueua potuto mandarglila et que nela nocte
ſeguente li mandaſſe ſolamente vno batello pienno
de homini ꝓ che lui li aiutaria et combateria  lo
capo gñale delibero de andarui cõ tre batelli
 lo pregaſſemo molto nõ voleſſe
vegnire ma lui como bon paſtore non volſe abandonare lo
ſuo grege. ameza nocte ſe partiſſemo ſexanta
homini armati de corſeletti et celade inſieme col re
xp̃iano il principi et alguni magiori et vinti o trenta ba languai
et tre hore inanſi lo jorno ariuaſſemo a matan
 lo capo non volſe combater alhora mali
mando adire ꝓ lo moro ſe voleuano hobedire []al
re de spagnia et recognioſcere lo re xp̃iano ꝓ
ſuo se. et darne lo nr̃a tributo li ſarebe
amicho maſe voleuano altramente aſpectaſſeno como
feriuão le nr̃e lance  riſpoſero
ſe haueuamo lance haueuão lancie de canne bruſtolatte
et pali bruſtolate et que nõ andaſſemo alhora ad
aſaltarli ma aſpectaſemo veniſſe lo giorno
perche ſarebenno piu gente. queſto diceuão açio
anda ſemo aritrouarli ꝓ che haueuão facto certi
foſſi fra le caze ꝓ farne caſcare
dento.  venuto lo giorno
ſaltaſſemo ne lacqua fina ale coſſie caranta
noue homini et cuſſi andaſſemo piu de dui trati de
baleſta inanzi poteſẽo ariuar al litto
 li bateli non potereno vegnire piu inanzi ꝓ certe
petre q̃ erano nel acqua  li alti vndici
homini reſtarono ꝓ gardia de li bateli  quando
ariuaſſemo in terra queſta gente haueuão facto
tre ſcadrony de piu de mille cinque cento ꝓſonne
ſubito ſentendone ne venirono a doſſo con voci
grandiſſimi dui ꝓ fiancho et lalto ꝓ
contro.  lo capo quã do viſte
queſto ne fece dui parti et coſi cominciaſſemo a
combater li ſquiopeti et baleſtieri tirarano da longi
caſi meza hora in vano ſola mente paſſandoli li
targoni facti de tauole ſotille et li brazi  lo
cappo gridaua nõ tirare nõ tirare ma non li
valeua niente. quando queſti viſtenno que tirauamo li
ſquiopeti in vano gridando deliborono a ſtar forte ma molto
piu gridauão  quando erano deſcarigati li
ſquiopeti []may nõ ſtauano fermi ſaltando
dequa et dela coperti con li ſui targonj ne tirauão tante
frechie lance de canna alguno di fero al capo gñalle
pali pontini bruſtolati pietre et lo fango apena ſe
poteuão defendere. vedendo queſto lo capo
gñale mando alguni abruſare le ſue caſe per
ſpauentarli quando queſti viſtenno bruzare le ſue
caze deuentorono piu fero  ci apreſſo de le
caſe forenno amazati dui deli nrj et vinti o trenta caſe li
bruſaſſemo  ne venirono tanti
adoſſo q̃ paſſarono cõ vna freza ve
nenata la gamba drita al capo per il que comando q̃
ſe retiraſſemo a poco apoco ma loro fugirono ſique
reſtaſſemo da ſey o octo cõ lo capitanio
 queſti non ne tirauão in alto
ſinon ale gambe per q̃ erano nude  ꝓ tante
lancie et pedre q̃ ne trahevano non poteſſemo
reſiſtere  le bombarde de li batelli ꝓ
eſſere tropo longui nõ ne poteuão ajutare
ſiche veniſſemo retirandoſi piu de vna bonna
baleſtrata longi de la riua ſempre comba tendo ne lacque fin
al ginoquio ſempre ne ſeguitoro et repigliando vna
medeſima lancie quato oſey volte ne la lanciauano
 queſti connioſſendo lo capo
tanti ſi voltorono ſopa de lui q̃ dui volte
li botarono lo celadõe fora del capo ma lui como bon caualiero
ſempre ſtaua forte cõ alguni alti piu de
vno hora coſſi combateſſemo et non volendoſi
piu retirare vno indio li lancio vna lanza di cana del vizo lui
 ſubito cõ la ſua lancia lo amazo et
laſciolila nel corpo poy volendo dar de []mano
a la ſpada non puote cauarla ſenon meza per vna ferita de
canna haueua nel brazo  quando viſteno queſto
tuti andorono adoſſo alui  vno cõ vno
grã terciado che e como vna ſimitara ma piu
groſſo li dete vna ferita nelagamba ſiniſtra
ꝓ laqalle caſco col volto inanzi 
subito li foreno adoſſo con lancie de fero et de cana et con
qelli ſui terciadi fin que il ſpechio il lume el
conforto et la vera guida nr̃a amazarono  quando lo
feriuão molte volte ſe volto indrieto ꝓ vedere
ſe eramo tucti dento neli bateli  poi
vedendolo morto al meglio poteſemo feriti ſe
ritraſſemo ali batelli q̃ gia ſe partiuão
 lo re xp̃iano ne hauereba ajutato ma lo
capo inanzi diſmontaſſemo in tera li
comiſſe non ſi doueſſe partire dal ſuo
balanghai et ſteſſe auedere in que modo
combateuão  quando lo re ſepe como era morto
piance ſe non era queſto pouero capo niuno de noy
si ſaluaua neli bateli ꝓ che quando lui combateua li
alti ſe retiravão ali batelli. spero in
vr̃a illma sa la fama duno ſi
generoſo capo non debia eſſere extinta neli
tempi noſti fra le altre vertu q̃ eranno in lui
era lo piu coſtante in vna grandiſſima fortuna q̃
may alguno alto foſſe ſupõ taua la
fame piu q̃ tucti li alti et piu juſtamente
q̃ homo foſſe al mondo carteaua et nauigaua et ſe
queſto fu il vero ſe ve de aperta mente ninguno
alto hauer̃ auuto tanto []jngenio ni ardire de
ſaper dar vna volta al mondo como ja cazi lui haueua dato.
queſta bataglia fo facta al sabato vintiſete de
apille . il capo la volſe fare in
ſabato ꝓ q̃ era lo giorno ſuo deuoto
nelaqalle foreno morti con lui octo de li nr̃i et
cato jndij facto xp̃iani dale bombarde deli bateli
q̃ eranno da poy venutj ꝓ aiutarne et deli nimici se non
quindici ma molti de noy feriti.
on friday, april twenty-six, zula, a chief of the
island of matan, sent one of his sons to present two goats to the
captain-general, and to say that he would send him all that he had
promised, but that he had not been able to send it to him because of
the other chief cilapulapu, who refused to obey the king of spagnia. he
requested the captain to send him only one boatload of men on the next
night, so that they might help him and fight against the other chief.
the captain-general decided to go thither with three boatloads. we
begged him repeatedly not to go, but he, like a good shepherd, refused
to abandon his flock. at midnight, sixty men of us set out armed with
corselets and helmets, together with the christian king, the prince,
some of the chief men, and twenty or thirty balanguais. we reached
matan three hours before dawn. the captain did not wish to fight then,
but sent a message to the natives by the moro to the effect that if
they would obey the king []of spagnia, recognize the
christian king as their sovereign, and pay us our tribute, he would be
their friend; but that if they wished otherwise, they should wait to
see how our lances wounded. they replied that if we had lances they had lances
of bamboo and stakes hardened with fire. [they asked us] not to proceed
to attack them at once, but to wait until morning, so that they might
have more men. they said that in order to induce us to go in search of
them; for they had dug certain pitholes between the houses in order
that we might fall into them. when morning came forty-nine of us leaped
into the water up to our thighs, and walked through water for more than
two crossbow flights before we could reach the shore. the boats could
not approach nearer because of certain rocks in the water. the other
eleven men remained behind to guard the boats. when we reached land,
those men had formed in three divisions to the number of more than one
thousand five hundred persons. when they saw us, they charged down upon
us with exceeding loud cries, two divisions on our flanks and the other
on our front. when the captain saw that, he formed us into two
divisions, and thus did we begin to fight. the musketeers and
crossbowmen shot from a distance for about a half-hour, but uselessly;
for the shots only passed through the shields which were made of thin
wood and the arms [of the bearers]. the captain cried to them,
“cease firing! cease firing!” but his order was not at all
heeded. when the natives saw that we were shooting our muskets to no
purpose, crying out they determined to stand firm, but they redoubled
their shouts. when our muskets were discharged, the natives
[]would never stand still, but leaped hither and
thither, covering themselves with their shields. they shot so many
arrows at us and hurled so many bamboo spears (some of them tipped with
iron) at the captain-general, besides pointed stakes hardened with
fire, stones, and mud, that we could scarcely defend ourselves. seeing
that the captain-general sent some men to burn their houses in order to
terrify them. when they saw their houses burning, they were roused to
greater fury. two of our men were killed near the houses, while we
burned twenty or thirty houses. so many of them charged down upon us
that they shot the captain through the right leg with a poisoned arrow.
on that account, he ordered us to retire slowly, but the men took to
flight, except six or eight of us who remained with the captain. the
natives shot only at our legs, for the latter were bare; and so many
were the spears and stones that they hurled at us, that we could offer
no resistance. the mortars in the boats could not aid us as they were
too far away. so we continued to retire for more than a good crossbow
flight from the shore always fighting up to our knees in the water. the
natives continued to pursue us, and picking up the same spear four or
six times, hurled it at us again and again. recognizing the captain, so
many turned upon him that they knocked his helmet off his head twice,
but he always stood firmly like a good knight, together with some
others. thus did we fight for more than one hour, refusing to retire
farther. an indian hurled a bamboo spear into the captain’s face,
but the latter immediately killed him with his lance, which he left in
the indian’s body. then, trying []to lay hand on sword,
he could draw it out but halfway, because he had been wounded in the
arm with a bamboo spear. when the natives saw that, they all hurled
themselves upon him. one of them wounded him on the left leg with a
large cutlass,
which resembles a scimitar, only being larger. that caused the captain
to fall face downward, when immediately they rushed upon him with iron
and bamboo spears and with their cutlasses, until they killed our
mirror, our light, our comfort, and our true guide. when they wounded
him, he turned back many times to see whether we were all in the boats.
thereupon, beholding him dead, we, wounded, retreated, as best we
could, to the boats, which were already pulling off. the christian king
would have aided us, but the captain charged him before we landed, not
to leave his balanghai, but to stay to see how we fought. when the king
learned that the captain was dead, he wept. had it not been for that
unfortunate captain, not a single one of us would have been saved in
the boats, for while he was fighting the others retired to the boats. i
hope through [the efforts of] your most illustrious lordship that the
fame of so noble a captain will not become effaced in our times. among
the other virtues which he possessed, he was more constant than ever
any one else in the greatest of adversity. he endured hunger better
than all the others, and more accurately than any man in the world did
he understand sea charts and navigation. and that this was the truth was
seen openly, for no other had had so much natural talent []nor
the boldness to learn how to circumnavigate the world, as he had almost
done. that battle was fought on saturday, april twenty-seven,
. the
captain desired to fight on saturday, because it was the day especially
holy to him. eight of our men were killed with him in that
battle, and
four indians, who had become christians and who had come afterward to
aid us were killed by the mortars of the boats. of the enemy, only
fifteen were killed, while many of us were wounded.
dopo diſnare le re xp̃iano mando adire
cõ lo noſto conſentimẽto aquelli de
matan se ne voleuão dare lo capo con li
alti morti q̃ li dareſſemo quanta
merchadantia voleſſero riſpoſero non ſi daua
vno tal homo como penſauamo et q̃ non lo darebenno ꝓ
la magior richeſſa del mondo ma lo voleuano tenire ꝓ
memoria ſua.
in the afternoon the christian king sent a message
with our consent to the people of matan, to the effect that if they
would give us the captain and the other men who had been killed, we
would give them as much merchandise as they wished. they answered that
they would not give up such a man, as we imagined [they would do], and
that they would not give him for all the riches in the world, but that
they intended to keep him as a memorial.
sabato q̃ fo morto lo capo
qelli cato q̃ ſtauano nela cita
ꝓ merchadantare fecero portare le noſtre merchantie alle
naui  poy faceſſemo dui gu bernatori duarte
barboza portugueſe parente del capo. et johã
ſeranno ſpagniolo  linterprete nr̃o q̃
ſe chiamaua henrich ꝓ eſſere vno poco ferito
nõ andaua piu in terra ꝓ fare le coſe nr̃e
neceſſarie ma ſtaua ſempre ne la ſquiauina
ꝓ ilque duarte barboſa guuernator̃ de la naue
capa li grido et diſſegli ſe benne e morto lo
capo ſuo se. ꝓ queſto non era
libero anzi voleua []quando foſſemo ariuati in
eſpagnia ſempre foſſe ſchiauo de ma dona
beatrice moglie del capo gñale et minaciandoli
ſe non anda ua in terra lo frustaria lo ſchiauo ſi leuo
et moſtro de non far cõto de queſte parolle et ando in
tera adire al re xp̃iano como ſe voleuão partire
preſto ma ſe lui voleua far a ſuo modo gadaneria li naue
et tucte le nr̃e merchadantie et cuſſi ordinorono vno
tradimento lo ſquiauo retorno ale naue et moſtro
eſſere piu ſacente que pima
on saturday, the day on which the captain was killed,
the four men who had remained in the city to trade, had our merchandise
carried to the ships. then we chose two commanders, namely, duarte
barboza, a
portuguese and a relative of the captain, and johan seranno, a
spaniard. as
our interpreter, henrich by name, was wounded slightly, he would not go
ashore any more to attend to our necessary affairs, but always kept his
bed. on that account, duarte barboza, the commander of the flagship,
cried out to him and told him, that although his master, the captain,
was dead, he was not therefore free; on the contrary he [i.e.,
barboza] would see []to it that when we should reach espagnia,
he should still be the slave of doña beatrice, the wife of the
captain-general. and threatening the slave that if he did go
ashore, he would be flogged, the latter arose, and, feigning to take no
heed to those words, went ashore to tell the christian
king that we
were about to leave very soon, but that if he would follow his advice,
he could gain the ships and all our merchandise. accordingly they
arranged a plot, and the slave returned to the ship, where he showed
that he was more cunning than before.
mercore matina pimo de magio lo re
xp̃ono mando adire ali gouuernatory como erano preparate le gioie
haueu  ꝓmeſſo de mandare al re
deſpagnia et que li pregaua cõ li alti ſoi
andaſero diſinare ſecho qella matina q̃
li la darebe andorono  homini in tera  cõ
queſti ando lo nr̃o aſtrologo che ſe chiamaua s.
martín de siuilla yo non li pote andare ꝓ che era tuto
infiato per vna ferita de freza venenata che haueua nela fronte
 jouan caruaio cõ lo barizello tornorono indietro et
ne diſcero como viſteno colui reſa nato ꝓ
miracolo menare lo prete acaſa ſua et ꝓ queſto
ſeranno partittj per che dubitauão de qalque
malle  nõ diſſero coſi preſto le
parolle que ſentiſſimo grã gridi et lamenti
 ſubito leuaſſemo lanchore et tirando molte
bombarde nele caſe ne aꝓpinquaſſemo piu ala terra
et cuſſi tirãdo vedeſſemo johã
ſeranno in camiza ligato et ferito gridare nõ
doueſſemo piu tirare per che lamazarebenno  li
[]domandaſſemo ſe tucti li
alti con lo interprete erano morti 
diſſe tucti erano morti ſaluo linterprete ne prego molto
lo doueſſemo reſcatare cõ qalque
merchadantia ma johã caruiao ſuo compare non volſero
ꝓ reſtare loro patronj andaſſe lo batello in tera
 ma johan ſeranno pur piangendo ne diſſe
q̃ nõ hauereſſemo coſi preſto facto
vella q̃ lauerianno amazato et diſſe q̃ pregaua
ydio nel jorno del juditio dimandaſſe lanima ſua a johan
caruiao ſuo compadre  ſubito ſe
partiſſemo  nõ ſo ſe morto o
viuo lui reſtaſſe.
on wednesday morning, the first of may, the christian
king sent word to the commanders that the jewels which he had promised to send to
the king of spagnia were ready, and that he begged them and their other
companions to come to dine with him that morning, when he would give
them the jewels. twenty-four men went ashore, among whom was our
astrologer, san martín de sivilla. i could not go because i was
all swollen up by a wound from a poisoned arrow which i had received in
my face. jovan carvaio and the constable returned, and told us that they saw the man
who had been cured by a miracle take the priest to his
house.
consequently, they had left that place, because they suspected some
evil. scarcely had they spoken those words when we heard loud cries and
lamentations. we immediately weighed anchor and discharging many
mortars into the houses, drew in nearer to the shore. while thus
discharging [our pieces] we saw johan seranno in his shirt bound and
wounded, crying to us not to fire any more, for the natives would kill
[]him. we asked him whether all the others and the
interpreter were dead. he said that they were all dead except the
interpreter. he begged us earnestly to redeem him with some of the
merchandise; but johan carvaio, his boon companion, [and others] would
not allow the boat to go ashore so that they might remain masters of
the ships. but
although johan serrano weeping asked us not to set sail so quickly, for
they would kill him, and said that he prayed god to ask his soul of
johan carvaio, his comrade, in the day of judgment, we immediately
departed. i do not know whether he is dead or alive.
jn queſta yzola ſe troua cani gati rizo
millio panizo ſorgo gengero figui neranzi limone canne dolci agio
mel cochi chiacare zuche carne de molte ſorte vino de palma et oro
et e grande yſola con vno bon porto q̃ a due intrate vna al
ponente lalta al grego et leuante  ſta de
latitudine al polo articho in x gradi de longitudine de la linea de la
repartitiõe cento ſexanta cato gradi et ſe
chiama zubu  quiui inanzi q̃ moriſſe lo
capo genneralle haueſſemo noua de malucho
 queſta gente ſonano de viola cõ corde de
ramo.
in that island are found dogs, cats, rice, millet,
panicum, sorgo, ginger, figs [i.e., bananas], oranges, lemons,
sugarcane, garlic, honey, cocoanuts, nangcas, gourds, flesh of many kinds, palm
wine, and gold.
it is a large island, and has a good port with two entrances—one
to the west and the other to the east northeast. it lies in x degrees of latitude toward the
arctic pole, and in a longitude of one hundred and
sixty-four
degrees from the line of demarcation. its name is zubu. we heard of
malucho there before the death of the captain-general. those people
play a violin with copper strings.
vocabuli de queſti populi gentili.
al homo:
lac
ala donna
paranpaon
ala jouene
beni beni
ala maritata
babay []
ali capilli
bo ho
al vizo
guay
ale palpebre
pilac
ale ciglie
chilei.
al ocquio
matta.
al nazo
jlon.
ale maſſelle
apin
ali labri
olol.
a la bocca
baba.
a li denti
nipin
ale gengiue
leghex.
ala linga
dilla
alle orechie
delengan.
ala gola
liogh.
al collo
tangip
al mento
q̃ilan.
ala barba
bonghot
ale ſpalle
bagha.
a la ſchena
licud.
al peto
dughan
al corpo
tiam
soto li braci
jlot
al bracio
botchen
al gomedo
ſico
al polſo
molanghai
ala mano
camat
a la palma de la man
palan
al dito
dudlo
ala ongia
coco
al lombelico
puſut
al membro
vtin
ali teſticoli
boto []
ala natura de le donne
billat
al vzar cõ loro
jiam
ale cullate
ſamput
ala coſsa
paha
al ginochio
tuhud.
al schincho
baſsag baſsag
ala polpa de la gamba
bitis
ala cauechia
bolbol
al calcagnio
tiochid
ala ſolla del pie
lapa lapa
al horo
balaoan
al argento
pilla
al laton
concach
al fero
butan
ale canne dolce
tube
al cuchiaro
gandan
al rizo
bughax baras
al melle
deghex
ala cera
talho
al ſalle
acin
al vino
tuba nio nipa
al bere
minuncubil
al mangiare
macan.
al porcho
babui
ala capra
candin
ala galina
monoch
al miglio
humas
al ſorgo
batat
al panizo
dana
al peuere
maniſſa
ali garofoli
chianche. []
ala cannella
mana.
al gengero
luia
al ayo
laxuna
ali naranſi
acſua
al ouo
ſilog
al coco
lubi.
al acceto
zlucha
al acqua
tubin
al fuoco
clayo.
al fumo
assu.
al ſofiare
tigban.
alle belancie
tinban
al pezo
tahil
ala perla
mutiara.
ale madre de le perle
tipay.
ala zampognia
subin
al mal de sto job.
alupalan
portame
palatin comorica
acerte fogacie de rizo
tinapai
buono
main
ti da le
al cortello
capol ſundan
ale forfice
catle
a tosare
chunthinch
al homo ben hornato
pixao
ala tella
balandan
a li panni q̃ ſe copreno
abaca
al conaglio
colon colon
ali pater nr̃j dogni ſorte
tacle []
al petine
cutlei miſsamis
al pentinare
monssughud.
ala camiza
sabun.
ala gugia de coſire
daghu
al cuſire
mamis
a la porcelana
mobuluc
al cana
aian ydo
al gato
epos.
ali ſui veli
gapas
ali criſtalini
balus
vien qi
marica
ala caza
jlaga balai
al legniame
tatamue
alle ſtore doue dormeno
tagichan
ale ſtore de palma
bani
ale cuſſini de foglie
vliman
a li piati de legnio
dulan
al ſuo ydio
abba.
al ſolle
adlo
ala luna
ſonghot
ala ſtela
bolan bunthun.
ala aurora
mene
ala matina
vema
ala taza
tagha
grande
baſsal
al archo
boſsugh.
ala freza
oghon.
ali targoni
calaſsan.
a le veſte inbotide ꝓ combater
baluti
ale ſue daghe
calix baladao []
ali ſui tertiadi
campilan.
a la lancia
bancan.
el talle
tuan.
ali figui
ſaghin
ale zuche
baghin
ale corde dele ſue violle
gotzap
al fiume
tau.
al riſaio ꝓ peſcare
pucat laia
al batello
ſampan.
a le canne grande
cauaghan.
ale picole
bonbon.
ale ſue barche grande
balanghai
ale ſue barque picolle
boloto
ali granci
cuban
al peſce
jcam yſſida
a vno peſcie tuto depinto
panap ſapã
a vno alto roſſo
timuan.
a vno certo alto
pilax
a vno alto
emaluan.
tuto e vno
siama siama
a vno ſchiauo
bonſul
a la forca
bolle
ala naue
benaoa
a vno re o capo
gñale
raia.
words of those heathen people
for man
lac
for woman
paranpaon
for young woman
beni beni
for married woman
babay []
for hair
boho
for face
guay
for eyelids
pilac
for eyebrows
chilei
for eye
matta
for nose
ilon
for jaws
apin
for lips
olol
for mouth
baba
for teeth
nipin
for gums
leghex
for tongue
dilla
for ears
delengan
for throat
liogh
for neck
tangip
for chin
queilan
for beard
bonghot
for shoulders
bagha
for spine
licud
for breast
dughan
for body
tiam
armpit
ilot
for arm
botchen
for elbow
sico
for pulse
molanghai
for hand
camat
for the palm of the hand
palan
for finger
dudlo
for fingernail
coco
for navel
pusut
for penis
utin
for testicles
boto []
for vagina
billat
for to have communication with women
jiam
for buttocks
samput
for thigh
paha
for knee
tuhud
for shin
bassag bassag
for calf of the leg
bitis
for ankle
bolbol
for heel
tiochid
for sole of the foot
lapa lapa
for gold
balaoan
for silver
pilla
for brass
concach
for iron
butan
for sugarcane
tube
for spoon
gandan
for rice
bughax baras
for honey
deghex
for wax
talho
for salt
acin
for wine
tuba nio nipa
for to drink
minuncubil
for to eat
macan
for hog
babui
for goat
candin
for chicken
monoch
for millet
humas
for sorgo
batat
for panicum
dana
for pepper
manissa
for cloves
chianche []
for cinnamon
mana
for ginger
luia
for garlic
laxuna
for oranges
acsua
for egg
silog
for cocoanut
lubi
for vinegar
zlucha
for water
tubin
for fire
clayo
for smoke
assu
for to blow
tigban
for balances
tinban
for weight
tahil
for pearl
mutiara
for mother of pearl
tipay
for pipe [a musical instrument]
sub in
for disease of st. job
alupalan
bring me
palatin comorica
for certain rice cakes
tinapai
good
main
no
tidale
for knife
capol, sundan
for scissors
catle
to shave
chunthinch
for a well adorned man
pixao
for linen
balandan
for the cloth with which they cover
themselves
abaca
for hawk’sbell
coloncolon
for pater nosters of all classes
tacle []
for comb
cutlei, missamis
for to comb
monssughud
for shirt
sabun
for sewing-needle
daghu
for to sew
mamis
for porcelain
mobuluc
for dog
aian, ydo
for cat
epos
for their scarfs
gapas
for glass beads
balus
come here
marica
for house
ilaga, balai
for timber
tatamue
for the mats on which they sleep
tagichan
for palm-mats
bani
for their leaf cushions
uliman
for wooden platters
dulan
for their god
abba
for sun
adlo
for moon
songhot
for star
bolan, bunthun
for dawn
mene
for morning
uema
for cup
tagha
large
bassal
for bow
bossugh
for arrow
oghon
for shields
calassan
for quilted garments used for fighting
baluti
for their daggers
calix, baladao []
for their cutlasses
campilan
for spear
bancan
for like
tuan
for figs [i.e., bananas]
saghin
for gourds
baghin
for the cords of their violins
gotzap
for river
tau
for fishing-net
pucat, laia
for small boat
sampan
for large canes
cauaghan
for the small ones
bonbon
for their large boats
balanghai
for their small boats
boloto
for crabs
cuban
for fish
icam, yssida
for a fish that is all colored
panapsapan
for another red [fish]
timuan
for a certain other [kind of fish]
pilax
for another [kind of fish]
emaluan
all the same
siama siama
for a slave
bonsul
for gallows
bolle
for ship
benaoa
for a king or captain-general
raia
numero:
vno
vzza []
duy
dua
tre
tolo.
quato
vpat
cinque
lima
sey
onom
sette
pitto
octo
gualu
noue
ciam.
diece
polo.
numbers
one
uzza []
two
dua
three
tolo
four
upat
five
lima
six
onom
seven
pitto
eight
gualu
nine
ciam
ten
polo
longi dizodoto legue de queſta yſola zzubu
al capo de qela alta q̃ ſe chiama bohol
bruzaſſemo in mezo de queſto arcipelago la naue
conceptiõe per eſſere reſtati tropo pochi et
forniſſemo le altre due de le coſe ſue megliore pi
gliaſſemo poy la via del garbin et mezo di coſtando la
jzola q̃ ſi diſe panilongon nela qalle
ſonno homini negi como in etiopia poy
ariuaſẽo a vna yſola grande lo re delaqalle
ꝓ fare pace cõ noy se cauo ſangue de la mano
ſiniſtra ſanguinandoſe lo corpo lo volto et la cima
de la linga in ſegnio de magior amitiſia 
coſi faceſſemo ancho nui  jo ſolo anday
cõ lo rey in tera ꝓ vedere queſta yſola
 ſubito q̃ jntraſſemo in vno fiume
molti peſcatori preſentarono peſce al re 
poy lo re ſe cauo li pannj que haueua intorno le ſue
ꝟgonie cõ alguni ſui principali et cantando co
minciorono a vogare paſſando ꝓ molti habitationi
q̃ erano ſoura lo fiume  ariuaſſemo a
due hore de nocte in caſa ſua  dal principio de
qʒſto fiume doue eſtauamo le naui fino a caſa del
re erão due legue  entrãdo nela caſa ne
venirono incontra molte torcie de canna et de foglie de palma
 queſte torcie erano de []anime como li dete de
soura  fin q̃ ſe aparechio la cene lo re con dui
principali et due ſue femine belle beue rono vno grã vazo
de vino pienno de palma ſenza mangiare niente  jo
eſcuſandomi hauere cennato non volce berre ſinon vna
volta beuendo faceuazão tute le cerimonie como el re de mazaua
 venne poy la cena de rizo et peſcie molto ſalato
poſto in ſcutelle de porcelana  mangiauão
lo rizo ꝓ panne  cocono lo rizo in queſto modo
prima meteno dento in pigniate de terra como le nr̃e
vna fogla grande che circunda tuta la pigniata  poy li
meteno lacque et il rizo coprẽdola la laſciano bugliere fin
q̃ venne lo rizo duro como panne  poi lo cauano fuora
in pezi  in tucte queſte parte cocono lo rizo in
queſta ſorte  cenato q̃ haueſſemo
lo re fece portare vna ſtora de canne con vnalta de
palma et vna cucino de foglie acio yo dormiſſe ſoura
queſte  il re con le due femine ando a dormire in vno
luoco ſeparato  dormi cõ vno ſuo
principali  venuto il giorno mentre ſe aparechio lo
diſnare anday ꝓ queſta izolla  vidi in
queſte loro caſe aſſay maſſaritie de oro
et poca victuuaria poy diſnaſſemo rizo et peſcie
 finito lo diſnare dice al [re] con ſegni vederia
la reyna  me reſpoſe era contento 
andaſſemo de compania in çima duno alto monte doue era
la caſa de la reyna quando entray in caſa le fece la
reuerentia et ley coſſi verſo de me 
ſedeti apreſſo a ella laqalle faceua vna
ſtora de palma ꝓ dormire ꝓ la caſa ſua
eraño atacati molti vazi de porcelana et quatro []borquie de metalo vna magiore de
lalta et due piu picole ꝓ ſenare 
gli eranno molti ſchiaui et ſchiaue q̃ la
ſeruiuão  queſte caſe ſonno
facte como le alte ja dete  pigliata
liſentia tornaſemo in caza del re  ſubito
fece darne vna colatiõe de canne dolce  la magior
abundantia q̃ ſia in queſta yſola e de oro
 mi moſtrorono certj valoni facendomi ſegnio que
in qelli era tanto horo como li ſui capilly ma non anno
fero ꝓ cauarlo ne ancque voleno qela fatiga
 queſta parte de la yſola e vna medeſma
terra con butuan et calaghan et paſſa ſopra bohol et
confina cõ mazaua per che tornaremo vna alta fiata in
queſta izolla non dico alto 
paſſato mezo di volſe tornare ale naui el re volſe
venire et li alti principali et cuſſi
veneſſemo nel mediſimo balanghai  retornando
ꝓ lo fiume viti aman drita ſopa vno monticello
tre huominj apicati a vno arbure q̃ haueua tagliati li ramy
 domanday al re qi eran qelli
 riſpoſi q̃ erano malfactorj et robatorj
 queſti populi vano nudi como li alti de
ſupa  lo re ſe chiama raia calanao
 el porto he buono et quiui ſe troua rizo gengero
porci capre galine et alte coſe  ſta
de latitudine al polo articho in octo gradi et cento
ſexantaſete de longitudine della linea repartitionalle et
longi da zubu cinquanta legue et ſe chiama chipit []due
jornate de ql al maiſtrale ſe troua vna jſola
grande detta lozon doue vanno ogni anno ſey hoꝟo octo junci
deli populi lechij
in the midst of that archipelago, at a distance of eighteen leguas
from that island of zzubu, at the head of the other island called
bohol, we burned the ship “conceptione,” for too few men of
us were left [to work it]. we stowed the best of its contents in the other
two ships, and the laid our course toward the south southwest, coasting
along the island called panilongon, where black men like those in etiopia live. then
we came to a large island [mindanao], whose king in order to make peace
with us, drew blood from his left hand marking his body, face, and the
tip of his tongue with it as a token of the closest friendship, and we
did the same. i went ashore alone with the king in order to see that
island. we had no sooner entered a river than many fishermen offered
fish to the king. then the king removed the cloths which covered his
privies, as did some of his chiefs; and began to row while singing past
many dwellings which were upon the river. two hours after nightfall we
reached the king’s house. the distance from the beginning of the
river where our ships were to the king’s house, was two leguas.
when we entered the house, we came upon many torches of cane and palm
leaves, which
were of the anime, []of which mention was made above.
until the supper was brought in, the king with two of his chiefs and
two of his beautiful women drank the contents of a large jar of palm
wine without eating anything. i, excusing myself as i had supped, would
only drink but once. in drinking they observed all the same ceremonies
that the king of mazaua did. then the supper, which consisted of rice
and very salt
fish, and was contained in porcelain dishes, was brought in. they ate
their rice as if it were bread, and cook it after the following manner.
they first put in an earthen jar like our jars, a large leaf which
lines all of the jar. then they add the water and the rice, and after
covering it allow it to boil until the rice becomes as hard as bread,
when it is taken out in pieces. rice is cooked in the same way
throughout those districts. when we had eaten, the king had a reed mat and
another of palm leaves, and a leaf pillow brought in so that i might
sleep on them. the king and his two women went to sleep in a separate
place, while i slept with one of his chiefs. when day came and until the dinner was
brought in, i walked about that island. i saw many articles of gold in
those houses
but little food. after that we dined on rice and fish, and at the
conclusion of dinner, i asked the king by signs whether i could see the
queen. he replied that he was willing, and we went together to the
summit of a lofty hill, where the queen’s house was located. when
i entered the house, i made a bow to the queen, and she did the same to
me, whereupon i sat down beside her. she was making a sleeping mat of
palm leaves. in the house there was hanging a number of porcelain jars
[]and four metal gongs—one of which was
larger than the second, while the other two were still
smaller—for playing upon. there were many male and female slaves
who served her. those houses are constructed like those already
mentioned. having taken our leave, we returned to the king’s
house, where the king had us immediately served with refreshments of
sugarcane. the most abundant product of that island is gold. they
showed me certain large valleys, making me a sign that the gold there was as
abundant as the hairs of their heads, but they have no iron with which
to dig it, and they do not dare to go to the trouble [to get
it]. that part
of the island belongs to the same land as butuan and calaghan, and lies
toward bohol, and is bounded by mazaua. as we shall return to that
island again, i shall say nothing further [now]. the afternoon having
waned, i desired to return to the ships. the king and the other chief
men wished to accompany me, and therefore we went in the same
balanghai. as
we were returning along the river, i saw, on the summit of a hill at
the right, three men suspended from one tree, the branches of which had
been cut away. i asked the king what was the reason for that, and he
replied that they were malefactors and robbers. those people go naked
as do the others above mentioned. the king’s name is raia
calanao. the
harbor is an excellent one. rice, ginger, swine, goats, fowls, and
other things are to be found there. that port lies in a latitude of
eight degrees toward the arctic pole, and in a longitude of one hundred
and sixty-seven degrees from the line of demarcation. it is fifty leguas
from zubu, []and is called chipit. two days’ journey thence to the
northwest is found a large island called lozon, where six or eight junks belonging to
the lequian people go yearly.
partendone de ql ala meza partita de
ponente et garbin deſſemo in vna yſola non molto grande
et caſi deſhabitata  la gente de queſta
ſonno mori et eranno banditi duna yſola deta burne
 vano nudi como li alti  anno za
robotane con li carcaſſeti alato pienni de freze con erba
venenata  anno pugnialli con li maniſi ornati de oro
et de pietre precioſe lancie rodelle et corazine de corno de
bufalo ne chiamauão corpi ſancti  jn
queſta yſola ſe trouaua pocha victuuaglia ma arborj
grandiſſimj  ſta de latitudine al polo
articho in ſette gradi et mezo et longi da chippit quaranta tre
legue et chiamaſſe caghaian.
leaving there and laying our course west southwest, we
cast anchor at an island not very large and almost uninhabited. the
people of that island are moros and were banished from an island called
burne. they go naked as do the others. they have blowpipes and small
quivers at their side, full of arrows and a poisonous herb. they have
daggers whose hafts are adorned with gold and precious gems, spears,
bucklers, and small cuirasses of buffalo horn. they called us holy beings. little
food was to be found in that island, but [there were] immense trees. it
lies in a latitude of seven and one-half degrees toward the arctic
pole, and is forty-three leguas from chippit. its name is caghaian.
da queſta yſola circa de vinti cinque legue
fra ponente et maiſtralle tro uaſſemo vna jzola grande
doue ſi troua rizo gengero porci capre galīe fighi longui
mezo brazo et groſſi como lo bracio ſonno boni et alguni
alti longui vno palmo et alti mancho molto
megliori de tucti li altri cochi batate canne dolci radice como rapi al
mãgiare et rizo cotto ſoto lo fuocho in canne o in legnio
 queſto dura piu que qello coto in
pigniatte  queſta tera poteuão chiamare la
terra de ꝓmissione perche jnanzi la trouaſſemo
patiuamo grã fame aſsay volte ſteſſemo in
force de habandomare le naui et andare in terra ꝓ non morire de
fame.  lo re fece pace cõ noi []tagliandoſſe vno pocho cõ vno
nr̃o cortello in mezo del pecto et ſanguinando ſe tocho
la lingua et la fronte in ſegnio de piu vera pace coſi fece
mo ancho nuy  queſta yſola ſta de latitudine
al polo articho in noue gradi et vno terſo et cento et
ſeptanta vno et vno terſo de longitudine de la lignea
ripartitiõe pulaoan.
about twenty-five leguas to the west northwest from
the above island we found a large island, where rice, ginger, swine,
goats, fowls, figs one-half braza long and as thick as the arm
[i.e., bananas] (they are excellent; and certain others are one
palmo and less in length, and are much better than all the others),
cocoanuts, camotes [batate], sugarcane, and roots resembling
turnips in taste, are found. rice is cooked there under the fire in
bamboos or in wood; and it lasts better than that cooked in earthen
pots. we called that land the land of promise, because we suffered
great hunger before we found it. we were often on the point of
abandoning the ships and going ashore in order that we might not die of
hunger.
[]the king made peace with us by gashing himself
slightly in the breast with one of our knives, and upon bleeding,
touching the tip of his tongue and his forehead in token of the truest
peace, and we did the same. that island lies in a latitude of nine and
one-third degrees toward the arctic pole, and a longitude of one
hundred and seventy-one and one-third degrees from the line of demarcation. [it is
called] pulaoan.
queſti populi de polaoan vano nudi como li
alti quaſi tucti lauaranno li ſui campi
 hanno zarabotanne cõ freze de legnio
groſſe piu duno palmo arponate et algune con ſpine de
peſce con erba venenata at alte cõ ponte de cana
arponate et venenate anno nel capo ficato vno pocho de legnio molle in
cambio de le penne nel fine dele ſue zarabotãe liganno vno
fero como di jannetone et quando anno tracte le freze combateno
cõ queſto precianno aneli cadennete de latone ſonaglie
cor teli et piu al filo de ramo ꝓ ligare li ſui ami da
peſcare  anno gally grandi molto domeſtici
 nõ li mangião ꝓ vna certa ſua
venneratiõe alguna volta li fanno combatere luno cõ
lalto et ogni vno meta ꝓ lo ſuo vno tanto et poy
de cului q̃ he ſuo el vincitore he ſuo el premio
 et anno vino de rizo lambicato piu grande et meglior̃
de qello de palma.
those people of polaoan go naked as do the others.
almost all of
them cultivate their fields. they have blowpipes with thick wooden
arrows more than one palmo long, with harpoon points, and others tipped
with fishbones, and poisoned with an herb; while others are tipped with
points of bamboo like harpoons and are poisoned. at the end of the arrow they attach
a little piece of soft wood, instead of feathers. at the end of their
blowpipes they fasten a bit of iron like a spear head; and when they have shot all
their arrows they fight with that. they place a value on brass rings
and chains, bells, knives, and still more on copper wire for binding
their fishhooks. they have large and very tame cocks, which they do not
eat because of a certain veneration that they have for them. sometimes
they make them fight with one another, and each one puts up a certain
amount on his cock, and the prize goes to him whose cock is the victor.
they have distilled rice wine which is stronger and better than that
made from the palm.
longi de queſta yſola dieze legue al garbin
deſsemo in vna jzola et coſteandola ne pareua alquanto
aſcendere intrati nel porte ne a parue el []corpo ſancto ꝓ vno tempo
oſcuriſſimo  dal principio de queſta
yſola fina al porto li ſonno cinquanta legue  lo
jorno ſequente a noue de juglio lo re de queſta yſola ne
mando vno prao molto bello cõ la proua et la popa lauorate doro
 era ſupa la proua vna bandiera de biancho
et lazuro con penne de pauonne in cima  alguni
ſonauão con cinphonie et tamburi veniuão cõ
queſto prao due al ma die  li prao ſonno como
fuſte et le almadie ſonno le ſue barche da peſcare
 octo homini vecqi deli principali entrarono
nele naui et ſederonno nela popa ſopa vno tapeto
ne apreſentarono vno vazo de legnio de pinto pieno de betre et
areca che e qel fructo que maſticano ſempre con
fiori de gelſomini et de naranci coperto de vno panno de ſeta
jallo due gabie pienne de galine vno paro de capre tre vazi pieni de
vino de rizo lanbicato et alquanti faſci de canne dolci et
coſſi de tero a laltra naue et abraciandone pigliaronno
liſentia  el vino de rizo he chiaro como lacqua ma
tanto grande q̃ molti deli noſti
ſembriacarõ et lo chiamano arach.
ten leguas southwest of that island, we came to an
island, which, as we coasted by, seemed to us to be going upward. after
entering the port, the holy []body [i.e., st.
elmo’s fire] appeared to us through the pitchy darkness. there is
a distance of fifty leguas from the beginning of that island to the port. on
the following day, july nine, the king of that island sent a very
beautiful prau to us, whose bow and stern were worked in gold. at the
bow flew a white and blue banner surmounted with peacock feathers. some
men were playing on musical instruments [cinphonie] and drums. two almadies came with that prau. praus
resemble fustas, while the almadies are their small fishing
boats. eight old men, who were chiefs, entered the ships and took seats
in the stern upon a carpet. they presented us with a painted wooden jar
full of betel and areca (the fruit which they chew continually), and
jessamine and
orange blossoms, a covering of yellow silk cloth, two cages full of
fowls, a couple of goats, three jarsful of distilled rice wine, and
some bundles of sugarcane. they did the same to the other ship, and
embracing us took their leave. the rice wine is as clear as water, but
so strong that it intoxicated many of our men. it is called arach [i.e., arrack].
deli aſey giorni lore mando vnalta
volta tre prao con molta pompa ſonãdo cinphonie tamburi et
borchie de latone circondorono le naui et ne fecero reuerentia
cõ certe sue berete de tella q̃ li copreno ſolamente
la cima del capo  li ſalutaſſemo cõle
bonbarde ſenza pietre  poy ne detero vno pñte
de diuerſe viuande ſolamente de rizo algune in foglie facte
in pezi alquanto longhi algune como pannj de []zucharo et alguni alti facti amodo de
torte con oui et melle  ne diſſero como lo
ſue re era contento pigliaſſemo hacqua et legnia et
contrataſſemo al nr̃o piacer̃  vdendo
queſto montaſſemo ſette de nuy alti
ſopa lo prao et portaſſemo vno pñte al
re elqalle era vna veſta de veluto ꝟde a la
turcheſca vna cathedra de veluto morello cinque bracia de panno
roſſo vno bonnet et vno biquier dorato vno vaso de vetro
coperto tre quinternj de carta et vno calamaro dorato ala regina tre
bracia de panno [roſso: crossed out in original
ms.] giallo vno paro de ſcarpe argentate vno guchiarollo
dargento pieno de gugie al gouuernator̃ tre bracia de panno
roſſo vno bonnet et vno bichier dorato  al re
darme q̃ era vennuto nelli prao gli deſemo vna veſta de
panno roſſo et ꝟde ala turcheſca vno bonnet et
vno quinterno de carta a li alti ſete principali a
qi tella a qi bonnetj et a ogni vno vno quinterno
de carta et ſubito ſe partiſſemo.
six days later the king again sent three praus with
great pomp, which encircled the ships with musical instruments
[cinphonie] playing and drums and brass gongs
beating. they saluted us with their peculiar cloth caps which cover
only the top of their heads. we saluted them by firing our mortars
without [loading with] stones. then they gave us a present of various
kinds of food, made only of rice. some were wrapped in leaves and were
made in somewhat longish pieces, some resembled sugar-loaves,
[]while others were made in the manner of tarts
with eggs and honey. they told us that their king was willing to let us
get water and wood, and to trade at our pleasure. upon hearing that
seven of us
entered their prau bearing a present to their king, which consisted of
a green velvet robe made in the turkish manner, a violet velvet chair,
five brazas of red cloth, a cap, a gilded drinking glass, a covered glass vase,
three writing-books of paper, and a gilded writing-case. to the queen
[we took] three brazas of [red: crossed out in original ms.]
yellow cloth, a pair of silvered shoes, and a silvered needle-case full
of needles. [we took] three brazas of red cloth, a cap, and a gilded
drinking-glass to the governor. to the herald who came in the prau we
gave a robe of red and green cloth, made in the turkish fashion, a cap,
and a writing book of paper; and to the other seven chief men, to one a
bit of cloth, and to another a cap, and to all of them a writing book
of paper. then we immediately departed [for the land].
quando jongeſſemo ala cita
ſteſſemo forſi due hore neli prao fin q̃
venirono dui elephanti coperti de ſeta et dudizi homini cõ
vno vazo ꝓ vno de porce lana coperto deſeta ꝓ
coprire nr̃i preſenti poy montaſſemo
ſopa li elefanty et queſti dodice hominj ne
andauão dinanzi cõ li preſenti neli vazi anda
ſemo cuſſi fin a la caſa del gouuernatore oue ne fo
data vna cena de molte viuande la nocte dormiſſemo ſoura
mataraſi de bambazo la ſua fodra era de tafeta li
linſoli de cambaia  lo giorno ſeguente
ſteſſemo in caſa fin amezo di poy
andaſſemo al palaçio del re []ſoura elefanti cõ li
pſ̃entj dinanci como lo giorno dananti da caſa del
gouuernator̃ fin in caſa del re tute le ſtrate erano
pienne de hominj con ſpade lancie et targonj ꝓ che
cuſſi haueua voluto lo re. jntraſſemo ſoura li
elefanti  ne la corte del palatio andaſſemo
ſu ꝓ vna ſcala acompagniatj dal gouuernator̃ et
alti principali et jntraſſemo in vna ſala
grande piena de molti baronj oue ſedeſſemo
ſopa vno tapeto cõ li pñti neli vazi
apreſſo noi  al capo de queſta ſala
nehe vnalta piu alta ma alquanto piu picola tuta ornata de
panni de ſeta oue ſe aprirono due feneſtre con due
cortine de brocato daliqalli veniua la luce nella ſala
 iui erano trecento homini in piedi cõ
ſtocqi nudi soura la coſſa ꝓ guardia
del re al capo de queſta era vna grande feneſta
dalaqalle ſe tiro vna cortina de brocato
dento de queſta vedeſſemo el re ſedere
ataula con vno ſuo figliolo picolino et maſticare betre
 dietro da lui erano ſinon donne alhora ne
diſſe vno principalle nuy nõ poteuão parlare al
re et ſe voleuamo alguna coſa lo diceſſemo alui
ꝓ che la direbe avno piu principale et quello avno fratello del
gouuernator̃ q̃ ſtaua nela ſala piu picola et poi
lui la direbe cõ vna zarabotana ꝓ vna ſfiſura
del pariete a vno q̃ ſtaua dento cõlore et
ne in ſegnio doueſſemo fare al re tre reuerentie
cõ li many jonte ſo p̃ lo capo alzando li piedi mo vno
mo alto et poy le basaſſemo coſi fo facto
queſta e la ſua reuerentia reale li diceſſemo como
eramo del []re deſpagnia et que lui voleua pace
ſeco et nõ domandauão alto ſaluo
potere mẽcadã tare  ne fece dire el re poy
chel re deſpagia voleua eſere ſuo amicho lui era
contentiſſimo de eſſer ſuo et diſſe
pigliaſſemo hacqua et legnia et merchadantaſemo a
nr̃o piacere  poi li deſſemo li
preſenti  faceua dognj coſa cõ lo capo vn
poco de riuerentia aciaſcuno de nuy alti fo dacto
brocadelo et panny de oro et de ſeta ponendoneli
ſopa la ſpala siniſtra ma poco laſciando
negli  ne deteno vna colatiõe de garofoli et canella
 alora foreno tirate le cortine et ſerate le
feneſtre  li homini q̃ era nel palatio tuti
haueuão panni de oro [de oro: doublet in original ms.] et
de ſeta intorno loro ꝟgonie pugniali cõ lo manicho
de oro et ornato de perle et petre precioſe et molti aneli nele
mani  retornaſſemo soura le elefanti ala
caſa del gouuernator̃  sete homini portorono il
prezente del re ſempre dinanzi quando foſsemo jonti
acaſa dereno a ogniuno lo suo et nel miſſero ſoura
la ſpala siniſtra  aliqalli ꝓ
ſua fatica donaſſemo a ciaſcaduna vno paro de
cortelli  venirono in caſa del gouuernator̃ noue
hominj cõ alti tanti piati de legnio grandi dal parte
de re  in ogni piato erão x hoꝟo dudize
ſcudelle de porcelana pienne de carne de vitello de caponi galine
pauonj et altry animali et de peſce 
cenaſſemo in tera ſoura vna ſtora de palma de
trenta o trenta dui ſorte de viuande de carne eccepto lo
peſce et alte coſe  beue uão a
ogni bocone pieno vno vazeto de porcelana grande como vno ouo de
qel vino lanbicato  mangiaſſemo rizo
et altre viuande []de ſucaro cõ cuchiarj doro como
li nr̃j  oue dormiſſemo le due nocte
ſtauão due torcie de cera biancha ſempre acceze
ſoura dui candellieri de argento vno poco alti et due lampade
grande pienne dolio cõ catro pauerj ꝓ ogni vna et dui
homini q̃ ſempre le ſpauilauão 
veniſſemo ſoura li elefanti fino a la riua del mare doue
forono dui prao q̃ ne conduſcero ale nauj 
queſta cita etuta fondata in acqua ſalſa ſaluo la
caſa del re et algune de certy principali et he de vinti cinque
miglia focqi le caſe ſonno tute de legno edificati
ſoura pali groſſi alti da tera quando lo mare
creſcie vanno le donne ꝓ la tera con barque vendendo
coſe neceſſarie al ſuo viuere  dinanzi
la caſa del re e vno muro de cadreli groſſo con
barbarcanj a modo de forteza nel qalle erano cinquanta
ſey bombarde de metalo et ſey de fero  in li dui
giornj ſteſſemo iui ſcaricorono molte 
queſto re e moro et ſe chiama raia siripada era de quaranta
anny et graſſo  ninguno lo gouerna ſe non
donne figliole deli principali  non ſi parte may fora
dal palatio ſe non quando va ala caza  ninguno li po
par lare ſinon ꝓ zarabotane tene x ſcriuanj q̃
ſcriueno le coſe ſue in ſcorſe de arbore molto
ſotille a queſti chiamano xiritoles.
when we reached the city, we remained about two hours
in the prau, until the arrival of two elephants with silk trappings,
and twelve men each of whom carried a porcelain jar covered with silk
in which to carry our presents. thereupon, we mounted the elephants
while those twelve men preceded us afoot with the presents in the jars.
in this way we went to the house of the governor, where we were given a
supper of many kinds of food. during the night we slept on cotton
mattresses,
whose lining was of taffeta, and the sheets of cambaia. next day we
stayed in the house until noon. then we went to the []king’s palace upon elephants, with our
presents in front as on the preceding day. all the streets from the
governor’s to the king’s house were full of men with
swords, spears, and shields, for such were the king’s orders. we
entered the courtyard of the palace mounted on the elephants. we went
up a ladder accompanied by the governor and other chiefs, and entered a
large hall full of many nobles, where we sat down upon a carpet with the presents
in the jars near us. at the end of that hall there is another hall
higher but somewhat smaller. it was all adorned with silk hangings, and
two windows, through which light entered the hall and hung with two
brocade curtains, opened from it. there were three hundred footsoldiers
with naked rapiers at their thighs in that hall to guard the
king. at the
end of the small hall was a large window from which a brocade curtain
was drawn aside so that we could see within it the king seated at a
table with one of his young sons chewing betel. no one but women were behind him. then
a chief told us that we could not speak to the king, and that if we
wished anything, we were to tell it to him, so that he could
communicate it to one of higher rank. the latter would communicate it
to a brother of the governor who was stationed in the smaller hall, and
this man would communicate it by means of a speaking-tube through a
hole in the wall to one who was inside with the king. the chief taught
us the manner of making three obeisances to the king with our hands
clasped above the head, raising first one foot and then the other and
then kissing the hands toward him, and we did so, that being the method
of the royal obeisance. []we told the king that we came from
the king of spagnia, and that the latter desired to make peace with him
and asked only for permission to trade. the king had us told that since
the king of spagnia desired to be his friend, he was very willing to be
his, and said that we could take water and wood, and trade at our
pleasure. then we gave him the presents, on receiving each of which he
nodded slightly. to each one of us was given some brocaded and gold
cloth and silk, which were placed upon our left shoulders, where they
were left but a moment. they presented us with refreshments of cloves and
cinnamon, after which the curtains were drawn to and the windows
closed. the men in the palace were all attired in cloth of gold and
silk which covered their privies, and carried daggers with gold hafts
adorned with pearls and precious gems, and they had many rings on their
hands. we returned upon the elephants to the governor’s house,
seven men carrying the king’s presents to us and always preceding
us. when we reached the house, they gave each one of us his present,
placing them upon our left shoulders. we gave each of those men a
couple of knives for his trouble. nine men came to the governor’s
house with a like number of large wooden trays from the king. each tray
contained ten or twelve porcelain dishes full of veal, capons,
chickens, peacocks, and other animals, and fish. we supped on the
ground upon a palm mat from thirty or thirty-two different kinds of
meat besides the fish and other things. at each mouthful of food we
drank a small cupful of their distilled wine from a porcelain cup the
size of an egg. we ate rice and other sweet food []with
gold spoons like ours. in our sleeping quarters there during those two
nights, two torches of white wax were kept constantly alight in two
rather tall silver candlesticks, and two large lamps full of oil with
four wicks apiece and two men to snuff them continually. we went
elephant-back to the seashore, where we found two praus which took us
back to the ships. that city is entirely built in salt water, except the houses
of the king and certain chiefs. it contains twenty-five thousand fires
[i.e., families]. the houses are all constructed of wood and built
up from the ground on tall pillars. when the tide is high the women go
in boats through the settlement [tera] selling the articles
necessary to maintain life. there is a large brick wall in front of the
king’s house with towers like a fort, in which were mounted
fifty-six bronze [metalo] pieces, and six of iron. during the
two days of our stay there, many pieces were discharged. that king is a
moro and his name is raia siripada. he was forty years old and
corpulent. no one serves him except women who are the
daughters of
chiefs. he never goes outside of his palace, unless when he goes
hunting, and no one is allowed to talk with him except through the
speaking tube. he has x scribes, called xiritoles, who write down his deeds on very
thin tree bark.
luni matina a vinti noue de jullio vedeſſemo
venire contra nui piu de cento prao partiti in tre ſcadronj con
alti tanti tunguli q̃ ſonno li ſue barche
picole  quando vedeſſemo queſto
penſando foſſe qalque jnganno ne
deſſemo lo piu preſto fo poſſibile
[]nela vella et ꝓ preſſa
laſciaſſemo vna anchora et molto piu ne dubitauão
de eſſere tolti in mezo de certi junci q̃ nel giorno
paſſato reſtarono dopo nuy subito ſe
voltaſſemo contra queſti et ne pigliaſſemo
cato amazando molte ꝓ ſonne  tri o
catro junci fugirono in ſeco in vno de qelli q̃
pigliaſſemo era lo figliolo del re dela yſola de lozon
 coſtui era capo gñale de
queſto re de burne et veniua cõ queſti jonci da vna
vila grande deta laoe q̃ he in capo de queſta iſola
verſo jaua magiore laqalle ꝓ non volere hobedire
aqueſto re ma aqello de jaua magiore la haueua ruynata
et ſacquegiata  giouan caruiao nr̃o piloto
laſſo andare queſto capo et lo jonco
ſenza noſto conſentimẽto ꝓ certa
cantita de oro como dapoy ſapeſſemo  ſe
non laſſaua queſto re lo capo ne haueria dato
tuto qello haueſſemo demandato ꝓ che
queſto capo era molto temuto in queſte parte ma
piu da gentilli ꝓ cio ſonno jnimiciſſimj de
queſto re moro.  in queſto porto glie
vnalta cita de gentilli magiori de qella de li
mori fondata anche ella in acqua ſalza ꝓ ilche ogni jorno
queſti dui populi combateno inſieme nel medeſimo porto
 il re gentille e potente como lo re moro ma nõ
tanto ſuperbo  facilmente ſe conuertirebe a la
fede de xp̃o jl re moro quando haueua jnteſo in que modo
haueuão tractati li jonci ne mando a dire ꝓ vno de li
noſti q̃ erão in tera como li prao
nõ veniuão ꝓ farne deſpiacere ma
andauão conta li gentilli et ꝓ
verificatiõe []de queſto li moſtrorono alguni
capi de homini morti et li diſcero que erão de gentili
mandaſſemo dire al re li piaceſſe laſciare
venire li noſtri duy homini q̃ ſtauano ne la cita
ꝓ contratare et lo figliolo de johã caruaio q̃ era
naſcuto nela tera del ꝟzin ma lui nõ volce
 de queſto fo cagiõe johã caruaio
ꝓ laſſiare qel capo 
reteniſſemo ſedizi homj̃ piu principali ꝓ
menarli in ſpagaia et tre donne in nome de la regina
deſpaga ma johã caruaio le vſurpo per
ſue.
on monday morning, july twenty-nine, we saw more than
one hundred praus divided into three squadrons and a like number of
tunguli  (which
are their small boats) coming toward us. upon catching sight of them,
imagining that there was some trickery afoot, we hoisted our sails as
quickly as possible, []abandoning an anchor in our haste. we
expected especially that we were to be captured in between certain
junks which had anchored behind us on the preceding day. we immediately
turned upon the latter, capturing four of them and killing many
persons. three or four of the junks sought flight by beaching. in one
of the junks which we captured was the son of the king of the island of
lozon. he was the captain-general of the king of burne, and came with
those junks from a large city named laoe, which is located at the end of that island
[i.e., borneo] toward java major. he had destroyed and sacked
that city because it refused to obey the king [of burne], but the king
of java major instead. giovan carvaio, our pilot, allowed that captain
and the junks to go without our consent, for a certain sum of gold, as
we learned afterward. had the pilot not given up the captain to the
king, the latter would have given us whatever we had asked, for that
captain was exceedingly feared throughout those regions, especially by
the heathens, as the latter are very hostile to that moro king. in that
same port there is another city inhabited by heathens, which is larger
than that of the moros, and built like the latter in salt water. on
that account the two peoples have daily combats together in that same
harbor. the heathen king is as powerful as the moro king, but is not so
haughty, and could be converted easily to the christian faith. when the
moro king heard how we had treated the junks, he sent us a message by
one of our men who was ashore to the effect that the praus were not
coming to do us any harm, but that they were going to attack the
[]heathens. as a proof of that statement, the
moros showed him some heads of men who had been killed, which they
declared to be the heads of heathens. we sent a message to the king,
asking him to please allow two of our men who were in the city for
purposes of trade and the son of johan carvaio, who had been born in
the country of verzin, to come to us, but the king refused. that was
the consequences of johan carvaio letting the above captain go. we kept
sixteen of the chiefest men [of the captured junks] to take them to
spagnia, and three women in the queen’s name, but johan carvaio
usurped the latter for himself.
ly jonci ſonno le ſue naui et facti
inqueſto modo lo fondo e circa duy palmi ſoura lacqua et de
taule con cauechie di legnio aſſay ben facto 
ſuura de queſto ſonno tucti de cane
groſiſſime  ꝓ contrapezo porta vno de
queſti tanta roba como vna naue li ſui arbore ſonno de
canne et le velle de ſcorſe de arbore  la
porcellana ſorte de tera bianquiſſima et ſta
cinquanta anny ſoto tera inanzi laſiadopere ꝓ che
altramente non ſaria fina  lo padre la ſotera
ꝓ lo figliolo  ſel [veleno] ſi ponne in
vno vazo de porcelana fino ſubito ſe rompe  la
moneta q̃ adoperano li morj in queſta parte e dimetalo
ſbuſata nel mezo ꝓ inſfilzarla et a
ſolamte duna parte quato ſegni q̃
ſonno lr̃e del grã re della chijna et la chiamano
picis  per vno cathil de argento viuo che e due libre de le
noſte ne dauano ſey ſcutelle []de
porcelana per vno quinterno de carta cento picis ꝓ cento
ſexanta cathili de metalo vno vazeto de porcelana ꝓ tre
cortelli vno vazo de porcelana  ꝓ  cathili de
metalo ne danão vno bahar de cera q̃ e duzento et tre
cathili per octanta cathili de metalo vno bahar de ſale ꝓ
quaranta cathili de metalo vno bahar de anime ꝓ conciar le nauj
ꝓ que in queſte parte nõ ſi troua pegola
 vinti tahil fanno vno cathil  qiui ſe
apretia metalo argento viuo vetro cenaprio pannj de lana telle et tutte
le altri nr̃e merce ma piu lo fero et li ochiali 
queſti morj vano nudi como li alti  beueno
largento viuo lo infermo lo beue per purgarſe et lo sano ꝓ
reſtare ſanno.
junks are their ships and are made in the following
manner. the bottom part is built about two palmos above the water and
is of planks fastened with wooden pegs, which are very well made; above
that they are entirely made of very large bamboos. they have a bamboo
as a counterweight. one of those junks carries as much cargo as a ship.
their masts are of bamboo, and the sails of the bark of
trees. their
porcelain is a sort of exceedingly white earth which is left for fifty
years under the earth before it is worked, for otherwise it would not
be fine. the father buries it for the son. if [poison] is placed in a
dish made of fine porcelain, the dish immediately breaks. the money made by the moros
in those regions is of bronze [metalo] pierced in the middle in
order that it may be strung. on only one side of it are four
characters, which are letters of the great king of chiina. we call that
money picis. they gave us six porcelain dishes for one
cathil
(which is equivalent to two of our libras) []of
quicksilver; one hundred picis for one book of writing paper;
one small porcelain vase for one hundred and sixty cathils of bronze
[metalo]; one porcelain vase for three knives; one bahar (which
is equivalent to two hundred and three cathils), of wax for  cathils
of bronze [metalo]; one bahar of salt for eighty cathils of
bronze [metalo]; one bahar of anime to calk the ships
(for no pitch is found in those regions) for forty cathils of bronze
[metalo]. twenty tahils make one cathil. at that place the
people highly esteem bronze [metalo], quicksilver, glass,
cinnabar, wool
cloth, linens, and all our other merchandise, although iron and
spectacles more
than all the rest. those moros go naked as do the other peoples [of
those regions]. they drink quicksilver—the sick man drinks it to
cleanse himself, and the well man to preserve his health.
jl re de burne a due perle groſſe come dui
oui de galina et ſonno tanto rotonde q̃ non puono
firmarſe ſoura vna tauola et queſto ſo certo
ꝓ q̃ quando li portaſſemo li preſenti li fo
facto ſegnio nele moſtraſe lui diſſe le
moſtrarebe lalto giorno poy alguni principali ne
diſſero loro hauerle vedute.
the king of burne has two pearls as large as two
hen’s eggs. they are so round that they will not stand still on a
table. i know that for a fact, for when we carried the king’s
presents to him, signs were made for him to show them to us, but he
said that he would show them next day. afterward some chiefs said that
they had seen them.
queſti mori adoranno mahometo et la ſua lege
et non mangiar carne de porco lauarſi il culo cõ la mano
ſiniſtra non mangiare cõ qella nõ
tagliare coſa alguna cõ la dextra ſedere quando
vrinano nõ amazare galine ne capre ſe pima
nõ parlano al ſolle tagliare de galine le cime de le alle
cõ le ſue pelecine q̃ li avanzano de ſoto et li
piedi et poy ſcartarla ꝓ mezo lauarſe lo volto
cõ la mano drita nõ lauarſe li denti []cõ li ditti et none mangiare coſa
alguna amazata ſe non da loro  ſonno circũ
ſiſi como li judei.
those moros worship mahomet. the latter’s law
orders them not to eat pork; as they wash the buttocks with the left
hand, not to use that hand in eating; not to cut anything with the right hand; to
sit down to urinate; not to kill fowls or goats without first
addressing the sun; to cut off the tops of the wings with the little
bits of skin that stick up from under and the feet of fowls; then to
split them in twain; to wash the face with the right hand, but
[]not to cleanse the teeth with the fingers; and
not to eat anything that has been killed unless it be by
themselves.
they are circumcised like the jews.
jn queſta yſola naſce la canfora
ſpecie de balſamo laqalle naſce fra li arbori
et la ſcorſa  e menuta como li remole
 se la ſe tiene diſcoperta apoco apoco diuenta
niente et la chiamano capor  li naſce cannela gengero
mirabolani neranci limoni chiacare meloni cogomari zuche rapani ceuole
ſcarlogne vache bufali porci capre galine oche ceruj elefanti
cauali et altre coſe  queſta yſola e tanto
grande q̃ ſi ſta a circundarla con vno prao tre mezi
ſta de latitudine al polo articho in cinque gradi et vno carto et
in cento et ſetantaſey et duy terſi de longitudine de la
linea repartitionale et ſe chiama burne.
camphor, a kind of balsam, is produced in that island.
it exudes between the wood and the bark, and the drops are as small as
[grains of] wheat bran. if it is exposed it gradually evaporates
[literally: becomes nothing]. those people call it capor.
cinnamon, ginger, mirabolans, oranges, lemons, nangcas, watermelons,
cucumbers, gourds, turnips, cabbages, scallions, cows, buffaloes,
swine, goats, chickens, geese, deer, elephants, horses, and other
things are found there. that island is so large that it takes three months
to sail round it in a prau. it lies in a latitude of five and
one-fourth degrees toward the arctic pole, and in a longitude of one
hundred and seventy-six and two-thirds degrees from the line of
demarcation, and its name is burne.
partendone de queſta yſola
tornaſſemo in drieto ꝓ truuare vno loco apto ꝓ
conciare le naui ꝓ che faceuano hacqua  vna naue
ꝓ poco vedere del ſuo piloto dete in certi baſſi
duna yſola deta bibalon ma cõ lo ajuto de dio la
liberaſſemo  vno marinaro de qella
naue nõ hauedendoſe deſpauilo vna candella in vna
barille pien de poluere re de bombarda subito la tolſe fora
ſenſa danno niſſuno  ſeguẽdo
poi lo nr̃o camino pigliaſſemo vno prao pienno de cochi
que andaua a burne  le homini fugirono in vna jſoleta
fin que pigliaſſemo queſto tre alti fugirono
de drieto da certe yſollete.
leaving that island, we turned back in order to find a
suitable place to calk the ships, for they were leaking. one ship ran
on to some shoals of an island called bibalon, because of the carelessness of its
pilot, but by the help of god we freed it. a sailor of that ship
incautiously snuffed a candle into a barrel full of gunpowder, but he
quickly snatched it out without any harm. then pursuing our course, we captured a prau
laden with cocoanuts on its way to burne. its crew sought refuge on an
islet, until we captured it. three other praus escaped behind certain
islets.
al capo de burne fa queſta et vna
jſola deta cimbonbon q̃ ſta in octo gradi et ſette
menuti e vno porto []ꝓfecto ꝓ conciare naui
ꝓ ilque entraſſemo dento et ꝓ
hauer̃ tropo le coſe neceſſarie ꝓ conciare
le naui tardaſſemo quarãtaduj giorni  jn
queſti giorni ognuno de nuy ſe afaticaua qi in vna
coſa qi in vnalta ma la magior faticha
haueuão era andar far legnia neli boſchi ſenza
ſcarpe  jn queſta yſola ſonno porci
ſaluatici ne amazaſſemo vno de queſti cõ lo
batello ne lacqua paſſando de vna yſola in
vnalta loqalle haueua lo capo longo duy palmi et
mezo et li denti grandi  gli ſonno cocodrili grandi
cuſſi de terra como de mare oſtrigue et cape de
diuerſe ſorte  fra le altre no
trouaſſemo due la carne de luna pezo vinti ſey
libr̃ et lalta quaranta catro 
pigliaſſemo vno peſce q̃ haueua lo capo como vno
porco con dui corni  el ſuo corpo era tuto duno
oſſo ſolo  haueua ſoura la ſchena
como vna ſella et era picolo  ancora qi
ſe troua arbori q̃ fanno la foglia quando caſcano
ſonno viue et ca minano quelle foglie ſonno de piu ne meno
como qelli del moraro ma nõ tanto longue 
apreſſo el pecolo de vna parte et delalta anno duy
piedi il pecollo e corto et pontino non anno ſangue et
qi le coca fugino  yo ne teny vna noue giorni in
vna ſcatola  quando la apriua queſta andaua in
torno intorno ꝓ la ſcatola non penſo viueno de
alto ſenon de arie.
at the head of burne between it and an island called
cimbonbon, which lies in [a latitude of] eight []degrees and seven minutes, is a perfect port for repairing
ships. consequently, we entered it; but as we lacked many things for
repairing the ships, we delayed there for forty-two days. during that
time, each one of us labored hard, one at one thing and one at another.
our greatest fatigue however was to go barefoot to the woods for wood.
in that island there are wild boars, of which we killed one which was
going by water from one island to another [by pursuing it] with the
small boat. its head was two and one-half palmos long, and its teeth were large.
there are found large crocodiles, both on land and sea, oysters and
shellfish of various kinds. among the last named we found two, the
flesh of one of which weighed twenty-six libras, and the other
forty-four. we
caught a fish, which had a head like that of a hog and two horns. its
body consisted entirely of one bone, and on its back it resembled a
saddle; and it was small. trees are also found there which produce leaves
which are alive when they fall, and walk. those leaves are quite like
those of the mulberry, but are not so long. on both sides near the
stem, which is short and pointed, they have two feet. they have no
blood, but if one touches them they run away. i kept one of them for nine
days in a box. when i opened the box, that leaf went round and round
it. i believe
those leaves live on nothing but air.
eſſendo partiti de queſta yſola
çioe del porto nel capo de qella yſola
pulaoã in contraſſemo vno jonco che veniua da burne
nelqalle era lo gouuernator̃ de pulaoan  li
faceſſemo ſegnio amaynaſſe le velle et lui
nõ volendole amaynare lo pigliaſſemo ꝓ
forſa et []lo ſacquegiaſſemo 
ſel gouernator̃ volſe eſſere libero ne dete in
termino de ſette giornj quatro cento meſure de rizo vinti
porci vinti capre et cento cinquanta galine  poy ne a
preſento cochi figui canne dolci vazi de vino de palma et
alte coſe  vedẽ do nuy la ſua
liberalita gli rendeſſemo alguni ſui pugnialli et
archibuſi  poy li donaſſemo vna bandiera vna
veſta de damaſco giallo et xv braçia de tella a vno
ſuo figliolo vna capo de panno lazuro et a vno fratello del
gouuernator̃ vna veſta de panno ꝟde et alte
coſe  ſe partiſſemo de lui como
amiçi et tornaſſemo indrieto fa la
yſola de cagajan et qel porto de cippit pigliando lo
camino a la carta del leuante ꝟſo ſiroco ꝓ
trouare le yſolle de malucho paſaſſemo ꝓ
certi monticelli circa de liqalli trouaſſemo lo
mare pienno de herbe cõ lo fondo grandisso quando
paſauarho ꝓ queſti ne pareua intrare ꝓ vno
alto mare  reſtãdo chipit al leuante
trouaſſemo due yſolle zolo et taghima al ponente
apreſſe de le qalle naſcono le perle
 le due del re de burne forono trouatte quiui et le hebe
como ne fo referito in queſto modo  queſto re
piglio per moglie vna figliola del re de zolo laqalle li
diſſe como ſuo padre haueua queſte due perle
 coſtui ſi delibero hauerli in ogni modo
 ando vna nocte con cinquecento prao et piglio lore con duy
ſui figlioli et meno li a burne ſel re de zolo ſe
volſe liberare li fu forſa darli le due perle. []
having left that island, that is, the port, we met at the head of the
island of pulaoan a junk which was coming from burne, on which was the
governor of pulaoan. we made them a signal to haul in their sails, and
as they refused to haul them in, we captured []the
junk by force, and sacked it. [we told] the governor [that] if [he]
wished his freedom, he was to give us, inside of seven days, four
hundred measures of rice, twenty swine, twenty goats, and one hundred
and fifty fowls. after that he presented us with cocoanuts, figs
[i.e., bananas], sugarcanes, jars full of palm wine, and other
things. seeing his liberality, we returned some of his daggers and
arquebuses to him, giving him in addition, a flag, a yellow damask
robe, and xv brazas of cloth; to his son, a cloak of blue cloth; to a
brother of the governor, a robe of green cloth and other things; and we
parted from them as friends. we turned our course back between the
island of cagaian and the port of cippit, and laid our course east by
south in order that we might find the islands of malucho. we passed by
certain reefs [literally: small elevations] near which we found
the sea to be full of grass, although the depth was very great. when we
passed through them, it seemed as though we were entering another sea.
leaving chipit to the east, we found two island, zolo and
taghima, which
lie toward the west, and near which pearls are found. the two pearls of the king
of burne were found there, and the king got them, as was told us, in
the following manner. that king took to wife a daughter of the king of
zolo, who told him that her father had those two pearls. the king
determined to get possession of them by hook or by crook. going one
night with five hundred praus, he captured the king and two of his sons, and took
them to burne with him. [he told] the king of zolo that if he wished
freedom, he must surrender the two pearls to him. []
poy al leuante carta del grego
paſaſſemo fra dui habitatiõe dete cauit et
subanin et vna jſola habitata deta monoripa longi x legue da li
monticeli  la gente de queſta hanno loro caſe in
barche et non habitano altroue  in qelle due
habitatiõe de cauit et subanin liqalli ſonno ne
la yſola de butuan et calaghan naſce la meglior canella
q̃ ſi poſſa trouare  ſe
ſtauão iui ꝓ dui giornj  ne carigauano
le naui ma ꝓ hauer bon vento apaſare vna ponta et certe
yſollete q̃ erano circha de queſta nõ
voleſſemo tardar̃ et andando a la vella
barataſſemo diſiſette libre ꝓ dui cortelli
grandi haue vamo tolti al gouuernator̃ de pulaoan 
larbore de queſta cannella he alto tre o catro cubito
et groſſo como li diti de la mano et nõ ha piu de tre
o catro rameti  la ſua foglia he como qella
del lauro  la ſua ſcorſa he la cannella
 la ſe coglie due volte a lanno coſi e forte lo
legnio et le foglie eſſendo verde como la cannella
 la chiamão caiu mana  caiu vol dire
legno et mana dolce çioe legnio dolce.
then we laid our course east by north between two
settlements called cauit and subanin, and an inhabited island called
monoripa, located x leguas from the reefs. the people of that island make their
dwellings in boats and do not live otherwise. in those two settlements
of cavit and subanin, which are located in the island of butuan and
calaghan, is found the best cinnamon that grows. had we stayed there
two days, those people would have laden our ships for us, but as we had
a wind favorable for passing a point and certain islets which were near
that island, we did not wish to delay. while under sail we bartered two
large knives which we had taken from the governor of pulaoan for
seventeen libras [of cinnamon]. the cinnamon tree grows to a height of
three or four cubits, and as thick as the fingers of the hand. it has
but three or four small branches and its leaves resemble those of the
laurel. its bark is the cinnamon, and it is gathered twice per year.
the wood and leaves are as strong as the cinnamon when they are green.
those people call it caiu mana. caiu means wood, and
mana, sweet, hence, “sweet wood.”
pigliando lo camino al grego et andando a vna cita
grande detta maingda nao laqalle he nela yſola de
butuan et calaghan acio ſapeſſemo qalque noua
de maluco pigliaſſemo ꝓ forſa vno bigniday e come
vno prao et amazaſſemo ſette homini in queſto erano
ſolum dizidoto homini diſpoſti  quanto
alguni alti vedeſſemo in queſte parte tucti
deli principali de ma ingdanao fra queſti vno ne diſſe
q̃ era fratello del re de maingdanao et che ſapeua doue era
[]malucho  ꝓ queſto
laſaſſemo la via del grego et pigliaſẽo la
via de ſiroco  in vno capo de queſta yſola
butuan et caleghan apreſſo de vno fiume ſe trouano
hominj pelozi grandiſſimi combatitori et arciere anno
ſpade largue vno palmo mangião ſinon lo core del huomo
crudo cõ ſugo de neranzi o limoni et ſe chiamano
benaian li peloſi  quando pigliaſſemo la via
del ſiroco ſtauamo in ſey gradi et ſete menuti
alartico et trenta legui longi de cauit.
laying our course toward the northeast, and going to a
large city called maingdanao, which is located in the island of butuan
and calaghan, so that we might gather information concerning maluco, we
captured by force a bigniday, a vessel resembling a prau, and killed seven
men. it contained only eighteen men, and they were as well built as any
whom we had seen in those regions. all were chiefs of maingdanao, among them being
one who told us that he was a brother of the king of maingdanao,
[]and that he knew the location of malucho.
through his directions we discontinued our course toward the northeast,
and took that toward the southeast. at a cape of that island of butuan
and caleghan, and near a river, are found shaggy men who are
exceedingly great fighters and archers. they use swords one palmo in
length, and eat only raw human hearts with the juice of oranges or
lemons. those
shaggy people are called benaian. when we took our course toward the
southeast, we lay in a latitude of six degrees and seven minutes toward
the arctic pole, and thirty leguas from cavit.
andando al ſiroco trouaſſemo quatro
yſolle ciboco biraham batolach saranganj et candighar vno
ſabato de nocte a vinti ſey de octobre coſteando birahan
batolach ne aſſalto vna fortuna grandiſſima
ꝓ ilque pregando ydio abaſſa ſemo tucte le velle
subito li tri noſti ſancti ne aparſero
deſcaciando tuta laſcuritate sto. elmo ſtette
piu de due hore incima lagabia como vna torchia sto. nicolo
in cima dela mezana et sta chiara ſoura lo trinqueto
 ꝓmeteſemo vno ſchiauo aſancto elmo a
sto nicolo et a sta. chiara gli deſſemo
a ogny vno laſua elemoſina  ſeguendo poy
nr̃o viagio intraſſemo in vno porto in mezo de le due
yſolle saranghani et candighar et ſe afermaſſemo al
leuante apreſſo vna habitatiõe de ſarangani oue
ſe troua oro et perle  queſti populi ſonno
gentili et vano nudi como gli alti  queſto
porto ſta de latitudine in cinque gradi et noue menuti et longi
cinquanta legue de cauit.
sailing toward the southeast, we found four islands,
[namely], ciboco, biraham batolach, sarangani, and candighar. one saturday night, october
twenty-six, while coasting by birahan batolach, we encountered a most
furious storm. thereupon, praying god, we lowered all the sails.
immediately our three saints appeared to us and dissipated all the
darkness. st.
elmo remained for more than two hours on the maintop, like a torch; st.
nicholas on the mizzentop; and st. clara on the foretop. we promised a
slave to st. elmo, st. nicholas, and st. clara, and gave alms to each
one. then continuing our voyage, we entered a harbor between the two
islands of saranghani and candighar, and anchored to the eastward near
a settlement of sarangani, where gold and pearls are found. those
people are heathens and go naked as do the others. that harbor lies in
a latitude of five degrees nine minutes, and is fifty leguas from
cavit.
stando quiui vno giorno pigliaſſemo dui
piloti ꝓ forſa acio ne inſegniaſeno malucho
 facendo nr̃o []viagio fa mezo
giorno et garbin paſaſſemo ꝓ octo yſole
habitate et deſhabitate poſte in modo de vna via
leqalle ſe chiamano cheaua cauiao cabiao camanuca
cabaluzao cheai lipan et nuza fin que ariuaſſemo in vna
yſola poſta in fine de queſte molto bella al vedere
 ꝓ hauere vento contrario et ꝓ non potere
paſſare vna ponta de queſta yſo la andauamo dequa
et dela çirca de ella ꝓ ilque vno de qelli
haueuamo pigliati a ſaranghai et lo fratello del re de maingdanao
cõ vno ſuo figliolo picolo ne la nocte fugirono nuotando in
queſta yſola ma il figliolo ꝓ nõ potere tenere
ſaldo ſoura le ſpalle de ſuo padre ſe anego
ꝓ nõ potere caualcare la dicta punta
paſſaſemo de ſoto dela yſola doue erano molte
yſolette  queſta yſola tenne
quato re raia matandatu raia lalagha raia bapti et raia
parabu  ſonno gentili  ſta in tre
gradi et mezo a lartico et . legue longi de ſaranghany. et
edetta ſanghir.
remaining one day in that harbor, we captured two
pilots by force, in order that they might show []us
where malucho lay. then laying our course south southwest, we passed
among eight inhabited and desert islands, which were situated in the
manner of a street. their names are cheaua, cauiao, cabiao, camanuca,
cabaluzao, cheai, lipan, and nuza. finally we came to an island at their end, which
was very beautiful to look at. as we had a contrary wind, so that we
could not double a point of that island, we sailed hither and thither
near it. consequently, one of the men whom we had captured at
saranghai, and the brother of the king of maingdanao who took with him
his small son, escaped during the night by swimming to that island. but
the boy was drowned, for he was unable to hold tightly to his
father’s shoulder. being unable to double the said point, we
passed below the island where there were many islets. that island has
four kings, [namely], raia matandatu, raia lalagha, raía bapti,
and raia parabu. the people are heathens. the island lies in a latitude
of three and one-half degrees toward the arctic pole and is  leguas
from saranghany. its name is sanghir.
facendo lo medeſimo camino
paſaſſemo zirca ſey jſolle cheama carachita
para zanghalura ciau lontana diece legue da ſanghir queſta
tenne vno mõte alto ma nõ largo lo ſuo re chiama
raia ponto et paghinzara longo octo legue da ciau laqalle a
tre montagnie alte lo ſuo re ſe chiama raia babintan talaut
 poy trouaſſemo al leuante de paghinzara longi
dodici legue due yſolle nõ molto grandi habitate dette zoar
et meau  paſſate queſte due yſolle
[]mercore aſey de nouembr̃
diſcoperſemo quato yſolle alte al leuante
longi dale due cadordice legue  lo pilloto q̃ ne era
reſtato diſſe como qelle quatro yſolle
erão maluco ꝓ ilque rengratiaſſemo ydio et
ꝓ allegreza deſcaricaſſemo tuta la artigliaria
 non era de marauiliarſi ſe eramo tanto alegri
perche haueuão paſſati vintiſette meſi
mancho dui giorni in cercare malucho ꝓ tute qʒſte
yſolle [ꝓ tute queſte yſolle: doublet in original ms.] fin amalucho  el menor
fondo trouaſſemo era in cento et ducento bracia al contrario
como diceuão li portugueſi q̃ quiui nõ ſi
poteua nauigare ꝓ li grã baſſi et il
çiello obſcuro como loro se haueuão ymaginato.
continuing the same course, we passed near six
islands, [namely], cheama, carachita, para, zanghalura, ciau (which is
ten leguas from sanghir, and has a high but not large mountain, and
whose king is called raia ponto), and paghinzara. the latter is located eight leguas
from ciau, and has three high mountains. the name of its king is raia
babintan. [then
we found the island] talaut; and we found twelve leguas to the east of
paghinzara two islands, not very large, but inhabited, called zoar and
meau. after
passing those two islands, on []wednesday, the sixth of
november, we discovered four lofty islands fourteen leguas east of the
two [abovementioned islands]. the pilot who still remained with us told
us that those four islands were maluco. therefore, we thanked god and
as an expression of our joy discharged all our artillery. it was no
wonder that we were so glad, for we had passed twenty-seven months less
two days in our search for malucho. among all those islands [among all those islands:
doublet in original ms.], even to malucho, the shallowest bottom
that we found was at a depth of one or two hundred brazas,
notwithstanding the assertion of the portuguese that that region could
not be navigated because of the numerous shoals and the dark sky as
they have imagined.
venere a octo de nouembr̃  tre hore inanzi lo
tramontar del ſolle entraſe mo in vno porto duna yſolla
deta tadore et ſurgendo apreſſo terra in vinti bracia
deſcaricaſſemo tuta lartigliaria  nel giorno
ſeguente venne lo re in vno prao a le naui et circundole vna volta
 ſubito li andaſſemo contra cõ lo
batello ꝓ honnorarlo  ne fece intrare nel ſuo
prao et ſedere apreſſo deſe  lui
ſedeua ſotto vna humbrela de seta q̃ andaua intorno
 dinanſi de lui era vno ſuo figliolo col scettro
realle et dui cõ dui vazi de oro ꝓ dare hacqua ale manj
et dui altrj cõ due caſſetine dorate pienne de
qelle betre. lo re ne diſſe foſſemo
libẽ venuttj et como lui ja grã tempo ſe haueua
ſogniato alquante naue vegnire amaluco da luogui
lontanj et ꝓ piu certificarſi aueua voluto vedere ne la
luna et vite como veniuano et q̃ nuy []eramo
qelli  entrando lo re nelle nauy tucti li
baſaronno la mano poi lo conducemo ſoura la popa et nel en
trare dentro nõ ſe voſce abaſſare ma entro
de ſoura via facendolo ſedere in vna cathedra de veluto
roſſo  li veſtiſſemo vna
veſta de veluto jallo ala turqueſca nui ꝓ piu ſuo
honnore ſedeuão in terra apreſſo lui 
eſendo tucti aſentati lo re comincio et diſſe lui
et tucti ſui populi volere ſemꝓ eſſere
fideliſſemj amici et vaſſali al nr̃o re
deſpagnia et acceptaua nuj como ſui figlioli et
doueſcemo deſcendere in terra como nele ꝓrie caſe
noſte ꝓ che daqi indietro ſua
yſola non ſe chiameria piu tadore ma caſtiglia ꝓ
lamore grande portaua al nr̃o re suo ſigniore  li
donaſſemo vno pñte qal fo la veſte la
cathedra vna peſſa de tella ſotille quatro bracia de
panno de ſcarlata vno ſaglio de brocato vno panno de
damaſco giallo alguni panny indiany lauorati de oro et de
ſeta vna peza de berania biancha tella de cambaia dui bonnetj
ſey filce de criſtalo dodici corteli tre ſpechi grandi
sey forfice ſey petini alquanti bichieri dorati et altre coſe
al ſuo figliolo vno paño indianno de oro et de ſeta
vno ſpechio grande vno bonnet et duy cortelli a noue
alti ſui principali a ogni vno vno panno de ſeta
bonneti et dui cortellj et a molti alti aqi
bonneti et aqi cortelli  deſſemo in
fin quel re ne diſſe doue ſsemo reſtare
 dopo ne diſſe lui nõ hauer
alto ſinon la ꝓpia vita ꝓ
mãdare al re ſuo s.  doueſſemo nuj
piu aꝓpincarſe a la cita []et se veniua de nocte
ale naui li amazaſſemo cõ li schiopeti 
partendoſſe de la popa may ſe volce abaſſare
 pigliata la liſſentia diſcare
caſſemo tucte le bombarde  queſto re he moro
et forſi de quaranta cinque anny ben facto cõ vna
pñtia realle et grandiſſimo aſtrologo
 alhora era veſtito duna camiſeta de tella
biancha ſoti liſſima cõli capi de le manigue
lauorati doro et de vno panno dela cinta quaſi fina in terra et
era deſcalſo  haueua jntorno lo capo [lo capo:
doublet in original ms.] vno velo de ſeta et ſoura vna
girlanda de fiory et chiamaſſe raia ſultan manzor.
three hours before sunset on friday, november eight,
, we
entered into a harbor of an island called tadore, and anchoring near
the shore in twenty brazas we fired all our artillery. next day the
king came to the ships in a prau, and circled about them once. we
immediately went to meet him with the small boat, in order to show him
honor. he made us enter his prau and seat ourselves near him. he was
seated under a silk awning which sheltered him on all sides. in front
of him was one of his sons with the royal scepter, and two persons with
two gold jars to pour water on his hands, and two others with two
gilded caskets filled with their betel. the king told us that we were
welcome there, and that he had dreamt some time ago that some ships
were coming to malucho from remote parts; and that for more assurance
he had determined to []consult the moon, whereupon he had seen the ships were
coming, and that we were they. upon the king entering our ships all
kissed his hand and then we led him to the stern. when he entered
inside there, he would not stoop, but entered from above. causing him to sit down in
a red velvet chair, we clothed him in a yellow velvet robe made in the
turkish fashion. in order to show him greater honor, we sat down on the
ground near him. then when all were seated, the king began to speak and
said that he and all his people desired ever to be the most loyal
friends and vassals to our king of spagnia. he received us as his
children, and we could go ashore as if in our own houses, for from that
time thenceforth, his island was to be called no more tadore but
castiglia, because of the great love which he bore to our king, his
sovereign. we made him a present which consisted of the robe, the
chair, a piece of delicate linen, four brazas of scarlet cloth, a piece
of brocaded silk, a piece of yellow damask, some indian cloth
embroidered with gold and silk, a piece of berania (the white
linen of cambaia), two caps, six strings of glass beads, twelve knives,
three large mirrors, six pairs of scissors, six combs, some gilded
drinking-cups,
and other articles. to his son we gave an indian cloth of gold and
silk, a large mirror, a cap, and two knives; and to each of nine others—all
of them his chiefs—a silk cloth, caps, and two knives; and to
many others caps or knives. we kept giving presents until the king bade
us desist. after that he declared to us that he had nothing else except
his own life to send to the king his sovereign. we were to approach
nearer to the city, and whoever []came to the ships at night,
we were to kill with our muskets. in leaving the stern, the king would
never bend his head. when he took his leave we discharged all the guns.
that king is a moro and about forty-five years old. he is well built
and has a royal presence, and is an excellent astrologer. at that time he
was clad in a shirt of the most delicate white stuff with the ends of
the sleeves embroidered in gold, and in a cloth that reached from his
waist to the ground. he was barefoot, and had a silk scarf wrapped
about his head [his head, doublet in original ms.], and above it
a garland of flowers. his name is raia sultan manzor.
domenica a x de nouembr̃ queſto re
volſe intendere quanto tempo era se eramo partiti deſpagnia
et lo ſoldo et la quintalada ne daua il re açiaſcuno
de nui et voliua li deſſemo vna firma del re et vna bandiera
reale ꝓ ch̃ daqi inanzi la ſua jſola
et vnalta chiamata tarenate de laqalle ſel
poteua coronare vno ſuo [figlio: crossed out in
original ms.] nepote deto calonaghapi farebe tucte due
ſerianno del re deſpagnia et ꝓ honnore del ſuo re
era ꝓ combatere inſino ala morte et quando non
poteſſe piu reſiſtere veniria in
ſpaga lui etucti li ſui in vno joncho faceua far
de nuoua cõla firma et bãdera reale percio grã
tempo era ſuo ſeruitor̃  ne prego li
laſciaſſemo algunj hominj acio ogni ora ſe
arecordaſſe del re deſpagnia et non mercadãtie
ꝓ che loro non gli reſtarebenno et ne diſſe
voleua andare a vna jſola chiamata bachian ꝓ fornirne piu
preſto le naui de []garoſali ꝓ cio nela
ſua non eranno tanti de ſechi fucero ſoficientj a
carigar le due naue ogi ꝓ eſſere domenicho non
volſe contractare  jl giorno feſtigiato da
queſti populi he lo nr̃o vennere.
on sunday, november x, that king desired us to tell
him how long it was since we had left spagnia, and what pay and
quintalada the
king gave to each of us. he requested us to give him a signature of the
king and a royal banner, for then and thenceforth, he would cause it
that his island and another called tarenate (provided that he were able
to crown one of his [sons: crossed out in original ms.]
grandsons,
named calonaghapi) would both belong to the king of spagnia; and for
the honor of his king he was ready to fight to the death, and when he
could no longer resist, he would go to spagnia with all his family in a
junk which he
was having built new, carrying the royal signature and banner; and
therefore he was the king’s servant for a long time. he begged us
to leave him some men so that he might constantly be reminded of the
king of spagnia. he did not ask for merchandise because the latter
would not remain with him. he told us that he would go to an island called
bachian, in order sooner to []furnish the ships with cloves, for
there were not enough dry cloves in his island to load the two ships.
as that day was sunday, it was decided not to trade the festive day of
those people is our friday.
açcio vr̃a jilma sa.
ſapra le yſolle doue naſcono li garofali sunno cinque
tarenatte tadore mutir machian et bachian  tarenate he la
principalle et quãdo viueua lo ſuo re signorigiaua
caſi tucte le altre  tadore et qella doue
eramo  tienne re mutir et machian non anno re ma ſe
regenno a populo et quando li dui re de tarenate et de tadore fanno
guera inſieme queſte due li ſerueno de gente
 la vltima e bachian et tienne re  tucta
queſta ꝓuin tia doue naſcono li garofali ſe
chiama malucho.  non era ancora octo meſy que ero
morto in tarenate vno franco ſeranno portugueſe
capo gñale del re de tarenate contra lo re de tadore
et opero tanto que conſtrinſe lo re de tadore donnare vna
ſua figliola ꝓ moglie al re de tarenate et quaſi tueti
li figlioli deli principali ꝓ oſtagio de laqal
figliola naſcete quel nepote del re de tadore  poy
facta fa loro la pace eſſendo venuto vno giorno
franco ſeranno in tadore ꝓ contractare garofali
queſto re lo fece velenare cõ qelle foglie de
betre et viuete ſinon catro jornj  il ſuo re lo
veleua far ſepelire ſecondo le ſue lege ma tre
xp̃iani ſui ſeruitorj non conſentirono lo
qal laſcio vno figliolo et vna figliola picoli de vna
donna que tolſi in jaua magiore et ducento []bahar de garofoli  coſtui era
grande amicho et parente del nr̃o fidel capo.
gñale et fo cauſa de comouerlo apigliar qʒſta
inpreſa perche piu volte eſſendo lo ñro
capo amalacha li haueua ſcripto como lui ſtaua iui
 d. manuel ja re de portugal ꝓ nõ volere
acreſcere la ꝓuiſione del nr̃o capo
gñale ſolamente de vno teſtonne al meſe ꝓ
li ſui bennemeriti venne in ſpagnia et hebe dala ſacra
mageſta tucto qello ſepe demandare 
paſſati x giorni dopo la morte de franco
ſeranno il re de tarenate deto raya abuleis hauendo
deſcaciato ſuo gennero re de bachian fu avelenato de ſua
figliola moglie del decto re soto ombra de volere cõcluder̃
la pace fra loro il qalle ſcampo ſolum duy giornj
et laſcio nuoue figlioly principali  li loro nomy
ſono queſti chechili momuli jadore vunighi chechili de roix
cili manzur cili pagi chialin chechilin cathara vaiechu serich et
calano ghapi.
in order that your most illustrious lordship may know
the islands where cloves grow, they are five, [namely], tarenatte,
tadore, mutir, machian, and bachian. tarenate is the chief one, and
when its king was alive, he ruled nearly all the others. tadore, the
one where we were, has a king. mutir and machian have no king but are
ruled by the people, and when the two kings of tarenate and of tadore
engage in war, those two islands furnish them with men. the last island
is bachian, and it has a king. that entire province where cloves grow
is called malucho. at that time it was not eight months since one
francesco seranno had died in tarenate. [he was] a portuguese and
the captain-general of the king of tarenate and opposed the king of
tadore. he did so well that he constrained the king of tadore to give
one of his daughters to wife to the king of tarenate, and almost all
the sons of the chiefs as hostages. the above mentioned grandson of the
king of tadore was born to that daughter. peace having been made
between the two kings, and when francesco seranno came one day to
tadore to trade cloves, the king of tadore had him poisoned with the
said betel leaves. he lived only four days. his king wished to have him
buried according to his law [i.e., with mahometan rites], but
three christians who were his servants would not consent to it. he left
a son and a daughter, both young, born by a woman whom he had taken to
wife in java major, []and two hundred bahars of cloves. he was a
close friend and a relative of our royal captain-general, and was the
cause of inciting the latter to undertake that enterprise, for when our
captain was at malacha, he had written to him several times that he was
in tarenate. as don manuel, then king of portugal, refused to increase
our captain-general’s pension by only a single testoon per month
for his merits, the latter went to spagnia, where he had obtained
everything for which he could ask from his sacred majesty. ten days after the death of
francesco seranno, the king of tarenate, by name, raya abuleis, having
expelled his son-in-law, the king of bachian, was poisoned by his
daughter, the wife of the latter king, under pretext of trying to bring
about peace between the two kings. the king lingered but two days, and
left nine principal sons, whose names are chechili momuli, jadore
vunighi, chechili de roix, cili manzur, cili pagi, chialin, chechilin
cathara, vaiechu serich, and calano ghapi.
luni a xj de nouembr̃ vno deli figlioli del re de
tarenate chechili de roix veſtito de veluto roſſo venne
ali naui cõ dui prao ſonnando cõ qelle
borchie et nõ volſe alhora entrare neli naui 
coſtui teneua la donna li figlioli et li alte coſe
de franco ſeranno quando lo cognioſſemo
mandaſſemo dire al re ſel doueuão receuere
ꝓ che eramo nel ſuo porto  ne riſpoſe
faceſſemo como voleuamo  lo figliolo del re
vedendone ſtar ſuſpeſi ſe diſcoſto
alquanto da le naui  li an daſemo cõlo batello
apñtarli vno panno []de oro et de ſeta indiano
cõ alquãti cortelli ſpechi et forfice 
accepto li cõ vno pocho de ſdegnio et ſubito ſe
parti  coſtui haueua ſeco vno jndio xp̃iano
chiamato manuel ſeruitor̃ dun peto alfonſo de
loroſa portugheſe loqal dopo la morte de
franco ſeranno vene de bandan ataranate  il
ſeruitor̃ ꝓ ſapere parlare in portugheſe
entro nele naue et diſſenne ſe ben li figlioli del re de
tarenate eranno nemici del re de tadore niente de meno ſempre
ſtauamo al ſeruitio del re de ſpagnia 
mã daſemo vna lr̃a apietro alfonſo de loroſa
ꝓ queſto ſuo ſeruitor̃ doueſſe
vegnire ſenza ſuſpecto niſſuno.
on monday, november xi, one of the sons of the king of
tarenate, [to wit], chechili de roix, came to the ships clad in red
velvet. he had two praus and his men were playing upon the
abovementioned gongs. he refused to enter the ship at that time. he had
[charge of] the wife and children, and the other possessions of
francesco seranno. when we found out who he was, we sent a message to
the king, asking him whether we should receive chechili de roix, since
we were in his port, and he replied to us that we could do as we
pleased. but the son of the king, seeing that we were hesitating, moved
off somewhat from the ships. we went to him with the []boat
in order to present him an indian cloth of gold and silk, and some
knives, mirrors, and scissors. he accepted them somewhat haughtily, and
immediately departed. he had a christian indian with him named manuel,
the servant of one petro alfonso de lorosa, a portuguese who went from bandan to
tarenate, after the death of francesco seranno. as the servant knew how
to talk portuguese, he came aboard our ship, and told us that, although
the sons of the king of tarenate were at enmity with the king of
tadore, yet they were always at the service of the king of spagnia.
we sent a
letter to pietro alfonso de lorosa, through his servant, [telling him]
that he could come without any hesitation.
queſti re teneno quante donne voleno ma ne anno
vna ꝓ ſuo moglie principale et tutte le altre
hobediſconno aqueſta  il re de tadore haueua vna
caſa grãde fuora de la çita doue eſtauano du
cento ſue donne de li piu principali cõ alte
tante le ſeruiuano quando lo re mangia ſta ſolo ho vero
cõ la ſuo mogle prin cipalle in vno luoco alto
como vn tribunalle oue po vedere tucte le altre q̃ li ſedenno
atorno et aqella piu li piace li comanda vada dormire
ſecho qela nocte  finito lo mangiare
ſe lui comanda qʒ queſte mangião inſieme lo
fanno ſe non ognuna va mangiare nella ſua camera.
 niuno ſenza liſentia del re le puo vedere et
ſe alguno he trouato o di giorno o de nocte apreſſo la
caza del re he amazato  ogni famiglia he hobligata de dare
al re vna et due figliole  queſto re haueua vinti
ſey figlioli octo maſchi lo reſto femine 
dinanzi a queſta yſola []nehe vna
grandiſſima chiamata giailolo che he habitata de mory et da
gentilli  ſe trouerano duy re fra li mory si como ne
diſſe el re vno ha uer̃ hauuto ſeycento figlioli et
lalto cinque cento et vinticinque  li gentili
nõ teneno tante donne ne viueno cõ tante
ſuperſtitioni ma adorana la pia coſa q̃
vedeno la matina quando eſconno fora de caſa ꝓ tuto
qel giorno  jl re de queſti gentilli deto
raya papua e richiſſimo de oro et habita dento ne
layſola  in queſta jſola de giaiallo
naſcono soura ſaſſi viui cane groſſe como
la gamba pienne de acqua molto buona da bere ne comprauão assay
daqueſti populi.
those kings have as many women as they wish, but only
one chief wife, whom all the others obey. the abovesaid king of tadore
had a large house outside of the city, where two hundred of his chief
women lived with a like number of women to serve them. when the king
eats, he sits alone or with his chief wife in a high place like a
gallery whence he can see all the other women who sit about the
gallery; and he orders her who best pleases him to sleep with him that
night. after the king has finished eating, if he orders those women to
eat together, they do so, but if not, each one goes to eat in her own
chamber. no one is allowed to see those women without permission from
the king, and if anyone is found near the king’s house by day or
by night, he is put to death. every family is obliged to give the king
one or two of its daughters. that king had twenty-six children, eight
sons, and the rest daughters. lying next that island there is a very
large []island, called giailolo [i.e., gilolo],
which is inhabited by moros and heathens. two kings are found there
among the moros, one of them, as we were told by the king, having had
six hundred children, and the other five hundred and
twenty-five.
the heathens do not have so many women; nor do they live under so many
superstitions, but adore for all that day the first thing that they see
in the morning when they go out of their houses. the king of those
heathens, called raya papua, is exceedingly rich in gold, and lives in
the interior of the island. reeds as thick around as the leg and filled
with water that is very good to drink, grow on the flinty rocks in the
island of giaiallo. we bought many of them from those people.
marti a dudici de nouembre il re fece fare in vno
giorno vna caſa nela cita ꝓ la nr̃a mercantia
 gli la portaſſemo quaſi tuta et ꝓ
guardia de quella laſciaſſemo tri homini de li nr̃j
et ſubito cominciaſſemo amerchadantare in queſto
modo  ꝓ x braçia de panno roſſo
asay bonno ne dauano vno bahar de garofali q̃ he quato
qʒi et ſey libr̃ un quintale e cento
libr̃ per quindici bracia de panno nõ tropo bonno un bahar
ꝓ quindice accette vno bahar ꝓ trenta cinque bichieri de
vetro vno bahar il re li hebe tucti ꝓ dizi ſette cachili de
cenaprio vn bahar ꝓ diziſete cathili de argento viuo vno
bahar ꝓ vintiſey bracia de tella vno bahar ꝓ
vinticinque bracia de tella piu ſotille vno bahar ꝓ cento
cinquanta cortelli vno bahar per cinquanta forfice vno bahar ꝓ
quaranta bonneti vno bahar ꝓ x panny de guzerati vno bahar per
tre de []qelle ſue borchie dui bahar
ꝓ vno quintal de metalo vno bahar  tucti li
ſpechi eranno rocti et li pocqi bonny ly volſe el
re  molte de queſte coſe eranno de
qelli junci haueuamo preſi  la
p̃ſteſa de venire in ſpagnia ne fece dare le
nr̃e merchantie ꝓ miglior mercato non hauereſſemo
facto  ogni giorno veniuano ale naui tante barque pienne de
capre galine figui cochi et altre coſe da mangiare q̃ era vna
marauiglia forniſſemo li naui de hacqua buona queſta
hacqua naſcie calda maſe ſta ꝓ ſpacio duna
hora fora de ſuo fonte diuenta frigidiſſima queſto
e ꝓ q̃ naſce nel monte delli garofoli al contrario
como ſe diceua in ſpagnia lacqua eſſer portata
amaluco de longi parte.
on tuesday, november twelve, the king had a house
built for us in the city in one day for our merchandise. we carried
almost all of our goods thither, and left three of our men to guard
them. we immediately began to trade in the following manner. for x
brazas of red cloth of very good quality, they gave us one bahar of
cloves, which is equivalent to four quintals and six libras; for
fifteen brazas of cloth of not very good quality, one quintal and one
hundred libras; for fifteen hatchets, one bahar; for thirty-five glass
drinking-cups, one bahar (the king getting them all); for seventeen
cathils of cinnabar, one bahar; for seventeen cathils of quicksilver,
one bahar; for twenty-six brazas of linen, one bahar; for twenty-five
brazas of finer linen, one bahar; for one hundred and fifty knives, one
bahar; for fifty pairs of scissors, one bahar; for forty caps, one
bahar; for x pieces of guzerat cloth, one bahar; for three []of
those gongs of theirs, two bahars; for one quinta of bronze [metalo], one
bahar. [almost] all the mirrors were broken, and the few good ones the
king wished for himself. many of those things [that we traded] were
from the abovementioned junks which we had captured. our haste to
return to spagnia made us dispose of our merchandise at better bargains
[to the natives] than we should have done. daily so many boatloads of goats,
fowls, figs [i.e., bananas], cocoanuts, and other kinds of food
were brought to the ships, that we were surprised. we supplied the
ships with good water, which issues forth hot [from the ground], but if
it stands for the space of an hour outside its spring, it becomes very
cold, the reason therefor being that it comes from the mountain of
cloves. this is quite the opposite from the assertion in spagnia that
water must be carried to maluco from distant parts.
mercore lo re mando ſuo figliolo deto mossahap a
mutir ꝓ garofoli açcio piu preſto ne
forniſſeno hogi diceſſemo al re como haueuamo
preſſi certj indij rengratio molto ydio et dicene
lifaceſſemo tanta gratia gli deſſemo li
preſoni ꝓche li mandarebe nelle ſue terre cõ
cinque hominj de li ſui ꝓ manifeſtare del re
deſpagnia et de ſua fama  alhora li
donaſſemo li tre donne pigliate in nome de la reyna ꝓ
la cagiõe ja detta  jl giorno ſeguente li
apreſentaſſemo tucti li preſoni ſaluo
qelli de burne  ne hebe grandiſſimo
piacere. dapoy ne diſce doueſſemo ꝓ ſuo
amore amazare tucti li porci haueuão []nele
nauj ꝓ che ne darebe tante capre et galine  gli
amazaſſemo ꝓ farli piaçere et li
apichaſſemo ſoto la couuerta  quado
coſtoro ꝓ ventura li vedeuano ſe copriuano lo volto
ꝓ non vederli ne ſentire lo ſuo odore.
on wednesday, the king sent his son, named mossahap,
to mutir, so that they might supply us more quickly. on that day we
told the king that we had captured certain indians. the king thanked
god heartily, and asked us to do him the kindness to give him their
persons, so that he might send them back to their land, with five of
his own men, in order that they might make the king of spagnia and his
fame known. then we gave him the three women who had been captured in
the queen’s name for the reason already advanced. next day, we
gave the king all the prisoners, except those from burne, for which he
thanked us fervently. thereupon, he asked us, in order thereby to show
our love for him, to kill all the swine that we had in []the
ships, in return for which he would give us an equal number of goats
and fowls. we killed them in order to show him a pleasure, and hung them up under the
deck. when those people happen to see any swine they cover their faces
in order that they might not look upon them or catch their odor.
(continued in vol. xxxiv, page
(continued in vol. xxxiv, page .)
[contents]
[note: in the following notes, citations from
richard eden are made from arber’s reprint the first three
english books on america (birmingham, ), from the third book,
entitled the decades of the newe worlde, first printed in london
in ; from mosto, from il primo viaggio, intorno al
globo di antonio pigafetta, by andrea da mosto (roma, ), which
was published as a portion of part v of volume iii of raccolta di documenti e studi pubblicati dalla r. commissione
colombiana pel quarto centenario dalla scoperta dell’america,
appearing under the auspices of the minister of public instruction; and
from stanley, from his first voyage round the world, by magellan
(hakluyt society publications, london, ), which was translated by
lord stanley in part from the longer french ms. in the bibliothèque nationale, paris, and in part from the
amoretti publication (milan, ) made from the italian ms. in the
biblioteca ambrosiana.]
 the greater part of
the life of antonio pigafetta is shrouded in darkness. the pigafetta
family, who resided at venice, and was formerly of tuscan origin, dates
back before him for several centuries. the pigafetta escutcheon was
white above and black below with a white transverse bar running from
left to right. on the lower part were three red roses, one of them on
the bar. the old family house is still standing and shows the motto
il nest rose sans espine, i.e., “no rose
without a thorn,” which was probably carved in , when the
house was repaired, and not by antonio pigafetta after his return from
his voyage as some assert. antonio pigafetta was born toward the close
of the fifteenth century, but the date cannot be positively fixed, some
declaring it to be ; but harrisse who follows marzari, gives the
date as . it is unknown who his parents were and some have asserted
that he was a natural child, although this is evidently unfounded, as
he was received into the military order of st. john. at an early age he
probably became familiar with the sea and developed his taste for
traveling. he went to spain with the roman ambassador chieregato, in
, but in what capacity is unknown. hearing details of
magalhães’s intended voyage he contrived to accompany him.
navarrete surmises that he is the antonio lombardo mentioned in the
list of the captain’s servants and volunteers who sailed on the
expedition, so called []as his country was lombardy. after
the return of the “victoria,” he journeyed in spain,
portugal, and france, and returned to italy probably in january, .
the relation presented by him to cárlos i was probably a draft
of his notes taken daily throughout the voyage. his relation as
we know it was undertaken at the request of the marchioness of mantova,
but its composition was arrested by an order from clement vii to come
to rome, whither he went in december, , or january, , meeting
villiers l’isle-adam on his journey thither. he remained in the
pope’s service but a short time, for in april, , he was back
in venice. that same year he was granted a copyright on his
relation, which he intended to print, for twenty years. pozzo
says that he was received into the order of st. john, october , ,
but it was probably somewhat before that date. between the dates of
august, , and august, , his work was presented to villiers
l’isle-adam. nothing further is known of him, though some say
that he fought against the turks as late as , while others have
placed his death in  or  and at malta. in addition to his
relation pigafetta wrote a treatise on the art of
navigation, which follows his relation. this is not
presented in the present publication, notwithstanding its importance,
as being outside of the present scope. it is reproduced by mosto. he
has sometimes been confused with marcantonio pigafetta (a venetian
gentleman), the author of itinerario da vienna a constantinopoli
(london, ); and wrongly called vincenzo antonio pigafetta, the
“vincenzo” being an error for “vicentino,”
i.e., “venetian.” see mosto, il primo
viaggio ... di antonio pigafetta (roma, ), pp. –;
larousse’s dictionnaire; and la
grande encyclopédie (paris).
 the order of st.
john of jerusalem. see vol. ii, p. , note .
throughout this relation pigafetta’s spelling of proper
names is retained.
 philippe de
villiers l’isle-adam, the forty-third grand master of the order
of the knights of st. john (called knights of malta after ), was
born of an old and distinguished family at beauvais, in , and died
at malta, august , , at grief, some say, over the dissensions in
his order. he was elected grand master of his order in  and in the
following year occurred his heroic defense of rhodes with but four
thousand five hundred soldiers against the huge fleet and army of
soliman. after six months he was compelled to surrender his stronghold
in october, and refusing soliman’s entreaties to remain with him,
went to italy. in  he was given the city of viterbe by clement vii,
where in june of  he held a general chapter of his order, at which
it was decided to accept the island of malta which had been offered by
charles v. the gift was confirmed by the letters-patent of charles v in
, and villiers l’isle-adam []adam went thither in
october of that year. he was always held in high esteem for his
bravery, prudence, and piety. see moreri’s dictionaire,
and larousse’s dictionnaire.
 the four mss. of
pigafetta’s relation are those known as the ambrosian or
italian, so called from its place of deposit, the biblioteca ambrosiana
in milan; no. ,, conserved in the bibliothèque nationale,
paris, in french; no. ,, in the same library, also in french; and
the nancy ms. (also french) so called because it was conserved in
nancy, france, now owned by the heirs of sir thomas phillips,
cheltenham, england. the mss. of the bibliothèque nationale are
both shorter than the italian ms. the nancy ms. is said to be the most
complete of the french manuscripts. the best bibliographical account of
these four mss. that has yet appeared is by mosto ut
supra. a full bibliographical account of both the mss. and printed
books will be given in the volume on bibliography in this series.
there are a number of radical differences between the paris ms. no.
, (which will be hereafter referred to simply as ms. ,) and the
italian ms., these differences including paragraph structure and the
division of ms. , into various chapters, although the sequence is
on the whole identical. the most radical of the differences will be
shown in these notes. ms. , contains the following title on the
page immediately preceding the beginning of the relation proper:
“navigation and discovery of upper indie,
written by me, anthoyne pigaphete, a venetian, and knight of
rhodes.”
 the emperor charles
v; but he was not elected to that dignity until june, . pigafetta
writing after that date is not explicit.
 francesco
chiericati was born in venice, in one of the most ancient and famous
families of that city, at the end of the fifteenth century. he attained
preëminence at sienna in both civil and ecclesiastical law. aided
by cardinal matteo lang, bishop of sion, he was received among the
prelates of the apostolic palace. later he conducted several diplomatic
missions with great skill. he left rome for spain in december, , on
a private mission for the pope, and especially to effect a crusade
against the turks who were then invading egypt and threatening
christianity. his house at barcelona became the meeting-place of the
savants of that day who discussed literature and science. see mosto, p.
, note .
 ms. , adds:
“scholars and men of understanding.”
 ms. , reads:
“so that i might satisfy the wish of the said gentlemen and also
my own desire, so that it could be said that i had made the said voyage
and indeed been an eyewitness of the things hereafter written.”
 see vol. i, p. , note  for sketch of magalhães.
the only adequate life of magalhães in english is that of
guillemard.
 that is, the
order of santiago. see vol. i, p. , note
. magalhães and falero were decorated with the cross of
comendador of the order by cárlos i in the presence of the royal
council in july, . see guillemard’s ferdinand
magellan, p. .
 see
vol. i for various documents during the period
of the preparation of the fleet; also guillemard’s
magellan, pp. – and –; and
stanley’s first voyage, pp. xxxiv–xlvi.
 pope clement
vii, who assumed the papacy november , . pigafetta was summoned
to rome very soon after clement’s election, for he was in rome
either in december, , or january, .
 the amoretti
edition (milan, ; a wofully garbled adaptation of the italian ms.)
wrongly ascribes this desire to clement vii, instead of villiers
l’isle-adam. see stanley, p. , note .
reads: “finally, most illustrious lordship, after all provisions
had been made and the ships were in readiness, the captain-general, a
wise and virtuous man, and one mindful of his honor, would not commence
his voyage without first making some good and suitable rules, such as
it is the approved custom to make for those who go to sea, although he
did not entirely declare the voyage that he was about to make lest
those men, through astonishment and fear, should refuse to accompany
him on the so long voyage that he had determined upon. in consideration
of the furious and violent storms that reign on the ocean sea where he
was about to sail, and in consideration of another reason also, namely,
that the masters and captains of the other ships in his fleet had no
liking for him (the reason for which i know not, unless because he, the
captain-general, was a portuguese, and they spaniards or castilians,
who have for a long while been biased and ill-disposed toward one
another, but who, in spite of that, rendered him obedience), he made
his rules such as follow, so that his ships might not go astray or
become separated from one another during storms at sea. he published
those rules and gave them in writing to every master in the ships and
ordered them to be inviolably observed and kept, unless for urgent and
legitimate excuse, and the proof that any other action was
impossible.”
 a spanish word,
meaning “lantern.”
 mosto wrongly
derives strengue from the spanish trenza
“braid” or “twist.” instead it is the spanish
word estrenque, []which denotes a large rope made
from spanish grass hemp (stipa)—known to the spaniards as
esparto. ms. , reads: “sometimes he set out a lantern;
at other times a thick rush cord which was lighted and was called
‘trenche’ [i.e., ‘estrenque,’
‘rope of spanish grass hemp’].” barcio
(diccionario general etimológico) says that the origin of
estrenque is unknown.
reads: “if he wished the other ships to haul in a bonnet-sail,
which was a part of the sail attached to the mainsail, he showed three
lights. also by three lights notwithstanding that the weather might be
favorable for making better time, it was understood that the
bonnet-sail was to be hauled in, so that the mainsail might be sooner
and easier struck and furled when bad weather came suddenly in any
squall or otherwise.”
 ms. , adds:
“which he had extinguished immediately after;” and
continues: “then showing a single light as a sign that he
intended to stop there and wait until the other ships should do as
he.”
 ms. , adds:
“that is to say, a rock in the sea.”
 stanley
translates the following passage wrongly. rightly translated, it is:
“also when he desired the bonnet-sail to be reattached to the
sail, he showed three fires.”
 this passage is
omitted in ms. ,.
 hora de la
modorra is in spanish that part of the night immediately preceding
the dawn. mosto, p. , note .
 contra
maestro (boatswain) corresponding to the french contremaître
and the spanish contramaestre, was formerly the third
officer of a ship’s crew. nochiero (french nocher) was the
officer next to contramaestre, although the name, according to
littré was applied to the master or seacaptain of certain small
craft. the maestro (french maître) was a sub-officer in charge of all the crew. the
pilot was next to the captain in importance. the translator or adapter
who made ms. , confuses the above officers (see following
note).
 the
instructions pertaining to the different watches are as follows in ms.
,: “in addition to the said rules for carrying on the art of
navigation as is fitting, and in order to avoid the dangers that may
come upon those who do not have watches set, the said captain, who was
skilled in the things required and in navigation, ordered three watches
to be set. the first was at the beginning of the night; the second at
midnight; and the third toward daybreak, which is commonly called the
‘diane’ [i.e., ‘morn’] or otherwise
‘the star of dawn.’ the abovenamed watches were changed
nightly: that is to say, that he who had stood first watch stood second
the day following, while he []who had stood second, stood third;
and thus did they continue to change nightly. the said captain ordered
that his rules, both those of signals and of watches, be thoroughly
observed, so that their voyage might be made with the greatest of
safety. the men of the said fleet were divided into three divisions:
the first was that of the captain; the second that of the pilot or
boatswain’s mate; and the third that of the master. the above
rules having been instituted, the captain-general determined to depart,
as follows.”
 see
guillemard’s magellan, pp. –, and navarrete,
col. de viages, iv, pp. –, –, for the
stores and equipments of the fleet and their cost. the stores carried
consisted of wine, olive oil, vinegar, fish, pork, peas and beans,
flour, garlic, cheese, honey, almonds, anchovies, raisins, prunes,
figs, sugar, quince preserves, capers, mustard, beef, and rice. the
apothecary supplies were carried in the “trinidad,” and the
ecclesiastical ornaments in that ship and the “san
antonio.”
 the exact
number of men who accompanied magalhães is a matter of doubt. a
royal decree, dated barcelona, may , , conserved in the papers of
the india house of trade in archivo general de indias at sevilla, with
pressmark est. , caj. , leg. –, orders that only two
hundred and thirty-five persons sail in the fleet. the same archives
contain various registers of the fleet (sec llorens ascensio’s
primera vuelta al mundo, madrid, ), one of which
is published by medina in his colección (i, p.
). guillemard (magellan, p. ) says that at least two
hundred and sixty-eight men went as is shown by the official lists and
“the casual occurrence of names in the numerous and lengthy
autos fiscales connected with the expedition.”
guillemard conjectures that the total number must have been between two
hundred and seventy and two hundred and eighty. mosto (p. , note )
says: “castanheda and barros say that the crews amounted to 
men, while herrera says . navarrete’s lists show a total of
 men. at least  were portuguese, and in addition to them and the
spaniards, the crews contained genoese and italians (thirty or more),
french (nineteen), flemings, germans, sicilians, english, corfiotes,
malays, negroes, moors, madeirans, and natives of the azores and canary
islands. but seventeen are recorded from seville, while there are many
biscayans. (see guillemard, ut supra, pp.
–.) the registers of men as given by navarrete (col. de viages, iv, pp. –) are as follows.
trinidad
(flagship of  tons)
capacity
name
nationality
chief captain of the fleet
hernando de magallanes
portuguese, citizen of oporto
pilot of his highness
esteban gomez
portuguese
notary
leon de espeleta
master
juan bautista de punzorol
cestre, on the genoese shore
alguacil
gonzalo gomez de espinosa
espinosa
contramaestre
francisco albo
axio, citizen of rodas
surgeon
juan de morales
sevilla
barber
marcos de bayas
san lucar de alpechin
carpenter
master antonio
genoese
steward
cristóbal ros or rodriguez
lepe
calker
felipe
genoese, native of reco
cooper
francisco martin
sevilla
sailor
francisco de espinosa
de le brizuela
sailor
ginés de mafra
jerez
sailor
leon pancaldo
saona, in génova
sailor
juan ginovés
san remó
sailor
francisco piora
saona
sailor
martin ginovés
cestre
sailor
anton hernandez colmenero
huelva
sailor
anton ros, or rodriguez
huelva []
sailor
bartolomé sanchez
huelva
sailor
tomas de natia
cestre
sailor
diego martin
huelva
sailor
domingo de urrutia
lequeitio
sailor
francisco martin
huelva
sailor
juan rodriguez
sevilla
gunner
master andres, chief gunner
bristol, in england
gunner
juan bautista
mompeller
gunner
guillermo tañegui
lila de groya
common seaman
antonio de goa
loró
common seaman
anton de noya
noya in galicia
common seaman
francisco de ayamonte
ayamonte
common seaman
juan de santandres
cueto
common seaman
blas de toledo
almunia in aragon
common seaman
anton
black
common seaman
basco gomez gallego
portuguese
common seaman
juan gallego
pontevedra
common seaman
luis de beas
beas in galicia
common seaman
juan de grijol
grijol in portugal
boy
gutierrez
asturian from villasevil
boy
juan genovés
a port on the genoese shore
boy
andres de la cruz
sevilla
servants of the captain and sobresalientes
servant
cristóbal rabelo
portuguese, native of oporto
sobresaliente
joan miñez or martinez
sevilla []
servant
fernando portogues
portuguese, native of
oporto
sobresaliente
antonio lombardo
lombardía
peti-joan
french, native of angeo [i.e., anjou]
gonzalo rodriguez
portuguese
diego sanchez barrasa
sevilla
luis alonso, de gois
portuguese, citizen of ayamonte
duarte barbosa
portuguese
albaro de la mezquita
portuguese
servant
nuño
portuguese, native of montemayor nuevo
servant
diego
san lucar
captain’s boy
francisco
portuguese, native of estremiz
idem
jorge morisco
lombardía
chaplain
pedro de balderrama
ecija
merino
alberto merino
cordova
servant of the alguacil
pero gomez
hornilla la prieta
armorer
pero sanchez
sevilla
interpreter, a servant
henrique de malaca
malaca
lázaro de torres
aracena
san antonio
( tons)
capacity
name
nationality
captain and supervisor of the fleet
juan de cartagena
accountant
antonio de coca
notary
hierónimo guerra
his majesty’s pilot
andres de san martin
pilot of his highness
juan rodriguez de mafra
master
juan de elorriaga
guipúzcoa
boatswain
diego hernandez
sevilla
barber
pedro olabarrieta
bilbao
steward
juan ortiz de gopegar
bilbao
calker
pedro de bilbao
bilbao
carpenter
pedro de sabtua
bermeo
calker
martin de goytisolo
baquio
cooper
joan de oviedo
sevilla
sailor
sebastian de olarte
bilbao
sailor
lope de uguarte
sailor
joanes de segura
segura in guipúzcoa
sailor
joan de francia
ruan [i.e., rouen]
sailor
jácome de mecina
mesina
sailor
christóbal garcía
from palos
sailor
pero hernandez
rivadesella
sailor
antonio rodríguez, calderero [i.e., blacksmith]
sevilla
sailor
hernando de morales
from moguer
sailor
francisco, marinero [i.e., a sailor]
citizen of huelva
sailor
francisco ros, or rodriguez
from huelva
sailor
pedro de laredo
portogalete
sailor
simon de asio
axio []
gunner
master jacques, chief gunner
from tierra lorena [i.e., land of
lorraine]
gunner
rojer dupict
monaym
gunner
joan jorge
silvedrin
common seaman
luis, grumete [i.e., a common seaman]
galicia
common seaman
martin de aguirre
arrigorriaga
common seaman
columbazo
bolonia [i.e., bologna]
common seaman
lucas de mecina
mesina
common seaman
lorencio rodriguez
from moguer
common seaman
miguel
pravia, in astúrias
common seaman
joanes de irun iranzo
irun iranza in guipúzcoa
common seaman
joan ginoves
saona
common seaman
joan de orue
munguia
common seaman
alonso del puerto
puerto de santa maría
boy
diego, son of cristóbal garcia
from palos
boy
diego, son of juan rodriguez de mafra
servants and sobresalientes
chaplain
bernardo calmeta
laytora in france
sobresaliente
joan de chinchilla
murcia
sobresaliente
anton de escobar
talavera
sobresaliente
francisco de angulo
moron
servant to the captain
francisco de molino
baeza
servant to the captain
roque pelea
salamanca
servant to the captain
rodrigo nieto, a galician
orense
servant to the captain
alonso del rio
búrgos
servant to the captain
pedro de balpuesta
citizen of búrgos
servant to the captain
joan de leon
leon
servant to the captain
gutierre de tuñon
tunon in astúrias
servant to the captain
joan de sagredo, merino
revenga, in the land of búrgos
servant to the captain
joan de minchaca, a crossbowman
bilbao []
captain’s servant
antonio hernandez; interpreter
ayamonte
servant to the accountant
juan gomez de espinosa
espinosa
servant to the accountant
pedro de urrea
brujas
concepcion
( tons)
captain
gaspar de quesada
notary
sancho de heredia
pilot of his highness
joan lopez caraballo
portuguese
master
joan sebastian de elcano
guetaria
boatswain
joan de acurio
bermeo
barber
hernando de bustamente
mérida
calker
antonio de basazabal
bermeo
carpenter
domingo de iraza
deva
steward
joan de campos
alcalá de henares
cooper
pero perez
sevilla
sailor
francisco rodriguez
sevilla
sailor
francisco ruiz
moguer
sailor
mateo de gorfo
gorfo
sailor
joan rodriguez
huelva
sailor
sebastian garcia
huelva
sailor
gomez hernandez
huelva
sailor
lorenzo de iruna
socavila in guipúzcoa
sailor
joan rodriguez, el sordo [i.e., the
deaf man]
sevilla
sailor
joan de aguírre
bermeo
sailor
joan de ortega
cifuentes []
gunner
hans vargue, chief gunner
german
gunner
master pedro
bruselas
gunner
roldan de argote
flandes, in brujas
common seaman
joan de olivar
common seaman
guillermo de lole
common seaman
cristóbal de costa
jerez
common seaman
guillen
galvey
common seaman
gonzalo de vigo
vigo
common seaman
pedro de muguertegui
muguertegui
common seaman
martin de isaurraga
bermeo
common seaman
rodrigo macias
sevilla
common seaman
joan navarro
pamplona
common seaman
joanes de tuy
boy
juanillo
galbey
boy
pedro de churdurza
bermeo
sobresalientes
captain’s servant
luis del molino
baeza
captain’s servant
antonio fernandez
portuguese, of sevilla
captain’s servant
alonso coto
genoese
captain’s servant
francisco diaz de madrid
madrid
merino
martin de judicibus
genoese
juan de silva
isla graciosa, in azores
blacksmith
gonzalo hernandez
santa maría del puerto
martin de magallayns
portuguese, of lisboa
joan de la torre
almonaster, a boundary of sevilla
victoria
( tons)
captain and treasurer of fleet
luis de mendoza
pilot of his highness
basco gallego
portuguese
notary
martin mendez
citizen of sevilla
master
anton salomon
trápana in sicilia
boatswain
miguel de rodas
rodas
alguacil
diego de peralta
peralta in navarra
steward
alonso gonzales
portuguese
calker
simon de la rochela
from la rochela
carpenter
martin de griate
from deva
sailor
miguel benesciano
bresá
sailor
diego gallego
bayona in galicia
sailor
lope navarro
tudela
sailor
nicolas ginoves
génova
sailor
nicolao de nápoles
nápoles de romanía
sailor
miguel sanchez
rodas
sailor
nicolao de capua
capua
sailor
benito genovés
arvenga
sailor
felipe de rodas
rodas
sailor
esteban villon
troya
sailor
joan griego
nápoles de romanía
gunner
jorge aleman [i.e., the german], chief gunner
from estric
gunner
filiberto de torres
toriana
gunner
hans, a german
agan
common seaman
joanico, a viscayan
somorostro
common seaman
joan de arratia
bilbao
common seaman
ochote
bilbao
common seaman
martin de ayamonte
common seaman
pedro de tolosa
tolosa in guipúzcoa
common seaman
sebastian ortiz
gelver
common seaman
antonio
baresa in génova
common seaman
bernal mahuri
narbona
common seaman
rodrigo gallego [i.e., a galician]
coruña []
common seaman
domingo portogues [i.e., a portuguese]
coimbra
boy
juan de zuvileta, the son of basco gallego
baracaldo
sobresalientes
the captain’s servant
francisco carvajal
salamanca
captain’s servant
joan martin
aguilar de campo
captain’s servant
simon de burgos
portuguese
captain’s servant
bartolomé de saldaña
palos
blacksmith
gonzalo rodriguez
blacksmith
pero garcia de herrero
ciudad real
blacksmith
joan villalon
antequera
blacksmith
alonso de mora, or de ebora
mora, in portugal
cooper
joan de córdoba
sanlúcar
cooper
diego diaz
sanlúcar
santiago
( tons)
captain and pilot of his highness
joan serrano
citizen of sevilla
notary
antonio de costa
master
baltasar ginoves
ribera de génova [i.e., the genoese
shore]
boatswain
bartolomé prior
san malo
steward
gaspar diaz
isla graciosa, in the azores
calker
joan garcía
génova
carpenter
ripart
bruz in normandia [i.e., normandy]
sailor
antonio flamenco [i.e., a fleming]
enveres []
sailor
luis martinez
huelva
sailor
bartolomé garcía
palos
sailor
joan garcía
palos
sailor
agustin
saona
sailor
bocacio alfonso
bollullos
sailor
pedro gascon [i.e., a gascon]
burdeos [i.e., bordeaux]
sailor
domingo
sailor
diego garcía de trigueros
trigueros
gunner
lorenzo corrat
talesa in normandia [i.e., normandy]
gunner
joan macia
troya
common seaman
pedro diaz
huelva
common seaman
antonio hernandez
palos
common seaman
juan, a negro
common seaman
joan breton [i.e., a breton]
cruesic in bretaña [i.e.,
brittany]
common seaman
pedro bello
palos
common seaman
hierónimo garcia
sevilla
common seaman
pero arnaot
horrai
common seaman
pero garcia
trigueros
boy
joan flamenco [i.e., a fleming]
enveres
boy
francisco paxe
sobresalientes
merino
joan de aroche
aroche, boundary of sevilla
martin barrena
villafranco in guipúzcoa
hernan lorenzo
aroche
the total number of men for the ships as above given is .
navarrete made his list from the list conserved in archivo general de
indias, and notes of juan bautista muñoz, and various other
sources. the obstacles in the way of a correct register were the
abbreviation of names and places, the custom prevalent of naming people
from their native town or province, and the fact that the various
registers were made between  and . from some of these
registers, it appears that the following men were also in the
fleet.
capacity
name
nationality
carpenter
aroca
viscayan
steward
blas alfonso
portuguese
calker
juan gutierrez
maestre pedro
sailor
bautista genovés
génova
common seaman
perucho de bermeo
common seaman
domingo alvarez
common seaman
domingo gonzalez
common seaman
domingo de zubillan
portuguese
common seaman
andres blanco
common seaman
antonio gomez
axio
common seaman
juan portugués [i.e., a portuguese]
common seaman
juan bras
common seaman
gonzalo gallego
common seaman
rodrigo de hurrira
sebastian portugués [i.e., a portuguese]
juan de ircepais
sobresalientes
secular priest
pero sanchez de reina
licentiate morales
hernando rodriguez
hartiga
diugurria
soldier
diego arias
sanlúcar
blacksmith
juan hernandez
triana
servant of luis de mendoza
hernando de aguilar
the negro of the pilot juan carballo
in addition there were probably others, this list being still three
short of guillemard’s figures, . harrisse (disc. of n.
amer., london and paris, , pp.  et seq.) gives a
partial list.
 the moorish
name of guadalquivir (from arabic wâd-al-kebir, “the
great river”), superseded the roman name of bætis. the
romans formed all southern spain into one province called bætica
after the name of the bætis. by the town gioan dal farax is meant
san juan de aznalfarache (from moorish hisn al-faradj). its
gothic name was osset and its roman name julia constantia. it is a
favorite resort of the inhabitants of sevilla. coría was once a
roman potters’ town and is still celebrated for its jars. san
lúcar de barrameda was named in honor of st. luke. it was
captured from the moors in  and granted to the father of guzman el
bueno. it attained importance after the discovery of america because of
its good harbor. the house of medina-sidonia was founded by alfonso
pérez de guzman, a famous captain.
 the original of
this passage is obscure. the distance given (ten leagues; and both ms.
, and eden agree substantially with it) is far too short for the
distance between san lucar and cape st. vincent, which is over one
hundred miles. pigafetta may have forgotten the actual distance, or it
may have been an error of his amanuensis. it is possible to translate
as follows: “which lies in  degrees of latitude, [that parallel
being] x leguas from the said port;” for “longui” may
be taken as agreeing with “gradi.” in all rendering of
distances, the spanish form will be used in preference to the italian;
and the same will apply to the names of spanish coins.
reads: “and after passing many small villages along the said
river, we at last reached a chateau belonging to the duke of
medinacidonia, and called sainct lucar, where there is a port with an
entrance into the ocean sea. one enters that port by the east wind, and
leaves by the west. nearby is the cape of sainct vincent, which,
according to cosmography, lies in a latitude of thirty-seven degrees at
a distance of twenty miles from []the said port. from the said
city [of sevilla] to the said port by the river abovesaid, the distance
is thirty-five or forty miles.” this passage might be cited as a
proof that pigafetta did not translate or write the french version, but
that the work was done by another, who takes various liberties with his
original.
reads: “furnish the fleet.”
 ninguna
in original, a spanish word.
 ms. , adds:
“otherwise called ‘labeiche.’” labech (italian
libeccio) is simply a name for the southwest wind. this is another
instance in which the french adapter adds an explanation to the
italian, thus explaining the italian term garbino,
“southwest.”
 ms. , reads
wrongly: “sixteenth.” the so-called genoese pilot (the
author of the “roteiro,” by which name his account will be
hereafter designated, and concerning whom, see guillemard’s
magellan, p. , and mosto, p. , and note ) gives the date
of departure as september  (with which barros agrees) and the arrival
at tenerife as the twenty-ninth (see stanley, p. ). peter martyr,
gomara, and oviedo agree with pigafetta, while castanheda makes the
departure in january, . hughes observes that if one keep in mind
the circumstance that the day of the arrival coincided with the day
dedicated by the church to st. michael, the date september  seems
more admissible. however, one may reconcile the two dates of the
arrival by observing that the ships stopped at tenerife until october
; while herrera says that the ships fetched montaña roja (the
monte rosso of the text) on september . see mosto, p. , notes  and
. it should be noted that gomara and oviedo are not entirely
trustworthy authorities, and that many times they have simply copied
from authorities, such as maximilianus transylvanus, who is not always
to be relied upon.
 the canaries
were known to the ancients under the names of islands of the blest,
fortunate islands, and the hesperides. the moors knew of them under the
name of islands of khaledat, but had no practical acquaintance with
them. in the fourteenth century these islands began to be known to
europeans, especially through the portuguese. in , the frenchman
jean de bethencourt went there, and shortly after began their conquest
under the auspices of the crown of castile. in consequence of the
settlements made by bethencourt, the islands were definitely ceded to
spain in  (see birch’s alboquerque, london,
–, hakluyt society publications, ii, p. vi). the
inhabitants of the islands were known as guanches or guanchinet, the
latter meaning “men of tenerife.” the inhabitants of this
island, holding out longer than the others, were not subdued until
. see also conquest of canaries (london, ); and
history and description []of africa (london, ), i,
pp. –: both publications of the hakluyt society. the island
of tenerife was formerly called nivana and by some the island of hell.
like all the other islands of the canaries it is volcanic in formation,
and its peak, the teyde, is one of the largest volcanic cones known.
its latitude is ° ′.
 guillemard
conjectures that this is punta roxa, located at the south end of
tenerife.
 ms. , adds:
“which is a substance needed by ships.” herrera says that
they waited three days at the port awaiting a caravel that was laden
with pitch for the fleet (mosto, p. , note ).
reads: “water coming from spring or river.”
 eden (p. )
adds to this account which he greatly abridges: “the lyke thynge
is alſo ſcene in the iland of ſaynt thomas, lyinge
directly vnder the equinoctiall lyne.” of this island of hierro,
pory (history and description of africa, hakluyt society
edition, p. ) says: “hierro hath neither
spring nor well, but is miraculously furnished with water by a cloud
which over-spreadeth a tree, from whence distilleth so much moisture,
as sufficeth both for men and cattel. this cloud ariseth an hower or
two before the sunne, and is dissolued two howers after sunne
rising.” this is an old story and is related by pliny and
founded upon fact “for both in madeira and the canaries the
laurel and other heavy-foliaged evergreens condense abundant water from
the daily mists” (guillemard’s magellan, p. ).
gregorio chil y naranio (estudios históricos ... de
las islas canarias, ) believes pigafetta means here the island
of palma, and that the first navigators visited only the coast and so
did not see the lake in the interior (mosto, p. , note ).
 ms. , adds:
“which the sailors of the east call ‘cyroc’”
this is the italian sirocco, which is the name for the
southeast wind instead of the south. herrera says they left the port
october  (mosto, p. , note ).
 eden (p. )
reads incorrectly: “in this coaſt they
had no maner of contrary wynds but a great calme and fayre wether for
the ſpace of three ſcore and tenne dayes, in the which they
came vnder the equinoctiall lyne.”
 ms. , adds:
“and of those persons who have sailed there often.”
reads: “and in order that our ships might not be wrecked or
broach to (which often happens when the squalls come together).”
 this last
phrase, as well as the two following sentences are missing in ms.
,. the third sentence following begins: “during the calm
weather, large fish called tiburoni,” etc. the word tiburoni, “sharks” is from the spanish tiburon, which comes from the french tibéron (tiburin, tiburon).—echagaray’s diccionario
etimológico (madrid, ).
reads: “the said fish are caught by means of a contrivance which
sailors call ‘hame’ which is an iron fishhook.”
hame (ain) is the french form of the italian amo,
meaning “fishhook.”
 ms. , adds:
“because of the bad weather.”
 ms. , reads
“a quarter of an hour,” and the same duration of time is
given by eden (p. ).
 ms. , adds:
“it is to be noted that whenever that fire that represents the
said saint anselme ascends and descends the mast of a ship while in a
storm at sea, that the said ship is never wrecked.” herrera
(cited by mosto, p. , note ) says that st. elmo appeared on the
masthead with a lighted candle and sometimes two during the storms
encountered along the coasts of guinea, and that the sailors were
greatly comforted thereby, and saluted the saint as is the custom of
seamen. when he appeared, he remained a quarter of an hour; and at his
departure a great flash of light occurred which blinded all the men.
eden (p. ) calls it the fire of st. helen. continuing, eden injects
into his abridgment of the first circumnavigation a description of st.
elmo’s fire by hieronimus cardanus in the second book of de
subtilitate. he says: “of the kynde of
trewe fyer, is the fyer baule or ſtarre commonly cauled ſaynt
helen which is ſumtyme ſeene abowt the maſtes of
ſhyppes, beinge of ſuche fyery nature that it ſumetyme
melteth braſen veſſels, and is a token of drownyng,
foraſmuch as this chaunceth only in great tempeſtes. for the
vapoure or exhalation whereof this fyre is engendered, can not bee
dryven togyther or compacte in forme of fyre, but of a groſe
vapoure and by a great poure of wynde, and is therfore a token of
imminent perell.” the fires called after st. peter and st.
nicholas are on the contrary, he says, good omens, and are generally to
be seen on the cables, after a storm. being little and swift moving
they can do no damage as they could do if massed and of slow movement.
st. elmo’s fire is the popular name for the atmospheric
electricity that gathers in the form of a star or brush about the
masthead of ships and on the rigging. it was sometimes accompanied by a
hissing noise and was considered as a good omen by sailors. the greeks
who observed this phenomenon wove it into the castor and pollux myth;
and the french edition of pigafetta’s relation published by simon
de []colines has the passage (see mosto, p. ):
“they saw the fires called sainct eline and sainct nicolas like
blazing torches (whom the ancients called castor and pollux).”
“elmo” is said by some to be a corruption of
“helena,” the sister of castor and pollux, and the name
“hellene” or “helen” was often given to the
fire when only one light was visible. it is, however, more probably
derived from st. elmo, bishop of formine who died about , and who is
invoked by sailors on the mediterranean. the phenomenon is also called
fire of “st. elias,” “st. clara,” “st.
nicolas,” and “composite,” “composant,”
and “corposant (i.e., corpus sanctum).”
 the second bird
mentioned is the stormy petrel (of the family laridæ and
genus thalassidroma), which is found along all the atlantic
coasts and on some of the pacific. the tale of the text was current
among sailors (see wilkes, u. s. exploring expedition, viii, pp.
, ). the cagassela (“cagaselo” in ms. ,) is the
stercorarius parasiticus, called also the jaeger, and by sailors
“boatswain,” “teaser,” and
“dung-hunter.” the last name arose from the belief, long
held even by scientists, that this bird fed on the dung of gulls and
terns. in reality it pursues the latter birds and compels them to
disgorge the fish that they have swallowed. the flying-fish is either a
species of exocœtus, or the scomberesox saurus of
europe and america, both of which feed in large schools and jump from
the water to escape their enemies. see riverside natural history
(boston and new york).
 ms. , adds:
“which is the collateral wind between the south and the
west;” and below reads: “twenty-four and one-half
degrees;” while eden (p. ) reads: “xxii degrees and a
halfe.”
 verzino,
the etymology of which is unknown (see varthema’s travels,
hakluyt society edition, p. lxxviii, note, and  note), is the
italian name for brazil-wood, from which brazil, which was first
visited by vicente pinzon, diego lope, pedro alvares cabral, and
amerigo vespucci, was named. the first names of the country were vera
cruz and santa cruz. cape santo agostinho, mentioned below, lies in
° ´ south latitude, and is the most eastern headland of
south america. it was the first land of that continent to be
discovered, being sighted at least as early as  by pinzon. before
sighting the above cape, magalhães arrested juan de cartagena
for insubordination and gave the command of the “san
antonio” to antonio de coca (see guillemard’s
magellan, p. ). albo’s log begins slightly before the
sighting of the point, his first entry being november . see
burton’s “introduction” in his captivity of hans
stade (hakluyt society publications, london, ). []
reads: “veal.” the anta is the tapir, once very
plentiful in south america, but now rare in the well civilized
districts. see burton’s captivity of hans stade, p. viii.
albo, however, seems to designate the llama by this name, for he says
when speaking of the stay at bay st. julian: “and many indians
came there, who are clad in certain skins of antas, which
resemble camels without the hump.” (navarrete, col. de
viages, iv, p. ).
 stanley
mistranslates the french phrase of ms. , et est de la longueur
dun naveau, “and is of the length of a shuttle,”
confusing naveau with navette, “shuttle.”
naveau here is equivalent to navet, “turnip”
or navette, “rape,” a plant of the turnip class, as
is proved by the italian.
reads: “and for a king of cards, of the kind which are used to
play with in italy, they gave me five fowls.” the four suits of
italian playing cards are called spade (“swords”),
bastoni (“clubs”), danari (literally:
“money;” “diamonds”), and coppe
(“cups”).
reads: “five.”
 ms. , adds:
“which is an astrological term. that zenith is a point in the
sky, according to astrologers, but only in the imagination, and is in a
straight line over our head, as can be seen by the treatise of the
sphere, and in aristotle, in the first book de caelo et
mondo.” by the treatise of the sphere is evidently meant the
treatise of pigafetta which follows his relation, and which is not
reproduced here as being outside the scope of the present work. in the
flyleaf of the italian original is the following: “notices
concerning the new world, with the charts of the countries discovered,
written by antonio pigafeta, venetian and knight of rodi. at the end
are added some rules for finding the longitude and latitude of places
east and west.” in the italian ms. this treatise occupies the
last twelve folios. stanley translates amoretti’s version of the
treatise, which is greatly abridged. mosto (p. ) conjectures
that the treatise is the fruits of his three-years’ experience
during the expedition.
 albo
(navarrete, iv, p. ) says that the fleet continued to coast
southwest from november  until arriving at st. lucy’s bay on
december  (st. lucy’s day). of the coast he says: “the
mountains are peaked and have many reefs about them. there are many
rivers and ports in the said brasil and san tomé, and some six
leguas down the coast there are many bays running two leguas into the
land. but the coast runs northeast and southwest to cape frio, and has
many islands and rivers. cape frio is a very large river.... at the
entrance of the said bay is a very large bay, and at the mouth a very
low island, and inside it spreads out extensively and has many ports
... []and is called the bay of santa lucía....
in the said bay, one finds a well-disposed and numerous race, who go
naked and trade for fishhooks, mirrors, and hawk’s bells with
food.... we entered that place on the very day of st. lucy, and stayed
there until the day of st. john, namely, the twenty-seventh of the said
month of december. on that day we went and took our course west
southwest, and found seven islands. to the right of them is a bay
called the bay of los reyes [i.e., the kings] which has a good
entrance.” the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says:
“as soon as they sighted the other coast of brazil, he steered to
the south-east [sic] along the coast as far as cabo-frio, which
is in twenty-three degrees south latitude; and from this cape he
steered to the west, a matter of thirty leagues, to make the rio de
janeiro, which is in the same latitude as cabo-frio, and they entered
the said river on the day of st. lucy, which was the th december, in
which place they took in wood, and they remained there until the first
octave of christmas, which was the th of december of the same
year.” brito (navarrete, iv, p. ) says: “setting sail
thence [i.e., from tenerife], the first land sighted was the
cape of the shoals of ambas. they descended the coast as far as the
river called janeiro, where they stayed  or  days.”
 eden (p. )
says: “bygger then all spayne, portugale, fraunce, and
italie.”
 ms. , adds:
“more like beasts than anything else.”
reads: “and some of those people live to the age of one hundred,
one hundred and twenty, one hundred and forty, or more.” eden (p.
) says: “c.xx. and c.xl. yeares.” for description of the
brazil indians, and their manners and customs, see captivity of hans
stade (hakluyt society edition), pp. –.
 wrongly
transcribed by stanley as “boy.”
reads: “you must know that a family of one hundred persons, who
make a great racket, lives in each of those houses called
boii.” one of these houses (called oca, in tupi) is
described by wilson (transactions of ethnological society, new
series, vol. i) as being “ or  feet long, divided into rooms
for several families by rush mats, and provided with a central fire
whose smoke passed through the roof. some of them contained 
head.” see burton’s captivity of hans stade, pp. ,
, note. the indians described by pigafetta are probably the tamoyos
of the tupi or guarani stock (mosto, p. , note ; see also burton,
ut supra, pp. lxi-lxxvi).
 amoretti makes
this passage read: “their boats, called []canoes, are hollowed out from the single trunk
of a huge tree;” understanding maschize as
massiccio “huge.” mosto prefers to read
maschize as two words ma schize (notwithstanding that it
is one word in the original), for ma schiacciate, “but
flattened.” accepting this, the translation would be: “they
have boats made from one single tree, only flattened.”
amoretti’s interpretation is to be preferred.
reads: “and one would believe them to be enemies from
hell.”
 ms. , adds:
“of the said country of verzin.”
reads: “daily.” amerigo vespucci says in a letter (mosto,
p. , note ): “i saw human flesh salted and suspended from the
beams, in the same way as we are wont to hang up bacon and
swine’s flesh.” see jesuit relations and allied
documents (cleveland reissue), for instances of cannibalism among
the north american indians. see also captivity of hans stade
(hakluyt society edition), pp. , –; and
dominguez’s conquest of the river plate (hakluyt society
publications, london, ), pp. , .
 for
carvagio, as in ms. ,, and later in the italian; an error of
the amanuensis. this was joão carvalho (the juan lopez caraballo
of the register—see note , ante). carvalho was a
portuguese, of none too scrupulous morals, even in his age, as appears
later in pigafetta’s narrative. after the fatal banquet in the
island of cebú, he became the leader of the remaining men of the
fleet, but was later deposed (see post, note ). he remained
behind with the ill-fated “trinidad,” and never returned to
europe. his son, borne to him by a native woman of brazil, was left
behind in borneo. see stanley, pp. –, for correa’s
account of the actions of carvalho after the death of
magalhães.
 the early
french edition and the italian edition of  both include the women
and children.—stanley.
 it is a
widespread (perhaps universal) characteristic of the american indian to
pull out the hair of the body. see jesuit relations and allied
documents (cleveland reissue).
 eden (p. ),
defines gatti mammoni as monkeys. monkeys of the genus
cebus are probably meant (mosto, p. , note ).
reads: “fresh cheese.” pigafetta may here refer to the
bread made from the casava or manioc root. see burton’s
captivity of hans stade, pp. –, for a description of
the method of preparing this root.
 the swine
mentioned by pigafetta is the tayasu (tagaçu), or peccari
(dicotyles torquatus), which has quills resembling those
[]of the porcupine, and is generally of a whitish
color. it is tailless and very fierce and difficult to domesticate. the
flesh was eaten; and the teeth were worn by some of the chiefs as
necklaces. burton (ut supra), p. , note.
 the platalea ajaja or rosy spoonbill, belonging to the
family of the plataleidæ, whose habitat
extends through all of tropical and subtropical america, including the
west indies, south to the falkland islands, patagonia and chile, and
north to the southern part of the united states.
 hans stade
(burton, ut supra) testifies to the chastity of the people of
eastern brazil among whom he lived as a prisoner.
reads: “the women attend to the outside affairs, and carry
everything necessary for their husband’s food in small panniers
on the head or fastened to the head.”
 ms. , adds:
“and compassion.”
reads: “when we departed they gave us a very great quantity of
verzin;” and adds: “that is a color which comes from trees
which grow in the said country, and so abundantly, that the country is
called verzin from it.”
 ms. adds:
“which was a piece of great simplicity.”
 this sentence
is preceded by the following in ms. ,: “besides the abovesaid
which proclaims their simplicity, the people of the above place showed
us another very simple thing.”
 this passage in
stanley reads as follows: “a beautiful young girl came one day
inside the ship of our captain, where i was, and did not come except to
seek for her luck: however, she directed her looks to the cabin of the
master, and saw a nail, of a finger’s length, and went and took
it as something valuable and new, and hid it in her hair, for otherwise
she would not have been able to conceal it, because she was naked, and,
bending forwards, she went away; and the captain and i saw this
mystery.” the matter between the words “length” and
“naked” is taken from ms. , (wrongly declared by
stanley to be the copy of his travels presented to the regent louise by
pigafetta, the conclusion being based on the fact that some of the
details are softened down), as stanley considered the incident as told
in ms. ,, the italian ms. and the first french edition, as unfit
for publication. stanley cites the following (in the original) from the
edition of  which omits the above story: “at the first land
at which we stopped, some female slaves whom we had brought in the
ships from other countries and who were heavy with child, were taken
with the pains of childbirth. consequently, they went alone out of the
ships, went ashore, and after having given birth, returned []immediately to the ships with their infants in
their arms.” he also cites the following passage from the first
french printed edition, which also narrates the above story of the
girl: “at the first coast that we passed, some slave women gave
birth. when they were in travail, they left the boat, after which they
immediately returned, and nursed their children.” stanley adds
that this story of the slave women is improbable, as women were not
allowed to come aboard ship.
 ms. , gives
the words of the brazil as follows: “maiz, huy, pinda, taesse,
chignap, pirame, itenmaraca, tum maraghatom.” amoretti (see
stanley’s edition, p. ) reads tacse as tarse and
itanmaraca as hanmaraca. stanley mistranslates the french
forcette (“scissors”) as
“fork.”
 eden says (p.
): “xxxiiii. degree and a halfe toward the pole
antartike.”
reads: “and to ask whether the others might come.”
reads: “that place was formerly called cape saincte marye and it
was thought that one could pass thence to the sea of sur, that is to
say the south sea, but it has not been ascertained that any ships have
ever discovered anything farther on.” eden (p. ) reads:
“abowt the mouth of this ryuer are
ſeven ilandes, in the byggeſt whereof, they founde certeyne
precious ſtones, and cauled it the cape of saynt marie. the
spanyardes thought that by this ryuer they might haue paſſed
into the ſouth ſea. but they were deceaued in theyr opinion.
for there was none other paſſage than by the ryuer which is
xvii. leagues large in the mouth.” this river was the rio
de la plata. the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says that
magalhães left rio de janeiro december , proceeding to the
cape santa maría and the river which was called st. christopher.
there they remained until february , . albo (navarrete, iv, p.
) also mentions the river which he calls the “river of
solís.” the ships sent to look for a strait through the
river were gone two days, and a careful exploration of the mouth of the
river was made. brito (navarrete, iv, pp. , ) says: “they
left that place [i.e., rio de janeiro] and coasted along shore until
they reached the river called solís, where fernando magallanes
thought that he could find a strait. they stayed there forty days.
magallanes ordered the ship ‘santiago’ to sail forward for
about  leguas to see whether there was any passage. not finding a
passage, he crossed the river which is about  leguas wide and found
the [opposite] coast which runs northeast and southwest.” for
early history of this region, see dominguez’s conquest of the
river plata. []
 juan diaz de
solis, a famous spanish navigator, was born at lebrixa, in . he is
said, although without sufficient authority, to have discovered yucatan
with pinzon in . he was appointed chief pilot of spain after the
death of amerigo vespucci in . in october, , he sailed in
command of an expedition in search of a southwest passage to india. he
discovered rio de la plata which he explored as far as the region of
the charrua tribe, by whom he and some of his men were killed and eaten
before september, . the remnant of the expedition was conducted
back to spain by his brother-in-law.
 eden adds (p.
): “which ſum thynke to bee
thoſe fyſſhes that wee caule pikes.” below,
the sea-wolf is described as having a head “of golden
coloure.” they were probably some species of the
otariidæ or fur-seals (giullemard, p. , note). the
“geese” were penguins. albo, herrera, and others, also
mention the “sea-wolves and ducks.” kohl (zeitschrift
der gesellschaft für erdkunde, xi, ) says that this bay
where the ships were laden with the seals and penguins is probably
desvelos bay, but it is more probably puerto deseado (“port
desire;” see mosto, p. , note ). drake also secured fresh
provisions from these “sea-wolves,” calling the bay where
he secured them “seale bay.” see world encompassed
(hakluyt society edition), pp. , .
 port st.
julian. the “roteiro” pilot (stanley, p. ) says that they
reached it on march , , and places it in ° ´ south
latitude. albo (navarrete, iv, p. ) says: “we went to a port
called san julian, where we entered the last day of march, and where we
stayed until the day of st. bartholomew. the said port lies in a
latitude of  and two-thirds degrees. we pitched the ships in that
port.” other writers give slightly different locations (see
mosto, p. , note ). antonio brito, the portuguese, whose ms. is
preserved in the torre do tombo at lisbon, writes in  to the king
of portugal certain news obtained from some of the men of the
“trinidad.” his information as might be expected, is at
times faulty. of port st. julian, he says: “they coasted along
shore until they reached a river called san juan where they wintered
for four months.”
 ms. , adds:
“jumping up and down.” the only reference made to the
patagonians by albo is as follows: “many indians came there, who
dress in certain skins of the anta, which resemble camels
without the hump. they have certain bows made from cane, which are very
small and resemble turkish bows. the arrows also resemble turkish
arrows, and are tipped with flint instead of iron. those indians are
very prudent, swift runners, and very well-built and well-appearing
men.” (navarrete, iv, []pp. , ). cf. with
pigafetta’s account that given by maximilianus transylvanus, in
vol. i, pp. –.
reads: “he began to marvel and to be afraid.”
 guillemard, who
follows the amoretti edition, translates (p. ) this passage:
“his hair was short and colored white,” but this
translation is borne out by neither the italian ms. nor ms. ,.
guillemard presents a picture of a patagonian, as does also wilkes
(narrative of u. s. exploring expedition, –), i,
facing p. . the latter describes indians, whom the officers of the
expedition thought to be patagonians, and who were taller than average
europeans, as follows: “they had good figures and pleasant
looking countenances, low foreheads, and high cheekbones, with broad
faces, the lower part projecting; their hair was course and cut short
on the crown leaving a narrow border of hair hanging down; over this
they wore a kind of cap or band of skin or woolen yarn. the front teeth
of all of them were very much worn, more apparent, however, in the old
than in the young. on one foot they wore a rude skin sandal. many of
them had their faces painted in red and black stripes, with clay, soot,
and ashes. their whole appearance, together with their inflamed and
sore eyes, was filthy and disgusting.” they showed that they had
had previous communication with white men. their food was fish and
shellfish, and they carried bows and arrows and had dogs. brinton
(american race, new york, ) says that “the patagonians
call themselves chonek or tzoneca, or inaken (men, people), and by
their pampean neighbors are referred to as tehuel-che,
southerners.” many of them are “from six to six feet four
inches in height, and built in proportion. in color they are a reddish
brown, and have aquiline noses and good foreheads.” ramon lista
(viage al pais de los tehuel-ches) gives the average
height of the patagonians as . m., hence the early accounts of
their great stature are greatly exaggerated (mosto, p. , note ). see
also the description of the patagonians in the “roteiro”
(stanley, p. ); and world encompassed by sir francis drake
(hakluyt society edition), pp. , – (where the origin of the
name “patagonian” is wrongly given).
 the guanaco, a
species of llama. see also vol. ii, p. , note
 hence arose the
name “patagonians” or “men with big feet,”
given by magalhães, because of the awkward appearance of the
feet in such coverings, which were stuffed with straw for greater
warmth.
 the words
“somewhat thicker than those of a lute” are lacking in ms.
 this sentence
is omitted by ms. ,.
 eden (p. )
says “two,” and following says that magalhaes gave the
giant “certeyne haukes belles and other great belles, with
alſo a lookynge glaſſe, a combe, and a payre of beades
of glaſſe.”
 ms. , adds:
“on the face.”
 ms. , omits
“face.”
 “for the
smiths” is omitted by ms. ,.
 maximilianus
transylvanus says that only one patagonian was captured, but that he
died shortly from self-starvation (vol. i, pp.
, ). the “roteiro” says (stanley, p. ) that three or
four were captured, but all died except one, who went to spain in the
“san antonio.” pigafetta’s account, as given by an
eyewitness, is to be preferred.
reads: “for otherwise they could have caused some of our men
trouble.” below stanley (p. ) again mistranslates the french
“forces” as “forks.”
adds: “of malefactors,” and reads farther: “and their
faces lighted up at seeing those manacles.”
reads: “and they were grieved that they could not take the irons
with their hands, for they were hindered by the other things that they
were holding.” eden (p. ) says at the end of his account of
the capture: “being thus taken, they were immediately
ſeperate and put in ſundry ſhyppes.”
adds: “that is, the big devil.”
arber in his introduction to the first three english books on
america says that shakespeare had access to the decades of the
newe worlde of eden, and created the character of caliban (who
invokes setebos) in the tempest from the description of the
patagonian giants. see also world encompassed by sir francis
drake (hakluyt society edition), p. , for mention of the god
settaboth.
reads: “the wife of one of the giants who had remained behind in
irons.”
makes this plural.
 see
ante, note .
 this word
is omitted in ms. ,.
adds: “in their language.”
omits this sentence.
reads “instead of taking medicine.” see jesuit relations
and allied documents (cleveland reissue) for examples []of
medicine and surgery as practiced by the north american indians.
reads “two feet or so.”
reads “cut short and shaven like religious.” hans stade
also notices the tonsure among the indians who captured him (see
captivity of hans stade, hakluyt society edition, pp.
–, and note, from which it appears that this manner of
wearing the hair, was practiced among many tupi tribes).
 stanley (p.
) does not translate this sentence, but gives the original from ms.
 in ms.
, this sentence reads as follows: “they seem to be painted,
and one of those enemies is taller than the others, and makes a greater
noise and gives expression to greater joy than the others.”
 mosto (p.
) mistranscribes or misprints “setebas.” roncagli (da
punta arenas a santo cruz, in “bollettino della
società geografica italiana,” , p. ) says that the
patagonians sacrificed to an evil spirit called “wallichu.”
brinton, ut supra, p. , says: “they are not without
some religious rites, and are accustomed to salute the new moon, and at
the beginning of any solemn undertaking to puff the smoke of their
pipes to the four cardinal points, just as did the algonquins and
iroquois.”
 see
ante, note . stanley mistranscribes “pataghoni” of
ms. , as “palaghom.”
 a reference
to the gypsies who had made their appearance in italy as early as ,
where they practiced various deceptions upon the credulous people. the
name “cingani” or zingari, as they are generally called in
italy, comes from the greek word τἀσιγχανοι,
by which they were called by byzantine writers of the ix–xii
centuries; the same name appearing also in slightly different forms in
turkey, bulgaria, roumania, hungary, bohemia, and germany. their
ancestral home was probably in northwestern india, whence they
emigrated in successive waves. in many countries extreme and harsh
measures were taken against them, especially in germany, where they had
appeared as early as . they were never allowed a foothold in
france, but have become a significant part of the population in russia,
hungary, and spain. in the latter country, where they are called
gitános (egyptians), in spite of many severe laws passed against
them until the reign of cárlos iii, they continued, more
fortunate than the jews, to thrive. they are mentioned by cervantes in
his don quixote (pt. i, chap, xxx), but the name gitáno
had first appeared in a spanish document of , where their customs
are described. []the few in italy have been allowed to remain,
and those in the slavic countries and england were generally treated
kindly. their language is aryan and was highly inflected; and while
they have been given many names by the nations among whom they have
lived, their own appellation is “rom” “the
man.” see new international encyclopedia (new york,
reads: “capae;” but stanley has mistranscribed
“capac.”
 “albo
(navarrete iv, p. ), the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ),
transylvanus and oviedo (mosto, p. , note ) give the date of
departure from port san julian august , ; but the second errs in
giving ½ instead of ½ months for the period for which
the fleet remained there. peter martyr places the date of departure as
august . castanheda, who gives the same date says that the name
“st. julian” or “of the ducks” was given to
that bay which he calls a river. barros gives the date of arrival as
april , and says that the place was called “river of saõ
julião.” see mosto, ut supra.
 a portion
of the passage relating to the attempted mutiny reads as follows in ms.
,: “however the treason was discovered, and as a consequence
the treasurer was killed by a dagger and then quartered. gaspar de
casada was beheaded and then quartered. the overseer trying shortly
after to lead another mutiny, was banished together with a priest and
set ashore on that land of pathagonia.” the italian ms. is badly
confused, while the above is more in accordance with the facts, and
shows the hand of the translator and adapter. eden (p. ) says of the
attempted mutiny: “they remayned fyue
monethes in this porte of sainte iulian, where certeyne of the vnder
capitaynes conſpirynge the death of theyr general, were hanged and
quartered: amonge whom the treaſurer luigo of mendozza was one.
certeyne of the other conſpirators, he left in the ſayd land
of patogoni.” see the short account of the mutiny given by
transylvanus in vol. i, p. , and the account
given in the same volume, pp. , . the roteiro (stanley, p.
) says that three of the ships revolted against
magalhães” saying that they intended to take him to
castile in arrest, as he was taking them all to destruction;” but
magalhães subdued the mutiny by the aid of the foreigners with
him. mendoza was killed by espinosa the chief constable of the fleet,
and gaspar quesada was beheaded and quartered. alvaro de mesquita,
magalhães’s cousin, is wrongly reported to have been given
command of one of the ships of those killed, but the command of the
“san antonio” that had previously been given to antonio de
coca, after magalhães had deprived cartagena of it, had been
given him before the real outbreak of the mutiny. []
the narrative of the mutiny as given by navarrete (col.
de viages, iv, pp. –) which was compiled mainly from
documents presented in the same volume and from herrera, is as
follows:
“march , the eve of palm sunday, magallanes entered the port
of san julian, where he intended to winter, and consequently ordered
the rations to be served by measure. in view of that and of the
barrenness and cold of the country, the men asked magallanes by various
arguments to increase the rations or turn back, since there was no hope
of finding the end of that country or any strait. but magallanes
replied that he would either die or accomplish what he had promised;
that the king had ordered the voyage which he was to accomplish; and
that he had to sail until he found that land or some strait which must
surely exist; that in regard to the food, they had no reason to
complain, since that bay had an abundance of good fish, good water,
many game birds, and quantities of wood, and that bread and wine had
not failed them, nor would fail them if they would abide by the rule
regarding rations. among other observations, he exhorted and begged
them not to be found wanting in the valorous spirit which the castilian
nation had manifested and showed daily in greater affairs; and offering
them corresponding rewards in the king’s name. by such means did
he quiet the men.
“april , palm sunday, magallanes summoned all his captains,
officers, and pilots to go ashore to hear mass and afterward to dine in
his ship. alvaro de la mezquita, antonio de coca, and all the men went
to hear mass. louis de mendoza, gaspar de quesada, and juan de
cartagena (the latter because he was a prisoner in quesada’s
keeping) did not go, however; and alvaro de la mezquita alone went to
dine with magallanes.
“during the night, gaspar de quesada and juan de cartagena
with about thirty armed men of the ship ‘concepcion’ went
to the ‘san antonio,’ where quesada requested that the
captain, alvaro de la mezquita, be surrendered to him, and told the
crew of the ship to seize it, as they had already done with the
‘concepcion’ and ‘victoria.’ [he said] that
they already knew how magallanes had treated and was treating them,
because they had asked him to fulfil the king’s orders; that they
were lost men; and that they should help him make another request of
magallanes, and if necessary, seize him. juan de elorriaga, the master
of the ‘san antonio,’ spoke in favor of his captain, alvaro
de la mezquita, saying to gaspar de quesada: ‘i summon you, in
god’s name and that of the king, don cárlos, to go to your
ship, for the present is no time to go through the ships with armed
men; and i also summon you to release our captain.’ thereupon
quesada replied: ‘must our deed remain unaccomplished because of
this madman?’ and drawing his dagger stabbed him four times in
[]the arm, thus overawing the men. mezquita was
kept prisoner, elorriaga was cared for, cartagena went to the ship
‘concepcion,’ while quesada remained in the ‘san
antonio.’ thus were quesada, cartagena, and mendoza masters of
the three ships, ‘san antonio,’ ‘concepcion,’
and ‘victoria.’
“thereupon, they sent a message to magallanes to the effect
that they held three ships and the small boats of all five at their
disposal in order to require him to fulfil his majesty’s
provisions. they said that they had done that in order that he might no
longer illtreat them as he had done thitherto. if he would agree to
fulfil his majesty’s orders, they would obey his commands, and
[said] that if they had thitherto treated him as a superior, they would
thenceforth treat him as a master, and would be most respectful to
him.
“magallanes sent word to them to come to his ship, where he
would hear them and do what was proper. they answered that they did not
dare come lest he illtreat them, but that he should go to the ship
‘san antonio,’ where they would all assemble and decide
definitely on what the king’s orders commanded.
“magallanes believing that boldness was more useful than
meekness in the face of such actions, determined to employ craft and
force together. he kept the small boat of the ship ‘san
antonio’ which was used for those negotiations, at his ship; and
sent the alguacil, gonzalo gomez de espinosa, in the skiff belonging to
his ship, to the ‘victoria,’ with six men armed secretly
and a letter for the treasurer, luis de mendoza, in which he told the
latter to come to the flagship. while the treasurer was reading the
letter and smiling as if to say ‘you don’t catch me that
way,’ espinosa stabbed him in the throat, while another sailor
stabbed him at the same instant on the head so that he fell dead.
magallanes, being a man with foresight, sent a boat under command of
duarte barbosa, sobresaliente of the ‘trinidad’ with
fifteen armed men, who entering the ‘victoria’ flung the
banner to the breeze without any resistance. that happened on april .
then the ‘victoria’ approached the flagship, and they
together immediately approached the ‘santiago.’
“on the following day, the ‘san antonio’ and the
‘concepcion’ which were held by quesada and cartagena tried
to put to sea, but it was necessary for them to pass close to the
flagship which stood farthest out. the ‘san antonio’ raised
two anchors, and being in danger with one, quesada determined to free
alvaro de la mezquita, whom he held a prisoner in his ship, in order to
send him to magallanes to arrange peace between them. mezquita,
however, told him that nothing would be obtained. finally, they
arranged that when they set sail, mezquita should station himself
forward and ask magallanes as they approached his ship, []not
to fire and that they would anchor provided affairs would be settled
favorably.
“before setting sail in the ‘san antonio,’ where
they were endangered, as it was night and the crew were asleep, the
ship dragged and ran foul of the flagship. the latter discharged some
large and small shots and men leaped aboard the ‘san
antonio’ crying, ‘for whom are you?’ they responding,
‘for the king, our sovereign, and your grace,’ surrendered
to magallanes. the latter seized quesada, the accountant, antonio de
coca, and other sobresalientes who had gone to the ‘san
antonio’ with quesada. then he sent to the
‘concepcion’ for juan de cartagena and imprisoned him with
them.
“next day magallanes ordered the body of mendoza taken ashore
and had it quartered, and mendoza cried as a traitor. on the seventh,
he ordered gaspar de quesada beheaded and quartered with a like cry.
that was done by quesada’s own follower and sobresaliente, luis
de molino, in order to save himself from hanging, for that sentence had
been passed on him. magallanes sentenced juan de cartagena and the lay
priest, pedro sanchez de la reina, who had been active in causing the
men to mutiny, to be marooned in that country. he pardoned more than
forty men who merited death, as they were needed to work the ships, and
so that he might not excite hard feelings by the severity of the
punishment.”
brito’s account of the mutiny (navarrete, iv, p. ) is very
brief and unsatisfactory: “in that port the captains began to ask
him where he was taking them, especially one juan de cartagena, who
said that he had a royal cedula naming him as associate with
magallanes, as rui falero would also have been, had he been there. then
they tried to rise against magallanes and kill him, and go back to
castilla or to rodas. from that point they went to the river of santa
cruz, where they endeavored to put their plan in execution. but when
magallanes discovered their ill-considered attempt, for the captains
said that they would kill him or take him prisoner, he ordered his ship
armed and juan de cartagena arrested. as soon as the other captains saw
their chief arrested they thought no longer of prosecuting their
attempt. magallanes, however, seized them all, for most of the crew
were in his favor. he sent the merino or alguacil to kill luis de
mendoza with his dagger, for the latter refused to be arrested; while
he had another named gaspar quesada beheaded. when they set sail, he
left juan de cartagena together with a secular priest ashore at a place
where there were no inhabitants.”
correa (stanley, pp. –) gives a different and imperfect
account of the meeting.
cf. with these accounts the one given by guillemard
(magellan), pp. –. when the “san
antonio” deserted, esteban []gomez is said to have rescued
cartagena and the priest. joão serrão (after the loss of
the “santiago”) was given command of the
“concepcion,” mesquita of the “san antonio,”
and duarte barbosa of the “victoria,” all portuguese
(guillemard, ut supra, p. ). it is rather singular that sir
francis drake should also have faced a mutiny in this same port, where
thomas doughty was executed. that the history of
magalhães’s expedition was generally known is evident from
the following: “the next day after, being
the twentieth of june, wee harboured ourselues againe in a very good
harborough, called by magellan port s. julian, where we found a
gibbet standing upon the maine, which we supposed to be the place where
magellan did execution upon some of his disobedient and
rebellious company.” world encompassed (hakluyt
society edition), p. .
reads: “twenty-five leagues.”
 instead of
this last phrase, ms. , reads: “and very little of
that.” the account of the shipwreck and rescue as given here is
very confusing and inadequate. cf. guillemard, ut supra, pp.
–, and navarrete, iv, pp. , . one man was lost, namely,
the negro slave of joão serrão. the “roteiro”
(stanley, p. ) gives the briefest mention of it. brito (navarrete, iv,
p. ) says: “after this [i.e., the mutiny], they
wintered for three months; and magallanes again ordered the ship
‘santiago’ to go ahead in order to explore. the ship was
wrecked but all of its crew were saved.” correa’s account
(stanley, p. ) is very short, and mentions that only the hull of the
vessel was lost.
 mosto (p.
, note ) derives this word from the spanish mejillon, a
variety of cockle, which he thinks may be the mytilus or common
mussel.
 see
vol. ii, p. , note *.
 eden (p.
) says: “. degree ... lackynge a thyrde parte.”
omits: “and the holy bodies,” and has in its place:
“by his grace.”
omits these last two words. the italian form braccio is retained
in view of these words; for the spanish braza is a measure about
equivalent to the english fathom, while the braccio, although
varying in different cities, is near three palmos (spans) in length.
the term is, however, translated brasse (“fathom”)
in ms. ,. mosto (p. , note ), conjectures this fish to be the
eliginus maclovinus. of this fish, theodore []gill, the well-known ichthyologist, says in a
letter of may , : “the italian editor gave a shrewd guess
in the suggestion that the fish in question was what was formerly
called eliginus maclovinus. the only vulgar name that i have
been able to find for it is ‘robalo,’ and this name is
applied to it by the spanish-speaking people of both sides of south
america. like most popular names, however, it is very misleading.
‘robalo’ is the spanish name for the european bass, which
is nearly related to our striped bass or rock bass. to that fish the
robalo of south america has no affinity or real resemblance, and
belongs to a very different family peculiar to the southern
hemisphere—the nototheniids. the so-called eliginus
maclovinus (properly, eliginops maclovinus) is the most
common and widely distributed species and probably the one obtained by
the fleet of magalhães.”
 of the
river santa cruz and the stay there, albo (navarrete, iv, p. ) says:
“we left that place [i.e., port san julian] on the th of
the said month [of august] and coasted along to the southwest by west.
about  leguas farther on, we found a river named santa cruz, which we
entered on the th of the same month. we stayed there until the day of
san lucas, the th of the month of october. we caught many fish there
and got wood and water. that coast extends northeast by east and
southwest by west, and is an excellent coast with good
indentations.” the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ) places
the river santa cruz twenty leagues from san julian and in about
°. that narrative says that the four remaining boats continued to
pick up the wreckage of the “santiago” until september .
the name santa cruz was said to have been given to the river because
they entered it on september , the day of the exaltation of the holy
cross (see stanley, p. , note , and mosto, p. , note ), but kohl
(mosto, ut supra) attributes the name to joão
serrão who was near that river on may , , the day on which
the church celebrates the feast of the finding of the holy cross.
navarrete (iv, p. ) cites herrera as authority for an eclipse of the
sun that happened while at this river on october , . guillemard
(ut supra, pp. , ) is disinclined to believe the report,
although he mentions an annular eclipse of the sun on october , ,
which was however not visible in patagonia. navarrete (ut supra)
says that magalhães gave instructions to his captains here
“saying that he would follow those coasts until finding a strait
or the end of that continent, even if he had to go to a latitude of
°; that before abandoning that enterprise, the ships might be
twice unrigged; and that after that he would go in search of maluco
toward the east and east northeast, by way of the cape of buena
esperanza and the island of san lorenzo.” []
a new chapter begins at this point in ms. ,, being simply headed
“chapter.”
 the
anonymous portuguese who accompanied duarte barbosa says °
´; barros, ° ´; elcano, °; and albo,
° ´. mosto, p. , note .
has the words in brackets.
 eden (p.
) says of the strait: “they founde the
ſtraight nowe cauled the ſtraight of magellanus, beinge in
ſum place c.x. leagues in length: and in breadth ſumwhere
very large and in other places lyttle more than halfe a league in
bredth.” stanley (p. ) is uncertain of the french
et quasi autant de largeur moins de demye lieue,
which is (translated freely) simply “something like almost a
half-league wide.” the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says
that the channel “at some places has a width of three leagues,
and two, and one, and in some places half a league.” transylvanus
(vol. i, p. ) gives the width as two, three,
five, or ten italian miles; gomara, two leagues or so; barros, one
league at the mouth, and the strait, from a musket or cannon shot to
one and one and one-half leagues; castanheda, at the mouth as wide as
two ships close together, then opening up to one league; peter martyr,
a sling-shot’s distance in places. (mosto, p. , note .)
proise or proi (proy, proic) is an ancient
catalonian word meaning the “bow moorings;” cf. jal,
glossaire nautìque (mosto, p. , note ). the
old spanish word is “proís,” which signifies both
the thing to which the ship is moored ashore, and the rope by which it
is moored to the shore.
 this
passage is as follows in ms. ,: “the said strait was a
circular place surrounded with mountains (as i have said), and the
majority of the sailors thought that there was no exit from it into the
said pacific sea. but the captain-general declared that there was
another strait which led out, and that he knew that well, for he had
seen it on a marine chart of the king of portugal. that map had been
made by a renowned sailor and pilot, named martin de boesme. the said
captain sent two of his ships forward—one named the ‘sainct
anthoine,’ and the other the ‘conception’—in
order that they might look for and discover the exit from the said
strait, which was called the cape de la baya.”
martin de behaim (beham, behem, behemira, behen, bœhem),
bœhm) was born about  (some say also in  or ) of a
family originally from bohemia, in nuremberg, germany, and died at
lisbon, july , . he was a draper in flanders, –,
after which he went to lisbon () where he became []acquainted with columbus. in  he was chosen
geographer of diego cam’s expedition to western africa. on his
return, he received the order of knighthood in the military order of
christ of portugal; after which he went to the island of fayal in the
azores where he became interested in colonization and agriculture, and
married the daughter of the governor. in  he returned to germany,
where he lived at nuremberg until , and where, at the request of
his townsmen, he constructed an immense globe on the information of
ptolemy, strabo, and others, which contains many errors (see facsimile
in guillemard), in  he returned to lisbon, and in  to fayal,
where he remained until , when he went to lisbon. many myths sprung
up about him, such that he had visited america before columbus and the
straits of magellan before magalhães, the latter of whom he may
have known at lisbon. see rose, new biographical dictionary
(london, ); grande encyclopédie (paris, lamirault et
cie.); and guillemard, pp. , .
see guillemard (ut supra, pp. –) for a discussion
of knowledge regarding the existence of a strait to the south of the
american continent, prior to magalhães’s discovery and
passage of it. guillemard, after weighing the evidence for and against,
decides that there may have been a “more or less inexact
knowledge of the existence of some antarctic break “that would
allow access to the eastern world.
 possession
bay, according to mosto, p. , note , but guillemard (pp. , )
thinks it may have been lomas bay.
 probably
anegada point to the northwest of cape orange.
 the
“first narrows” or primera garganta, just beyond anegada
point.
 lago de los
estrechos, st. philip’s bay, or boucant bay.
 the
“second narrows” and broad reach.
does not mention the smoke signals.
reads: “when near us they suddenly discharged a number of guns,
whereat we very joyously saluted them with artillery and
cries.”
 the first
is the passage east of dawson island, which extends to the northeast
into useless bay and to the southeast into admiralty sound. the second
opening was the passage between the western side of dawson island and
brunswick peninsula.
 esteban
gomez was an experienced portuguese navigator and pilot with ambitions
only less than those of magalhães, his kinsman (guillemard, p.
). his desertion occurred probably []in the first part of
november, and was perhaps directly due to pique at what he considered
lack of appreciation from magalhães. conspiring with
gerónimo guerra, the notary, who was elected captain of the
“san antonio” they made off with that ship, and after
imprisoning alvaro de mezquita, returned to spain, anchoring at sevilla
may , . there gomez was imprisoned after the return of the
“victoria,” but was liberated, and in  proposed an
expedition to discover a northwest passage. an expedition having been
fitted out by cárlos i, he coasted florida and the eastern
coast, as far as cape cod, and returned to spain in . see grande
encyclopédie; navarrete, iv, pp. –, and
–; and guillemard, ut supra, pp. –.
brito’s story of the exploration of the strait and the loss of
the “san antonio” (navarrete, iv, pp. , ) is as
follows: “they left that place [i.e., the river of santa
cruz] on october , and went to enter a strait of which they had no
knowledge. the entrance of the strait extends for about  leguas; and
after they had entered, it seemed to them that it was all land-locked,
and they accordingly anchored there. magallanes sent a portuguese pilot
named juan carballo ashore with orders to ascend a mountain in order to
ascertain whether there was any outlet. carballo returned saying that
it appeared land-locked to him. thereupon magallanes ordered the ships
‘san antonio’ and the ‘concepcion’ to go in
advance in order to explore the strait. after having gone ahead for
about  leguas, they returned to tell magallanes that the river went
farther but that they could not tell where it would take them. upon
receiving that information magallanes weighed anchor with all three
ships, and advanced along the strait until reaching the point to which
the others had explored. then he ordered the ‘san antonio’
of which alvaro de mezquito, his cousin, was captain, and esteban
gomez, a portuguese pilot, to go ahead and explore a southern channel
that opened in the strait. that ship did not return to the others and
it is not known whether it returned to castilla or whether it was
wrecked. magallanes proceeded with his remaining ships until he found
an exit.” correa’s account of the desertion of the
“san antonio” is as usual with him, inadequate, and
evidently based on hearsay evidence (see stanley, p. ).
 literally
“brother;” but to be understood probably as the expression
cugino germano, “cousin german.”
begins this sentence as follows: “but that ship lost its time,
for the other.”
 guillemard
(p. ) conjectures from the records of albo, pigafetta, and herrera
that the river of sardines is port gallant which is located on the
brunswick peninsula, opposite the charles islands. albo (navarrete, iv,
p. ) says that after taking the []course to the northwest they
sailed about  leagues before anchoring.
 albo
(navarrete, iv, p. ) says that the two capes at the exit of the
strait were called fermosa and deseado, this latter being cape pillar
(see guillemard, map facing p. ).
adds: “which were on the other side.”
 joão
serrão, the brother of magalhães’s staunchest
friend francisco serrão, and a firm supporter of the great
navigator. pigafetta errs in calling him a spaniard (see p. ),
though he may have become a naturalized spaniard, since the register
speaks of him as a citizen of sevilla. one document (navarrete, iv, p.
) calls him a portuguese pilot, and brito (navarrete, iv, p. ) a
castilian. he was an experienced navigator and captain, and had served
under vasco da gama, almeida, and albuquerque. vasco da gama (on his
second voyage, –) made him captain of the ship
“pomposa” which was built in mozambique where he was left
to attend to portuguese affairs. on this expedition he saw the coast of
brazil for the first time, for vasco da gama’s fleet, ere
doubling the cape of good hope, crossed to the brazilian coast, which
they followed as far as cape santo agostinho. he fought bravely in the
battle of cananor under almeida (march , , in which
magalhães also participated). he was chief captain of three
caravels in august, , in eastern water, and was in the java seas in
, but must have returned to portugal soon after that, for he was
there in ; although he seems to have been appointed clerk at the
fortress of calicut in the latter year. he embarked with
magalhães as captain and pilot of the “santiago,”
but after the wreck of that vessel near port san julian was given
command of the “concepcion,” in which he later explored the
strait. failing to dissuade magalhães from attacking the natives
of matan, he became commander, with duarte barbosa, of the fleet at
magalhães’s death, and was murdered by the cebuans after
the treacherous banquet given by them to the fleet. see guillemard
(ut supra), and stanley’s three voyages of vasco da
gama (hakluyt society publications, london, ).
reads as follows: “such was the method ordered by the captain
from the beginning, in order that the ship that happened to become
separated from the others might rejoin the fleet.” then it adds:
“thereupon the crew of the said ship did what the captain had
ordered them and more, for they set two banners with their
letters,” etc.
 “the
island of santa magdalena (mosto, p. , note ).
 according
to guillemard the river of isleo (or “of islands”)
[]is located on brunswick peninsula, and is
identified with the port of san miguel, just east of the “river
of sardines;” the island where the cross was planted would be one
of the charles islands.
 the
“roteiro” (stanley, p. ) mentions that the day at the port
of san julian was about seven hours long; while the anonymous
portuguese (stanley, p. ) says that the sun only appeared for some
“four hours each day” in june and july. transylvanus says
the nights in the strait were not longer than five hours.
adds: “which is the collateral wind between the east and
south.”
adds: “and anchorages.”
 various
kinds of these umbelliferous parsley plants are still to be found in
patagonia, where they are highly esteemed (mosto, p. , note ).
reads: “i do not believe that there is a more beautiful country
or a better strait than that.” see albo’s description of
the strait, in vol. i, pp. –; that
of transylvanus, vol. i, pp. –; and
that in world encompassed (hakluyt society edition), pp. ,
 (this last account also mentioning the difficulty of finding water
sufficiently shallow for anchoring). the anonymous portuguese (stanley,
p. ) says that the strait was called the “strait of victoria,
because the ship ‘victoria’ was the first that had seen it:
some called it the strait of magalhaens because our captain was named
fernando de magalhaens.” castanheda says that magalhães
gave it the name of “bay of all saints” because it was
discovered on november ; and san martin in his reply to
magalhães’s request for opinions regarding the continuance
of the expedition calls it “channel of all saints:” but
this name was first applied to only one gulf or one branch and later
extended to the entire channel. this name is found in the instructions
given for the expedition of sebastian cabot in , and in the map
made that same year at sevilla by the englishman robert thorne.
sarmiento de gamboa petitioned felipe ii that it be called
“strait of the mother of god.” it was also called
“strait of martin behaim.” the anonymous portuguese
(stanley, p. ) says that the strait is  miles long. the
“roterio” (stanley, pp. , ) says that it is  leagues
in length, and that in traversing it, they “sailed as long as it
was daylight, and anchored when it was night.” transylvanus
(vol. i, p. ) gives the length as 
spanish miles; oviedo,  or  leagues; herrera,  leagues, and
twenty days to navigate; gomara,  to  leagues; peter martyr, 
leagues. see mosto, p. , note , and p. , note ; and ante,
note . []
 these fish
are: a species of coryphæna; the thymnus albacora, and the thymnus
plamys.
 from the
spanish golondrina, the sapphirine gurnard or tubfish (trigla hirundo).
reads: “one foot or more.”
 at this
point in the original italian ms., which ends a page, occurs the
heading of the following page sequitur vocabuli
pataghoni, that is, “continuation of patagonian
words.”
 literally:
“for the nature of women.”
presents the following differences in the list of patagonian words from
the italian ms.
eyes
ather
eyelashes
occhechl
lips
schiane
hair
ajchir
throat
ohumer
shoulders
peles
penis
scachet
testicles
scaneos
rump
schiachen
arm
mar
pulse
ohon
legs
choss
feet
teche
heel
there
sole of the foot
cartscheni
fingernails
colini
to scratch
ghecare
young man
calemi
water
oli
smoke
jaiche
we
chen
yes
zei
petre lazure
secheghi
sun
calexcheni
to eat
mecchiere
to look
conne
to walk
rhei
ship
theu
to run
haim
ostrich eggs
jan
the powder of the herb which they eat
capae
red cloth
terechai []
black
amel
red
theiche
to cook
jrecoles
a goose
chache
their little devils
cheleult
in the above list, chen corresponds in the italian
ms. to ehen, the equivalent of “no;”
theu is “ship” in the above, and “snow”
in the italian; courire (the equivalent of covrire or coprire, “to cover”)
in the italian, becomes courir (“to run”)
in ms. ,. all are to be regarded as errors of the french. certain
words are left in italian in ms. ,, which are as follows: la copa; alcalcagno; (italian ms. al calcagno); homo squerzo (italian ms.
sguerco); a la pignate (italian ms.
pigniata); alstruzzo vcelo (italian
ms. al seruzo ucelo); and alcocinare
(italian ms. al coçinare). stanley offers this
as proof that ms. , was written by pigafetta, and not translated
from his italian, but it furnishes no evidence that pigafetta even saw
the french version of his relation. it must be remembered that stanley
did not himself see the italian ms. but only the amoretti mutilation of
it (from which, and from ms. ,, he reproduces the vocabulary,
without english translation); and hence bases his observations on that
and the conjectures of its editor. stanley points out the fact that
amoretti has omitted several words of this list, but they are all in
the italian ms. a sad blunder has been made by stanley in his
transcription of la pouldre dherbe qui mangent whose
patagonian equivalent is capac. he transcribes as
follows: la pouldre d’herbe with patagonian
equivalent qui (which it is to be noted is only the
wrong form of the french relative), and mangent with patagonian
equivalent capac, explaining mangent in a
footnote as “food, the root used as bread.” stanley also
makes the following mistranscriptions: orescho for
oresche (“nostrils”); canneghin for caimeghin (“palm of the
hand”); ochy for ochii
(“bosom”); scancos for scaneos (“testicles”); hou for
hoii (“buttocks”); ohoy
for ohon (“pulse”); cartschem for cartscheni (“sole of the
foot”); chol for thol
(“heart”); om for oni
(“wind”); aschame for aschanie (“earthen pot”); oamaghei for oamaghce (“to
fight”); amet for amel
(“black”); and ixecoles for jrocoles (“to cook”). amoretti has also made many
errors (see stanley’s first voyage, pp. , ). mosto,
who is on the whole a faithful transcriber, has sacancos as the patagonian equivalent of a li
testiculi; om jani for a li sui,
the correct forms of the latter being jani and
a li sui oui; and tcrechai for the
equivalent of “red cloth.” eden (p. ) gives only the
following words: “breade, capar: water, oli: redde clothe,
cherecai: red colour, cheiche: blacke colour, amel.”
mosto (p. , note ) gives the following words from the
[]vocabulary of the tehuel-ches compiled by the
second lieutenant of the ship “roncagli,” which correspond
almost exactly with those given by pigafetta.
english
roncagli
pigafetta
nose
or
or
eye
óthel
other
hand
tzén
chene
ear
sha
sane
ostrich
óyue
hoi hoi
brinton (american race, p. ) cites ramon lista (mis exploraciones y descubrìmientos en patagonia,
buenos ayres, ) in proof that the language of the patagonians has
undergone but slight change since the time of pigafetta. see also lists
of words in brinton (ut supra), p. , from the patagonian and
fuegian languages. the vocabularies given by horatio hale
(wilkes’s u. s. exploring expedition, –,
philadelphia, , viii, pp. –) bear no resemblance to
pigafetta’s vocabulary. hale says that guttural sounds are
frequent among the indians of the patagonian district.
reads: “capae.”
 cf. with
the methods of fire-making used by the north american indians in
jesuit relations and allied documents (cleveland reissue); see
also captivity of hans stade (hakluyt society edition), p.
at this point (folio a) in the original italian ms. occurs the
first chart, representing the straits of magellan (see p. ). the
cardinal points in all of pigafetta’s charts are the reverse of
the ordinary, the north being below and the south above. ms. ,
precedes this chart (which there occupies folio a) by the words:
“below is depicted the strait of patagonie.” immediately
following this chart in the italian ms. (folio a) is the chart of the
ysole infortunate (“unfortunate isles;” see p. ).
these islands are shown in ms. , on folio a, with the following
notice: “here are shown the two islands called ‘unfortunate
islands.’” the charts in the italian ms. are brown or dull
black on a blue ground.
 the
“roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says that magalhães left
the strait november  (having entered it october ); the anonymous
portuguese (stanley, p. ) and peter martyr (mosto, p. , note ),
november .
reads: “and we ate only biscuits that had fallen to powder, which
was quite full of worms, and stank from the filth of the urine of rats
that covered it, and of which the good had been eaten.” eden (p.
) reads: “and hauynge in []this
tyme conſumed all theyr byſket and other vyttales, they fell
into ſuche neceſſitie that they were inforced to eate
the pouder that remayned therof beinge nowe full of woormes and
ſtynkynge lyke pyſſe by reaſon of the ſalte
water,” herrera (navarrete, iv, p. ) says that the rice
was cooked with salt water.
 a curious
coincidence in view of magalhães’s answer to esteban gomez
at a council called in the strait to discuss the continuance of the
voyage that “although he had to eat the cowhide wrappings of the
yardarms, he would still persevere and discover what he had promised
the emperor” (navarrete, iv, p. ; cited from herrera). at that
council andré de san martin, pilot in the “san
antonio,” advised that they continue explorations until the
middle of january, , and then return to spain; and urged that no
farther southward descent be made, and that navigation along so
dangerous coasts be only by day, in order that the crew might have some
rest (navarrete, iv, pp. –).
reads: “enough of them.”
 this was
the scurvy. navarrete (iv, p. ) following a document conserved in
archivo general de indias, says that only eleven men died of scurvy
during the voyage from the strait to the ladrones.
 the
anonymous portuguese says (stanley, p. ) that after sailing west and
northwest for , miles, the equator was reached. at the line
(“roteiro,” stanley, p. ), magalhães changed the
course in order to strike land north of the moluccas, as “he had
information that there were no provisions” there.
reads: “it is well named pacific.”
adds: “which is a large fish called tiburoni.” the
anonymous portuguese (stanley, p. ), says that the unfortunate
islands were met before the line was reached and were eight hundred
miles distant from one another. one was called st. peter (in °)
and the other the island of tiburones (in °). transylvanus
(vol. i, p. ), herrera, and oviedo, say that
the three vessels stopped two days at those islands for supplies, but
albo’s journal (navarrete, iv, p. ) indicates that no stop was
made there. the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ), gives the
latitude of these islands as ° or ° and ° or °.
albo (navarrete, iv, p. ) says that the first was discovered january
 in ° ´, and was called san pablo, because that was the
date of st. paul’s conversion; and the island of tiburones was
discovered february , in ° ´, at a distance of °
(sic) from the former. eden (p. ) says that the second island
lay in °. these two islands were probably puka-puka (the
honden eyland of the dutch atlases) of the
tuamotu group, located in latitude []° ´ south, and
longitude ° ´ west; and flint island of the manihiki
group, located in latitude ° ´ south and longitude
° ´ west. the latter is still uninhabited, but the
former contains a population of over four hundred. see ante,
note . see guillemard, p. , and mosto, p. , note .
reads: “now at the stern, now at the windward side, or
otherwise.” amoretti changes this passage completely, reading:
“according to our measurement of the distance that we made with
the chain astern, we ran from sixty to seventy leagues daily.”
many basing themselves on this passage of amoretti, have believed that
the log was in use at the time of the first circumnavigation. dr.
breusing (die catena a poppa bei pigafetta und die logge, in
“zeitschrift der gesellschaft für erdkunde zu berlin,”
, iv, pp. –) believes that the “stern chain
(catena poppa) is not the log properly so-called, but an
instrument for determining the angle of the ship’s leeway, an
opinion accepted also by gelcich in his la scoperta
d’america e cristoforo colombo nella letteratura moderna
(gorizia, ). l’vzielle (studi bibliogr. e biogr.
sulla storia della geogr. in italia, roma, , part ii,
introduction, pp. –), combats that opinion, as well as the
idea that the log is meant. the difficulty of the passage, he says,
hinges on the word ho and whether it is interpreted as a verb or
a conjunction. if it be a conjunction then the passage, means
“estimating by sight, the rate of the ship from the ‘bow
catena,’ or at the stern” (‘catena’ being a beam
perpendicular to the ship’s axis at the point near the bow where
it begins to curve inward; that is, at such a point that from that
place to the stern, the direction of the apparent way is parallel to
the longitudinal axis of the ship) his ship made fifty, sixty, or
seventy leagues.” one might suppose, if ho be regarded as
a verb, that pigafetta called catena a cross beam of
the stern (the passage reading “the catena that was at the
stern”); or that the disjunctive ho, “or” is
used in place of e, “and,” and that pigafetta,
dividing the distance between the stern and the bow catena by the time
necessary for a fixed point of the sea to pass from the elevation of
the bow to that of the stern, thus deduced the ship’s rate. see
mosto, p. , note .
l’vzielli’s opinion is the most probable, for although the
log is mentioned by purchas as early as , its use did not become
general until . an instrument used to measure the rates of vessels
is mentioned as early as , but it was very deficient.
 the
“roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says that this cape, which he
calls “cape of the virgins” was discovered on october ,
, and lay in latitude about ° south. barros says that it was
discovered on october ; and transylvanus and oviedo, on november .
see mosto, p. , note . []
 regarding
the reckonings eden says: “in ſo much
that it was neceſſarie to helpe the needle with the lode
ſtone (commonly cauled the adamant) before they could ſaile
therwith, bycauſe it moued not as it doothe when it is in
theſe owre partes.” eden also gives a cut of the
“ſtarres abowt the pole antartike.” the same
author also (pp. –) compiles from amerigo vespucci and
andreas de corsali a treatise entitled “of
the pole antartike and the stars abowt the same and of the qualitie of
the regions and disposition of the elementes abowt the equinoctiall
line. alſo certeyne ſecreates touching the arte of
ſaylynge.” the former says: “the pole antartike hath nother the great beare nor the lyttle
as is ſeene abowte owre pole. but hath foure ſtarres whiche
compaſſe it abowt in forme of a quadrangle. when these are
hydden, there is ſeene on the lefte ſyde a bryght canopus of
three ſtarres of notable greatneſſe, whiche beinge in
the myddeſt of heauen, repreſenteth this figure.” the
latter says: “here we ſawe a marueylous order of
ſtarres, ſo that in the parte of heauen contrary to owre
northe pole, to knowe in what place and degree the ſouth pole was,
we tooke the day with the ſoonne, and obſerued the nyght with
the aſtrolabie, and ſaw manifeſtly twoo clowdes of
reaſonable bygneſſe mouynge abowt the place of the pole
continually nowe ryſynge and nowe faulynge, ſo keepynge theyr
continuall courſe in circular mouynge, with a ſtarre euer in
the myddeſt which is turned abowt with them abowte. xi. degrees
frome the pole. aboue theſe appeareth a marueylous
croſſe in the myddeſt of fyue notable ſtarres which
compaſſe it abowt.... this croſſe is so fayre and
bewtiful, that none other heuenly gne may be compared to
it....” these are the magallanic clouds (nuebecula major
and nubecula minor) and the constellation of the southern cross or
crux. the magellanic clouds resemble portions of the milky way,
nubecula major being visible to the naked eye in strong moonlight and
covering about two hundred times the moon’s surface, while the
nubecula minor, although visible to the naked eye, disappears in full
moonlight, and covers an area only one-fourth that of the former. they
were first observed by the arabians. the portuguese pilots probably
called them at first “clouds of the cape.” (mosto, p. ,
note ). the southern cross, which resembles a lute rather than a
cross, was first erected into a constellation by royer in ,
although often spoken of before as a cross. only one of its five
principal stars belongs to the first magnitude. the cross is only
° in extent north and south and less than that east and west.
the second chart of the plate at p.  represents the ladrones
islands and occurs in the italian ms. at this point (folio b). this
chart is found on folio b in ms. ,, and is preceded by the
inscription: “the island of the robbers and the style of their
boats.” []
reads: “during that time of two months and twelve
days.”
 amoretti
reads: “three degrees east of capo verde.” if the cape is
meant, the correction is proper, but if the islands, the ms. is
correct. see mosto, p. , note .
 cipangu is
japan, while sumbdit pradit may be the island of antilia, called
“septe citade” on martin behaim’s globe (mosto, p.
, note ). the locations given by pigafetta prove that they did not
see them, but that he writes only from vague reports. europe first
learned of japan, near the end of the thirteenth century, through marco
polo, who had been told in china fabulous tales of the wealth of
zipangu. this word is derived by marco polo from the chinese
dschi-pen-kuë or dschi-pon, which the japanese have transformed
into nippon or nihon. see travels of marco polo, book iii, ch.
ii; and rein’s japan, p. .
 see
vol. i, pp. , , , , .
reads: “sixty.” transylvanus (vol.
i, p. ) names two islands of the ladrones inuagana and
acacan, but says that both were uninhabited. guillemard (ut
supra, p. ) conjectures these names to be identical with agana
in guam and sosan in rota. hugues (mosto, p. , note ) believes the
first island visited to have been guam, and his conjecture is
undoubtedly correct.
adds: “called skiff.”
adds: “of the said island.”
has a new unnumbered chapter heading before the following
paragraph.
 this phrase
is omitted in ms. ,, as is also all the following sentence; but
that ms. adds: “we left the said island immediately afterward,
and continued our course.” this was on march , on which day the
only englishman in the fleet, “master andrew” of bristol,
died (guillemard, ut supra, p. ).
 eden (p.
) says: “two hundreth of theyr boates.”
has a new chapter at this point, although the chapter is
unnumbered.
when loaisa’s expedition reached the ladrones, they found
still alive a galician, one of three deserters from espinosa’s
ship (see vol. ii, pp. , , , ). see
the reception accorded legazpi, and a description of one of those
islands in , vol. ii, pp. –.
the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says that the expedition
reached the ladrones, march ,  (with which albo, navarrete, iv, p.
 agrees); and that after the theft of the []skiff, magellan landed with fifty or sixty men,
burned the whole village, killed seven or eight persons, both men and
women; and that supplies were taken aboard. the anonymous portuguese
(stanley, p. ) says that the ladrones (which lay in
°–° north latitude, were , miles by the course
traveled from the equator. brito (navarrete, iv, p. ) says:
“thence [i.e., the unfortunate islands] they laid their
course westward, and after sailing  leguas came to certain islands
where they found a considerable number of savages. so many of the
latter boarded the vessels that when the men tried to restore order in
them, they were unable to get rid of the savages except by
lance-thrusts. they killed many savages, who laughed as if it were a
cause for rejoicing.”
adds: “or superior.”
reads: “cloth.”
 at this
point, ms. , begins a new sentence, thus: “there are found in
that place.”
reads: “those women.”
makes use of the italian word store for stuoje or
stoje meaning “mats,” and explains by adding:
“which we call mats.”
 they also
(according to herrera) received the name las velas, “the
sails” from the lateen-rigged vessels that the natives used
(mosto, p. , note ). see also vol. xvi, pp.
 in ms.
, this sentence reads as follows: “the pastime of the men and
women of the said place and their sport, is to go in their boats to
catch those flying fish with fishhooks made of fishbone.”
 mosto (p.
, note ) says that these boats were the fisolere,
which were small and very swift oared-vessels, used in winter on the
venetian lakes by the venetian nobles for hunting with bows and arrows
and guns. amoretti conjectures that pigafetta means the
fusiniere, boats named after fusine whence people are ferried to
venice.
reads: “the said boats have no difference between stern and
bow.” albo (navarrete, iv, p. ), in speaking of the boats of
the chamorros, uses almost identically the same expression: “they
went both ways, for they could make the stern, bow, and the bow, stern,
whenever they wished.” the apparatus described by pigafetta as
belonging to these boats is the outrigger, common to many of the boats
of the eastern islands.
 in the
italian ms., the chart of aguada ly boni segnaly
(“watering-place of good signs”), zzamal (samar), abarien,
[]humunu, hyunagan, zuluam, cenalo, and ybusson
(q.v., p. ) follows at this point. it is found on folio b
of ms. , and is preceded by the following: “here is shown the
island of good signs, and the four islands, cenalo, humanghar, ibusson,
and abarien, and several others.”
 “the
tenth of march” in eden, and the distance of zamal from the
ladrones is given as “xxx. leagues.” albo (navarrete, iv,
p. ) says that the first land seen was called yunagan, “which
extended north and had many bays;” and that going south from
there they anchored at a small island called suluan. at the former
“we saw some canoes, and went thither, but they fled. that island
lies in ° ´ north latitude.” the
“roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says that the first land seen
was in “barely eleven degrees,” and that the fleet
“went to touch at another further on, which appeared
first.” two praus approached a boat sent ashore, whereupon the
latter was ordered back, and the praus fled. thereupon the fleet went
to another nearby island “which lies in ten degrees, to which
they gave the name of the ‘island of good signs,’ because
they found some gold in it.”
 this word
is omitted in ms. ,.
reads: “more than one foot long.”
 since rice
is an important staple among all the eastern islands, it is natural
that there are different and distinctive names for that grain in the
various languages and dialects for all stages of its growth and all its
modes of preparation. thus the tagálog has words for
“green rice,” “rice with small heads,”
“dirty and partly rotten rice,” “early rice,”
“late rice,” “cooked rice,” and many others.
see also u. s. philippine gazetteer, pp. , .
reads: “in order to explain what manner of fruit is that above
named, one must know that what is called ‘cochi’ is the
fruit borne by the palm-tree. just as we have bread, wine, oil, and
vinegar, which are obtained from different things, so those people get
the above named substances from those palm-trees alone.” see
delgado’s historia, pp. –, for description of
the useful cocoa palm; also, u. s. philippine gazetteer, pp. ,
reads: “along the tree.” practically the method used today
to gather the cocoanut wine. see u. s. philippine gazetteer, p.
 in
describing the cocoanut palm and fruit, eden (p. ) reads:
“vnder this rynde, there is a thicke ſhell whiche they burne
and make pouder thereof and vſe it as a remedie for certeyne
diſeaſes.” he says lower, that the cocoanut milk on
congealing “lyeth within the ſhell lyke an egge.”
reads: “by so doing they last a century.”
 called
“suluan” by albo (navarrete, iv, p. ). it is a small
island southeast of samar. see ante, note . dr. david p.
barrows (census of the philippines, washington, , i, p.
), says that the men from suluan “were perhaps not typical of
the rest of the population which magellan found sparsely scattered
about the coasts of the central islands, but ... were almost certainly
of the same stock from which the present visayan people are in the main
descended.” these natives had probably come, he says, “in
successively extending settlements, up the west coast of mindanao from
the sulu archipelago. ‘sulúan’ itself means
‘where there are suluges,’ that is, men of sulu or
joló.”
 ms. adds:
“seeing that they were thus well dispositioned.”
adds: “into the sea.”
 albo calls
it (navarrete, iv, p. ) the island of gada (i.e.,
aguada, “watering-place”) “where we took on
water and wood, that island being very free of shoals” (see
ante, note ). this island is now called homonhón,
jomonjol, or malhón. its greatest dimensions are ten miles from
northwest to southeast, and five miles from northeast to southwest. it
is eleven miles southwest from the nearest point in samar. it is called
“buenas señas” on murillo velarde’s map.
 the
“roteiro” (stanley p. ) says that the archipelago was
also called “vall sem periguo,” or “valley without
peril.” the name “filipinas” was not applied to them
until  by villalobos (see vol. ii, p.
 probably
the jungle-fowl (gallus bankiva) which is caught and tamed in
large numbers by the natives of the philippines and still used for
crossing with the domestic fowl. see guillemard (ut supra, p.
, note ).
 this
sentence is omitted in ms. ,.
reads: “in his ears he wore pendants of gold jewels, which they
call ‘schione.’”
 ms. adds:
“whom he had put ashore on that island that they might recruit
their strength.”
reads: “there is another island near the above island, inhabited
by people.” mosto says (p. , note ) that picheti is
from the spanish piquete, “a small hole made with a sharp
pointed instrument.” this custom of piercing the ears is quite
general among savage, barbarous, and semi-barbarous peoples.
 eden (p.
) reads: “caphranita that is gentyles.” see
vol. iii, p. , note .
 this word
is omitted in ms. ,.
 our
transcript reads facine, and ms. , fascine, both of
which translate “fascines.” mosto reads focine,
which is amended by amoretti to foscine. this latter is probably
the same word as fiocina, a “harpoon” or
“eel-spear,” and hence here a “dart.”
 stanley
failed to decipher this word in ms. ,, which is the same as the
word in the italian ms. mosto, citing boerio (dizion.
veneziano), says of rizali: “rizzagio or
rizzagno, ‘sweepnet’ a fine thickly woven net, which
when thrown into rivers by the fisherman, opens, and when near the
bottom, closes, and covers and encloses the fish. rizzagio is
also called that contrivance or net, made in the manner of an inverted
cone, with a barrel hoop attached to the circumference as a selvage. it
has a hole underneath, through which if the eels in the ponds slyly
enter the net, there is no danger of their escape.”
fish are caught in the philippines by various devices—in
favorable situations by traps, weirs, corrals of bamboo set along the
shore in shallow waters. various kinds of nets and seines, the hook and
line, and also the spear, are also used. see census of the
philippine islands (washington, ), iv, p. .
reads: “hiunanghar.” stanley has mistranscribed
“huinanghar.” it is difficult to identify the four islands
of cenalo, hiunanghan, ibusson, and abarien with certainty. mosto (p.
, notes) suggests that they may be dinagat, cabugan, gibuson, and
cabalarián. the first three are evidently correct, as those
islands would naturally be sighted in the course followed. the last
island is shown in pigafetta’s chart to be north of
malhón, and the probability is that he names and locates it
merely from hearsay, and that they did not see it. its position seems
to indicate manicani rather than cabalarián.
after this paragraph in the italian ms. (folio a) follows the
chart of the islands of pozzon, ticobon, polon, baibai and ceilon
(together forming the island of leyte), gatighan, bohol, and mazzana
(sic) (q.v., p. ). this chart in ms. , (on folio
a) is preceded by: “below is shown the cape of gatighan and
many other islands surrounding it.”
 albo
(navarrete, iv, p. ) says: “we departed thence [i.e.,
from malhón] and went toward the west in order to strike a large
island called seilani [i.e., leyte] which is inhabited and has
gold in it. we coasted along it and took our course to the west
southwest in order to strike a small island, which is inhabited and
called mazava. the people there are very friendly. []we
erected a cross on a mountain in that island. three islands lying to
the west southwest were pointed out to us from that island, which are
said to possess gold in abundance. they showed us how it was obtained.
they found pieces as large as chickpeas and beans. masava lies in
latitude  and two-thirds degrees north.” the
“roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says: “they ran on to
another island twenty leagues from that from which they sailed
[i.e., malhón], and came to anchor at another island,
which is named macangor [i.e., masaua], which is nine degrees;
and in this island they were very well received, and they placed a
cross in it.” see also vol. i, pp. ,
reads: “but they moved off immediately and would not enter the
ship through distrust of us.” the slave who acted as interpreter
is the henrique de malaca of navarrete’s list.
bara: the spanish word barra.
reads: “to ask him to give him some food for his ships in
exchange for his money.”
reads: “the king hearing that came with seven or eight
men.”
 for
dorade, i.e., the dorado. ms. , adds: “which
are very large fish of the kind abovesaid.”
 the
ceremony of blood brotherhood. casicasi means “intimate
friends.” see trumbull’s blood covenant
(philadelphia, ), which shows how widespread was the covenant or
friendship typified by blood.
reads: “after that the said captain had one of his men-at-arms
armed in offensive armor.” stanley has translated harnois
blanc literally as “white armor.”
 this
passage may be translated: “thereby was the king rendered almost
speechless, and told the captain, through the slave, that one of those
armed men was worth a hundred of his own men. the captain answered that
that was a fact, and that he had brought two hundred men in each ship,
who were armed in that manner.” eden so understood it, and reads:
“whereat the kynge marualed greatly, and ſayde to th[e]
interpretoure (who was a ſlaue borne in malacha) that one of
thoſe armed men was able to encounter with a hundreth of his
men.” ms. , agrees with the translation of the text.
 instead of
this last phrase ms. , has: “and he made two of his men
engage in sword-play before the king.”
says only: “then he showed the king the sea-chart, and the
navigation compass.” eden says (p. ) that the first to use the
compass was one “flauius of malpha, a citie
in []the kingdom of naples.... next vnto flauius, the
chiefe commendation is dew to the spanyardes and portugales by
whoſe daylye experience, the ſame is brought to further
perfection, and the vſe thereof better knowen; althowghe hytherto
no man knoweth the cauſe why the iren touched with the lode
ſtone, turneth euer towarde the north ſtarre, as playnely
appeareth in euery common dyall.” he also says: “as
touchynge the needle of the compaſſe, i haue redde in the
portugales nauigations that ſaylynge as farre ſouth as cap.
de bona speranza, the poynt of the needle ſtyll reſpected the
northe as it dyd on this ſyde the equinoctiall, ſauynge that
it ſumwhat trembeled and declyned a lyttle, whereby the force
ſeemed ſumwhat to be diminiſſhed, ſo that they
were fayne to helpe it with the lode ſtone.” (see
ante, p. ). the compass was known in a rough form to the
chinese at early as  b.c., and first
applied to navigation in the third or fourth century a.d., or perhaps earlier. it was probably introduced into
europe through the arabs who learned of it from the chinese. it is
first referred to in european literature by alexander neckam in the
twelfth century in de utensilibus. the variations from
the true north were observed as early as .
 stanley
says that the amoretti edition represents the king as making this
request and magalhães as assenting thereto; but the italian ms.
reads as distinctly as ms. ,, that magalhães made the
request.
omits the remainder of this sentence.
adds: “that is, a boat.”
 the
following passage relating to the meal reads thus in ms. ,:
“then the king had a plate of pork and some wine brought in.
their fashion of drinking is as follows. first they lift their hands
toward the sky, and then take with the right hand the vessel from which
they drink, while extending the fist of the left hand toward the
people. the king did that to me, and extended his fist toward me, so
that i thought that he was going to strike me. but i did the same to
him, and in such wise did we banquet and afterwards sup with him using
that ceremony and others.” see spencer’s ceremonial
institutions, especially chapter i.
 eden reads
(p. ): “when the kynge ſawe antonie
pigafetta write the names of many thinges, and afterwarde rehearſe
them ageyne, he marualed yet more, makynge ſygnes that ſuche
men deſcended from heauen.” continuing he confuses
the eldest son of the first king with the latter’s brother, the
second king.
 a tolerably
good description of the native houses of the []present day in the philippines. cf.
morga’s description, vol. xvi, pp.
begins a new unnumbered chapter at this point.
 this
sentence to this point in ms. ,, is wrongly made to refer to the
house of the king. the passage there reads: “all the dishes with
which he is served, and also a part of his house, which was well
furnished according to the custom of the country, were of
gold.”
omits this sentence.
 butuan and
caraga in the northeastern part of mindanao.
 this name
is variously rendered: mosto, siain; ms. ,, siaui;
stanley, siani; and amoretti and eden, siagu.
reads: “the captain sent the chaplain ashore to celebrate
mass.”
says that they took only their swords; but the italian ms. says
distinctly that a signal was given to the ships from the shore by means
of muskets, and again that the musketry was fired when the kings and
magalhães separated, both of which references are omitted by ms.
,. eden reads: “the captaine came alande
with fyftie of his men in theyr beſt apparel withowte weapons or
harneſſe, and all the reſydue well
armed.”
 in eden (p.
): “damaſke water.”
reads: “but they offered nothing.”
says: “every one did his duties as a christian and received our
lord.”
adds: “for the people.”
 the italian
ms. reads literally and somewhat ambiguously: “they made
immediate reverence;” ms. , says “to which these kings
made reverence,” which is scarcely likely, as the latter would,
until told by magalhães, see nothing in the ceremony. rather it
was the spaniards who made the reverence.
reads: “whenever any ships came from spain.”
 cf. morga,
vol. xvi, p. .
reads: “men and ships to render them obedient to him.”
reads: “to the middle of the highest mountain,” evidently
confusing mezo di (“afternoon”) of the
italian ms. with mezo (mezzo;
“middle”); for the cross was set up on the summit of the
mountain. the passage in ms. , continues: “then those two
kings and the captain rested, and while conversing, the latter had them
asked [not “i had them asked” []as
in stanley, who mistranscribes jl (il) as je]
where the best port was for getting food. they replied that there were
three, namely, ceylom, zzubu, and galaghan, but that zzeubu was the
largest and the best trading place.” these are the islands of
leyte (the seilani of albo, navarrete, iv, p. ; and the selani of
transylvanus, vol. i, p. ), cebú, and
mindanao (the caraga district).
 , reads
simply: “then we descended to the place where their boats
were.”
 this
account is very much shortened in ms. ,, where it reads as follows:
“as the captain intended to leave next morning, he asked the king
for pilots in order that they might conduct him to the ports abovesaid.
he promised the king to treat those pilots as he would them themselves,
and that he would leave one of his men as a hostage. in reply the first
king said that he would go himself to guide the captain to those ports
and that he would be his pilot, but asked him to wait two days until he
should gather his rice, and do some other things which he had to do. he
asked the captain to lend him some of his men, so that he could
accomplish it sooner, and the captain agreed to it.” at this
point ms. , begins a new unnumbered chapter.
 the billon
and afterward copper coin quattrino, which was struck in the
mints of venice, rome, florence, reggio, the two sicilies, etc. the
quattrino of the popes was often distinguished as “quattrino
romano.” the venetian copper quattrino was first struck in the
reign of francesco foscari (–). see w. c. hazlitt’s
coinage of european continent (london and new york, ), p.
doppione: a gold coin struck by louis xii of france during his
occupation of the milanese (–). hazlitt, ut supra,
p. .
colona: possibly the name of some coin of the period.
 this entire
paragraph is omitted in ms. ,. that ms. has another chapter
division at this point.
 stanley
mistranslates the french gentilz as “gentle.”
 probably
the abacá, although it may be the cloth made from the palm. see
morga’s description of the visayans, vol.
xvi, p. .
 cf.
morga’s sucesos, vol. xvi, pp. ,
greatly abridges this account, reading as follows: “they cut that
fruit into four parts, and after they have chewed it a long time, they
spit it out and throw it away.” cf. the account in morga’s
sucesos, vol. xvi, pp. –.
omits this product. cf. morga’s sucesos, vol. xvi, pp. –.
 in ms.
,, “mazzaua;” in eden, “meſſana;”
in mosto, “mazana,” while in the chart it appears as
“mazzana;” transylvanus, “massana;” and albo,
“masava.” it is now called the island of limasaua, and has
an area of about ten and one-half square miles.
 mosto
mistranscribes the italian word for “among” fra as
prima “first.” the error arises through the
abbreviation used, namely fa, mosto mistaking it for
pa, which would be prima.
 stanley
mistranscribes “gatighan” from ms. , as
“satighan.” the names of the five islands as given by eden
are: “zeilon, bohol, canghu, barbai, and catighan.” these
are the islands of leite, bohol, canigao (west of leyte), the northern
part of leyte (today the name of a town, hamlet and inlet in leyte),
and possibly apit or himuquitan, or one of the other nearby islands on
the west coast of leyte. see chart of these islands on p. .
albo (navarrete, iv, pp. , ) says: “we left mazava and
went north toward the island of seilani, after which we ran along the
said island to the northwest as far as  degrees. there we saw three
rocky islands, and turned our course west for about  leguas where we
came upon two islets. we stayed there that night and in the morning
went toward the south southwest for about  leguas, as far as  and
one-third degrees. at that point we entered a channel between two
islands, one of which is called matan and the other subu. subu, as well
as the islands of mazava and suluan extend north by east and south by
west. between subu and seilani we spied a very lofty land lying to the
north, which is called baibai. it is said to contain considerable gold
and to be well stocked with food, and so great an extent of land that
its limits are unknown. from mazava, seilani, and subu, on the course
followed toward the south, look out for the many shoals, which are very
bad. on that account a canoe which was guiding us along that course,
refused to go ahead. from the beginning of the channel of subu and
matan, we turned west by a middle channel and reached the city of subu.
there we anchored and made peace, and the people there gave us rice,
millet, and meat. we stayed there for a considerable time. the king and
queen of that place and many of the inhabitants readily became
christians.” the “roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says that
the king of macangar (i.e., mazaua) conducted the spaniards
“a matter of thirty leagues to another island named cabo
[i.e., cebú], which is in ten degrees, and in this island
fernando de magalhães did what he pleased with the consent of
[]the country.” brito says merely
(navarrete, iv, p. ): “after that, after passing amid many
islands, they reached one called mazaba, which lies in  degrees. the
king of mazaba conducted them to another large island called
zubó.”
reads: “only one of them.” barbastili is a venetian
word for pipistrelli. these bats are the pteropi or
“flying foxes,” the large fruit-eating bats of which so
many species inhabit the malay archipelago. bats are especially found
in guimarás, siquijor, and cebú, and the skins of some
are used as fur. see guillemard (ut supra, p. ). see also
delgado’s historia, pp. , ; and u. s. philippine
gazetteer.
 stanley
mistranslates as “tortoises.” the “black birds with
the long tail” are the tabón “mound-building
megapodes, gallinacious birds peculiar to the austro-malayan
subregion” (guillemard’s magellan, p. ). see also
vol. v, p. , note , and vol. xvi, page , note ; also vol.
xvi, p. , note .
 these are
the camotes, which lie west of leyte, and their names are poro,
pasijan, and pansón. see pigafetta’s chart showing these
islands on p. .
 following
this point in the italian ms. (folio a) is the chart of the islands
of bohol, mattam, and zzubu (q.v., p. ).
ms. , presents this chart on folio a, preceded by the words:
“below are shown the islands of zzubu, mattan, and
bohól.”
reads: “but the interpreter reassured them by telling
them.”
reads: “and he was going, by the orders of the said sovereign, to
discover the islands of mallucque.”
reads: “thereupon the abovesaid merchant said to the king in
their language,” etc., without giving the original malay words.
eden gives the phrase as catacaia chita.
 calicut,
properly kálíkot (said to be derived from two words
meaning cock-crow, because the territory granted to the first king of
kálíkot was limited to the extent over which a cock could
be heard to crow; or from káli, one of the names of the goddess
gauri) is the name of a district and city on the malabar coast. the
king of all the malabar coast from goa to cape comorin, samari perymal,
having adopted the mahometan faith divided his kingdom into the
kingdoms of calicut, cochin, cananor, and coulão, and gave them
to his friends, on condition that the king of calicut be termed
“zamorim” or “samorim,” i.e.,
“supreme emperor and god upon earth” (although the proper
form is said to be “tamurin” which is conjectured by some
to be a modification of the sanskrit “samunri,”
“seaking.” []the city of kálíkot,
a noted emporium of trade, was built perhaps as early as 
a.d., although the date  a.d. is also given as that of its founding; and is
described by ibn batuta in  as one of the finest ports in the
world. it was visited by covilham in , and vasco da gama’s
ships were freighted there in . the latter attacked the city in
 and , and the portuguese built a fortified factory there in
 which was destroyed by the governor in  to avoid its falling
into the enemy’s hands. the english established a factory in the
city in , which was captured in  by haidar ali; but after a
further series of capture and recapture, the city and district was
permanently turned over to the british (). see stanley’s
vasco da gama (hakluyt society publications, london, );
birch’s alboquerque (hakluyt society publications, london,
–); jones and badger’s ludovico di varthema
(hakluyt society publications, london, ), pp. –; also
grey’s travels of pietro della valle (hakluyt society
publications, london, ), pp. , , note.
malacca, or more correctly mâlaka is the name of an ancient
territory and city, which was probably first settled by javanese, and
is possibly derived from “malayu” meaning in javanese
“to run” or “fugitive.” at an early period
malacca fell under the sway of the siamese. the city, located on both
sides of the malacca river, and only one hundred and thirty miles
northwest of singapore (which has usurped the great volume of trade
once centering at malacca) was founded about  a.d. the first european to visit the city was varthema,
about the year . it was captured by the portuguese under
albuquerque in , and they held it (– under spanish
control) until  when it was captured by the dutch, who had
unsuccessfully besieged it, with the aid of the king of jahor, in .
the english obtained possession of it in , and still hold it,
although the dutch possessed it from –. for descriptions
and history of malacca, see the following hakluyt society publications:
stanley’s east africa and malabar (london, ), pp.
–; birch’s alboquerque, iii, pp. –
(and other citations); burnell and tiele’s linschoten
(london, ), i, pp. –; gray’s voyage of
françois pyrard (london, ), part i, p. ii. also see
crawfurd’s dictionary, pp. –.
the terms india major (greater india) and india minor (lesser india)
are differently applied by different authors. schiltbergen applied the
term lesser india to the northern portion of the peninsula on this side
of the ganges, while the southern portion of the peninsula was termed
greater india. marco polo’s lesser india extended from makran to
and including the coromandel coast, and his greater india extended from
the coromandel coast to cochin china, while middle india was abyssinia.
[]mosto wrongly identifies india major with the
present indian empire. see telfer’s johann schiltberger
(hakluyt society publications, ). friar jordanus (wonders of the
east, hakluyt society edition, london, ), describes (pp.
–) india the less, india the greater, and india tertia. yule
points out that jordanus’s lesser india embraces sindh, and
probably mekran, and india along the coast as far as some point
immediately north of malabar. greater india extends from malabar very
indefinitely to the eastward, for he makes it include champa. india
tertia is the east of africa below abyssinia. thus jordanus just
reverses the lesser and greater indias of marco polo. ramusio who gives
the summary of kingdoms of an old portuguese geographer, ends
first india at mangalore, and second india at the ganges. benjamin of
tudela speaks of “middle india which is called aden.” conti
divides india into three parts: the first extending from persia to the
indus, the second from the indus to the ganges, and the third all the
land beyond. pliny discusses whether mekran and other lands belonged to
india or ariana.
adds: “and treat his subjects well.”
 this phrase
is omitted in ms. ,.
adds: “who was in the captain’s ship.”
reads: “thereupon the king told them that he was willing, and
that as a greater token of his love, he would send the captain a drop
of his blood from his right arm, and [asked] the captain to do the
same.”
reads: “consequently they should ask their captain whether he
intended to observe the custom.”
reads: “he should commence by giving a present, whereupon the
captain would do his duty.” this ms. begins another chapter at
this point.
reads: “so do our arms destroy the enemies of our
faith.”
adds: “of the ships.”
reads: “and whether that prince who had come with them, was
empowered to make peace.”
omits these last two clauses.
 this phrase
is omitted in ms. ,.
adds: “and for love toward god.”
“he would leave them the arms that the christians use.”
 these last
two clauses are omitted in ms. ,. []
adds: “of sainct jacques [i.e., santiago].”
 this
sentence is omitted in ms. ,.
 called
“drynking glaſſes of venice woorke” in eden (p.
reads: “he had his face painted with fire in various
designs.” eden reads: “and had the
residue of his body paynted with dyuers coloures whereof ſum were
lyke vnto flamynge fyre.”
reads: “he had four jars full of palm-wine, which he was drinking
through reed pipes.”
reads: “we made the due reverence to him while presenting to him
the present sent him by the captain, and told him through the mouth of
the interpreter that it was not to be regarded as a recompense for his
present which he had made to the captain, but for the love which the
captain bore him.” this ms. omits the following three
sentences.
 the
“sinus magnus” of ptolemy, today the chinese gulf (mosto,
p. , note ).
 this
passage is considerably abbreviated in ms. ,, where it reads as
follows: “the prince, the king’s nephew, took us to his
house, where he showed us four girls who were playing on four very
strange and very sweet instruments, and their manner of playing was
somewhat musical. afterward he had us dance with them. those girls were
naked except that they wore a garment made of the said palm-tree cloth
before their privies and which hung from the waist to the knee,
although some were quite naked. we were given refreshments there, and
then we returned to the ships.” these gongs are used in many
parts of the orient.
adds: “by the captain’s order.”
reads: “we told him of the death of our man, and that our captain
requested that he might be buried.”
adds: “according to our manner.”
reads: “the king took it under his charge, and promised that no
trickery or wrong would be done the king. four of our men were chosen
to despatch and to sell the said merchandise.”
reads: “they have wooden balances like those of pardeca to weigh
their merchandise.” pardeca, as stanley points out, is for
par de ça de loire which is equivalent to langue
d’oil, and denotes the region in france north of the loire.
par de la meant languedoc. this passage was adapted to the
french []understanding by the person who translated and
adapted the italian manuscript.
 this
sentence is omitted in ms. ,. as mosto points out the measure here
mentioned would be one of capacity, and must have been the common
measure for rice, perhaps the ganta.
lagan is a shellfish found in the philippines which has a shell
resembling that of the nautilus pompilius that is used for
holding incense or as a drinking vessel. this shell is very white
inside, while the exterior is spotted a pale yellow color. it resembles
mother-of-pearl, and is very common. delgado says that most of the
shellfish, are indigestible but highly esteemed. see delgado’s
historia, p. .
adds: “which was of various strange kinds.”
 eden says:
“xvi. poundes weyght of iren.”
reads: “the captain-general did not wish to take too great a
quantity of gold, so that the sailors might not sell their share in the
merchandise too cheaply, because of their lust for gold, and so that on
that account he should not be constrained to do the same with his
merchandise, for he wished to sell it at as high a price as
possible.”
adds: “or any other balls”
makes the two armed men follow instead of precede the royal banner.
adds: “and the natives of the country for their fear of it, fled
hither and thither,” which is in place of the following
sentence.
 this
sentence is omitted in ms. ,.
reads: “one covered with red and the other with
velvet.”
adds: “in the manner of the country.”
 the account
of the baptism of the king is considerably abridged in ms. , where
it reads as follows: “then the captain began to address the king
through the interpreter, in order that he might incite him to the faith
of jesus christ. he told him that if he wished to become a good
christian (as he had signified on the preceding day), that he must have
all the idols of his country burned and set up a cross in their place,
which they were all to adore daily on both knees, with hands clasped
and raised toward the heaven. the captain showed the king how he was to
make the sign of the cross daily. in reply the king and all his men
said that they would obey the captain’s commandment, and do all
that he told them. the captain took the king []by
the hand, and they walked to the platform. at his baptism the captain
told the king that he would call him dom charles, after the emperor his
sovereign. he named the prince dom fernand, after the brother of the
said emperor, and the king of mazzaua, jehan. he gave the name of
christofle to the moro, while he called each of the others by names
according to his fancy. thus before the mass fifty men [sic: but
an error of the french adapter for five hundred] were baptized. at the
conclusion of mass, the captain invited the king and the others of his
chief men to dine with him, but he would not accept. however, he
accompanied the captain to the shore, where, at his arrival, the ships
discharged all the artillery. then embracing they took leave of one
another.” eden gives the number baptized as five hundred men.
reads: “on seeing that, she expressed the greatest desire to
became a christian, and asking for baptism, she was baptized and given
the name of jehanne, after the emperor’s mother.”
 there are
many cases of this wholesale baptism in the history of the catholic
missions in various countries, and it cannot be condemned entirely and
regarded as devoid of good effects, for many instances reveal the
contrary. see jesuit relations (cleveland reissue).
 those last
six words are omitted in ms. ,. mosto conjectures that
solana means solecchio or solicchio signifying an
apparatus to protect one from the sun. pigafetta may have misapplied
the spanish word solana, which signifies a place bathed by the
noontide sun or a place in which to take the sun.
 this last
clause is omitted in ms. ,.
adds: “and we gave it to her.” this was the image found by
one of legazpi’s soldiers in cebú in  (see
vol. ii, pp. , , , , ; and
vol. v, p. ). encarnación (dic. bisaya-español, manila, ), says: “the
cebuan indians, both past and present, give the name of
bathála [god] to the image of the holy child, which is
supposed to have been left by the celebrated magallanes.”
reads: “evening.”
mentions only the artillery. the “tromb” or
“trunk” was a kind of hand rocket-tube made of wood and
hooped with iron, and was used for discharging wild-fire or greek-fire
(see corbett’s spanish war, – [london], ,
p. ). at this point stanley discontinues the narrative of ms. ,,
and translates from amoretti’s version of the italian ms.
reads: “to better instruct and confirm him in the faith.”
 eden says
the queen was preceded by “three younge damoſelles and three
men with theyr cappes in theyr handes.”
adds: “and presentation.”
reads simply for this last clause: “and several others,”
omitting all the names.
reads: “and they all so swore.”
reads from this point: “then they swore, and thus the captain
caused the king to swear by that image, by the life of the emperor his
sovereign, and by his habit, to ever remain faithful and subject to the
emperor,” thus ascribing this oath to the king instead of to
magalhães. the words “by his habit” can refer only
to magalhães, who wore that of santiago, and not to any habit
worn by the barbaric ruler of cebú.
adds: “and hang.”
adds: “and deck.”
adds: “and demolished.”
adds: “and overthrew.”
 there is a
strange difference between the italian ms. and ms. , in regard to
these names. the latter reads to this point: “there are a number
of villages in that island, whose names and those of their chiefs are
as follows: cinghapola, cilaton, ciguibucan, cimaningha, cimaticat, and
cicambul; another, mandaui, and its chief and seignior, lambuzzan;
another cot-cot, and its chief, acibagalen; another, puzzo, and its
chief, apanoan; another, lalan, and its chief, theteu; another,
lulutan, and its chief, tapan [amoretti, followed by stanley, says
japau, and mosto, iapan]; another cilumay; and also lubucun.”
amoretti, who places this list after the disastrous battle and
consequent treachery of the cebuans, and stanley, have “lubucin:
its chief is cilumai.” mandaui is mandaue; lalan may be liloan;
cot-cot is on the east coast; lubucun may be lubú, but mosto (p.
, note ) conjectures it to be lambusan. an examination of the nancy
ms. may reveal the source of this difference.
adds after the word borchies: “instruments so
called.”
 probably
cotton cloth. see stanley’s east african and malabar
coasts, p. : “they make there [i.e., in cambay] many
cloths of white cotton, fine and coarse, and other woven and colored
fabrics, of all kinds and colours.”
adds: “and closed.”
reads: “she who has killed the hog, puts a []lighted torch in her mouth, which she
extinguishes, and which she holds constantly alight with her teeth
during that ceremony.”
 cf. the
ceremonies of the baylanes described by loarca, vol. v, pp. , , and by chirino, vol.
xii, p. .
 otorno: mosto, p. , mistranscribes otoro,
and queries attorno in a note.
omits the description of this custom, giving only the first and last
sentence to this point. stanley omits the translation to this point.
see vol. v, p. , and vol.
xvi, p. , where loarca and morga describe this custom.
valzi: mosto queries vasi, “jars,” which appears
probable.
adds: “made in the manner abovesaid;” but this was crossed
out, showing that the writer or adapter of that ms. had at first
intended to narrate the custom that is given in the italian ms.
 this word
is omitted in ms. ,.
reads: “the other women sit about the dead chamber sadly and in
tears.”
 pigafetta
uses the present and imperfect tenses rather indiscriminately
throughout this narration, but we have translated uniformly in the
present. cf. loarca’s description of burial and mourning customs
among the visayans, vol. v, pp. , ,
–; plasencia’s description among the tagálogs,
vol. vii, pp. , ; and morga, vol. xvi, p. .
reads: “five or six hours.”
 eden in
describing the island of matan confuses the pigafetta narrative. he
says: “not farre from this ilande of zubut,
is the hand of mathan, whoſe inhabitauntes vſe maruelous
ceremonies in theyr ſacrifices to the ſoone and burying the
deade. they were rynges of gold abowt theyr priuie members.” in
the description of the battle in matan, eden says that each of the
three divisions of the islanders contained “two thouſand and
fiftie men armed with bowes, arrowes, dartes and iauelins hardened at
the poyntes with fyer.”
 to this
point the italian ms. and ms. , agree approximately. the story of
the battle in the latter ms., however, is much abridged and much less
graphic. it is as follows: “they replied that they had bamboo
spears and stakes burned and hardened in the fire, and that we could
attack them when we wished. at daybreak, forty-nine of us leaped into
the water, in the place whither we had thus gone, at a distance of more
than three [sic] crossbow flights before we could reach shore,
for the boats could []not approach nearer because of the rocks
and reefs which were in the water. thus we reached land, and attacked
them. they were arranged in three divisions, of more than one thousand
five hundred persons. we shot many arrows at them from a distance, but
it was in vain, for they received them on their shields. they leaped
hither and thither in such a way that scarce could we wound one of
them. on the other hand, our artillery in the boats was so far away
from us that it could not aid us. those people seeing that, and that
the captain had had some of their houses burned in order to inspire
them with terror, and having become more enraged, threw so many iron
pointed spears at us, and shot so many arrows even at the captain
himself that we could defend ourselves with difficulty. finally, having
been driven by them quite down to the shore, and while our captain was
fighting bravely although wounded in the leg with an arrow, one of
those indians hurled a poisoned bamboo lance into his face which laid
him stiff and dead. then they pressed upon us so closely that we were
forced to retire to our boats and to leave the dead body of the
captain-general, with our other killed.” the eulogy on the dead
commander is approximately the same in both mss., except at the end,
where ms. , reads: “eight of our men died there with him, and
four indians, who had become christians. of the enemy fifteen were
killed by the artillery of the ships, which had at last come to our
aid, while many of us were wounded.”
brito (navarrete, iv, p. ) says of the stay at cebú and
the death of magalhães: “they stayed there about one
month, and the majority of the people and the king became christians.
the king of zubó ordered the kings of the other islands to come
to him, but inasmuch as two of them refused to come, magallanes, as
soon as he learned it, resolved to go to fight with them, and went to
an island called mathá. he set fire to a village, and not
content with that, set out for a large settlement, where he, his
servant, and five castilians were killed in combat with the savages.
the others, seeing their captain dead, went back to their
boats.”
terciado: a spanish word.
carteava: a spanish word.
 the
“roteiro” (stanley, p. ) dates the battle april . the
account of the battle is as follows: “fernan de magalhães
desired that the other kings, neighbours to this one, should become
subject to this who had become christian: and these did not choose to
yield such obedience. fernan de magalhães seeing that, got ready
one night with his boats, and burned the villages of those who would
not yield the said obedience; and a matter of ten or twelve days after
this was done, he sent to a village about []half a league from
that which he had burned, which is named matam, and which is also an
island, and ordered them to send him at once three goats, three pigs,
three loads of rice, and three loads of millet for provisions for the
ships; they replied that for each article which he sent to ask them
three of, they would send to him by twos, and if he was satisfied with
this they would at once comply, if not, it might be as he pleased, but
that they would not give it. because they did not choose to grant what
he demanded of them, fernan de magalhães ordered three boats to
be equipped with a matter of fifty or sixty men, and went against the
said place, which was on the th day of april, in the morning; there
they found many people, who might well be as many as three thousand or
four thousand men, who fought with such a good will that the said
fernan de magalhães was killed there, with six of his men, in
the year .”
 navarrete
(iv, pp. , ) gives the names of the men killed with
magalhães on april  as follows: christóbal rabelo, then
captain of the “victoria;” francisco espinosa, a sailor;
anton gallego, a common seaman; juan de torres, sobresaliente and
soldier; rodrigo nieto, servant of juan de cartagena; pedro gomez,
servant of gonzalo espinosa; and anton de escovar, sobresaliente,
wounded but died april .
 see
vol. i, pp. , , note *.
gives this name as duart bobase, although lower it is spelled barbase.
duarte or odoardo barbosa, the son of diogo barbosa, who after serving
in portugal, became alcaide of the sevilla arsenal, was born at lisbon
at the end of the fifteenth century. he spent the years –
in the orient, the result of that stay being his livro
emque dà relação do que viu e ouviu no
oriente, which was first published at lisbon in  in vol. vii of
collecçao de noticias para a historia et geographia
das nações ultramarinas, and its translation by
stanley, a description of the coasts of east africa and malabar
(hakluyt society publications, london, ). he became a clerk in the
portuguese factory at cananor under his uncle gil fernandez barbosa,
and became so expert in the malabar language that he was said to speak
it even better than the natives. on account of his facility in the
language he had been appointed commissioner by nuno da cunha to
negotiate peace with the zamorin. he was commissioned in  to
oversee the construction of some galleys by alboquerque. while at
sevilla, magalhães lived in the household of diogo barbosa,
where he married duarte’s sister beatriz. duarte embarked on the
“trinidad” as a sobresaliente, and it was he who captured
the “victoria” from the mutineers at port st. julian, after
which he became captain of that vessel. failing to recover
magalhães body from the natives of mactán, he was
[]himself slain at cebú at the fatal
banquet may , . besides the above book, which is a most valuable
contribution to early oriental affairs, there is extant in the torre do
tombo a letter written by him from cananor, january , ,
complaining of the portuguese excesses. see guillemard’s
magellan; stanley’s vasco da gama; birch’s
alboquerque; and hoefer’s nouvelle biographie
générale (paris, )
 see
ante, note .
magalhães married beatriz barbosa, daughter of diogo barbosa in
sevilla, probably in the year . one son rodrigo was born of the
union, who was about six months old at the time of the departure.
rodrigo died in september, , and in the march following beatriz
died. see guillemard, ut supra, pp. –, .
adds: “and to advise the christian king.”
 mosto
transcribes this word wrongly as facente, “busy.”
ms. , reads: “wiser and more affectionate than
before.”
adds: “and presents.”
 the
constable was gonzalo gomez de espinosa, who was left behind with the
“trinidad” and was one of the four survivors of that
ill-fated vessel, returning to spain long after.
 this
sentence is confused in ms. ,, reading: jehan
caruaie auecques le bariſel ſen retournerẽt qui nous
dirent comment jlz auoyent veu mener celluy quy fut guery par miracle
et le preſtre a ſa maiſon et que pour cela jlz ſen
eſtoyent partiz eulx doubtans de quelque male aduanture. by
dropping the first et this becomes equivalent to the text.
reads: “for we would kill him.”
reads: “but jehan carvaie, his comrade, and others refused, for
fear lest they would not remain masters there if the boat went
ashore.”
in regard to joão serrão’s death, brito
(navarrete, iv, p. ) says: “as soon as the men in the ships
saw that slaughter, they hoisted their anchors, and tried to set sail
in order to return to burneo. at that juncture, the savages brought
juan serrano, one of those whom they wished to ransom, and asked two
guns and two bahars of copper for him, besides some brittanias or
linens such as they carried in the ships as merchandise of trade and
barter. serrano told them to take him to the ship and he would give
them what they asked, but they, on the contrary, insisted that those
things be taken ashore. but [the men in the ships] fearing another act
of treachery like the past, set sail, and abandoned that man there, and
nothing more was heard of him.” []
 the
“roteiro” (stanley, p. ) says nothing about the banquet,
but says that the men, twenty-eight in number, counting the two
captains, went ashore to ask pilots to borneo, whereupon the natives,
who had determined upon their course of action attacked and killed
them. peter martyr (mosto, p. , note ) asserts that the violation of
the women by the sailors was the cause of the massacre. concerning the
number killed, brito (navarrete, iv, p. ) says that thirty-five or
thirty-six men went ashore, and castanheda and gomara say thirty, the
last asserting that a like number were made slaves, of whom eight were
sold in china. peter martyr places the number of the slain at twelve.
navarrete (iv, pp. , ) gives the names of those massacred as
follows:
duarte barbosa
captain of the
“trinidad”
juan serrano
captain of the “concepcion”
luis alfonso de gois
captain of the “victoria”
andres de s. martin
pilot of his majesty
sancho de heredia
notary
leon de ezpeleta
notary
pedro de valderrama
priest
francisco martin
cooper
simon de la rochela
calker
cristóbal rodriguez
steward
francisco de madrid
sobresaliente and soldier
hernando de aguilar
servant of luis de mendoza
guillermo fenesi or tanaguì
gunner of the “trinidad”
anton rodriguez
sailor
juan sigura
sailor
francisco picora
sailor
francisco martin
sailor
anton de goa
common seaman
rodrigo de hurrira
common seaman
pedro herrero
sobresaliente
hartiga
sobresaliente
juan de silva, portuguese
sobresaliente
nuño
servant of magallanes
henrique, from málaca
servant of magallanes and interpreter
peti juan, french
servant of magallanes
francisco de la mezquita
servant of magallanes
francisco
son-in-law of juan serrano
all of these names are to be found in navarrete’s list. see
ante, note .
chiacare: the nangca; see vol. xxxiv, p.
, where pigafetta describes and names this fruit. mosto confuses it
with the durio xibethenus, which is abundant in the western
islands of the indian []archipelagoes, mindanao being the
only one of the philippines where it is found (crawfurd,
dictionary); but it is the artocarpus integrifolia (see
vol. xvi, p. , note ). ms. , makes this
“capers.”
omits mention of the panicum, sorgo, garlic, and nangcas.
reads: “one to the east northeast, and the other to the west
southwest.”
adds: “and eleven minutes.”
 stanley
says wrongly °.
 this word
ends a page in the original italian ms. on the following page is a
repetition of the title: vocabili deli populi gentilli, that is
“words of those heathen peoples.” ms. , does not
contain this list, and it is also omitted by stanley.
 see
ante, note .
 bassag
bassag does not correspond to “shin,” but to
“basket for holding clothes, etc.,” or “cartilage of
the nose;” or possibly to basac basac, “the sound
made by falling water.”
 the
equivalent of pigafetta’s dana is daoa or
daua, “millet.” mais, probably the equivalent
of humas is the word for “panicum.”
tahil is found in the tagálog dictionaries, and is the
name of a specific weight, not weight in general. it is the chinese
weight called “tael,” which was introduced by the chinese
into the east indies, whence it spread throughout the various
archipelagoes. see crawfurd’s dictionary; and vols. iii, p. , note ; iv, p.
, note ; and vii, p. .
 see note
, post.
 tinapay
(used also by the bicols to denote any kind of bread) denotes a kind of
cake or loaf made with flour and baked about the size of a
chocolate-cup saucer. two of these are put together before baking with
some sugar between. the word is extended also to wheat bread and to the
hosts. see encarnación’s diccionario.
amoretti’s conjectured reading of sonaglio
(“hawk’s-bell”) for conaglio (see mosto, p.
), proves correct from the visayan dictionaries.
baloto signifies a canoe dug out of a single log. one of twenty
varas in length is termed bilis, while the hull alone is called
dalámas.
 most of the
words of pigafetta’s visayan vocabulary can be distinguished in
the dictionaries of that language, although []it
is necessary to make allowance at times for pigafetta’s italian
phonetic rendering. following is a list of the words that can be
distinguished from diccionario bisaya-español y
español-bisaya (manila, ), by juan félix de la
encarnación, o.s.a. (recollect); and diccionario
hispano-bisaya y bisaya-español (manila, ) by antonio
sanchez de la rosa, o.s.f. see also pocket dictionary of the
english, spanish and visayan languages (cebu, ) by h. m. cohen;
and mallat’s les philippines (paris, ), ii, pp.
–. the words queried in the following list are simply
offered as conjectural equivalents.
english
visayan
(pigafetta)
(encarnación)
(sanchez)
man
lac
lalaqui (?)
woman (married)
babay
babaye
babaye
hair
boho
bohóc
bohoc
face
guay
bayhon (?)
eyebrows
chilei
quilay
quiray
eye
matta
matà
mata
nose
ilon
ilong
irong
jaw
apin
aping
aping
mouth
baba
bá-ba
bábá
teeth
nipin
ngipon
ngipon
gums
leghex
lagos
lagus
tongue
dilla
dila
dila
ear
delenghan
dalonggan
doronggan
throat
liogh
liog
chin
queilan
solang (?)
sulang (?)
beard
bonghot
bongot
bongot
shoulder
bagha
abaga
abaga
spine [backbone]
licud
licod
licod
breast
dughan
doghan
dughan
body
tiam
tian
tian
armpit
ilot
iloc
iroc
arm
botchen
bocton; botcon
butcon
elbow
sico
sico
sico
hand
camat
camot
camut
palm of hand
palan
palad [sa camot]
palad [sa camut]
finger
dudlo
todlo
tudlo
fingernail
coco
coco
coco; colo
navel
pusut
posad
posud
penis
utin
otin
otin []
testicles
boto
boto
boto
vagina
billat
bilat
bilat
buttocks
samput
sampot
thigh
paha
paa
paa
knee
tuhud
tohod
tohud
calf of leg
bitis
bitiis
bíti-is
ankle
bolbol
bool bool
boco boco
heel
tiochid
ticód
ticud
sole of foot
lapa lapa
lapa lapa
gold
balaoan
buláoan
bulauan
silver
pilla
pilác
brass
concach
calonggáqui
iron
butan
pothao
puthao
sugarcane
tube
tobó
tubo
honey
deghex
dogos
dugos
wax
talho
talo
talo
salt
acin
asín
asin
wine
tuba nia nipa
toba nga nipa
tuba nga nipa
to eat
macan
pagcaon (?)
pagcaon (?)
hog
babui
baboy
babuy
goat
candin
canding
canding
chicken
monoch
manóc
manuc
pepper
manissa
malisa
cloves
chianche
sangqui
sangqui
cinnamon
mana
mana
mana
ginger
luia
loy-a
luy-a
garlic
laxuna
lasona
lasona
egg
silong
itlog
itlug
cocoanut
lubi
lobí
lubi
vinegar
zlucha
suca
suca
water
tubin
tobig; tubig
tubig
fire
clayo
calayo
calayo
smoke
assu
aso
aso
balances
tinban
timbangan
timbang; timbangan
pearl
mutiara
mutia
mutia
mother-of-pearl
tipay
tipay
tipay
pipe
subin
sobing
subing
rice cakes
tinapai
tinapay
tinapay
good
main
maayo
maopay
knife
capol; sundan
sípol; sondang
sipol; sundang
scissors
catle
catli
catli
to shave
chunthinch
gunting
linen
balandan
balantan
their cloth [i.e., hemp]
abaca
abacá
abacá
hawk’s bell
coloncolon
colongcolong
goronggorong
comb
cutlei
surlay
sodlay
shirt
sabun
sabong (?) [i.e., ornament]
sewing-needle
daghu
dagom
dagum
dog
aian; ydo
——; iro
ayam; ——
scarf [veil]
gapas
gapas [i.e., cotton]
house
ilaga; baiai
——; balay
——; balay
timber
tatamue
tatha (?) [i.e., to split] or pata (?)
[i.e., a piece of wood or bamboo]
tahamis (?)
mat
tagichan
tagicán
taguican
palm-mat
bani
banig
banag
cushion
uliman
olnan, and allied forms
olonan (?)
wooden platters
dulan
dolong
dulang
sun
adlo
arlao
adlao
star
bunthun
bitoon (?)
bitoon (?)
morning
uema
ogma; odma (?)
cup
tagha
tagay
tagay
bow
bossugh
bosog
bosog
arrow
oghun
odyong
odiong
shield
calassan
calasag
calasag
quilted armor
baluti
baloti
dagger
calix; baladao
calis; baladao
caris; baladao
cutlass
campilan
campilan
campilang
spear
bancan
bangcao
bangcao
like
tuan
to-ang
banana
saghin
saguing
saguing
gourd
baghin
bagong
net
pucat; laia
——; laya
raya
small boat
sampan
sampan
sampan
large canes
cauaghan
caoayan
cauayan
small canes
bonbon
bongbong
bongbong []
large boats
balanghai
balañgay
barangay
small boats
boloto
baloto
baloto
crabs
cuban
coboa
fish
ícam; yssida
——; isda
——; isda
a colored fish
panapsapan
panapsápan
panapsapan
a red fish
timuan
tiao (?)
another fish
pilax
pilas
ship
benaoa
bángca
king
raia
hari
hadi
one
uzza
usá
usa
two
dua
doha
duha
three
tolo
toló
tolo
four
upat
opát
upat
five
lima
limá
lima
six
onom
onóm
unum
seven
pitto
pitó
pito
eight
gualu
oaló
ualo
nine
ciam
siàm
siam
ten
polo
napoló
napolo
some of the words present difficulties however, due probably to
error on pigafetta’s part and the obstacles in the method of
communication between peoples the genius of whose respective languages
is entirely distinct. the general visayan word for “man” is
tao or tauo, although mallat gives a
form dala, which may correspond to the lac of pigafetta (but see vol. v, p.
, where the origin of the words lalac,
“man,” and babaye, “woman,”
are given by loarca). babaye (babae)
is the general word for “woman” or “married
woman;” while binibini is given by mallat as the
tagálog equivalent of “girl,” and by santos in his
vocabulario de la lengua tagala (manila, ) as the
equivalent of “influential woman.” liog is
used for both “throat” and “neck.” tian is properly “belly,” and the mistake would
arise naturally in pigafetta pointing to himself when desiring the word
for “body,” which would be construed by the natives to that
particular part toward which he happened to point. boto is used for both the male and female generative organs,
especially the latter, as well as for the testicles. britiis corresponds to both “shin” and “calf
of the leg.” iro denotes also the civet cat.
bulan the equivalent of pigafetta’s bolon is the word for “moon” instead of
“star.” the occurrence of what are today tagálog
forms in pigafetta’s list shows how the various dialects shade
into one another and how the one has retained words that have sunk into
disuse in the other. []
 preceding
this paragraph in the italian ms. (folio b) is the chart of the
island of panilonghon (panisonghon; q.v., p. ). it is given
on folio a of ms. ,, preceded by the words: “below is shown
the islands of panilonghon.”
 the
“roteiro” (stanley, pp. , ) says that the captains
elected in place of those killed at cebú were “joam lopez
[carvalho], who was the chief treasurer” to “be
captain-major of the fleet, and the chief constable of the fleet”
to “be captain of one of the ships; he was named gonzalo vaz
despinosa.” pigafetta makes no mention at all of elcano, who
brought the “victoria” home; both the above captains
remaining with the “trinidad.” when the
“concepcion” was burned, only one hundred and fifteen men
were left for the working of the two ships (see guillemard, ut supra, p. ), although the “roteiro”
(stanley, p. ) says one hundred and eight men, and barros, one
hundred and eighty.
 in eden:
“pauiloghon, where they founde blacke men lyke vnto the
saraſins.” this is the island of panglao and the
“black men” are the negritos. see w. a. reed’s
negritos of zambales, published by department of the interior
“ethnological survey publications” ii, part i (manila,
), which says (p. ) that the only large islands, besides
luzón, inhabited at present by negritos are panay, negros,
mindanao, and paragua, although they do inhabit some of the smaller
islands. the pure type is decreasing through marriage with the bukidnon
or mountain visayans; and (p. ) “so far there is no evidence
that negritos exist on cebu, bohol, samar, and leyte. the negrito
population of the philippines is probably not in excess of ,. the
u. s. census report of  gives to panglao a population of ,,
all civilized. see also census of the philippines, i, pp. ,
reads: “when entering that house, we were preceded by many reed
and palmleaf torches.”
 these two
words are omitted in ms. ,.
 see
crawfurd’s dictionary, pp. , , on the origin and use
of rice in the eastern islands, and the etymology of the native names
for that grain; and census of the philippines, iv.
 instead of
this last clause, ms. , reads: “where he slept with his
principal wife.”
reads: “in the houses of the king.”
reads: “little valleys.”
 cf.
vol. iii, pp. , . []
reads: “boat.”
reads: “calanoa;” and eden: “calauar.”
reads: “one hundred and sixty-six;” and eden:
 albo
(navarrete, iv, p. ) reads as follows when relating the course of
the ships on leaving cebú: “we left subu and sailed
southwest to a latitude of  and three-fourths degrees, between the end
of subu and an island called bohol. toward the western end of subu lies
another island, by name, panilongo, which is inhabited by blacks. that
island and subu contain gold and considerable ginger. the former lies
in  and one-third degrees and subu in  and one-third degrees.
accordingly we left that channel and went  leguas south and anchored
in the island of bohol. there we made two ships of the three, burning
the third, because we had no men. the last-named island lies in  and
one-half degrees. we left bohol and sailed southwest toward quipit, and
anchored at that settlement on the right hand side of a river. on the
northwest and open side are two islets which lie in  and one-half
degrees. we could get no food there, for the people had none, but we
made peace with them. that island of quipit contains a quantity of
gold, ginger, and cinnamon. accordingly, we determined to go in search
