reduce their cost by using swift's premium oleomargarine.
loaf fig cake
light part
½ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
½ cupful sweet milk
½ teaspoonfuls baking-powder
 cupful sugar
½ cupfuls flour
 teaspoonful vanilla
whites of  eggs
cream the oleomargarine and sugar. add the milk, with which
the vanilla has been mixed. sift the baking-powder with the
flour and add gradually. add the whites, well beaten, last.
dark part
½ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
¾ cupful milk
½ teaspoonfuls baking-powder
yolks of  eggs
½ pound of raisins
½ cupfuls sugar
 cupfuls flour
 dessertspoonful each of cinnamon, cloves, allspice, and nutmeg
 pound of figs
cream the oleomargarine and sugar. add the egg-yolks, well
beaten, then the milk. sift the baking-powder and spices with
the flour and add gradually. the raisins should be seeded
and dredged with flour, and the figs should be cut in small
pieces and dredged with flour and added to the batter the
last thing. put in the pan alternate layers of each part and
bake in a loaf.
the italian uses olive oil; the swiss, butter from goat's milk; and
the thrifty american housewife, swift's premium oleomargarine.
[page four]
sugar cookies
 cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
 cupful sour milk
 teaspoonful soda
 cupfuls sugar
 eggs, well beaten
flavoring to taste
flour enough to roll out thin
cream the oleomargarine and sugar. add the eggs, whites and
yolks beaten together. dissolve the soda in the sour milk.
add this and then the flour. roll out thin. just before cutting
out the cookies sift granulated sugar on top and roll it in
slightly, then cut out cookies with cookie-cutter and bake in
a moderate oven.
lemon pie
 cupful sugar
 tablespoonfuls flour
yolks of three eggs
 cupful water
juice and grated rind of  lemon
a lump of swift's premium oleomargarine the size of an egg
put all together in an oatmeal cooker and cook over hot water
until thick. take from the fire and cool a little. line a
deep pie-plate with crust, pour in the lemon mixture, and
bake in a moderate oven until the crust is done. remove
from the oven and have ready the whites of the three eggs,
beaten up stiff, with three level tablespoonfuls of powdered
sugar; spread this meringue smoothly over the pie, return to
the oven, and bake a light brown.
cornbread
¼ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
 cupful sweet milk
 cupful cornmeal
¼ cupful sugar
 cupful flour
 teaspoonfuls baking-powder
 eggs
sift together meal, flour, baking-powder, and sugar. to this
add in order the milk, the egg-yolks well beaten, the oleomargarine
melted and lastly the well-beaten whites of the eggs.
bake in a hot oven for thirty to thirty-five minutes. this is
particularly delicious if just before it is done half a cupful of
cream is poured over the top.
have you tasted swift's premium oleomargarine?
[page five]
oatmeal crackers
¾ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
 cupfuls rolled oats
½ cupful milk
½ teaspoonful soda
½ cupfuls raisins chopped fine
 cupfuls flour
 cupful sugar
 teaspoonful cinnamon
 eggs
a pinch of salt
cream oleomargarine and sugar. add egg-yolks well beaten.
dissolve soda in milk and add next. mix oats, flour, salt,
and cinnamon together well and add. add the raisins last.
beat well and drop with a spoon on to buttered tins and
bake in moderate oven.
english walnut pudding
½ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
 egg
 cupful boiling water
 teaspoonful cinnamon
½ cupful walnuts
 cupful molasses
 teaspoonful soda
 cupfuls flour
½ teaspoonful cloves
½ cupful raisins
beat the egg white and yolk together and add it to the molasses.
dissolve the soda in the boiling water and add that
next. mix flour, cinnamon, and cloves together and add
gradually. add the butterine melted. lastly add the
raisins. steam two and a half hours. serve warm with
sauce made of one cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
stirred until smooth with one cupful powdered sugar. add
one egg, flavor to taste, and beat until smooth.
penoche
¼ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
½ cupfuls rich milk
 cupfuls light-brown sugar
 cupful chopped walnuts
stir together the oleomargarine, milk, and sugar, and cook until it
can be picked up when dropped in cold water. beat until
it thickens and add the walnuts slightly salted. pour in
buttered tins and cut in squares.
ask your grocer for a carton of swift's premium oleomargarine.
[page six]
butter scotch
¾ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
 cupful molasses
 cupfuls sugar
⅓ cupful vinegar
put all together and cook, stirring all the time. cook until
brittle when dropped in cold water. pour into buttered
tins and mark for breaking before it is cold.
ginger bread
½ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
 cupful molasses
 teaspoonful ginger
 teaspoonful cloves
 teaspoonful cinnamon
⅛ teaspoonful nutmeg
 egg, beaten light
½ cupful sugar
 cupful sour milk
 teaspoonful baking soda
 cupfuls flour
mix into a light dough and bake in a flat pan. quick oven.
cookies
½ cupfuls sugar
¾ cupful swift's premium oleomargarine
 cupful sour cream
 eggs
½ teaspoonful soda
 teaspoonful nutmeg
 teaspoonful vanilla
 teaspoonful almond
mix with flour enough to roll thin, and bake in a quick oven.
would you like to reduce your butter bill? then use swift's
premium oleomargarine.
[page seven]
on baking-day
when you wish a fine-grained cake, beat the whites of the
eggs to a stiff foam with a dover egg-beater. if something spongy,
such as an angel cake, is desired, use a wire egg-beater, which
makes a more air-inflated foam.
recipes in the older, much-prized cook-books often call for a
teacupful of yeast. a teacupful liquid yeast is equal to one cake
of compressed yeast.
to remove pecan meats whole, pour boiling water over nuts
and let them stand until cold. then stand the nut on end and
crack with a hammer, striking the small end of the nut.
if beef or mutton drippings are used in making a pie-crust,
beat them to a cream with a teaspoonful of baking-powder and
the juice of half a lemon. this effectually removes all taste.
when a cake sticks to a pan, set it for a few minutes on a
cloth wrung out of cold water. it will then come out in good
shape.
heat the blade of the bread-knife before cutting a loaf of fresh
bread. this prevents the usual breaking and crumbling of the
slices. for cutting hot fudge, first dip the blade of the knife in
boiling water.
nothing is better for pudding molds than jelly tumblers with
light tin covers. one can readily tell when the puddings are
done without removing the covers.
the juice will not boil out of apple or berry pies if you dot
bits of swift's premium oleomargarine near the outer edge.
a little salt in the oven under the baking-tins will prevent
burning on the bottom.
there is nothing more effective for removing the burned
crust from cake or bread than a flat grater. it works evenly
and leaves a smooth surface.
use a wooden potato masher for stirring butter and sugar
together for a cake. it is much quicker than a spoon.
swift's premium oleomargarine is sweet, pure, and clean.
[page eight]
renovating suggestions
to clean a velvet suit, sponge the spots with pure alcohol.
then suspend the suit on a hanger in the bathroom in such a
way that the air can reach all sides of the garment. turn on
the hot water in the tub until the steam fills the room; shut the
door and windows; shut off the water, and let the steam do its
work for an hour. then admit the air, but do not touch the
garment until it is perfectly dry.
to remove shine from woolen goods, use gentle friction
with emery paper. rub just enough to raise the nap, and then
rub it over with a piece of silk.
to mend kid gloves, first buttonhole around the rent not
so close as in a buttonhole; then overcast, taking up the thread
of the buttonhole on the edge, and then draw together.
to clean men's coat collars, rub with a black stocking
saturated with grain alcohol. this will remove the greasy look.
to freshen a thin dress, dissolve two teaspoonfuls of elastic
starch in half a cupful of lukewarm water, and with a soft rag
dampen on the right side, then with a hot iron press on the
wrong side.
to clean grease spots from silk, split a visiting card and
rub the soft internal part on the spot on the wrong side of the
silk. the spot will disappear without taking the gloss off the silk.
to mend lace curtains, take a small piece of net, dip it
and the curtains in hot starch, and apply the patch over the hole.
the patch will adhere when dry, and the repair will show much
less than if the curtains were mended.
to renew veils, dip them in gum-arabic water, and pin
them out to dry as you would a lace curtain. when dry they
will look like new.
to freshen black taffeta or satin, sponge with a cupful of
strong tea to which a little ammonia has been added. then press
on the wrong side over a damp cloth.
to remove perspiration stains, lay the stain over clean
white blotting-paper, and sponge with equal parts of alcohol and
ether mixed. rub dry, then touch lightly with household ammonia.
if this leaves a blur, rub well with powdered french
chalk on the wrong side. the blotting-paper prevents the fluids
from forming a ring around the spot.
[page nine]
house-cleaning hints and helps
to clean linen shades, lay them flat and rub with powdered
bath-brick.
to clean piano keys, rub with muslin dipped in alcohol.
if the keys are very yellow, use a piece of flannel moistened
with cologne water.
to clean books with delicate bindings, which are soiled
from handling, rub with chamois skin dipped in powdered pumice
stone.
to restore straw matting which has become stained
or faded, wash with a strong solution of soda water. use ordinary
baking soda and plenty of swift's pride soap and wash thoroughly,
and when dry it will be found that the spots have all
disappeared and the matting is all one color.
to clean glass vases, tea-leaves moistened with vinegar
will remove the discoloration in glass vases caused by flowers,
such as asters.
to clean windows and mirrors, rub them over with
thin cold starch, let it dry on, and then wipe off with a soft cloth.
this will clean the glass and also give it a brilliant polish.
to remove paint from window glass, use strong hot vinegar.
to remove white spots from furniture, rub first with
oil, and then with slightly diluted alcohol.
to remove stains from an enameled saucepan, fill with
water, add a little chloride of lime, and boil for a few minutes.
to clean willow-ware, wash with salt water, using a brush.
to polish the globes of gas and electric-light fixtures,
wash with water in which a few drops of ammonia have been
dissolved.
to clean tiling, wipe with a soft cloth wrung out in soapy
water. never scrub tiling, as scrubbing or the use of much water
will eventually loosen the cement and dislodge the sections.
to brighten nickel trimmings on a gas stove, wash with
warm water, in which two tablespoonfuls of kerosene have been
stirred.
to save dusting, a piece of cheese cloth about two yards
long placed on the floor in a freshly swept room will save much
of the usual dusting.
[page ten]
laundry helps
a few cents' worth of powdered orris-root put in the wash
water will impart a delicate odor to the clothes.
hot milk is better than hot water to remove fruit stains.
to remove spots from gingham, wet with milk and cover
with common salt. leave for two hours, then rinse thoroughly.
in washing white goods that have become yellow, put a few
drops of turpentine into the water, then lay on the grass to dry
in the strong sunshine.
to make wash silk look like new, put a tablespoonful of
wood alcohol to every quart of water when rinsing and iron
while still damp.
when washing, if the article is badly soiled, use a small
scrubbing brush and scrub the goods over the washboard.
to set green or blue, mauve or purple, soak the articles for
at least ten minutes in alum water before washing them. use an
ounce of alum to a gallon of water. to set brown or tan color,
soak for ten minutes in a solution made of a cupful of vinegar
in a pail of water. black goods and black-and-white goods need
to be soaked in strong salt water, or to have a cupful of turpentine
put into the wash water. yellows, buffs, and tans are made
much brighter by having a cupful of strong, strained coffee put
in the rinsing water.
when ironing fine pieces, instead of sprinkling afresh, take a
piece of muslin, wring it out in cold water, and lay on the ironing
board under the article; press with a warm iron; remove the
wet piece and iron.
when making starch for light clothes use wool soap in the
water. this will give the clothes a glossy appearance and the
irons will not stick.
badly scorched linen may be improved by using the following
solution: boil together well a pint of vinegar, an ounce of
wool soap, four ounces of fuller's earth, and the juice of two
onions. spread this solution over the scorched spots on the linen
and let it dry. afterward wash the garment and the scorch will
disappear.
to keep the clothes-line from twisting, hold the ball of rope
in one hand and wind with the other until a twist appears; then
change ball to the other hand and the twist will disappear. keep
doing this, changing the rope from one hand to the other until
the line is all wound up.
[page eleven]
about house plants
to make ferns grow better, place some thin pieces of raw
beef close to the inside of the pot, between the pot and the soil.
old-fashioned portulaca makes a pretty low-growing green
for a fern dish.
to prevent plants from dropping their buds, give extra good
drainage and systematic but moderate watering.
an infallible wash for destroying the scaly insects that infest
house plants is made as follows: place half a bar of swift's
pride laundry soap in a deep saucer and pour kerosene around
it. let this stand for about a week until the soap has absorbed
the oil. then make a strong lather of this soap and with it
wash the plants. after which spray them with clear water until
clean.
to destroy aphis, shower foliage of infested plant on both
sides with strong tobacco tea, or, if the plant be small enough,
immerse it in this tea.
insects in the earth of a potted plant may be destroyed by
pouring over the soil a glass of water in which a pinch of mustard
has been stirred.
if an asparagus fern turns yellow, repot it, giving it a strong
loam enriched with one-fifth very old and finely crumbed manure
and add a little coarse sand. give the fern only an hour
or two of sunlight each day. water when it looks dry, but do
not let it stand in any water that may have run through into the
saucer.
before putting plants in a wooden window box whitewash
the inside of the box. this not only keeps the box from rotting,
but prevents insects.
if sprays of growing nasturtiums are broken off in the late
summer and placed in a bowl of water they will root and grow
all winter.
[page twelve]
how to use the cheaper
cuts of meat
much time has been given in the last few years to the study
of foods, their necessary proportions, and the manner of cooking
them. educators and scientists have alike agreed that this knowledge
ought to be disseminated. on the part of the public also
there has been a general awakening in this regard. there has
been a wide demand especially from those of limited incomes for
information on the purchase and preparation of foods. to meet
this demand books have been published and articles have appeared
in the various women's papers giving directions for living at all
sorts of prices, from the extremely low one, "how to live on
ten cents a day," to the normal one which requires the preparation
of appetizing and satisfying dinners at a nominal cost.
in order to accomplish living comfortably at small cost it is
evident that one must understand the comparative values of foods,
so as to select those which at low prices furnish the necessary
nourishment, and, also, be able to cook them in an appetizing
way which will conserve the nourishment. meat is a necessity
to most people. yet much of the present expense in the purchase
of meat is needless and unwise. many pieces of meat of
the best quality are sold at low rates because not in shapes to
be served as roasting or broiling pieces. these serve well for
entrees or made-up dishes. other pieces which are tough but
well flavored can, in the hands of an educated cook, be sent to
the table as tender, palatable, sightly and nutritious as the prime
cuts. it is to show some methods of preparing these cheaper
cuts of meat in an appetizing manner that the following explanation
of the processes of cooking and the accompanying recipes
are given.
meat is cooked, first, to aid digestion; secondly, to develop
new flavors and render it more palatable.
for cooking there are three essentials besides the material to
be cooked—namely, heat, air, and moisture, the latter in the form
of water, either found in the food or added to it.
the combined effect of heat and moisture swells and bursts
starch grains, hardens albumen, and softens fiber.
albumen is a substance like the white of an egg. it exists
in the juices of meat and contains much nourishment. if allowed
to escape, the nourishment is lost and the meat is hard.
therefore we have the first general rule for the cooking of meat,
namely:
to retain the albumen, the outside of each piece of meat
should be seared or sealed at once before the cooking is continued.
[page thirteen]
albumen is coagulated and hardened by intense heat.
therefrom comes the second general rule, namely:
intense heat hardens and toughens meat, while a soft moist
heat softens the fiber.
from these general rules we pass to the specific methods of
cooking meat, which are nine in number—broiling, roasting, baking,
frying, sauteing, steaming, boiling, stewing, or fricasseeing.
broiling and roasting are practically the same, the chief difference
being in the time employed. both mean to expose one
side of the meat to the fire while the other is exposed to the
air. by this method the meat is quickly seared and the nutritive
juices retained. meat cooked in this way is richer and finer in
flavor.
baking means cooking in a pan in the oven of a stove, and
in these days of hurry has largely superseded roasting.
frying is the cooking by immersion in hot fat at a temperature
of  degrees fahrenheit. there must be sufficient fat to
wholly cover each article. this method is employed for croquettes,
oysters, etc., and is less injurious to digestion than
sauteing.
sauteing is cooking in a small quantity of fat, as an omelet
or hashed browned potatoes are cooked. this is the least wholesome
of all methods of cooking meat, and is often held directly
responsible for indigestion.
steaming is an admirable method of cooking tough meats or
hams. modern housewives use a "cooker," which comes for
this purpose, but the old-fashioned perforated steamer over a
kettle of boiling water is also good.
boiling is one of the simplest methods of cooking the cheaper
cuts of meat. properly employed, it consists in plunging the
whole piece of meat in a large kettle of rapidly boiling water.
the meat should be entirely covered by the water, which should
continue to boil rapidly for five minutes after the meat has been
immersed in it. the temperature of the water should then be
immediately lowered to  degrees fahrenheit. if one has not
a cooking thermometer, one has only to remember that water
boils at  degrees fahrenheit, and it will easily be seen that
 degrees is considerably below the boiling point.
stewing or fricasseeing is really cooking slowly in a sauce
after the meat has first been browned in a little hot fat. if the
mixture is allowed to boil the meat will be tough and shriveled,
but if properly stewed it will be soft and easy to digest. fricasseeing
is the most economical of all methods of cooking meat, as
there is very little loss in weight, and what is lost from the meat
is found in the sauce.
[page fourteen]
braising is a method much used in france, and is a cross
between boiling and baking. it is done in a covered pan in the
oven. the meat is first browned in a little hot fat and then
placed in a pan which is partly filled with stock or water. the
pan is covered closely and set in a hot oven. after ten minutes
the temperature of the oven is reduced to a very low point, and
the meat cooks slowly as the stock in the pan evaporates. this
method is the best for inferior pieces which require long, slow
cooking. it is an excellent method of cooking veal. meat which
is lacking in flavor can be flavored by adding vegetables or herbs
to the stock in the pan.
different cuts of meat require different methods of cooking
to bring about the best results. the following diagram and the
accompanying suggestions for proper cuts for certain methods of
cooking are those given by a prominent teacher in one of the
leading domestic science schools in the united states.
chuck
ribs
loin
rump
round
hind shank
flank
navel end
clod
fore shank
brisket.
[page fifteen]
the practical
value and use of
fireless cookers
[page sixteen]
the object of the following article is to
present in simple and convenient form
the history of the growth of fireless cooking
and its advantages over the ordinary
methods, so that those women who have
had no experience in the management of
fireless cookers may be encouraged to try
them, and those adventurous women who
experimented with the earlier cookers and
met with disappointment may be induced
to try again.
such eminent authorities as linda hull
larned, author of a series of cook-books;
margaret j. mitchell, instructor of domestic
science at drexel, pa., and formerly
dietitian of manhattan institute
state hospital, n. y.; mrs. runyon,
manager of the lunchroom in the boston
chamber of commerce; and miss armstrong,
director of the drexel institute
lunchroom—all advocate the use of fireless
cookers, and unite in the assertion
that it has invariably been found that a
good understanding of their management
has resulted in success followed inevitably
by enthusiasm.
[page seventeen]
the practical value and use of
fireless cookers
this twentieth century is the age of progress in many directions,
but most of all in domestic science. never
before has so much attention been devoted to the home.
journalists are giving columns of space to this topic.
churches are directing their efforts to the betterment of the home.
women's clubs and charitable organizations have taken up the
study of the home. the most important result of all this action
and thought is the widespread awakening to the fact that the
social and moral standing of the home is directly dependent upon
its hygienic and economic condition.
in view of this fact, the national federation of women's
clubs has practically covered the united states with their county,
state, and national committees on housekeeping. they know
that bad cooking in the home means unsatisfied stomachs, to
gratify whose cravings the saloons are filled; it means anemic
children, a physical condition that tends to produce criminals; it
means premature funerals. to remedy these evils, churches,
journalists, philanthropists, clubs are alike working, and all are
working along the same lines—that is, better home furnishings,
better fuels, better utensils, more efficient, more economic, and
less laborious methods of housekeeping. they have not only
sought and introduced new inventions, but they have studied the
past and adapted and bettered the old.
among the adaptations of the old ideas with new and modern
improvements is the fireless cooker. ages ago norwegian
and german peasant women, obliged to be away from the house
all day working in the fields, knew the secret of bringing food
to the boiling point and then continuing its cooking and keeping
it hot by packing it in an improvised box of hay. in the
evening when the women returned, weary and worn from their
field labor, there was the family dinner all ready to serve.
german club women were the first to see the value of this
idea adapted to the needs of the german working class of the
present day. these german club women revived the hay boxes
and distributed numbers of them among poor families and began
an educational campaign on their use. the american manufacturer,
ever on the alert for ideas, was quick to perceive the economic
and commercial advantages of making such an appliance
in an up-to-date manner, and so to-day we have on the market
numerous fireless cookers.
[page eighteen]
the principle of fireless cooking, though it bears the difficult
name of recaloration, is simple enough. it is merely the retention
of heat through complete insulation, just as we retain cold
in the ice-box by complete insulation. in the first case, a material
which is a poor conductor of heat is interposed between the kettle
of hot food and the surrounding atmosphere to prevent radiation
or the escape of heat into the surrounding air. in the second
case, a poor conductor of heat is placed between the ice and the
warmer surrounding atmosphere to prevent the contact of the
atmosphere with the ice and the consequent equalization of temperatures.
a vacuum is an excellent non-conductor of heat and
is employed in the thermos bottles advertised for use on automobile
trips, but a vacuum is expensive and difficult to obtain,
which accounts for the high price of thermos bottles. the effort
has been to find some insulating agent within the means of
the average housewife. this has now been done in the metal-lined
cookers.
the explanation of the cooking principle is equally simple.
ordinarily we heat food to a certain temperature, say, the boiling
point, and then we leave it over the fire for some time, not
to get hotter, that would be impossible, but to keep it at the same
degree of heat, and to do this we must, on account of radiation
into the surrounding atmosphere, keep on supplying heat. in
the fireless cooker the heat once generated is conserved, and there
is no need to add thereto.
herein lies the economy in fuel. you have only to burn
gas long enough to bring the food to the boiling point, and the
fireless cooker does the rest. you can put dinner on to cook, and
go to work, to the theatre, to visit a friend, or read, or sew, without
giving your meal any further attention till time to serve it.
this sounds like a fairy tale, but it is absolutely true.
by the fireless cooker you save nine-tenths of the fuel, and
ninety-nine hundredths of your temper, your time, and your labor.
you do not become perspiring and cross in a hot kitchen.
you do not have scorched pots and kettles to scrape and scour
and wash.
another point in favor of fireless cooking is that it is attended
by absolutely no odors. such vegetables as onions and
cabbage can be cooked without any one's suspecting they are in
the house.
the economy in using the fireless cooker is not confined
solely to a saving in gas and labor. there is also an actual and
great economy in food, for there is almost no waste in this method
of cooking. take for example a -pound piece of beef from the
round. put this in the kettle of the fireless cooker with a pint of
[page nineteen]
water for each pound of meat. heat it on the gas range slowly,
taking about twenty minutes to bring it to the boiling point.
then, according to directions, place it in the fireless cooker and
finish the cooking. when it is done and tender, it will be found
that there is only a minute loss in weight; to be exact,  ounces
for  pounds. you bought  pounds of meat and have to serve
on your table  pounds and  ounces. you could not make any
such showing if you had cooked the meat on a gas or coal range.
four pounds and  ounces, however, is not all that you
have to serve. you originally added to your meat  pints of
water. a little of this evaporated or cooked away in the twenty
minutes primary cooking on the stove. all the rest is retained,
for there is absolutely no evaporation in a fireless cooker. this
water has added to it the nutritive value and flavor acquired
from the meat. so besides your  pounds and  ounces of meat
you have over  pints of rich soup stock which has cost you absolutely
nothing, as it is a by-product of the system of fireless
cooking.
"but," objects some one, "the meat cooked in such wise
will have lost all its juice and flavor." on the contrary, there is
a distinct gain in the matter of flavor in fireless cookery. we absolutely
know this to be so, for we have had various cuts of
meat, especially the cheaper cuts, cooked in a fireless cooker and
the dishes so prepared have been submitted to competent judges;
the opinion was unanimous that there was a real difference between
the flavor of meats so cooked and that of corresponding
cuts cooked after the usual methods, and that the delicacy and
richness of flavor lay with those meats cooked by the fireless
method.
when one understands the principles of cookery this richness
of flavor of meats cooked by the fireless method is not surprising.
every one knows the proverbial deliciousness of french cookery.
the special peculiarity of the french cuisine is the long, slow
simmering of meats in closely covered earthen pots called casseroles.
the principle is essentially that of the fireless cooker,
but the casserole not being insulated, the french cook is obliged
to keep on supplying a sufficient degree of heat to keep the casserole
warm and its contents simmering.
examples of fireless cooking with which many persons are
familiar by experience or hearsay are the foods cooked in primitive
ways, whose deliciousness is generally ascribed to the "hunger
sauce" that accompanies outdoor cookery. among such examples
are the burying of the saucepan in a hole in the ground, the
cooking of food by dropping heated stones into the mixture, and[page twenty]
the clambake known among the narragansett indians. in all
these cases we have the principle of the fireless cooker—i. e.,
closely-covered food slowly cooked at low temperature. indeed,
one fireless cooker is constructed directly on the principle employed
in the new england clambake, and every one knows the
deliciousness of food so cooked has become proverbial.
by the fireless cooker the cheaper cuts of meat can be cooked
so that they are delicious, appetizing, tender. there is here a
distinct saving in money, for by the employment of the fireless
method of cooking, the cheaper cuts of meat can be made to serve
all the purposes of the higher-priced pieces. further, if the meats
are stewed, boiled, or steamed, you also acquire at no cost whatever
as many pints of delicious soup stock, less one, as you have
pounds of meat.
let us now recapitulate the advantages of fireless cooking:—
a fireless cooker saves money
. because by its use cheaper meats can be made to answer
as well as higher-priced cuts.
. because out of a given quantity of raw material you get,
after the cooking is done, more actual food than by any other
method.
a fireless cooker saves fuel
you have only to burn your gas twenty minutes for a -pound
piece of meat for fireless cooking, whereas by the usual
method you would burn the gas two to four hours, according to
the way you desired the meat cooked.
a fireless cooker saves time
because you have only to watch the meat until it boils. by
the usual method you must attend to it all the hours it is on
cooking.
a fireless cooker saves irritation and worry
for by this method of cooking the housewife knows that the
food cannot burn or overcook.
a fireless cooker adds to the intellectual
expansion and the pleasures of
the family
because it gives the mother time from her kitchen to oversee
the development of her children, and to share with them and
their father their pleasures and interests.
[page twenty-one]
to the wage-earning woman
the fireless cooker is a positive godsend. she can put food into
the cooker before going to work, and return to find her meal all
ready.
if the housewife lives in the city
and has to serve dinner at night all the preliminary cooking can
be done at noon, and the meal placed in the fireless cooker till
evening.
to the bachelor girl
who lives by means of a kitchenette, and must do her cooking
in what is at once parlor, bedroom and kitchen, what a blessing
is the absence of heat and odors that the fireless cooker assures.
in conclusion
we quote from a bulletin published by the university of illinois,
in which a study is made of the methods of roasting and cooking
meats. the authors found that there was no advantage in cooking
meat in a very hot oven ( degrees fahrenheit), but rather
a difficulty to keep it from burning; that in an oven which was
about  degrees fahrenheit the meat cooked better; and that
in an aladdin oven, which kept the meat at  degrees fahrenheit,
it cooked best of all—that is, it was of more uniform character
all through, more juicy and more highly flavored. these
findings point to an advantage in fireless cooking, and miss
mitchell asserts that practical experience bears it out. with regard
to meats cooked in water in the cooker, miss mitchell asserts
that experience has shown that they become well done and
are more tender than when boiled, showing that the temperatures
necessary to reach that degree of cooking are obtained even
in the center of a large piece of meat, without toughening or
hardening the outside of the meat, as is done when more intense
heat is applied.
[page twenty-two]
recipes
the following recipes are for the cheaper cuts of meat exclusively,
and employ one or another of the preceding methods.
note that in all the recipes the two general rules for tender and
juicy meat are observed. the outside of the meat is first quickly
seared over to prevent the escape of the juices, and after the first
five minutes the heat is reduced so as not to harden the albumen.
boiled or fricasseed meats should cook slowly. if meat is boiled
at a gallop the connective tissue is destroyed, the meat falls from
the bones in strings, and is hard and leathery.
for stews, meat en casserole, or in any fashion where water
is used in the cooking, select the round (), either upper or
under. for boiling, the clod () or the round () or the
extreme lower piece of (). for rolled steak, mock fillet,
steak à la flamande, or beefsteak pie, the flank steak () is
best. for cheap stews use (). for beef à la mode, in
a large family use a thick slice of the round (), for a small
family the clod (). for soup, use the shin or leg. for beef
tea, mince meat, and beef loaf, the neck is best. the chuck ()
is used only for roasting or baking, and is good value only for a
large family. () and () are the standing ribs and carve to the
best advantage. the aitch or pin bone (in ) is a desirable roast
for a large family. () is the loin, the choicest part of the
animal. from it come the fillet or tenderloin, the sirloin, and
the porterhouse steaks. () is the rump, from which come
good steaks for broiling.
beef cannelon with tomato sauce
(one of the nicest and easiest of the cheap dishes)
use flank steak ()
 pound uncooked beef chopped fine
 cupful cold boiled potatoes
 teaspoonful salt
 egg unbeaten
¼ teaspoonful white pepper
½ cupful swift's beef extract
 tablespoonful swift's premium oleomargarine
mix together beef, potatoes, salt, and pepper, and stir in egg
last. form into a roll  inches long. roll this in a piece
of white paper which has been oiled on both sides. place
in a baking-pan and add the beef extract and the oleomargarine.
bake half an hour, basting twice over the paper.
swift's premium oleomargarine reduces the cost of good living.
[page twenty-three]
to serve beef cannelon, remove the paper, place the roll on the
platter, and pour over it
tomato sauce
 tablespoonful swift's premium oleomargarine
 cupful strained tomatoes
 teaspoonful onion juice
 tablespoonful flour
¼ teaspoonful white pepper
 bay-leaf
add onion, bay leaf, salt and pepper to tomatoes. rub the oleomargarine
and flour together and place in inner kettle of oatmeal
cooker, set over the fire, add the tomato, and stir until it
boils. then place the kettle over hot water in the lower
half of the oatmeal cooker, and cook so for ten minutes,
when it is ready to serve.
spanish minced beef in meat box
(very pretty and palatable)
use any of the cheaper cuts.
the filling
 tablespoonful swift's premium oleomargarine
 onion chopped fine
 sweet peppers cut in strips
 tomatoes peeled, cut in halves and seeds squeezed out
½ teaspoonful salt
make the filling first. put the oleomargarine in upper half of an
oatmeal kettle, add onion and peppers, and simmer gently for
twenty minutes.
then add the tomato halves cut into three or four pieces each
and cook twenty minutes longer. then add salt and pepper
and set over hot water in lower half of kettle to keep hot
till wanted. now make the
meat box
 pounds uncooked beef chopped fine
 egg unbeaten
 teaspoonful salt
¼ teaspoonful pepper
work all well together. form into a box whose sides are about
an inch thick. place this box on a piece of oiled paper in
the bottom of a baking-pan and bake in a quick oven for
thirty minutes, basting twice with melted oleomargarine.
to serve, lift box carefully, and place on platter and pour the
filling into the center, and send at once to the table.
swift's premium oleomargarine is a delicious, wholesome spread
for bread.
[page twenty-four]
beef à la mode
use clod () or under round ()
the day before the beef is to be served rub it all over with the
following, well mixed together:—
½ teaspoonful ground cloves
 teaspoonful ground ginger
½ teaspoonful ground allspice
½ teaspoonful ground cinnamon
½ teaspoonful white pepper
then sprinkle the beef with about two tablespoonfuls vinegar
and let stand overnight. next day put in the bottom of the
roasting pan:—
 cupful small white button onions (chopped onion will do)
 cupful carrot cut in dice
½ teaspoonful celery-seed
 bay-leaf
 cupfuls swift's beef extract or of stock
 tablespoonfuls gelatine that has been soaked in cold water for
half an hour
lay the meat on the vegetables in the pan, cover closely, and set
in an exceedingly hot oven until the meat has browned a
little; then reduce the temperature of the oven, and cook
very slowly for four hours, basting frequently.
serve garnished with the vegetables. make a brown sauce from
the stock left in the pan.
this is a very good way to prepare meat in warm weather, as
the spices enable it to be kept well for over a week. it is
excellent served cold with
creamed horseradish sauce
 tablespoonfuls grated horseradish with the vinegar drained off
¼ teaspoonful salt
 tablespoonfuls thick cream
yolk of  egg
add the salt and egg-yolk to the horseradish and mix thoroughly;
whip the cream stiff, and fold it in carefully and send at
once to table.
have you seen swift's premium oleomargarine? its appearance
is appetizing.
[page twenty-five]
boiled beef
use cuts from (), (), (), ()
put the trimmings and suet of the beef into a large kettle and
fry out the fat.
remove the cracklings or scraps and into the hot fat put the
meat and turn quickly until it is red on all sides.
cover completely with boiling water and boil rapidly for five
minutes, then turn down the gas or remove kettle to back
of coal range so that the water cannot possibly boil again,
and cook fifteen minutes to each pound of meat.
one hour before it is done add one tablespoonful salt and one-quarter
teaspoonful pepper.
when done garnish with watercress, or boiled cabbage, or vegetables.
the liquor in which the meat was boiled can be saved for soup,
or made into brown sauce to serve with it.
left-over boiled beef may be served cold cut in thin slices, or
made into croquettes, or into meat and potato roll, or into
various warmed-over dishes.
steak en casserole
use a round steak ()  inch thick
 pounds uncooked steak cut in pieces  inches square
 cupful small white button onions
 tablespoonful chopped parsley
½ cupful carrot cut in dice
½ cupful white turnip cut in dice
¼ teaspoonful celery-seed
 teaspoonful salt
¼ teaspoonful white pepper
 cupfuls swift's beef extract or of stock boiling hot
cover the bottom of the casserole with a layer of the mixed
vegetables.
put in an iron frying-pan over the fire to heat. when hot, rub
over the bottom with a piece of swift's premium oleomargarine.
lay in the pieces of steak and brown quickly on both
sides. remove them from the frying-pan and arrange on the
vegetables in the casserole. cover them with the remaining
vegetables. sprinkle over the celery-seed, salt, and pepper,
and then pour the hot stock over all. cover the dish and
bake for one hour in a quick oven.
steak en casserole should be sent to the table in the same dish
in which it is cooked. the steak should be brown and
tender, the vegetables slightly brown, and the stock nearly
all absorbed.
swift's premium oleomargarine is u. s. government inspected
and passed.
[page twenty-six]
beef loaf
use cuts from chuck () or the round ()
 pounds uncooked meat chopped fine
 cupfuls bread-crumbs
 tablespoonfuls chopped parsley
 level teaspoonful pepper
 eggs unbeaten
 large onion chopped fine
 rounding teaspoonfuls salt
mix meat and onion. add the dry ingredients next. mix well,
then add the eggs. pack all down hard in a square bread-pan
so the loaf will take the form of the pan.
bake for two hours in a moderately quick oven, basting every
fifteen minutes with hot swift's beef extract or hot stock.
when done, set away in the pan until cold.
to serve, turn out on a platter and cut in thin slices and serve
with catsup or with cream horseradish sauce. recipe for
the latter is given under "beef à la mode."
little beef cakes
use any of the cheaper cuts
 pound uncooked beef chopped fine
 tablespoonful swift's premium oleomargarine
 tablespoonful flour
½ teaspoonful salt
 tablespoonful grated onion
 cupfuls beef extract or stock
 teaspoonful kitchen bouquet
¼ teaspoonful white pepper
shape the meat into little cakes. put the oleomargarine in a frying-pan,
and when hot lay in the cakes and brown quickly on
both sides. then remove the cakes.
into the oleomargarine left in the pan put the flour and brown.
then add the stock gradually, stirring all the time so there
will be no lumps. when smooth add the seasonings. then
lay in the beef cakes, cover, and cook slowly for five minutes.
serve at once with the sauce poured over them.
have you tried swift's premium oleomargarine? it is worth trying.
[page twenty-seven]
curry balls
use any of the cheaper cuts
 pound uncooked beef chopped fine
 tablespoonfuls swift's premium oleomargarine
 tablespoonful flour
 level teaspoonful salt
 teaspoonful curry-powder
 onion chopped
 cupful strained tomatoes
¼ teaspoonful white pepper
make the meat into little balls. put one tablespoon oleomargarine
in frying-pan, and in it cook the onion slowly without browning
it until the onion is soft. then add the curry-powder
and meat balls, and shake the pan over a quick fire for ten
minutes.
put the second tablespoonful oleomargarine in another frying-pan,
and when hot add to it the flour. stir well, then add the salt,
pepper and tomato. let come to a boil and then pour over
the meat balls. cover and cook slowly for five minutes.
curry balls are nicest served with boiled rice.
smothered beef with corn pudding
use any of the cheaper cuts
 pounds uncooked beef chopped fine
 level teaspoonful salt
 tablespoonfuls swift's premium oleomargarine
¼ teaspoonful pepper
this meat should be free from fat. have ready an iron pan
very hot. put the chopped meat in it and set in a very hot
oven for fifteen minutes, stirring it once or twice. then
add the oleomargarine, salt and pepper, and serve at once with
corn pudding
 can corn
 cupful milk
 level teaspoonful salt
 teaspoonful baking-powder
¼ teaspoonful white pepper
 eggs
¾ cupfuls flour
mix corn with milk, salt and pepper. add the yolks, well
beaten. sift the flour with the baking-powder and add it
gradually. lastly, fold in the well-beaten whites of the
eggs. bake in a quick oven for thirty minutes.
the high price of butter has no terror for users of swift's premium
oleomargarine.
[page twenty-eight]
beefsteak pie
use the flank steak () or round ()
 pounds uncooked meat cut in inch cubes
 cupful flour
 tablespoonful parsley chopped fine
¼ pound suet freed of membrane and chopped fine
 onion chopped fine
 cupful swift's beef extract or stock boiling hot
 teaspoonful salt
¼ teaspoonful pepper
put meat in deep pudding-dish and sprinkle over it parsley,
onion, salt and pepper.
to the suet add the flour, a pinch of salt, and sufficient ice water
to moisten, but not to make wet. knead a little until it
can be rolled out in a crust large enough to cover the top
of the pudding-dish.
pour the boiling stock over the meat. spread the crust over it
and cut a slit in the top. brush over with milk and bake in
a moderate oven one and a quarter hours.
serve in same dish with a napkin folded around it.
braised beef
use inch thick slice from under round ()
½ cupful onion chopped
½ cupful carrot cut in dice
½ cupful turnip cut in dice
½ cupful celery cut in ½-inch lengths
 stem parsley
 peppercorns
 cloves
 bay-leaf
 teaspoonful salt
 cupfuls swift's beef extract
rub the slice of meat with flour. have ready bacon or pork fat
very hot in frying-pan. lay in the meat and brown quickly
on both sides.
spread the seasonings and vegetables over the bottom of a baking-pan.
lay the browned meat upon them; add the
swift's beef extract; cover, and bake three hours in very
slow oven, basting every fifteen minutes.
to serve, lay meat in center of the platter. place vegetables
around it. make a brown sauce with the liquor left in pan
and pour over the vegetables.
use swift's premium oleomargarine on your table and for cooking.
[page twenty-nine]
brown beef stew with dumplings
use bony end shoulder () or veiny piece (lower )
 pounds uncooked beef cut in inch cubes
 tablespoonfuls flour
 teaspoonful kitchen bouquet
 small carrot cut in dice
¼ teaspoonful pepper
 teaspoonful salt
 ounces of suet
 cupfuls swift's beef extract or of stock
 onion
 bay-leaf
roll the meat cubes in one tablespoonful of the flour. put suet
in frying-pan and shake over fire until melted. remove the
crackling, put in the meat cubes and turn till they are
slightly browned on all sides. remove the meat.
into the fat in the pan stir the second tablespoonful of flour;
mix and add gradually the stock, stirring all the while so
there will be no lumps. when smooth, return the meat to
the pan, add the vegetables and seasonings. cover the pan,
draw to the back of the coal range, or reduce the flame of
the gas so that the stew will not boil, and let it simmer for
one and one-half hours.
ten minutes before serving make the
dumplings
 cupfuls flour
 rounding teaspoonful baking-powder
½ level teaspoonful salt
⅔ cupful milk
sift flour, baking-powder, and salt together. add the milk.
take to fire and drop the mixture by spoonfuls all over the
stew. cover and cook slowly for ten minutes without once
removing the cover.
to serve, lift the dumplings carefully and lay around the edge of
the platter; place stew in the center, and over it pour the
sauce.
wherever butter is specified in a recipe use a slightly smaller
quantity of swift's premium oleomargarine, it costs less and is just as
good.
[page thirty]
timetable for baking
beans (if prepared by soaking and boiling),  to  hrs.
beef sirloin or rib, rare, weight  pounds,  hr.  min.
beef sirloin or rib, well done, weight  pounds,  hr.  min.
beef rump, rare, weight  pounds,  hr.  min.
biscuit raised,  to  min.
biscuits, baking-powder,  to  min.
bread, white loaf,  to  min.
bread, graham loaf,  to  min.
cake, layer,  to  min.
cake, loaf,  to  min.
cake, sponge,  to  min.
chicken,  to  pounds, ½ to  hrs.
cookies,  to  min.
custard (baked in cups),  to  min.
duck, domestic,  to ½ hrs.
duck, wild,  to  min.
fish, thick,  to  pounds,  to  min.
fish, small,  to  min.
gingerbread,  to  min.
lamb leg, well done, ½ to  hrs.
mutton, ½ to  hrs.
pork, well done,  pounds,  hrs.
potatoes,  to  min.
puddings, rice, bread,  to  min.
veal leg, well done, per pound,  min.
timetable for boiling
asparagus,  to  min.
beans, shell,  to ½ hrs.
beans, string,  to  min.
beets, young,  to  min.
beets, old,  to  hrs.
brown bread, steamed,  hrs.
cabbage,  to  min.
carrots,  hr.
cauliflower,  to  min.
chickens, young,  to  pounds,  to ¼ hrs.
corn, green,  min.
corned beef, gentle simmering,  to  hrs.
eggs, soft cooked (in water which does not boil),  to  min.
eggs, hard cooked (in water which does not boil),  to  min.
ham, weight  to  pounds,  to  hrs.
onions,  to  min.
rice in fast boiling water,  min.
smoked tongue,  hrs.
timetable for frying
bacon,  to  min.
fritters or doughnuts,  to  min.
croquettes,  to  min.
breaded chops,  to  min.
smelts,  to  min.
small fish,  to  min.
[page thirty-one]
index
baking-day helps, 
beef à la mode, 
beef cannelon, 
beef loaf, 
beefsteak pie, 
boiled beef, 
braised beef, 
brown beef stew, 
butter scotch, 
cookies, 
cornbread, 
corn pudding, 
cream horseradish sauce, 
curry balls, 
dumplings, 
english walnut pudding, 
fireless cooker, the practical value and use of, -
ginger bread, 
house-cleaning hints, 
house-plant suggestions, 
how to use the cheaper cuts of meat, -
illustration showing standard cuts of beef, 
laundry helps, 
lemon pie, 
little beef cakes, 
loaf fig cake, 
oatmeal crackers, 
oleomargarine, swift's premium, foot notes
oleomargarine, the truth about, 
penoche, 
renovating suggestions, 
recipes, -, -
smothered beef with corn pudding, 
spanish minced beef, 
steak en casserole, 
sugar cookies, 
timetables (baking, boiling, frying), 
tomato sauce, 
truth about oleomargarine, 
transcriber's note:
both "to-day" and "today" appear in the original text. this has not
been changed.
the following corrections have been made to the text:
p. : "dopping" to "dropping" (dropping their buds)
p. : "fahrenheat" to "fahrenheit" (at  degrees fahrenheit)
p. : "a la" to "à la" ("à la flamande" and "à la mode")
p. : "try" to "fry" (fry out the fat)
p. : missing close bracket added (bony end shoulder () or veiny piece)
******* this file should be named -h.txt or -h.zip *******
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/////
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
