with a known visual quality which is thereafter enlarged
by adding on qualities apprehended by the other
senses does not rest upon experience; it rests upon
making experience conform to the notion that every
experience must be a cognitive noting. as long as the
visual stimulus operates as a stimulus on its own account,
there is no apprehension, no noting, of color or
light at all. to much the greater portion of sensory
stimuli we react in precisely this wholly non-cognitive
way. in the attitude of suspended response in which
consequences are anticipated, the direct stimulus becomes
a sign or index of something else—and thus matter
of noting or apprehension or acquaintance, or
whatever term may be employed. this difference (together,
of course, with the consequences which go with
it) is the difference which the natural event of
knowing makes to the natural event of direct organic
stimulation. it is no change of a reality into an
unreality, of an object into something subjective; it
is no secret, illicit, or epistemological transformation;
it is a genuine acquisition of new and distinctive features
through entering into relations with things with
which it was not formerly connected—namely, possible
and future things.
but, replies some one so obsessed with the epistemological
point of view that he assumes that the prior
account is a rival epistemology in disguise, all this involves
no change in reality, no difference made to
reality. water was all the time all the things it is
ever found out to be. its real nature has not been altered
by knowing it; any such alteration means a mis-knowing.
in reply let it be said,—once more and finally,—there
is no assertion or implication about the real
object or the real world or the reality. such an assumption
goes with that epistemological universe of
discourse which has to be abandoned in an empirical
universe of discourse. the change is of a real object.
an incident of the world operating as a physiologically
direct stimulus is assuredly a reality. responded to,
it produces specific consequences in virtue of the response.
water is not drunk unless somebody drinks it;
it does not quench thirst unless a thirsty person drinks
it—and so on. consequences occur whether one is
aware of them or not; they are integral facts in experience.
but let one of these consequences be anticipated
and let it, as anticipated, become an indispensable
element in the stimulus, and then there is a known
object. it is not that knowing produces a change,
but that it is a change of the specific kind described.
a serial process, the successive portions of which are
as such incapable of simultaneous occurrence, is telescoped
and condensed into an object, a unified inter-reference
of contemporaneous properties, most of
which express potentialities rather than completed
data.
because of this change, an object possesses truth or
error (which the physical occurrence as such never
has); it is classifiable as fact or fantasy; it is of a sort
or kind, expresses an essence or nature, possesses implications,
etc., etc. that is to say, it is marked by
specifiable logical traits not found in physical occurrences
as such. because objective idealisms have seized
upon these traits as constituting the very essence of
reality is no reason for proclaiming that they are
ready-made features of physical happenings, and
hence for maintaining that knowing is nothing but an
appearance of things on a stage for which "consciousness"
supplies the footlights. for only the epistemological
predicament leads to "presentations" being
regarded as cognitions of things which were
previously unpresented. in any empirical situation of
everyday life or of science, knowledge signifies something
stated or inferred of another thing. visible water
is not a more less erroneous presentation of ho, but
ho is a knowledge about the thing we see, drink, wash
with, sail on, and use for power.
a further point and the present phase of discussion
terminates. treating knowledge as a presentative relation
between the knower and object makes it necessary
to regard the mechanism of presentation as constituting
the act of knowing. since things may be presented
in sense-perception, in recollection, in imagination
and in conception, and since the mechanism in every
one of these four styles of presentation is sensory-cerebral
the problem of knowing becomes a mind-body
problem. the psychological, or physiological, mechanism
of presentation involved in seeing a chair,
remembering what i ate yesterday for luncheon, imagining
the moon the size of a cart wheel, conceiving a
mathematical continuum is identified with the operation
of knowing. the evil consequences are twofold. the
problem of the relation of mind and body has become
a part of the problem of the possibility of knowledge
in general, to the further complication of a matter
already hopelessly constrained. meantime the actual
process of knowing, namely, operations of controlled
observation, inference, reasoning, and testing, the only
process with intellectual import, is dismissed as irrelevant
to the theory of knowing. the methods of
knowing practised in daily life and science are excluded
from consideration in the philosophical theory
of knowing. hence the constructions of the latter
become more and more elaborately artificial because
there is no definite check upon them. it would be
easy to quote from epistemological writers statements
to the effect that these processes (which supply the
only empirically verifiable facts of knowing) are
merely inductive in character, or even that they
are of purely psychological significance. it would
be difficult to find a more complete inversion of the
facts than in the latter statement, since presentation
constitutes in fact the psychological affair. a
confusion of logic with physiological physiology has
bred hybrid epistemology, with the amazing result that
the technique of effective inquiry is rendered irrelevant
to the theory of knowing, and those physical events involved
in the occurrence of data for knowing are
treated as if they constituted the act of knowing.
what are the bearings of our discussion upon the
conception of the present scope and office of philosophy?
what do our conclusions indicate and demand
with reference to philosophy itself? for the philosophy
which reaches such conclusions regarding knowledge and
mind must apply them, sincerely and whole-heartedly,
to its idea of its own nature. for philosophy
claims to be one form or mode of knowing. if, then, the
conclusion is reached that knowing is a way of employing
empirical occurrences with respect to increasing
power to direct the consequences which flow from
things, the application of the conclusion must be made
to philosophy itself. it, too, becomes not a contemplative
survey of existence nor an analysis of what is past
and done with, but an outlook upon future possibilities
with reference to attaining the better and averting the
worse. philosophy must take, with good grace, its own
medicine.
it is easier to state the negative results of the changed
idea of philosophy than the positive ones. the point
that occurs to mind most readily is that philosophy
will have to surrender all pretension to be peculiarly
concerned with ultimate reality, or with reality as a
complete (i.e., completed) whole: with the real object.
the surrender is not easy of achievement. the philosophic
tradition that comes to us from classic greek
thought and that was reinforced by christian philosophy
in the middle ages discriminates philosophical
knowing from other modes of knowing by means of an
alleged peculiarly intimate concern with supreme, ultimate,
true reality. to deny this trait to philosophy
seems to many to be the suicide of philosophy; to be a
systematic adoption of skepticism or agnostic positivism.
the pervasiveness of the tradition is shown in the
fact that so vitally a contemporary thinker as bergson,
who finds a philosophic revolution involved in
abandonment of the traditional identification of the
truly real with the fixed (an identification inherited
from greek thought), does not find it in his heart to
abandon the counterpart identification of philosophy
with search for the truly real; and hence finds it necessary
to substitute an ultimate and absolute flux for
an ultimate and absolute permanence. thus his great
empirical services in calling attention to the fundamental
importance of considerations of time for
problems of life and mind get compromised with a
mystic, non-empirical "intuition"; and we find him preoccupied
with solving, by means of his new idea of
ultimate reality, the traditional problems of realities-in-themselves
and phenomena, matter and mind, free-will
and determinism, god and the world. is not that another
evidence of the influence of the classic idea about
philosophy?
even the new realists are not content to take their
realism as a plea for approaching subject-matter directly
instead of through the intervention of epistemological
apparatus; they find it necessary first to
determine the status of the real object. thus they
too become entangled in the problem of the possibility
of error, dreams, hallucinations, etc., in short, the problem
of evil. for i take it that an uncorrupted realism
would accept such things as real events, and find in
them no other problems than those attending the consideration
of any real occurrence—namely, problems
of structure, origin, and operation.
it is often said that pragmatism, unless it is content
to be a contribution to mere methodology, must
develop a theory of reality. but the chief characteristic
trait of the pragmatic notion of reality is precisely
that no theory of reality in general, überhaupt,
is possible or needed. it occupies the position of an
emancipated empiricism or a thoroughgoing naïve
realism. it finds that "reality" is a denotative term,
a word used to designate indifferently everything that
happens. lies, dreams, insanities, deceptions, myths,
theories are all of them just the events which they specifically
are. pragmatism is content to take its stand
with science; for science finds all such events to be
subject-matter of description and inquiry—just like
stars and fossils, mosquitoes and malaria, circulation
and vision. it also takes its stand with daily life, which
finds that such things really have to be reckoned with
as they occur interwoven in the texture of events.
the only way in which the term reality can ever
become more than a blanket denotative term is through
recourse to specific events in all their diversity and
thatness. speaking summarily, i find that the retention
by philosophy of the notion of a reality feudally
superior to the events of everyday occurrence is the
chief source of the increasing isolation of philosophy
from common sense and science. for the latter do
not operate in any such region. as with them of old,
philosophy in dealing with real difficulties finds itself
still hampered by reference to realities more real, more
ultimate, than those which directly happen.
i have said that identifying the cause of philosophy
with the notion of superior reality is the cause of an
increasing isolation from science and practical life. the
phrase reminds us that there was a time when the enterprise
of science and the moral interests of men both
moved in a universe invidiously distinguished from that
of ordinary occurrence. while all that happens is
equally real—since it really happens—happenings are
not of equal worth. their respective consequences,
their import, varies tremendously. counterfeit money,
although real (or rather because real), is really different
from valid circulatory medium, just as disease is
really different from health; different in specific structure
and so different in consequences. in occidental
thought, the greeks were the first to draw the distinction
between the genuine and the spurious in a generalized
fashion and to formulate and enforce its tremendous
significance for the conduct of life. but since they
had at command no technique of experimental analysis
and no adequate technique of mathematical analysis,
they were compelled to treat the difference of the true
and the false, the dependable and the deceptive, as
signifying two kinds of existence, the truly real and
the apparently real.
two points can hardly be asserted with too much
emphasis. the greeks were wholly right in the feeling
that questions of good and ill, as far as they fall within
human control, are bound up with discrimination of
the genuine from the spurious, of "being" from what
only pretends to be. but because they lacked adequate
instrumentalities for coping with this difference in specific
situations, they were forced to treat the difference
as a wholesale and rigid one. science was concerned
with vision of ultimate and true reality; opinion was
concerned with getting along with apparent realities.
each had its appropriate region permanently marked
off. matters of opinion could never become matters
of science; their intrinsic nature forbade. when the
practice of science went on under such conditions,
science and philosophy were one and the same thing.
both had to do with ultimate reality in its rigid and
insuperable difference from ordinary occurrences.
we have only to refer to the way in which medieval
life wrought the philosophy of an ultimate and supreme
reality into the context of practical life to realize that
for centuries political and moral interests were bound
up with the distinction between the absolutely real and
the relatively real. the difference was no matter of a
remote technical philosophy, but one which controlled
life from the cradle to the grave, from the grave to the
endless life after death. by means of a vast institution,
which in effect was state as well as church, the
claims of ultimate reality were enforced; means of access
to it were provided. acknowledgment of the
reality brought security in this world and salvation
in the next. it is not necessary to report the story
of the change which has since taken place. it is enough
for our purposes to note that none of the modern
philosophies of a superior reality, or the real object,
idealistic or realistic, holds that its insight makes a
difference like that between sin and holiness, eternal
condemnation and eternal bliss. while in its own context
the philosophy of ultimate reality entered into the
vital concerns of men, it now tends to be an ingenious
dialectic exercised in professorial corners by a few who
have retained ancient premises while rejecting their
application to the conduct of life.
the increased isolation from science of any philosophy
identified with the problem of the real is equally
marked. for the growth of science has consisted precisely
in the invention of an equipment, a technique of
appliances and procedures, which, accepting all occurrences
as homogeneously real, proceeds to distinguish
the authenticated from the spurious, the true from the
false, by specific modes of treatment in specific situations.
the procedures of the trained engineer, of the
competent physician, of the laboratory expert, have
turned out to be the only ways of discriminating the
counterfeit from the valid. and they have revealed
that the difference is not one of antecedent fixity of
existence, but one of mode of treatment and of the
consequences thereon attendant. after mankind has
learned to put its trust in specific procedures in order
to make its discriminations between the false and the
true, philosophy arrogates to itself the enforcement
of the distinction at its own cost.
more than once, this essay has intimated that the
counterpart of the idea of invidiously real reality is
the spectator notion of knowledge. if the knower, however
defined, is set over against the world to be known,
knowing consists in possessing a transcript, more or less
accurate but otiose, of real things. whether this transcript
is presentative in character (as realists say) or
whether it is by means of states of consciousness which
represent things (as subjectivists say), is a matter of
great importance in its own context. but, in another
regard, this difference is negligible in comparison with
the point in which both agree. knowing is viewing
from outside. but if it be true that the self or subject
of experience is part and parcel of the course of events,
it follows that the self becomes a knower. it becomes
a mind in virtue of a distinctive way of partaking in
the course of events. the significant distinction is no
longer between the knower and the world; it is between
different ways of being in and of the movement of
things; between a brute physical way and a purposive,
intelligent way.
there is no call to repeat in detail the statements
which have been advanced. their net purport is that
the directive presence of future possibilities in dealing
with existent conditions is what is meant by knowing;
that the self becomes a knower or mind when anticipation
of future consequences operates as its stimulus.
what we are now concerned with is the effect of this
conception upon the nature of philosophic knowing.
as far as i can judge, popular response to pragmatic
philosophy was moved by two quite different considerations.
by some it was thought to provide a new species
of sanctions, a new mode of apologetics, for certain
religious ideas whose standing had been threatened.
by others, it was welcomed because it was taken as a
sign that philosophy was about to surrender its otiose
and speculative remoteness; that philosophers were beginning
to recognize that philosophy is of account only
if, like everyday knowing and like science, it affords
guidance to action and thereby makes a difference in
the event. it was welcomed as a sign that philosophers
were willing to have the worth of their philosophizing
measured by responsible tests.
i have not seen this point of view emphasized, or
hardly recognized, by professional critics. the difference
of attitude can probably be easily explained. the
epistemological universe of discourse is so highly technical
that only those who have been trained in the history
of thought think in terms of it. it did not occur,
accordingly, to non-technical readers to interpret the
doctrine that the meaning and validity of thought are
fixed by differences made in consequences and in satisfactoriness,
to mean consequences in personal feelings.
those who were professionally trained, however, took
the statement to mean that consciousness or mind in
the mere act of looking at things modifies them. it understood
the doctrine of test of validity by consequences
to mean that apprehensions and conceptions are true
if the modifications affected by them were of an emotionally
desirable tone.
prior discussion should have made it reasonably clear
that the source of this misunderstanding lies in the
neglect of temporal considerations. the change made
in things by the self in knowing is not immediate and,
so to say, cross-sectional. it is longitudinal—in the
redirection given to changes already going on. its analogue
is found in the changes which take place in the
development of, say, iron ore into a watch-spring, not
in those of the miracle of transubstantiation. for the
static, cross-sectional, non-temporal relation of subject
and object, the pragmatic hypothesis substitutes
apprehension of a thing in terms of the results in other
things which it is tending to effect. for the unique
epistemological relation, it substitutes a practical relation
of a familiar type:—responsive behavior which
changes in time the subject-matter to which it applies.
the unique thing about the responsive behavior which
constitutes knowing is the specific difference which
marks it off from other modes of response, namely, the
part played in it by anticipation and prediction. knowing
is the act, stimulated by this foresight, of securing
and averting consequences. the success of the achievement
measures the standing of the foresight by which response
is directed. the popular impression that pragmatic
philosophy means that philosophy shall develop
ideas relevant to the actual crises of life, ideas influential
in dealing with them and tested by the assistance
they afford, is correct.
reference to practical response suggests, however,
another misapprehension. many critics have jumped
at the obvious association of the word pragmatic with
practical. they have assumed that the intent is to
limit all knowledge, philosophic included, to promoting
"action," understanding by action either just any
bodily movement, or those bodily movements which conduce
to the preservation and grosser well-being of the
body. james' statement, that general conceptions
must "cash in" has been taken (especially by european
critics) to mean that the end and measure of intelligence
lies in the narrow and coarse utilities which
it produces. even an acute american thinker, after
first criticizing pragmatism as a kind of idealistic epistemology,
goes on to treat it as a doctrine which regards
intelligence as a lubricating oil facilitating the workings
of the body.
one source of the misunderstanding is suggested by
the fact that "cashing in" to james meant that a
general idea must always be capable of verification in
specific existential cases. the notion of "cashing in"
says nothing about the breadth or depth of the specific
consequences. as an empirical doctrine, it could not
say anything about them in general; the specific cases
must speak for themselves. if one conception is verified
in terms of eating beefsteak, and another
in terms of a favorable credit balance in the
bank, that is not because of anything in the
theory, but because of the specific nature of the
conceptions in question, and because there exist particular
events like hunger and trade. if there are
also existences in which the most liberal esthetic
ideas and the most generous moral conceptions can be
verified by specific embodiment, assuredly so much the
better. the fact that a strictly empirical philosophy
was taken by so many critics to imply an a priori dogma
about the kind of consequences capable of existence is
evidence, i think, of the inability of many philosophers
to think in concretely empirical terms. since the critics
were themselves accustomed to get results by manipulating
the concepts of "consequences" and of "practice,"
they assumed that even a would-be empiricist
must be doing the same sort of thing. it will, i suppose,
remain for a long time incredible to some that a
philosopher should really intend to go to specific experiences
to determine of what scope and depth practice
admits, and what sort of consequences the world permits
to come into being. concepts are so clear; it takes so
little time to develop their implications; experiences
are so confused, and it requires so much time and energy
to lay hold of them. and yet these same critics charge
pragmatism with adopting subjective and emotional
standards!
as a matter of fact, the pragmatic theory of intelligence
means that the function of mind is to project new
and more complex ends—to free experience from routine
and from caprice. not the use of thought to accomplish
purposes already given either in the mechanism
of the body or in that of the existent state of
society, but the use of intelligence to liberate and
liberalize action, is the pragmatic lesson. action restricted
to given and fixed ends may attain great
technical efficiency; but efficiency is the only quality to
which it can lay claim. such action is mechanical (or
becomes so), no matter what the scope of the preformed
end, be it the will of god or kultur. but the
doctrine that intelligence develops within the sphere of
action for the sake of possibilities not yet given is the
opposite of a doctrine of mechanical efficiency. intelligence
as intelligence is inherently forward-looking;
only by ignoring its primary function does it become a
mere means for an end already given. the latter is
servile, even when the end is labeled moral, religious, or
esthetic. but action directed to ends to which the agent
has not previously been attached inevitably carries with
it a quickened and enlarged spirit. a pragmatic intelligence
is a creative intelligence, not a routine mechanic.
all this may read like a defense of pragmatism by
one concerned to make out for it the best case possible.
such is not, however, the intention. the purpose is
to indicate the extent to which intelligence frees action
from a mechanically instrumental character. intelligence
is, indeed, instrumental through action to the determination
of the qualities of future experience. but
the very fact that the concern of intelligence is with
the future, with the as-yet-unrealized (and with the
given and the established only as conditions of the
realization of possibilities), makes the action in which
it takes effect generous and liberal; free of spirit. just
that action which extends and approves intelligence
has an intrinsic value of its own in being instrumental:—the
intrinsic value of being informed with intelligence
in behalf of the enrichment of life. by the same stroke,
intelligence becomes truly liberal: knowing is a human
undertaking, not an esthetic appreciation carried on
by a refined class or a capitalistic possession of a few
learned specialists, whether men of science or of philosophy.
more emphasis has been put upon what philosophy
is not than upon what it may become. but it is not
necessary, it is not even desirable, to set forth philosophy
as a scheduled program. there are human difficulties
of an urgent, deep-seated kind which may be
clarified by trained reflection, and whose solution may
be forwarded by the careful development of hypotheses.
when it is understood that philosophic thinking is
caught up in the actual course of events, having the
office of guiding them towards a prosperous issue, problems
will abundantly present themselves. philosophy
will not solve these problems; philosophy is vision, imagination,
reflection—and these functions, apart from
action, modify nothing and hence resolve nothing. but
in a complicated and perverse world, action which is
not informed with vision, imagination, and reflection,
is more likely to increase confusion and conflict than to
straighten things out. it is not easy for generous and
sustained reflection to become a guiding and illuminating
method in action. until it frees itself from identification
with problems which are supposed to depend
upon reality as such, or its distinction from a world
of appearance, or its relation to a knower as such,
the hands of philosophy are tied. having no chance to
link its fortunes with a responsible career by suggesting
things to be tried, it cannot identify itself with questions
which actually arise in the vicissitudes of life.
philosophy recovers itself when it ceases to be a device
for dealing with the problems of philosophers and becomes
a method, cultivated by philosophers, for dealing
with the problems of men.
emphasis must vary with the stress and special impact
of the troubles which perplex men. each age
knows its own ills, and seeks its own remedies. one does
not have to forecast a particular program to note that
the central need of any program at the present day
is an adequate conception of the nature of intelligence
and its place in action. philosophy cannot disavow
responsibility for many misconceptions of the nature
of intelligence which now hamper its efficacious operation.
it has at least a negative task imposed upon it.
it must take away the burdens which it has laid upon
the intelligence of the common man in struggling with
his difficulties. it must deny and eject that intelligence
which is naught but a distant eye, registering in
a remote and alien medium the spectacle of nature and
life. to enforce the fact that the emergence of imagination
and thought is relative to the connexion of the
sufferings of men with their doings is of itself to illuminate
those sufferings and to instruct those doings.
to catch mind in its connexion with the entrance of the
novel into the course of the world is to be on the road
to see that intelligence is itself the most promising of
all novelties, the revelation of the meaning of that transformation
of past into future which is the reality of
every present. to reveal intelligence as the organ for
the guidance of this transformation, the sole director of
its quality, is to make a declaration of present untold
significance for action. to elaborate these convictions
of the connexion of intelligence with what men undergo
because of their doings and with the emergence and
direction of the creative, the novel, in the world is of
itself a program which will keep philosophers busy
until something more worth while is forced upon them.
for the elaboration has to be made through application
to all the disciplines which have an intimate connexion
with human conduct:—to logic, ethics, esthetics, economics,
and the procedure of the sciences formal and
natural.
i also believe that there is a genuine sense in which
the enforcement of the pivotal position of intelligence
in the world and thereby in control of human fortunes
(so far as they are manageable) is the peculiar problem
in the problems of life which come home most closely
to ourselves—to ourselves living not merely in the
early twentieth century but in the united states. it
is easy to be foolish about the connexion of thought
with national life. but i do not see how any one can
question the distinctively national color of english, or
french, or german philosophies. and if of late the
history of thought has come under the domination of
the german dogma of an inner evolution of ideas, it
requires but a little inquiry to convince oneself that
that dogma itself testifies to a particularly nationalistic
need and origin. i believe that philosophy in america
will be lost between chewing a historic cud long since reduced
to woody fiber, or an apologetics for lost causes
(lost to natural science), or a scholastic, schematic
formalism, unless it can somehow bring to consciousness
america's own needs and its own implicit principle
of successful action.
this need and principle, i am convinced, is the necessity
of a deliberate control of policies by the method
of intelligence, an intelligence which is not the faculty
of intellect honored in text-books and neglected elsewhere,
but which is the sum-total of impulses, habits,
emotions, records, and discoveries which forecast what
is desirable and undesirable in future possibilities, and
which contrive ingeniously in behalf of imagined good.
our life has no background of sanctified categories
upon which we may fall back; we rely upon precedent
as authority only to our own undoing—for with us
there is such a continuously novel situation that final
reliance upon precedent entails some class interest
guiding us by the nose whither it will. british empiricism,
with its appeal to what has been in the past, is,
after all, only a kind of a priorism. for it lays down
a fixed rule for future intelligence to follow; and only
the immersion of philosophy in technical learning prevents
our seeing that this is the essence of a priorism.
we pride ourselves upon being realistic, desiring a
hardheaded cognizance of facts, and devoted to mastering
the means of life. we pride ourselves upon a
practical idealism, a lively and easily moved faith in
possibilities as yet unrealized, in willingness to make
sacrifice for their realization. idealism easily becomes
a sanction of waste and carefulness, and realism a
sanction of legal formalism in behalf of things as they
are—the rights of the possessor. we thus tend to
combine a loose and ineffective optimism with assent
to the doctrine of take who take can: a deification of
power. all peoples at all times have been narrowly
realistic in practice and have then employed idealization
to cover up in sentiment and theory their brutalities.
but never, perhaps, has the tendency been so
dangerous and so tempting as with ourselves. faith
in the power of intelligence to imagine a future which
is the projection of the desirable in the present, and to
invent the instrumentalities of its realization, is our
salvation. and it is a faith which must be nurtured
and made articulate: surely a sufficiently large task
for our philosophy.
in a general survey of the development of logical
theory one is struck by the similarity, not to say identity,
of the indictments which reformers, since the days
of aristotle, have brought against it. the most fundamental
of these charges are: first, that the theory of
logic has left it formal and with little significance for
the advancement of science and the conduct of society;
second, that it has great difficulty in avoiding the
predicament of logical operations that are merely labored
reproductions of non-logical activities and therefore
tautologous and trifling, or of logical operations
that are so far removed from immediate, non-logical experience
that they are irrelevant; third, that logical
theory has had trouble in finding room in its own
household for both truth and error; each crowds out
the other.
the identity of these indictments regardless of the
general philosophical faith, empiricism, or rationalism,
realism, or idealism to which the reformer or the
logic to be reformed has belonged, suggests that
whatever the differences in the doctrines of these various
philosophic traditions, they possess a common
ground from which these common difficulties spring.
it is the conviction of a number who are at present
attempting to rid logic of these ancient disabilities
that their common source is to be found in a lack of
continuity between the acts of intelligence (or to avoid
the dangers of hypostasis, intelligent acts) and other
acts; between logical conduct and other conduct. so
wide, indeed, is this breach, that often little remains of
the act of knowing but the name. it may still be
called an act, but it has no describable instruments nor
technique of operation. it is an indefinable and often
mystical performance of which only the results can be
stated. in recent logical discussion this techniqueless
act of knowing has been properly enough transformed
into an indefinable "external relation" in which an
entity called a knower stands to another entity called
the known.
for many centuries this breach between the operations
of intelligence and other operations has been
closed by various metaphysical devices with the result
that logic has been a hybrid science,—half logic, half
metaphysics and epistemology. so great has been
the momentum of the metaphysical tradition that long
after we have begun to discover the connection between
logical and non-logical operations its methods remain
to plague us. efforts to heal the breach without a
direct appeal to metaphysical agencies have been made
by attempting a complete logicizing of all operations.
but besides requiring additional metaphysics to effect
it, the procedure is as fatal to continuity as is an impassable
disjunction. continuity demands distinction
as well as connection. it requires the development, the
growth of old material and functions into new forms.
driven by the difficulties of this complete logicization,
which are as serious as those of isolation, logical
theory was obliged to reinstate some sort of distinction.
this it did by resorting to the categories of
"explicit" and "implicit." all so-called non-logical
operations were regarded as "implicitly" logical.
and, paradoxically, logical operations had for their
task the transformation of the implicit into the explicit.
an adequate account of the origin and continuance
of this isolation of the conduct of intelligence
from other conduct is too long a story to be
told here. suffice it to recall that in the society in
which the distinction between immediate and reflective
experience, between opinion and science, between percepts
and universals was first made, intelligence was
largely the possession of a special and privileged class
removed in great measure from hand-to-hand contact
with nature and with much of society. because it did
not fully participate in the operations of nature and
society intelligence could not become fully domesticated,
i.e., fully naturalized and socialized in its world. it
was a charmed spectator of the cosmic and social drama.
doubtless when greek intelligence discovered the distinction
between immediate and reflective experience—possibly
the most momentous discovery in history—"the
world," as kant says of the speculations of
thales, "must suddenly have appeared in a new light."
but not recognizing the full significance of this discovery,
ideas, universals, became but a wondrous spectacle
for the eye of reason. they brought, to be sure,
blessed relief from the bewildering and baffling flux of
perception. but it was the relief of sanctuary, not of
victory.
that the brilliant speculations of greek intelligence
were barren because there was no technique for testing
and applying them in detail is an old story. but it
is merely a restatement, not a solution, of the pertinent
question. this is: why did not greek intelligence
develop such a technique? the answer lies in
the fact that the technique of intelligence is to be found
precisely in the details of the operations of nature and of
human conduct from which an aristocratic intelligence
is always in large measure shut off. intelligence cannot
operate fruitfully in a vacuum. it must be incarnate.
it must, as hegel said, have "hands and feet."
when we turn to the history of modern science the one
thing that stands out is that it was not until the point
was reached where intelligence was ready (continuing
the hegelian figure) to thrust its hands into the vitals
of nature and society that it began to acquire a real
control over its operations.
in default of such controlling technique there was
nothing to be done with this newly found instrument of
intelligence—the universal—but to retain it as an object
of contemplation and of worshipful adoration.
this involved, of course, its hypostasis as the metaphysical
reality of supreme importance. with this, the
only difference between "opinion" and "science" became
one of the kind of objects known. that universals
were known by reason and particulars by sense
was of little more logical significance than that sounds
are known by the ear and smells by the nose. particulars
and universals were equally given. if the latter required
some abstraction this was regarded as merely
auxiliary to the immediate vision, as sniffing is to the
perception of odor. that universals should or could
be conceived as experimental, as hypotheses, was, when
translated into later theology, the sin against the holy
ghost.
however, the fact that the particulars in the world
of opinion were the stimuli to the "recollection" of
universals and that the latter in turn were the patterns,
the forms, for the particulars, opened the way in actual
practice for the exercise of a great deal of the controlling
function of the universals. but the failure to
recognize this control value of the universal as fundamental,
made it necessary for the universal to exercise
its function surreptitiously, in the disguise of a pattern
and in the clumsy garb of imitation and participation.
with perceptions, desires, and impulses relegated to
the world of opinion and shadows, and with the newly
discovered instrument of knowledge turned into an object,
the knower was stripped of all his knowing apparatus
and was left an empty, scuttled entity definable
and describable only as "a knower." the knower
must know, even if he had nothing to know with.
hence the mystical almost indefinable character of the
knowing act or relation. i say "almost indefinable";
for as an act it had, of course, to have some sort of
conceptualized form. and this form vision naturally
furnished. "naturally," because intelligence was so
largely contemplative, and vision so largely immediate,
unanalyzed, and diaphanous. there was, to be sure, the
concept of effluxes. but this was a statement of the
fact of vision in terms of its results, not of the process
itself. thus it was that the whole terminology of
knowing which we still use was moulded and fixed upon
a very crude conception of one of the constituents of
its process. there can be no doubt that this terminology
has added much to the inertia against which
the advance of logical theory has worked. it would
be interesting to see what would be the effect upon
logical theory of the substitution of an auditory or
olfactory terminology for visual; or of a visual terminology
revised to agree with modern scientific analysis
of the act of vision as determined by its connections
with other functions.
with the act of knowing stripped of its technique
and left a bare, unique, indescribable act or relation, the
foundations for epistemological and metaphysical logic
were laid. that greek logic escaped the ravages of
epistemology was due to the saving materialism in its
metaphysical conception of mind and to the steadfastness
of the aristocratic régime. but when medieval
theology and cartesian metaphysics had destroyed the
last remnant of metaphysical connection between the
knowing mind and nature, and when revolutions had
torn the individual from his social moorings, the stage
for epistemological logic was fully set. i do not mean
to identify the epistemological situation with the cartesian
disjunction. that disjunction was but the metaphysical
expression of the one which constitutes the
real foundation of epistemology—the disjunction,
namely, between the act of knowing and other acts.
from
this point logic has followed one of two
general courses. it has sought continuity by attempting
to reduce non-logical things and operations to terms
of logical operations, i.e., to sensations or universals
or both; or it has attempted to exclude entirely the act
of knowing from logic and to transfer logical distinctions
and operations, and even the attributes of truth
and error to objects which, significantly enough, are
still composed of these same hypostatized logical processes.
the first course results in an epistemological
logic of some form of the idealistic tradition, rationalism,
sensationalism, or transcendentalism, depending
upon whether universals, or sensations, or a combination
of both, is made fundamental in the constitution of
the object. the second course yields an epistemological
logic of the realistic type,—again, sensational or rationalistic
(mathematical), or a combination of the
two—a sort of realistic transcendentalism. each type
has essentially the same difficulties with the processes
of inference, with the problem of change, with truth
and error, and, on the ethical side, with good and evil.
with the processes of knowing converted into objects,
and with the act of knowing reduced to a unique
and external relation between the despoiled knower and
the objects made from its own hypostatized processes,
all knowing becomes in the end immediate. all attempts
at an inference that is anything more than an elaborated
and often confused restatement of non-logical
operations break down. the associational inference
of empiricism, the subsumptive inference of rationalism,
the transcendental inference of objective idealism, the
analytical inference of neo-realism—all alike face
the dilemma of an inference that is trifling or
miraculous, tautologous or false. where the knower
and its object are so constituted that the only relation
in which the latter can stand to the former is that of
presence or absence, and if to be present is to be known,
how, as plato asked, can there be any false knowing?
for those who accept the foregoing general diagnosis
the prescription is obvious. the present task of logical
theory is the restoration of the continuity of the act
and agent of knowing with other acts and agents. but
this is not to be done by merely furnishing the act of
knowing with a body and a nervous system. if the
nervous system be regarded as only an onlooking, beholding
nervous system, if no connection be made between
the logical operations of a nervous system and
its other operations a nervous system has no logical
advantage over a purely psychical mind.
it was to be expected that this movement toward
restoration of continuity made in the name of "instrumental"
or "experimental" logic would be regarded,
alike, by the logics of rationalism and empiricism, of
idealism and of realism, as an attempt to rob intelligence
of its own unique and proper character; to reduce
it to a merely "psychological" and "existential" affair;
to leave no place for genuine intellectual interest
and activity; and to make science a series of more or
less respectable adventures. the counter thesis is, that
this restoration is truly a restoration—not a despoliation
of the character and rights of intelligence; that
only such a restoration can preserve the unique function
of intelligence, can prevent it from becoming merely
"existential," and can provide a distinct place for intellectual
and scientific interest and activity. it does
not, however, promise to remove the stigma of "adventure"
from science. every experiment is an adventure;
and it is precisely the experimental character
of scientific logic that distinguishes it from scholasticism,
medieval or modern.
first it is clear that a reform of logic based upon the
restoration of knowing to its connections with other
acts will begin with a chapter containing an account
of these other operations and the general character of
this connection. logical theory has been truncated.
it has tried to begin and end in the middle, with the
result that it has ended in the air. logic presents the
curious anachronism of a science which attempts to
deal with its subject-matter apart from what it comes
from and what comes from it.
the objection that such a chapter on the conditions
and genesis of the operations of knowing belongs to
psychology, only shows how firmly fixed is the discontinuity
we are trying to escape. as we have seen, the
original motive for leaving this account of genesis to
psychology was that the act of knowing was supposed
to originate in a purely psychical mind. such an origin
was of course embarrassing to logic, which aimed to be
scientific. the old opposition between origin and
validity was due to the kind of origin assumed and the
kind of validity necessitated by the origin. one may
well be excused for evading the question of how ideas,
originated in a purely psychical mind, can, in kant's
phrase, "have objective validity," by throwing out the
question of origin altogether. whatever difficulties remain
for validity after this expulsion could not be
greater than those of the task of combining the objective
validity of ideas with their subjective origin.
the whole of this chapter on the connection between
logical and non-logical operations cannot be written
here. but its central point would be that these other
acts with which the act of knowing must have continuity
are just the operations of our unreflective conduct.
note that it is "unreflective," not "unconscious," nor
yet merely "instinctive" conduct. it is our perceptive,
remembering, imagining, desiring, loving, hating
conduct. note also that we do not say "psychical" or
"physical," nor "psycho-physical" conduct. these
terms stand for certain distinctions in logical conduct,
and we are here concerned with the character of non-logical
conduct which is to be distinguished from, and
yet kept in closest continuity with, logical conduct.
if, here, the metaphysical logician should ask: "are
you not in this assumption of a world of reflective and
unreflective conduct and affection, and of a world of
beings in interaction, begging a whole system of metaphysics?"
the reply is that if it is a metaphysics bad
for logic, it will keep turning up in the course of logical
theory as a constant source of trouble. on the
other hand, if logic encounters grave difficulties
when it attempts to get on without it, its assumption,
for the purposes of logic, has all the justification possible.
again it will be urged that this alleged non-logical
conduct, in so far as it involves perception, memory,
and anticipation, is already cognitive and logical; or if
the act of knowing is to be entirely excluded from logic,
then, in so far as what is left involves objective "terms
and relations," it, also, is already logical. and it may
be thought strange that a logic based upon the restoration
of continuity between the act of knowing and other
acts should here be insisting on distinction and separation.
the point is fundamental; and must be disposed
of before we go on. first, we must observe that the
unity secured by making all conscious conduct logical
turns out, on examination, to be more nominal than
real. as we have already seen, this attempt at a complete
logicizing of all conduct is forced at once to introduce
the distinction of "explicit" and "implicit," of
"conscious and unconscious" or "subconscious" logic.
some cynics have found that this suggests dividing
triangles into explicit and implicit triangles, or into
triangles and sub-triangles.
doubtless the attempt to make all perceptions, memories,
and anticipations, and even instincts and habits,
into implicit or subconscious inference is an awkward
effort to restore the continuity of logical and non-logical
conduct. its awkwardness consists in attempting
to secure this continuity by the method of subsumptive
identity, instead of finding it in a transitive continuity
of function;—instead of seeing that perception, memory,
and anticipation become logical processes when
they are employed in a process of inquiry, whose purpose
is to relieve the difficulties into which these operations
in their function as direct stimuli have fallen.
logical conduct is constituted by the coöperation of
these processes for the improvement of their further
operation. to regard perception, memory, and imagination
as implicit forms or as sub-species of logical
operation is much like conceiving the movements of our
fingers and arms as implicit or imperfect species of
painting, or swimming.
moreover, this doctrine of universal logicism teaches
that when that which is perfect is come, imperfection
shall be done away. this should mean that when painting
becomes completely "explicit" and perfect, fingers
and hands shall disappear. perfect painting will be
the pure essence of painting. and this interpretation
is not strained; for this logic expressly teaches that in
the perfected real system all temporal elements are
unessential to logical operations. they are, of course,
psychologically necessary for finite beings, who can
never have perfectly logical experiences. but, from
the standpoint of a completely logicized experience, all
finite, temporal processes are accidents, not essentials,
of logical operations.
the fact that the processes of perception,
memory, and anticipation are transformed in their
logical operation into sensations and universals, terms,
and relations, and, as such, become the subject-matter
of logical theory, does not mean that they have
lost their mediating character, and have become merely
objects of logical contemplation at large. sensations
or sense-data, and ideas, terms and relations, are
the subject-matter of logical theory for the reason that
they sometimes succeed and sometimes fail in their
logical operations. and it is the business of logical
theory to diagnose the conditions of this success and
failure. if, in writing, my pen becomes defective and
is made an object of inquiry, it does not therefore lose
all its character as a pen and become merely an object
at large. it is as an instrument of writing that it is
investigated. so, sense-data, universals, terms, and
relations as subject-matter of logic are investigated in
their character as mediators of the ambiguities and
conflicts, of non-logical experience.
if the operations of habit, instinct, perceptions,
memory, and anticipation become logical, when, instead
of operating as direct stimuli, they are employed in a
process of inquiry, we must next ask: () under
what conditions do they pass over into this process of
inquiry? () what modifications of operation do they
undergo, what new forms do they take, and what new
results do they produce in their logical operations?
if the act of inquiry be not superimposed, it must
arise out of some specific condition in the course of non-logical
conduct. once more, if the alarm be sounded
at this proposal to find the origin of logical in non-logical
operations it must be summarily answered by
asking if the one who raises the cry finds it impossible
to imagine that one who is not hungry, or angry, or
patriotic, or wise may become so. non-logical conduct
is not the abstract formal contradictory of logical conduct
any more than present satiety or foolishness is
the contradictory of later hunger or wisdom, or than
anger at one person contradicts cordiality to another,
or to the same person, later. the old bogie of the
logical irrelevance of origin was due to the inability to
conceive continuity except in the form of identity in
which there was no place for the notion of growth.
the conditions under which non-logical conduct becomes
logical are familiar to those who have followed
the doctrines of experimental logic as expounded in the
discussions of the past few years. the transformation
begins at the point where non-logical processes instead
of operating as direct unambiguous stimuli and response
become ambiguous with consequent inhibition of conduct.
but again this does not mean that at this juncture
the non-logical processes quit the field and give
place to a totally new faculty and process called reason.
they stay on the job. but there is a change in
the job, which now is to get rid of this ambiguity.
this modification of the task requires, of course, corresponding
modification and adaptation of these
operations. they take on the form of sensations and
universals, terms and relations, data and hypotheses.
this modification of function and form constitutes
"reason" or, better, reasoning.
here some one will ask, "whence comes this ambiguity?
how can a mere perception or memory as
such be ambiguous? must it not be ambiguous to, or
for, something, or some one?" the point is well taken.
but it should not be taken to imply that the ambiguity
is for a merely onlooking, beholding psychical mind—especially
when the perception is itself regarded as an
act of beholding. nor are we any better off if we suppose
the beholding mind to be equipped with a faculty
of reason in the form of the principle of "contradiction."
for this throws no light on the origin and
meaning of ambiguity. and if we seek to make all perceptions
as such ambiguous and contradictory, in order
to make room for, and justify, the operations of reason,
other difficulties at once beset us. when we attempt
to remove this specific ambiguity of perceptive conduct
we shall be forced, before we are through, to appeal
back to perception, which we have condemned as inherently
contradictory, both for data and for verification.
however, the insistence that perception must be ambiguous
to, or for, something beyond itself is well
grounded. and this was recognized in the statement
that it is equivocal as a stimulus in conduct. there
need be no mystery as to how such equivocation arises.
that there is such a thing as a conduct at all means
that there are certain beings who have acquired definite
ways of responding to one another. it is important
to observe that these forms of interaction—instinct
and habit, perception, memory, etc.—are not to be
located in either of the interacting beings but are functions
of both. the conception of these operations as
the private functions of an organism is the forerunner
of the epistemological predicament. it results in a
conception of knowing as wholly the act of a knower
apart from the known. this is the beginning of epistemology.
but to whatever extent interacting beings have acquired
definite and specific ways of behavior toward one
another it is equally plain—the theory of external relations
notwithstanding—that in this process of interaction
these ways of behavior, of stimulus and response,
undergo modification. if the world consisted of
two interacting beings, it is conceivable that
the modifications of behavior might occur in
such close continuity of relation to each of
the interacting beings that the adjustment would
be very continuous, and there might be little or no
ambiguity and conflict. but in a world where any two
interacting beings have innumerable interactions with
innumerable other beings and in all these interactions
modifications are effected, it is to be expected that
changes in the behavior of each or both will occur, so
marked that they are bound to result in breaks in the
continuity of stimulus and response—even to the point
of tragedy. however, the tragedy is seldom so great
that the ambiguity extends to the whole field of conduct.
except in extreme pathological cases (and in
epistemology), complete skepticism and aboulia do not
occur. ambiguity always falls within a field or direction
of conduct, and though it may extend much further,
and must extend some further than the point at which
equivocation occurs, yet it is never ubiquitous. an
ambiguity concerning the action of gravitation is no
less specific than one regarding color or sound; indeed,
the one may be found to involve the other.
logical conduct is, then, conduct which aims to
remove ambiguity and inhibition in unreflective
conduct. the instruments of its operation are forged
from the processes of unreflective conduct by such
modification and adaptation as is required to enable
them to accomplish this end. since these logical operations
sometimes fail and sometimes succeed they become
the subject-matter of logical theory. but the
technique of this second involution of reflection is not
supplied by some new and unique entity. it also is
derived from modifications of previous operations of
both reflective and non-reflective conduct.
while emphasizing the continuity between non-logical
and logical operations, we must keep in mind that
their distinction is of equal importance. confusion at
this point is fatal. a case in point is the confusion
between non-logical and logical observation. the results
of non-logical observation, e.g., looking and listening,
are direct stimuli to further conduct. but the
purpose and result of logical observation are to secure
data, not as direct stimuli to immediate conduct but as
stimuli to the construction or verification of hypotheses
which are the responses of the logical operation of imagination
to the data. hypotheses are anticipatory.
but they differ from non-logical anticipation in that
they are tentatively, experimentally, i.e., logically anticipatory.
the non-logical operations of memory and
anticipation lack just this tentative, experimental character.
when we confuse the logical and non-logical
operations of these processes the result is either that
logical processes will merely repeat non-logical operations
in which case we have inference that is tautologous
and trifling; or the non-logical will attempt to
perform logical operations, and our inference is
miraculous. if we seek to escape by an appeal to habit,
as in empiricism, or to an objective universal, as in
idealism and neo-realism, we are merely disguising, not
removing the miracle.
it may be thought that this confusion would be most
likely to occur in a theory which teaches that non-logical
processes are carried over into logical operations. but
this overlooks the fact that the theory recognizes at
the same time that these non-logical operations undergo
modification and adaptation to the demands of the logical
enterprise. on the other hand, those who make all
perceptions, memory, and anticipation, not to speak of
habit and instinct, logical, have no basis for the distinction
between logical and non-logical results; while those
who refuse to give the operations of perception, memory,
etc., any place in logic can make no connections
between logical and non-logical conduct. nor are they
able to distinguish in a specific case truth from error.
in all logics that fail to make this connection and
distinction between logical and non-logical operations
there is no criterion for data. if ultimate simplicity
is demanded of the data, there is no standard
for simplicity except the minimum sensibile or the
minimum intelligibile which have recently been
resurrected. on the other hand, where simplicity is
waived, as in the logic of objective idealism, there is
still no criterion of logical adequacy. but if we understand
by logical data not anything that happens to be
given, but something sought as material for an hypothesis,
i.e., a proposed solution (proposition) of an
ambiguous object of conduct and affection, then whatever
results of observation meet this requirement are
logical data. and whenever data are found from which
an hypothesis is constructed that succeeds in abolishing
the ambiguity, they are simple, adequate, and true
data.
no scientist, not even the mathematician, in the
specific investigations of his field, seeks for ultimate
and irreducible data at large. and if he found them he
could not use them. it is only in his metaphysical personality
that he longs for such data. the data which
the scientist in any specific inquiry seeks are the data
which suggest a solution of the question in which the
investigation starts. when these data are found they
are the "irreducibles" of that problem. but they are
relative to the question and answer of the investigation.
their simplicity consists in the fact that they are the
data from which a conclusion can be made. the term
"simple data" is tautologous. that one is in need
of data more "simple" means that one is in need of
new data from which an hypothesis can be formed.
it is true that the actual working elements with which
the scientist operates are always complex in the sense
that they are always something more than elements in
any specific investigation. they have other connections
and alliances. and this complexity is at once the
despair and the hope of the scientist; his despair, because
he cannot be sure when these other connections
will interfere with the allegiance of his elements to his
particular undertaking; his hope, because when these
alliances are revealed they often make the elements more
efficient or exhibit capacities which will make them
elements in some other undertaking for which elements
have not been found. a general resolves his army into
so many marching, eating, shooting units; but these
elements are something more than marching, shooting
units. they are husbands and fathers, brothers and
lovers, protestants and catholics, artists and artisans,
etc. and the militarist can never be sure at what point
these other activities—i do not say merely external
relationships—may upset his calculations. if he could
find units whose whole and sole nature is to march and
shoot, his problem would be, in some respects, simpler,
though in others more complex. as it is, he is constantly
required to ask how far these other functions
will support and at what point they will rebel at the
marching and shooting.
such, in principle, is the situation in every scientific
inquiry. when the failure of the old elements occurs
it is common to say that "simpler" elements are
needed. and doubtless in his perplexity the scientist
may long for elements which have no entangling alliances,
whose sole nature and character is to be
elements. but what in fact he actually seeks in every
specific investigation are elements whose nature and
functions will not interfere with their serving as units
in the enterprise in hand. but from some other standpoint
these new elements may be vastly more complex
than the old, as is the case with the modern as compared
with the ancient atom. when the elements are
secured which operate successfully, the non-interfering
connections can be ignored and the elements can be
treated as if they did not have them,—as if they were
metaphysically simple. but there is no criterion for
metaphysical simplicity except operative simplicity.
to be simple is to serve as an element, and to serve
as an element is to be simple.
it is scarcely necessary in view of the foregoing to
add that the data of science are not "sense-data," if
by sense-data be meant data which are the result of the
operations of sense organs alone. data are as much
or more the result of operations, first, of the motor
system of the scientist's own organism, and second, of
all of the machinery of his laboratory which he calls
to his aid. whether named after the way they are obtained,
or after the way they are used, data are quite
as much "motor" as "sense." nor, on the other hand,
are there any purely intellectual data—not even for the
mathematician. some mathematicians may insist that
their symbols and diagrams are merely stimuli to the
platonic operation of pure and given universals. but
until mathematics can get on without these symbols or
any substitutes the intuitionist in mathematics will
continue to have his say.
wherever the discontinuity between logical operations
and their acts persists, all the difficulties with data have
their correlative difficulties with hypotheses. in mill's
logic the account of the origin of hypotheses oscillates
between the view that they are happy guesses of
a mind composed of states of consciousness, and
the view that they are "found in the facts" or
are "impressed on the mind by the facts." the
miracle of relevancy required in the first position
drives the theory to the second. and the tautologous,
useless nature of the hypothesis in the second
forces the theory back to the first view. in this
predicament, little wonder mill finds that the easiest
way out is to make hypotheses "auxiliary" and not indigenous
to inference. but this exclusion of hypotheses
as essential leaves his account of inference to oscillate
between the association of particulars of nominalism
and scholastic formalism, from both of which mill, with
the dignified zeal of a prophet, set out to rescue
logic.
mill's rejection of hypotheses formed by a mind
whose operations have no discoverable continuity with
the operations of things, or by things whose actions
are independent of the operations of ideas, is forever
sound. but his acceptance of the discontinuity between
the acts of knowing and the operation of things,
and the conclusion that these two conceptions of the
origin and nature of hypotheses are the only alternatives,
were the source of most of his difficulties.
the efforts of classic empiricism at the reform of
logic have long been an easy mark for idealistic reformers.
but it is interesting to observe that the idealistic
logic from the beginning finds itself in precisely the
same predicament regarding hypotheses;—they are
trifling or false. and in the end they are made, as
in mill, "accidents" of inference.
the part played by kant's sense-material and the
categories is almost the reverse of those of data and
hypothesis in science. sense material and the categories
are the given elements from which objects are
somehow made; in scientific procedure data and hypothesis
are derived through logical observation and imagination
from the content and operations of immediate
experience. in kant's account of the process by which
objects are constructed we are nowhere in sight of any
experimental procedure. indeed, the real act of knowing,
the selection and application of the category to
the sense matter, is, as kant in the end had to confess,
"hidden away in the depths of the soul." made in
the presence of the elaborate machinery of knowing
which kant had constructed, this confession is almost
tragic; and the tragic aspect grows when we find that
the result of the "hidden" operation is merely a phenomenal
object. that this should be the case, however,
is not strange. a phenomenal object is the inevitable
correlate of the "hidden" act of knowing whether in
a "transcendental" or in an "empirical" logic. in
vain do we call the act of knowing "constructive"
and "synthetic" if its method of synthesis is hidden.
a transcendental unity whose method is indefinable has
no advantage over empirical association.
it was the dream of kant as of mill to replace the
logics of sensationalism and rationalism with a "logic
of things" and of "truth." but as mill's things turned
to states of consciousness, so kant's are phenomenal.
their common fate proclaims their common failure—the
failure to reëstablish continuity between the conduct
of intelligence and other conduct.
one of the chief counts in hegel's indictment of
kant's logic is that "it had no influence on the methods
of science." hegel's explanation is that kant's categories
have no genesis; they are not constructed in
and as part of logical operations. as given, ready-made,
their relevance is a miracle. but if categories
be "generated" in the process of knowing, says hegel,
they are indigenous, and their fitness is inevitable.
in such statements hegel raises expectations that we
are at last to have a logic which squares with the procedure
of science. but when we discover that instead
of being "generated" out of all the material involved
in the scientific problem hegel's categories are derived
from each other, misgivings arise. and when we further
learn that this "genesis" is timeless, which means that,
after all, the categories stand related to each other in
a closed, eternal system of implication, we abandon
hope of a scientific—i.e., experimental—logic.
hegel also says it is the business of philosophy "to
substitute categories or in more precise language adequate
notions for the several modes of feeling, perception,
desire, and will." the word "substitute" reveals
the point at issue. if "to substitute" means that
philosophy is a complete exchange of the modes of
feeling, perception, desire, and will for a world of categories
or notions, then, saying nothing of the range of
values in such a world, the problem of the meaning
of "adequate" is on our hands. what is the
notion to be adequate to? but if "to substitute"
means that the modes of feeling, perception, desire, and
will, when in a specific situation of ambiguity and inhibition,
go over into, take on, the modes of data and
hypothesis in the effort to get rid of inhibiting conflict
that is quite another matter. here the "notion,"
as the scientific hypothesis, has a criterion for its adequacy.
but if the notion usurps the place of feeling,
perception, desire, and will, as many find, in the end,
it does in hegel's logic, it thereby loses all tests
for the adequacy of its function and character as a
notion.
in the development of the logical doctrines of kant
and hegel by lotze, green, sigwart, bradley, bosanquet,
royce, and others, there are indeed differences.
but these differences only throw their common ground
into bolder relief. this common ground is that, procedure
by hypotheses, by induction, is, in the language
of professor bosanquet, "a transient and external
characteristic of inference." and the ground of this
verdict is essentially the same as mill's, when he rejects
hypotheses "made by the mind," namely, that such
hypotheses are too subjective in their origin and nature
to have objective validity. "objective" idealism is
trying, like mill, to escape the subjectivism of the
purely individual and "psychical" knower. but, being
unable to reconstruct the finite knower, and being
too sophisticated to make what it regards as mill's
naïve appeal to "hypotheses found in things," it transfers
the real process of inference to the "objective
universal," and the process of all thought, including
inference, is now defined as "the reproduction, by a
universal presented in a content, of contents distinguished
from the presented content which also are
differences of the same universal."
it need scarcely be said that in inference thus defined
there is scant room for hypotheses. there is
nothing "hypothetical," "experimental," or "tentative"
in this process of reproduction by the objective
universal as such. as little is there any possibility of
error. if there is anything hypothetical, or any possibility
of error, in inference, it is due to the temporal,
finite human being in which, paradoxically enough, this
process of "reproduction" goes on and to whom, at
times, is given an "infinitesimal" part in the operation,
while at other times he is said merely to "witness"
it. but the real inference does not "proceed by hypotheses";
it is only the finite mind in witnessing the
real logical spectacle or in its "infinitesimal" contribution
to it that lamely proceeds in this manner.
here, again, we have the same break in continuity between
the finite, human act of knowing and the operations
that constitute the real world. when the logic of the
objective universal rejects imputations of harboring a
despoiled psychical knower it has in mind, of course, the
objective universal as knower, not the finite, human act.
but, if the participations of the latter are all accidents
of inference, as they are said to be, its advantage
over a purely psychical knower, or "states
of consciousness," is difficult to see. the rejection
of metaphysical dualism is of no consequence if the
logical operations of the finite, human being are only
"accidents" of the real logical process. as already
remarked, the metaphysical disjunction is merely a
schematism of the more fundamental, logical disjunction.
as for tautology and miracle, the follower of mill
might well ask: how an association of particulars,
whether mental states or things, could be more tautologous
than a universal reproducing its own differences?
and if the transition from particular to particular is
a miracle in which the grace of god is disguised as
"habit," why is not habit as good a disguise for providence
as universals? moreover, by what miracle
does the one all-inclusive universal become a universal?
and since perception always presents a number of universals,
what determines which one shall perform the
reproduction? finally, since there are infinite differences
of the universal that might be reproduced, what
determines just which differences shall be reproduced?
in this wise the controversy has gone on ever since the
challenge of the old rationalistic logic by the nominalists
launched the issue of empiricism and rationalism. all
the charges which each makes against the other are
easily retorted upon itself. each side is resistless in
attack, but helpless in defense.
in a conception of inference in which both data and
hypothesis are regarded as the tentative, experimental
results of the processes of perception, memory, and
constructive imagination engaged in the special task
of removing conflict, ambiguity, and inhibition, and in
which these processes are not conceived as the functions
of a private mind nor of an equally private brain
and nervous system, but as functions of interacting
beings,—in such a conception there is no ground for
anxiety concerning the simplicity of data, nor the objectivity
of hypotheses. simplicity and objectivity
do not have to be secured through elaborate and
labored metaphysical construction. the data are
simple and the hypothesis objective in so far as they
accomplish the work where unto they are called—the
removal of conflict, ambiguity, and inhibition in conduct
and affection.
in the experimental conception of inference it is clear
that the principles of formal logic must play their rôle
wholly inside the course of logical operations. they
do not apply to relations between these operations and
"reality"; nor to "reality" itself. formal identity
and non-contradiction signify, in experimental logic,
the complete correlativity of data and hypothesis. they
mean that in the logical procedure data must not be
shifted without a corresponding change in the hypothesis
and conversely. the doctrine that "theoretically"
there may be any number of hypotheses for
"the same facts" is, when these multiple hypotheses
are anything more than different names or symbols,
nothing less than the very essence of formal contradiction.
it doubtless makes little difference whether a
disease be attributed to big or little, black or red, demons
or whether the cause be represented by a, b, or c,
etc. but where data and hypotheses are such as are
capable of verification, i.e., of mutually checking up
each other, a change in one without a corresponding
modification of the other is the principle of all formal
fallacies.
with this conception of the origin, nature, and functions
of logical operations little remains to be said of
their truth and falsity. if the whole enterprise of logical
operation, of the construction and verification of
hypothesis, is in the interest of the removal of ambiguity,
and inhibition in conduct, the only relevant
truth or falsity they can possess must be determined
by their success or failure in that undertaking. the
acceptance of this view of truth and error, be it said
again, depends on holding steadfastly to the conception
of the operations of knowing as real acts, which, though
having a distinct character and function, are yet in
closest continuity with other acts of which indeed they
are but modifications and adaptations in order to meet
the logical demand.
here, perhaps, is the place for a word on truth and
satisfaction. the satisfaction which marks the truth
of logical operations—"intellectual satisfaction"—is
the satisfaction which attends the accomplishment of
their task, viz., the removal of ambiguity in conduct,
i.e., in our interaction with other beings. it does not
mean that this satisfaction is bound to be followed by
wholly blissful consequences. all our troubles are not
over when the distress of ambiguity is removed. it
may be indeed that the verdict of the logical operation
is that we must face certain death. very well, we must
have felt it to be "good to know the worst," or no
inquiry would have been started. we should have
deemed ignorance bliss and sat with closed eyes waiting
for fate to overtake us instead of going forward to
meet it and in some measure determine it. death anticipated
and accepted is realiter very different from
death that falls upon us unawares, however we may
estimate that difference. if this distinction in the foci
of satisfaction is kept clear it must do away with a
large amount of the hedonistic interpretations of satisfaction
in which many critics have indulged.
but hereupon some one may exclaim, as did a colleague
recently: "welcome to the ranks of the intellectualists!"
if so, the experimentalist is bound to
reply that he is as willing, and as unwilling, to be welcomed
to the ranks of intellectualism as to those of
anti-intellectualism. he wonders, however, how long
the welcome would last in either. among the intellectualists
the welcome would begin to cool as soon as it
should be discovered that the ambiguity to which logical
operations are the response is not regarded by the experimentalist
as a purely intellectual affair. it is an
ambiguity in conduct with all the attendant affectional
values that may be at stake. it is, to be sure, the
fact of ambiguity, and the effort to resolve it, that adds
the intellectual, logical character to conduct and to
affectional values. but if the logical interest attempts
entirely to detach itself it will soon be without either
subject-matter or criterion. and if it sets itself up as
supreme, we shall be forced to say that our quandaries
of affection, our problems of life and death are merely
to furnish occasions and material for logical operations.
on the other hand, the welcome of the anti-intellectualists
is equally sure to wane when the experimentalist
asserts that the doctrine that logical operations
mutilate the wholeness of immediate experience overlooks
the palpable fact that it is precisely these immediate
experiences—the experiences of intuition and instinct—that
get into conflict and inhibit and mutilate
one another, and as a consequence are obliged to go
into logical session to patch up the mutilation and
provide new and better methods of coöperation.
at this point the weakness in bergson's view of logical
operations appears. bergson, too, is impressed by
the break in continuity between logical operations and
the rest of experience. but with mr. bradley he believes
this breach to be essentially incurable, because
the mutilations and disjunctions are due to and introduced
by logical operations. just why the latter are
introduced remains in the end a mystery. both, to be
sure, believe that logical operations are valuable for
"practical" purposes,—for action. but, aside from
the question of how operations essentially mutilative can
be valuable for action, immediate intuitional experience
being already in unity with reality, why should there
be any practical need for logical operations—least
of all such as introduce disjunction and mutilation?
the admission of a demand for logical operations,
whether charged to matter, the devil, or any other
metaphysical adversary, is, of course, a confession that
conflict and ambiguity are as fundamental in experience
as unity and immediacy and that logical operations
are therefore no less indigenous. the failure to see
this implication is responsible for the paradox that in
the logic of creative evolution the operations of intelligence
are neither creative nor evolutional. they
not only have no constructive part but are positively
destructive and devolutional.
since, moreover, these logical operations, like those
of the objective universal, and like mill's association
of particulars, can only reproduce in fragmentary
form what has already been done, it is difficult to see
how they can meet the demands of action. for here
no more than in mill, or in the logic of idealism, is
there any place for constructive hypotheses or any
technique by which they can become effective. whatever
"creative evolution" may be, there is no place
in its logic for "creative intelligence."
the prominence in current discussion of the logical
reforms proposed by the "analytic logic" of the neo-realistic
movement and the enthusiastic optimism of its
representatives over the prospective results of these
reforms for logic, science, and practical life are the warrant
for devoting a special section to their discussion.
there are indeed some marked differences of opinion
among the expounders of the "new logic" concerning
the results which it is expected to achieve. some find
that it clears away incredible accumulations of metaphysical
lumber; others rejoice that it is to restore
metaphysics, "once the queen of the sciences, to her
ancient throne."
but whatever the difference among the representatives
of analytical logic all seem agreed at the outset
on two fundamental reforms which the "new logic"
makes. these are: first, that analytic logic gets rid
entirely of the act of knowing, the retention of which
has been the bane of all other logics; second, in its discovery
of "terms and relations," "sense-data and
universals" as the simple elements not only of logic
but of the world, it furnishes science at last with
the simple neutral elements at large which it is supposed
science so long has sought, and "mourned because it
found them not."
taking these in order, we are told that "realism frees
logic as a study of objective fact from all accounts of
the states and operations of mind." ... "logic and
mathematics are sciences which can be pursued quite
independently of the study of knowing." "the new
logic believes that it deals with no such entities as
thoughts, ideas, or minds, but with entities that merely
are."
the motive for the banishment of the act of knowing
from logic is that as an act knowing is "mental,"
"psychological," and "subjective." all other logics
have indeed realized this subjective character of the act
of knowing, but have neither dared completely to discard
it nor been able sufficiently to counteract its effects
even with such agencies as the objective universal
to prevent it from infecting logic with its subjectivity.
because logic has tolerated and attempted to compromise
with this subjective act of knowing, say these
reformers, it has been forced constantly into epistemology
and has become a hybrid science. had logic
possessed the courage long ago to throw overboard this
subjective jonah it would have been spared the storms
of epistemology and the reefs of metaphysics.
analytic logic is the first attempt in the history of
modern logical theory at a deliberate, sophisticated exclusion
of the act of knowing from logic. other logics,
to be sure, have tried to neutralize the effects of its
presence, but none has had the temerity to cast it bodily
overboard. the experiment, therefore, is highly interesting.
we should note at the outset that in regarding the
act of knowing as incurably "psychical" and "subjective"
analytic logic accepts a fundamental premise
of the logics of rationalism, empiricism, and idealism
which it seeks to reform. it is true that it is the
bold proposal of analytic logic to keep logic out
of the pit of epistemology by excluding the
act of knowing from logic. nevertheless analytic
logic still accepts the subjective character of this
act; and if it excludes it from its logic it welcomes it
in its psychology. this is a dangerous situation. can
the analytic logician prevent all osmosis between his
logic and his psychology? if not, and if the psychological
act is subjective, woe then to his logic.
had the new logic begun with a bold challenge of the
psychical character of the act of knowing, the prospect
of a logic free from epistemology would have been
much brighter.
with the desire to rid logic of the epistemological
taint the "experimental logic" of the pragmatic movement
has the strongest sympathy. but the proposal to
effect this by the excision of the act of knowing appears
to experimental logic to be a case of heroic but fatal
surgery. prima facie a logic with no act of knowing
presents an uncanny appearance. what sort of logical
operations are possible in such a logic and of what
kind of truth and falsity are they capable?
before taking up these questions in detail it is worth
while to note the character of the entities that "merely
are" with which analytic logic proposes exclusively to
deal. in their general form they are "terms" and
"propositions," "sense-data" and universals. we are
struck at once by the fact that these entities bear the
names of logical operations. they are, to be sure, disguised
as entities and have been baptised in a highly
dilute solution of objectivity called "subsistence."
but this does not conceal their origin, nor does it obscure
the fact that if it is possible for any entities
that "merely are" to have logical character those
made from hypostatized processes of logical operations
should be the most promising. they might
be expected to retain some vestiges of logical character
even after they have been torn from the process
of inquiry and converted into "entities that merely
are." also it is not surprising that having stripped
the act of knowing of its constituent operations
analytic logic should feel that it can well dispense
with the empty shell called "mind" and, as professor
dewey says, "wish it on psychology." but if the
analytic logician be also a philosopher and perchance
a lover of his fellow-man, it is hard to see how he can
have a good conscience over this disposition of the
case.
turning now to the character of inference and of
truth and falsity which are possible in a logic which
excludes the operation of knowing and deals only with
"entities that are," all the expounders seem to agree
that in such a logic inference must be purely deductive.
all alleged induction is either disguised deduction or
a lucky guess. this raises apprehension at the
start concerning the value of analytic logic for other
sciences. but let us observe what deduction in analytic
logic is.
we begin at once with a distinction which involves
the whole issue. we are asked to carefully distinguish
"logical" deduction from "psychological" deduction.
the latter is the vulgar meaning of the term,
and is "the thinker's name for his own act of conforming
his thought" to the objective and independent processes
that constitute the real logical process. this act
of conforming the mind is a purely "psychological"
affair. it has no logical function whatever. in what
the "conforming" consists is not clear. it seems to be
merely the act of turning the "psychological" eye on
the objective logical process. "one beholds it (the
logical process) as one beholds a star, a river, a character
in a play.... the novelist and the dramatist,
like the mathematician and logician, are onlookers at
the logical spectacle." on the other hand, the term
"conforming" suggests a task, with the possibilities
of success and failure. have we, then, two wholly independent
possibilities of error—one merely "psychological,"
the other "logical"? the same point may be
made even more obviously with reference to the term
"beholding." the term is used as if beholding were a perfectly
simple act, having no problems and no possibilities
of mistakes—as if there could be no mis-beholding.
but fixing our psychological eye on the "logical
spectacle," what does it behold? a universal generating
an infinite series of identical instances of itself—i.e.,
instances which differ only in "logical position." if in
a world of entities that "merely are" the term "generation"
causes perplexity, the tension is soon relieved;
for this turns out to be a merely subsistential non-temporal
generation which, like hegel's generation of
the categories, in no way compromises a world of entities
that "merely are."
steering clear of the thicket of metaphysical problems
that we here encounter, let us keep to the logical
trail. first it is clear that logical operations
are of the same reproductive repetitive type that we
have found in the associational logic of empiricism, and
in the logic of the objective universal. indeed, after
objective idealism has conceded that the finite mind
merely "witnesses" or at most contributes only in an
"infinitesimal" degree to the logical activity of the
objective universal, what remains of the supposed gulf
between absolute idealism and analytic realism?
it follows, of course, that there can be no place in
analytic logic for "procedure by hypotheses." however,
it is to the credit of some analytic logicians that
they see this and frankly accept the situation instead
of attempting to retain hypotheses by making them "accidents"
or mere "auxiliaries" of inference. on the
other hand, others find that the chief glory of analytic
logic is precisely that it "gives thought wings" for
the free construction of hypotheses. in his lectures on
"scientific methods in philosophy" mr. russell calls
some of the most elemental and sacred entities of analytic
logic "convenient fictions." this retention of hypotheses
at the cost of cogency is of course in order to avoid
a break with science. those who see that there is no
place in analytic logic for hypotheses are equally anxious
to preserve their connections with science. hence
they boldly challenge the "superstition" that science
has anything to do with hypotheses. newton's "hypotheses
non fingo" should be the motto of every conscientious
scientist who dares "trust his own perceptions
and disregard the ukase of idealism." "the
theory of mental construction is the child of idealism,
now put out to service for the support of its parents."
"theory is no longer regarded in science as an hypothesis
added to the observed facts," but a law which
is "found in the facts." the identity of this with
mill's doctrine of hypotheses as "found in things"
is obvious.
as against the conception of hypotheses as "free,"
"winged," constructions of a psychical, beholding, gossiping
mind we may well take our stand with those who
would exclude such hypotheses from science. and this
doubtless was the sort of mind and sort of hypotheses
newton meant when he said "hypotheses non fingo."
but had newton's mind really been of the character
which he, as a physicist, had learned from philosophers
to suppose it to be, and had he really waited to find his
hypotheses ready-made in the facts, there never would
have been any dispute about who discovered the calculus,
and we should never have been interested in what
newton said about hypotheses or anything else. what
newton did is a much better source of information on
the part hypotheses play in scientific method than
what he said about them. the former speaks for itself;
the latter is the pious repetition of a metaphysical creed
made necessary by the very separation of mind from
things expressed in the statement quoted.
logically there is little to choose between hypotheses
found ready-made in the facts and those which are
the "winged" constructions of a purely psychical mind.
both are equally useless in logic and in science. one
makes logic and science "trifling," the other makes
them "miraculous." but if hypotheses be conceived
not as the output of a cloistered psychical entity but as
the joint product of all the beings and operations
involved in the specific situation in which logical
inquiry originates, and more particularly in all those
involved in the operations of the inquiry itself (including
all the experimental material and apparatus which
the inquiry may require), we shall have sufficient continuity
between hypotheses and things to do away with
miracle, and sufficient reconstruction to avoid inference
that is trifling.
it is, however, the second contribution of analytic
logic that is the basis of the enthusiasm over its prospective
value for other sciences. this is the discovery
that terms and propositions, sense-data, and universals,
are not only elements of logical operation but are
the simple, neutral elements at large which science is
supposed to have been seeking. "as the botanist analyzes
the structures of the vegetable organism and
finds chemical compounds of which they are built so
the ordinary chemist analyzes these compounds into
their elements, but does not analyze these. the physical
chemist analyzes these elemental atoms, as now appears,
into minuter components which he in turn must
leave to the mathematicians and logicians further to
analyze."
again it is worth noting that this mutation of
logical into ontological elements seems to differ
only "in position" from the universal logicism of
absolute idealism.
what are these simple elements into which the
mathematician and logician are to analyze the crude
elements of the laboratory? and how are these elements
to be put into operation in the laboratory? let
us picture an analytic logician meeting a physical
scientist at a moment when the latter is distressed over
the unmanageable complexity of his elements. will
the logician say to the scientist: "your difficulty is
that you are trusting too much to your mundane apparatus.
the kingdom of truth cometh not with such
things. forsake your microscopes, test tubes, refractors
and resonators, and follow me, and you shall behold
the truly simple elements of which you have dreamed."?
and when the moment of revelation arrives and the
expectant scientist is solemnly told that the "simple
elements" which he has sought so long are "terms and
propositions," sense-data and universals, is it surprising
that he does not seem impressed? will he not ask:
"what am i to do with these in the specific difficulties
of my laboratory? shall i say to the crude and complex
elements of my laboratory operations: 'be ye resolved
into terms and propositions, sense-data and
universals'; and will they forthwith obey this incantation
and fall apart so that i may locate and remove
the hidden source of my difficulty? are you not mocking
me and deceiving yourself with the old ontological
argument? your 'simple' elements—are they anything
but the hypostatized process by which elements may
be found?"
the expounders as well as the critics of analytic
logic have agreed that it reaches its most critical junction
when it faces the problem of truth and error.
there is no doubt that the logic of objective idealism, in
other respects so similar to analytic logic, has at this
point an advantage; for it retains just enough of the
finite operation of knowing—an "infinitesimal" part
will answer—to furnish the culture germs of error.
but analytic logic having completely sterilized itself
against this source of infection is in serious difficulty.
here again it is professor holt who has the courage
to follow—or shall we say "behold"?—his theory
as it "generates" the doctrine that error is a given
objective opposition of forces entirely independent of
any such thing as a process of inquiry and all that such
a process presupposes. "all collisions between bodies,
all inference between energies, all process of warming
and cooling, of starting and stopping, of combining
and separating, all counterbalancings, as in cantilevers
and gothic vaultings, are contradictory forces
which can be stated only in propositions that manifestly
contradict each other." but the argument
proves too much. for in the world of forces
to which we have here appealed there is no
force which is not opposed by others and no
particle which is not the center of opposing forces.
hence error is ubiquitous. in making error objective
we have made all objectivity erroneous. we find ourselves
obliged to say that the choir of westminster
abbey, the brooklyn bridge, the heads on our shoulders
are all supported by logical errors!
following these illustrations of ontological contradictions
there is indeed this interesting statement:
"nature is so full of these mutually negative processes
that we are moved to admiration when a few forces coöperate
long enough to form what we call an organism."
the implication is, apparently, that as an
"opposition" of forces is error, "coöperation" of
forces is truth. but what is to distinguish "opposition"
from "coöperation"? in the illustration it is
clear that opposing forces—error—do not interfere
with coöperative forces—truth. where should we find
more counterbalancing, more starting and stopping,
warming and cooling, combining and separating
than in an organism? and if these processes
can be stated only in propositions that are
"manifestly contradictory," are we to understand
that truth has errors for its constituent
elements? such paradoxes have always delighted the
soul of absolute idealism. but, as we have seen, only
the veil of an infinitesimal finitude intervenes between the
logic of the objective universal of absolute idealism
and the objective logic of analytic realism.
it is, of course, this predicament regarding
objective truth and error that has driven most
analytic logicians to recall the exiled psychological,
"mental" act of knowing. it had to be
recalled to provide some basis of distinction
between truth and error, but, this act having already
been conceived as incurably "subjective," the result
is only an exchange of dilemmas. for the reinstatement
of this act ipso facto reinstates the epistemological
predicament to get rid of which it was first banished
from logic.
earnest efforts to escape this outcome have been
made by attaching the act of knowing to the nervous
system, and this is a move in the right direction. but
so far the effort has been fruitless because no connection
has been made between the knowing function of
the nervous system and its other functions. the result
is that the cognitive operation of the nervous system,
as of the "psychical" mind, is that of a mere spectator;
and the epistemological problem abides. an
onlooking nervous system has no advantage over an
"onlooking" mind. onlooking, beholding may indeed
be a part of a genuine act of knowing. but in that
act it is always a stimulus or response to other acts.
it is one of them;—never a mere spectator of them.
it is when the act of knowing is cut off from its connection
with other acts and finds itself adrift that it
seeks metaphysical lodgings. and this it may find
either in an empty psychical mind or in an equally
empty body.
if, in reinstating the act of knowing as a function
of the nervous system, neo-realism had recognized the
logical significance of the fact that the nervous system
of which knowing is a function is the same nervous
system of which loving and hating, desiring and striving
are functions and that the transition from these
to the operations of inquiry and knowing is not a
capricious jump but a transition motived by the loving
and hating, desiring and striving—if this had been
recognized the logic of neo-realism would have been
spared its embarrassments over the distinction of truth
and error. it would have seen that the passage
from loving and hating, desiring and striving to inquiry
and knowing is made in order to renew and reform
specific desires and strivings which, through
conflict and consequent equivocation, have become
fruitless and vain; and it must have seen that the results
of the inquiry are true or false as they succeed
or fail in this reformation and renewal.
but once more, it must steadily be kept in view that
while the loving and hating, desiring and striving,
which the logical operations are reforming and renewing,
are functions of the nervous system, they are not
functions of the nervous system alone, else the door
of subjectivism again closes upon us. loving and
hating, desiring and striving have their "objects."
hence any reformation of these functions involves no
less a reformation of their objects. when therefore
we say that truth and error are relevant to desires
and strivings, this means relevant to them as including
their objects, not as entitized processes (such are
the pitfalls of language) inclosed in a nervous system
or mind. with this before us the relevance of truth
and error to desires and strivings can never be made
the basis for the charge of subjectivism. the conception
of desires as peculiarly individual and subjective
is a survival of the very isolation which is the source
of the difficulty with truth and error. hence the appeal
to this isolation, made alike by idealism and realism,
in charging instrumental logic with subjectivism
is an elementary petitio.
doubtless it will be urged again that the act of
knowing is motived by an independent desire and striving
of its own. this is of course consonant with the
neo-realistic atomism, however inconsonant it may be
with the conception of implication which it employs.
if we take a small enough, isolated segment of experience
we can find meaning for this notion, as we
may for the idea that the earth is flat and that the
sun moves around the earth. but as consequences accrue
we find as great difficulties with the one as with
the other. if the course of events did not bring us to
book, if we could get off with a mere definition of truth
and error we might go on piling up subsistential definitional
logics world without end. but sublime adventurers,
logically unregenerate and uninitiated, will
go on sailing westward to the confusion and confounding
of all definitional systems that leave them out of
account.
the conclusion is plain. if logic is to have room
in its household for both truth and error, if it is to
avoid the old predicament of knowledge that is trifling
or miraculous, tautologous or false, if it is to have no
fear of the challenge of other sciences or of practical
life, it must be content to take for its subject-matter
the operations of intelligence conceived as real acts
on the same metaphysical plane and in strictest continuity
with other acts. such a logic will not fear
the challenge of science, for it is precisely this continuity
that makes possible experimentation, which is
the fundamental characteristic of scientific procedure.
science without experiment is indeed a strange apparition.
it is a λόγος with no λέγειν, a science
with no scire; and this spells dogmatism. how necessary
such continuity is to experimentation is apparent
when we recall that there is no limit to the range of
operations of every sort which scientific experiment
calls into play; and that unless there be thoroughgoing
continuity between the logical demand of the experiment
and all the materials and devices employed in the
process of the experiment, the operations of the latter
in the experiment will be either miraculous or ruinous.
finally, if this continuity of the operations of intelligence
with other operations be essential to science,
its relation to "practical" life is ipso facto established.
for science is "practical" life aware of its problems
and aware of the part that experimental—i.e.,
creative—intelligence plays in the solution of those
problems.
herbart is said to have given the deathblow to
faculty psychology. man no longer appears endowed
with volition, passion, desire, and reason; and logic,
deprived of its hereditary right to elucidate the operations
of inherent intelligence, has the new problem of
investigating forms of intelligence in the making. this
is no inconsequential task. "if man originally possesses
only capacities which after a given amount of
education will produce ideas and judgments" (thorndike,
educational psychology, vol. i, p. ), and if
these ideas and judgments are to be substituted for
a mythical intelligence it follows that tracing their development
and observing their functioning renders
clearer our conception of their nature and value and
brings us nearer that exact knowledge of what we
are talking about in which the philosopher at least
aspires to equal the scientist, however much he may fall
below his ideal.
for contemporary thought concerning the mathematical
sciences this altered point of view generates
peculiarly pressing problems. mathematicians have
weighed the old logic and found it wanting. they have
builded themselves a new logic more adequate to their
ends. but they have not whole-heartedly recognized
the change that has come about in psychology; hence
they have retained the faculty of intelligence knit into
certain indefinables such as implication, relation, class,
term, and the like, and have transported the faculty
from the human soul to a mysterious realm of subsistence
whence it radiates its ghostly light upon the realm
of existence below. but while they reproach the old
logic, often bitterly, their new logic merely furnishes
a more adequate show-case in which already attained
knowledge may be arranged to set off its charms for
the observer in the same way that specimens in a
museum are displayed before an admiring world. this
statement is not a sweeping condemnation, however, for
such a setting forth is not useless. it resembles the
classificatory stage of science which, although not itself
in the highest sense creative, often leads to higher
stages by bringing under observation relations and
facts that might otherwise have escaped notice. and
in the realm of pure mathematics, the new logic has
undoubtedly contributed in this manner to such discoveries.
danger appears when the logician attains
cartesian intoxication with the beauty of logico-mathematical
form and tries to infer from the form
itself the real nature of the formed material. the
realm of subsistence too often has armed indefinables
with metaphysical myths whose attack is valiant when
the doors of reflection are opened. it may be possible,
however, to arrive at an understanding of mathematics
without entering the kingdom of these warriors.
it is the essence of science to make prediction possible.
the value of prediction lies in the fact that
through this function man can control his environment,
or, at worst, fortify himself to meet its vagaries. to
attain such predictions, however, the world need not
be grasped in its full concreteness. hence arise processes
of abstraction. while all other symptoms remain
unnoticed, the temperature and pulse may mark a
disease, or a barometer-reading the weather. the
physicist may work only in terms of quantity in a
world which is equally truly qualitative. all that is
necessary is to select the elements which are most
effective for prediction and control. such selection
gives the principle that dominates all abstractions.
progress is movement from the less abstract to the
more abstract, but it is progress only because the
more abstract is as genuinely an aspect of the concrete
starting-point as anything is. moreover, the
outcome of progress of this sort cannot be definitely
foreseen at the beginnings. the simple activities of
primitive men have to be spontaneously performed before
their value becomes evident. only afterwards can
they be cultivated for the sake of their value, and then
only can the self-conscious cultivation of a science begin.
the process remains full not only of perplexities,
but of surprises; men's activities lead to goals far other
than those which appear at the start. these goals,
however, never deny the method by which the start is
made. developed intelligence is nothing but skill in
using a set of concepts generated in this manner. in
this sense the histories of all human endeavors run
parallel.
where the empirical bases of a science are continually
in the foreground, as in physics or chemistry, the
foregoing formulation of procedure is intelligible and
acceptable to most men. mathematics seem, however,
to stand peculiarly apart. many, with descartes, have
delighted in them "on account of the certitude and
evidence of their reasonings" and recognized their
contribution to the advancement of mechanical arts.
but since the days of kant even this value has become
a problem, and many a young philosophic student has
the question laid before him as to why it is that mathematics,
"a purely conceptual science," can tell us
anything about the character of a world which is, apparently
at least, free from the idiosyncrasies of individual
mind. it may be that mathematics began in
empirical practice, such philosophers admit, but they
add that, somehow, in its later career, it has escaped
its lowly origin. now it moves in the higher circles of
postulated relations and arbitrarily defined entities
to which its humble progenitors and relatives are denied
the entrée. parvenus, however, usually bear with them
the mark of history, and in the case of this one, at
least, we may hope that the history will be sufficient to
drag it from the affectations of its newly acquired set
and reinstate it in its proper place in the workaday
world. for the sake of this hope, we shall take the
risk of being tedious by citing certain striking moments
of mathematical progress; and then we shall
try to interpret its genuine status in the world of
working truths.
beginnings of arithmetic and geometry
the most primitive mathematical activity of man is
counting, but here his first efforts are lost in the obscurity
of the past. the lower races, however, yield
us evidence that is not without value. although
the savage mind is not identical with the mind of primitive
man, there is much in the activities of undeveloped
races that can throw light upon the behavior of peoples
more advanced. we must be careful in our inferences,
however. among the australians and south
americans there are peoples whose numerical systems
go little, or not at all, beyond the first two or three
numbers. "it has been inferred from this," writes
professor boas (mind of primitive man, pp. -),
"that the people speaking these languages are not
capable of forming the concept of higher numbers....
people like the south american indians,
... or like the esquimo ... are presumably
not in need of higher numerical expressions, because
there are not many objects that they have to count.
on the other hand, just as soon as these same people
find themselves in contact with civilization, and when
they acquire standards of value that have to be
counted, they adopt with perfect ease higher numerals
from other languages, and develop a more or less perfect
system of counting.... it must be borne in
mind that counting does not become necessary until
objects are considered in such generalized form that
their individualities are entirely lost sight of. for this
reason it is possible that even a person who owns a
herd of domesticated animals may know them by name
and by their characteristics, without even desiring to
count them."
and there is one other false interpretation to be
avoided. man does not feel the need of counting and
then develop a system of numerals to meet the need.
such an assumption is as ridiculous as to assume prehistoric
man thinking to himself: "i must speak,"
and then inventing voice culture and grammar to make
speaking pleasant and possible. rather, when powers
of communication are once attained, presumably in
their beginnings also without forethought, man being
still more animal than man, there were gradually
dissociated communications of a kind approaching
what numbers mean to us. but the number is not yet
a symbol apart from that of the things numbered.
picture writing, re-representing the things meant, preceded
developmentally any kind of symbolization representing
the number by mere one-one correspondence
with non-particularized symbols. it is plausible, although
i have no anthropological authority for the
statement, that the prevalence of finger words as number
symbols (cf. infra) is originally a consequence of
the fact that our organization makes the hand the
natural instrument of pointing.
the difficulty of passing from concrete representations
to abstract symbols has been keenly stated by
conant (the number concept, pp. -), although
his terminology is that of an old psychology and the
limitations implied for the primitive mind are limitations
of practice rather than of capacity as mr. conant
seems to believe. "an abstract conception is
something quite foreign to the essentially primitive
mind, as missionaries and explorers have found to their
chagrin. the savage can form no mental concept of
what civilized man means by such a word as soul; nor
would his idea of the abstract number  be much clearer.
when he says five, he uses, in many cases at least, the
same word that serves him when he wishes to say hand;
and his mental concept when he says five is a hand.
the concrete idea of a closed fist, of an open hand with
outstretched fingers, is what is uppermost in his mind.
he knows no more and cares no more about the pure
number  than he does about the law of conservation
of energy. he sees in his mental picture only the real,
material image, and his only comprehension of the
number is, "these objects are as many as the fingers
on my hand." then, in the lapse of the long interval
of centuries which intervene between lowest barbarism
and highest civilization, the abstract and concrete become
slowly dissociated, the one from the other. first
the actual hand picture fades away, and the number
is recognized without the original assistance furnished
by the derivation of the word. but the number is still
for a long time a certain number of objects, and not an
independent concept."
an excellent fur trader's story, reported to me by
mr. dewey, suggests a further impulse to count besides
that given by the need of keeping a tally, namely, the
need of making one thing correspond to another in a
business transaction. the indian laid down one skin
and the trader two dollars; if he proposed to count
several skins at once and pay for all together, the
former replied "too much cheatem." the result,
however, demanded a tally either by the fingers,
a pebble, or a mark made in the sand, and as the magnitude
of such transactions grows the need of a specific
number symbol becomes ever more acute.
the first obstacle, then, to overcome—and it has already
been successfully passed by many primitive peoples—is
the need of fortuitous attainment of a numerical
symbol, which is not the mere repeated symbol of
the things numbered. significantly, this symbol is
usually derived from the hand, suggesting gestures of
tallying, and not from the words of already developed
language. consequently, number words relate themselves
for the most part to the hand, and written number
symbols, which are among the earliest writings of
most peoples, tend to depict it as soon as they have
passed beyond the stage mentioned above of merely repeating
the symbol of the things numbered. w. c.
eells, in writing of the number systems of the north
american indians (am. math. mo., nov., ; pp.
-), finds clear linguistic evidence for a digital
origin in about % of the languages examined. of
the non-digital instances,  was sometimes connected
with the first personal pronoun,  with roots meaning
separation, , rarely, meaning more, or plural as distinguished
from the dual, just as the greek uses a
plural as well as a dual in nouns and verbs,  is often
the perfect, complete right. it is often a sacred number
and the base of a quarternary system. conant
(loc. cit. p. ) also gives a classification of the meanings
of simple number words for more advanced languages;
and even in them the hand is constantly in
evidence, as in , the hand; , two hands, half a man,
when fingers and toes are both considered, or a man,
when the hands alone are considered; , one man, two
feet. the other meanings hang upon the ideas of existence,
piece, group, beginning, for ; and repetition,
division, and collection for higher numerals.
a peculiar difficulty lies in the fact that when once
numbering has become a self-conscious effort, the collection
of things to be numbered frequently tends to
exceed the number of names that have become available.
sometimes the difficulty is met by using a second
man when the fingers and toes of the first are used up,
sometimes by a method of repetition with the record
of the number of the repetition itself added to the
numerical significance of the whole process. hence
arise the various systems of bases that occur in developed
mathematics. but the inertia to be overcome
in the recognition of the base idea is nowhere more
obvious than in the retention by the comparatively developed
babylonian system of a second base of  to
supplement the decimal one for smaller numbers.
among the american indians (eells, loc. cit.) the system
of bases used varies from the cumbersome binary
scale, that exercised such a fascination over leibniz
(opera, iii, p. ), through the rare ternary, and
the more common quarternary to the "natural" quinary,
decimal, and vigesimal systems derived from the
use of the fingers and toes in counting.
the achievement of a number base and number words,
however, does not always open the way to further mathematical
development. only too often a complexity of
expression is involved that almost immediately cuts off
further progress. thus the youcos of the amazon
cannot get beyond the number three, for the simplest
expression for the idea in their language is
"pzettarrarorincoaroac" (conant, loc. cit., pp. ,
, ). such names as ", tongo solo manani nun
solo manani" (i.e., , understood,  plus  times, and
 plus ) of the soussous of sierra leone; ",
caxtolli onnauh poalli ipan caxtolli onnaui" ( plus
 times  plus  plus ) of the aztec; ", wick a
chimen ne nompah sam pah nep e chu wink a"
(sioux), make it easy to understand the proverb of
the yorubas of abeokuta, "you may be very clever,
but you can't tell  times ."
almost contemporaneously with the beginnings of
counting various auxiliary devices were introduced to
help out the difficult task. in place of many men,
notched sticks, knotted strings, pebbles, or finger pantomime
were used. in the best form, these devices resulted
in the abacus; indeed, it was not until after the
introduction of arabic numerals and well into the
renaissance period that instrumental arithmetic gave
way to graphical in europe (d. e. smith, rara arithmetica,
under "counters"). "in eastern europe,"
say smith and mikami (japanese mathematics, pp.
-), "it"—the abacus—"has never been replaced,
for the tschotü is used everywhere in russia to-day, and
when one passes over into persia the same type of
abacus is common in all the bazaars. in china the
swan-pan is universally used for the purposes of computation,
and in japan the soroban is as strongly entrenched
as it was before the invasion of western
ideas."
given, then, the idea of counting, and a mechanical
device to aid computation, it still remains necessary to
obtain some notation in which to record results. at
the early dawn of history the egyptians seem to have
been already possessed of number signs (cf. cantor,
gesch. de. math., p. ) and the phœnicians either
wrote out their number words or used a few simple
signs, vertical, horizontal, and oblique lines, a process
which the arabians perpetuated up to the beginning
of the eleventh century (fink, p. ); the greeks, as
early as  b. c., used the initial letters of words for
numbers. but speaking generally, historical beginnings
of european number signs are too obscure to
furnish us good material.
our indians have few number symbols other than
words, but when they occur (cf. eells, loc. cit.) they
usually take the form of pictorial presentation of some
counting device such as strokes, lines dotted to suggest
a knotted cord, etc. indeed, the smaller roman numerals
were probably but a pictorial representation of
finger symbols. however, a beautiful concrete instance
is furnished us in the japanese mathematics (cf. smith
and mikami, ch. iii). the earliest instrument of
reckoning in japan seems to have been the rod, ch'eou,
adapted from the chinese under the name of chikusaku
(bamboo rods) about  a. d. at first relatively
large (measuring rods?), they became reduced to about
 cm., but from their tendency to roll were quickly
replaced by the sangi (square prisms, about  mm.
thick and  cm. long) and the number symbols were
evidently derived from the use of these rods:
for the sake of clearness, tens, hundreds, etc., were
expressed in the even place by horizontal instead of
vertical lines and vice versa; thus  would be
formed the rods were arranged on a sort of
chessboard called the swan-pan. much later the lines
were transferred to paper, and a circle used to denote
the vacant square. the use of squares, however, rendered
it unnecessary to arrange the even places differently
from the odd, so numbers like  came to
be written instead of 
as in the earlier notation.
somewhere in the course of these early mathematical
activities the process has changed from the more or
less spontaneous operating that led primitive man to
the first enunciation of arithmetical ideas, and has
become a self-conscious striving for the solution of
problems. this change had already taken place before
the historical origins of arithmetic are met. thus,
the treatise of ahmes ( b. c.) contains the curious
problem:  persons each have  cats; each cat eats
 mice; each mouse eats  ears of barley; from each ear
 measures of corn may grow; how much grain has
been saved? such problems are, however, half play,
as appears in a leonardo of pisa version some 
years later:  old women go to rome; each woman
has  mules; each mule,  sacks; each sack contains 
loaves; with each loaf are  knives; each knife is in 
sheaths. similarly in diophantus' epitaph (
a. d.): "diophantus passed / of his life in childhood,
/ in youth, and / more as a bachelor; 
years after his marriage, was born a son who died 
years before his father at / his age." often among
peoples such puzzles were a favorite social amusement.
thus braymagupta ( a. d.) reads, "these problems
are proposed simply for pleasure; the wise man
can invent a thousand others, or he can solve the problems
of others by the rules given here. as the sun
eclipses the stars by its brilliancy, so the man of knowledge
will eclipse the fame of others in assemblies of
the people if he proposes algebraic problems, and
still more if he solves them" (cajori, hist. of math.,
p. ).
the limitation of these early methods is that the
notation merely records and does not aid computation.
and this is true even of such a highly developed system
as was in use among the romans. if the reader
is unconvinced, let him attempt some such problem
as the multiplication of cccxvi by cccclxviii,
expressing it and carrying it through in roman numerals,
and he will long for the abacus to assist his
labors. it was the positional arithmetic of the arabians,
of which the origins are obscure, that made possible
the development of modern technique. of this discovery,
or rediscovery from the hindoos, together with
the zero symbol, cajori (hist. of math., p. ) has said
"of all mathematical discoveries, no one has contributed
more to the general progress of intelligence
than this." the notation no longer merely records results,
but now assists in performing operations.
the origins of geometry are even more obscure than
those of arithmetic. not only is geometry as highly
developed as arithmetic when it first appears in occidental
civilization, but, in addition, the problems of
primitive peoples seem to have been such that they
have developed no geometrical formulæ striking enough
to be recorded by investigators, so far as i have been
able to discover. but just as the commercial life of the
phœnicians early forced them self-consciously to develop
arithmetical calculation, so environmental conditions
seem to have forced upon the egyptians a need
for geometrical considerations.
it is almost platitudinous to quote herodotus' remark
that the invention of geometry was necessary because
of the floods of the nile, which washed away the
boundaries and changed the contours of the fields. and
as proclus diadochus adds (procli diadochi, in primum
euclidis elementorum librum commentarii—quoted cantor,
i, p. ): "it is not surprising that the discovery
of this as well as other sciences has sprung from need,
because everything in the process of beginning proceeds
from the incomplete to the complete. there takes
place a suitable transition from sensible perception to
thoughtful consideration and rational knowledge. just
as with the phœnicians, for the sake of business and
commerce, an exact knowledge of numbers had its beginning,
so with the egyptians, for the above-mentioned
reasons, was geometry contrived."
the earliest egyptian mathematical writing that we
know is that of ahmes ( b. c.), but long before
this the mural decorations of the temple wall involved
many figures, the construction of which involved a certain
amount of working knowledge of such operations
as may be performed with the aid of a ruler and compass.
the fact that these operations did not earlier
lead to geometry, as ruler and compass work seems to
have done in japan in the nineteenth century (smith
and mikami, index, "geometry"), is probably due to
the stage at which the development of egyptian intelligence
had arrived, feebly advanced on the road to
higher abstract thinking. it is everywhere characteristic
of egyptian genius that little purely intellectual
curiosity is shown. even astronomical knowledge was
limited to those determinations which had religious or
magically practical significance, and its arithmetic and
geometry never escaped these bounds as with the more
imaginative pythagoreans, where mystical interpretation
seems to have been a consequence of rather
than a stimulus to investigation. an old egyptian
treatise reads (cantor, p. ): "i hold the wooden pin
(nebi) and the handle of the mallet (semes), i hold
the line in concurrence with the goddess sạfech. my
glance follows the course of the stars. when my eye
comes to the constellation of the great bear and the
time of the number of the hour determined by me is
fulfilled, i place the corner of the temple." this incantation
method could hardly advance intelligence; but
the methods of practical measuring were more effective.
here the rather happy device of using knotted
cords, carried about by the harpedonapts, or cord
stretchers, was of some moment. especially, the fact
that the lengths , , and , brought into triangular
form, served for an interesting connection between
arithmetic and the right triangle, was not a little gain,
later making possible the discovery of the pythagorean
theorem, although in egypt the theoretical properties
of the triangle were never developed. the triangle obviously
must have been practically considered by the
decorators of the temple and its builders, but the cord
stretchers rendered clear its arithmetical significance.
however, ahmes' "rules for attaining the knowledge
of all dark things ... all secrets that are contained
in objects" (cantor, loc. cit., p. ) contains merely
a mixture of all sorts of mathematical information of
a practical nature,—"rules for making a round fruit
house," "rules for measuring fields," "rules for making
an ornament," etc., but hardly a word of arithmetical
and geometrical processes in themselves, unless it be
certain devices for writing fractions and the like.
the progress of self-conscious theory
a characteristic of greek social life is responsible
both for the next phase of the development of mathematical
thought and for the misapprehension of its
nature by so many moderns. "when archytas and
menaechmus employed mechanical instruments for solving
certain geometrical problems, 'plato,' says plutarch,
'inveighed against them with great indignation
and persistence as destroying and perverting all the
good that there is in geometry; for the method absconds
from incorporeal and intellectual or sensible
things, and besides employs again such bodies as require
much vulgar handicraft: in this way mechanics
was dissimilated and expelled from geometry, and being
for a long time looked down upon by philosophy, became
one of the arts of war.' in fact, manual labor
was looked down upon by the greeks, and a sharp distinction
was drawn between the slaves who performed
bodily work and really observed nature, and the leisured
upper classes who speculated, and often only knew
nature by hearsay. this explains much of the naïve
dreamy and hazy character of ancient natural science.
only seldom did the impulse to make experiments for
oneself break through; but when it did, a great progress
resulted, as was the case of archytas and archimedes.
archimedes, like plato, held that it was undesirable for
a philosopher to seek to apply the results of science to
any practical use; but, whatever might have been his
view of what ought to be in the case, he did actually
introduce a large number of new inventions" (jourdain,
the nature of mathematics, pp. -).
following the greek lead, certain empirically minded
modern thinkers construe geometry wholly from an
intellectual point of view. history is read by them
as establishing indubitably the proposition that
mathematics is a matter of purely intellectual operations.
but by so construing it, they have, in geometry,
remembered solely the measuring and forgotten
the land, and, in arithmetic, remembered the counting
and forgotten the things counted.
arithmetic experienced little immediate gain from
its new association with geometry, which was destined
to be of momentous import in its latter history, beyond
the discovery of irrationals (which, however,
were for centuries not accepted as numbers), and the
establishment of the problem of root-taking by its association
with the square, and interest in negative
numbers.
the greeks had only subtracted smaller numbers
from larger, but the arabs began to generalize the
process and had some acquaintance with negative results,
but it was difficult for them to see that these
results might really have significance. n. chuquet, in
the fifteenth century, seems to have been the first to
interpret the negative numbers, but he remained a long
time without imitators. michael stifel, in the sixteenth
century, still calls them "numeri absurdi" as over
against the "numeri veri." however, their geometrical
interpretation was not difficult, and they soon won
their way into good standing. but the case of the
imaginary is more striking. the need for it was first
felt when it was seen that negative numbers have no
square roots. chuquet had dealt with second-degree
equations involving the roots of negative numbers in
, but says these numbers are "impossible," and
descartes (geom., ) first uses the word "imaginary"
to denote them. their introduction is due to
the italian algebrists of the sixteenth century. they
knew that the real roots of certain algebraic equations
of the third degree are represented as results of operations
effected upon "impossible" numbers of the form
a+b√- (where a and b are real numbers) without
it being possible in general to find an algebraic
expression for the roots containing only real numbers.
cardan calculated with these "impossibles," using them
to get real results [(+√-)(-√-)=-(-)=],
but adds that it is a "quantitas
quae vere est sophistica" and that the calculus itself
"adeo est subtilis ut est inutilis." in , girard
announced the theorem that every complete algebraic
equation admits of as many roots, real or imaginary,
as there are units in its degree, but gauss first proved
this in , and finally, in his theory of complex
quantity, in .
geometry, however, among the greeks passed into
a stage of abstraction in which lines, planes, etc., in
the sense in which they are understood in our elementary
texts, took the place of actually measured surfaces,
and also took on the deductive form of presentation
that has served as a model for all mathematical
presentation since euclid. mensuration smacked too
much of the exchange, and before the time of archimedes
is practically wholly absent. even such theorems
as "that the area of a triangle equals half the product
of its base and its altitude" is foreign to euclid (cf.
cajori, p. ). lines were merely directions, and
points limitations from which one worked. but there
was still dependence upon the things that one measures.
euclid's elements, "when examined in the light
of strict mathematical logic, ... has been pronounced
by c. s. peirce to be 'riddled with fallacies'"
(cajori, p. ). not logic, but observation
of the figures drawn, that is, concrete symbolization
of the processes indicated, saves euclid from
error.
roman practical geometry seems to have come from
the etruscans, but the roman here is as little inventive
as in his arithmetical ventures, although the latter
were stimulated somewhat by problems of inheritance
and interest reckoning. indeed, before the entrance of
arabic learning into europe and the translation of
euclid from the arabic in , there is little or no
advance over the egyptian geometry of  b. c. even
the universities neglected mathematics. at paris "in
 a rule was introduced that no student should
take a degree without attending lectures on mathematics,
and from a commentary on the first six books
of euclid, dated , it appears that candidates for
the degree of a. m. had to give an oath that they had
attended lectures on these books. examinations, when
held at all, probably did not extend beyond the first
book, as is shown by the nickname 'magister matheseos'
applied to the theorem of pythagoras, the last
in the first book.... at oxford, in the middle of
the fifteenth century, the first two books of euclid were
read" (cajori, loc. cit., p. ). but later geometry
dropped out and not till  was a professorship of
geometry instituted at oxford. roger bacon speaks
of euclid's fifth proposition as "elefuga," and it also
gets the name of "pons asinorum" from its point of
transition to higher learning. as late as the fourteenth
century an english manuscript begins "nowe sues
here a tretis of geometri whereby you may knowe the
hegte, depnes, and the brede of most what erthely
thynges."
the first significant turning-point lies in the geometry
of descartes. viete (-) and others had
already applied algebra to geometry, but descartes,
by means of coördinate representation, established the
idea of motion in geometry in a fashion destined to
react most fruitfully on algebra, and through this, on
arithmetic, as well as enormously to increase the scope
of geometry. these discoveries are not, however, of
first moment for our problem, for the ideas of mathematical
entities remain throughout them the generalized
processes that had appeared in greece. it is worth
noting, however, that in england mechanics has always
been taught as an experimental science, while on the
continent it has been expanded deductively, as a development
of a priori principles.
contemporary thought in arithmetic and
geometry
to develop the complete history of arithmetic and
geometry would be a task quite beyond the limits of this
paper, and of the writer's knowledge. in arithmetic
we were able to observe a stage in which spontaneous
behavior led to the invention of number names and
methods of counting. then, by certain speculative and
"play" impulses, there arose elementary arithmetical
problems which began to be of interest in themselves.
geometry here also comes into consideration, and, in
connection with positional number symbols, begin those
interactions between arithmetic and geometry that
result in the forms of our contemporary mathematics.
the complex quantities represented by number symbols
are no longer merely the necessary results of
analyzing commercial relations or practical measurements,
and geometry is no longer directly based upon
the intuitively given line, point, and plane. if number
relations are to be expressed in terms of empirical spatial
positions, it is necessary to construct many imaginary
surfaces, as is done by riemann in his theory of functions,
a construction representing the type of imagination
which poincaré has called the intuitional in
contradistinction to the logical (value of science,
ch. i). and geometry has not only been led to
the construction of many non-euclidian spaces, but
has even, with peano and his school, been freed from
the bonds of any necessary spatial interpretation
whatsoever.
to trace in concrete detail the attainment of modern
refinements of number theory would likewise exhibit
nothing new in the building up of mathematical intelligence.
we should find, here, a process carried out
without thought of the consequences, there, an analogy
suggesting an operation that might lead us beyond a
difficulty that had blocked progress; here, a play interest
leading to a combination of symbols out of which a
new idea has sprung; there, a painstaking and methodical
effort to overcome a difficulty recognized from the
start. it is rather for us now to ask what it is that
has been attained by these means, to inquire finally
what are those things called "number" and "line"
in the broad sense in which the terms are now used.
in so far as the cardinal number at least is concerned,
the answer generally accepted by dedekind,
peano, russell, and such writers is this: the number
is a "class of similar classes" (whitehead and russell,
prin. math., vol. ii, p. ). to the interpretation of
this answer, mr. russell, the most self-consciously
philosophical of these mathematicians, has devoted his
full dialectic skill. the definition has at least the
merit of being free from certain arbitrary psychologizing
that has vitiated many earlier attempts at the problem.
mr. russell claims for it "() that the formal
properties which we expect cardinal numbers to have
result from it; () that unless we adopt this definition
or some more complicated and practically equivalent
definition, it is necessary to regard the cardinal number
of a class as indefinable" (loc. cit., p. ). that
the definition's terms, however, are not without obscurity
appears in mr. russell's struggles with the zigzag
theory, the no-class theory, etc., and finally in his taking
refuge in the theory of "logical types" (loc. cit.,
vol. iii, part v. e.), whereby the contradiction that
subverted frege and drove mr. russell from the standpoint
of the principles of mathematics is finally overcome.
the second of mr. russell's claims for his definition
adds nothing to the first, for it merely asserts that
unless we adopt some definition of the cardinal number
from which its formal properties result, number is
undefined. any such definition would be, ipso facto, a
practical equivalent of the first. we need only consider
whether or not the formal properties of numbers
clearly follow from this definition.
mr. russell's own experience makes us hesitate.
when he first adopted this definition from frege, he
was led to make the inference that the class of all possible
classes might furnish a type for a greatest cardinal
number. but this led to nothing but paradox and
contradiction. the obvious conclusion was that something
was wrong with the concept of class, and the
obvious way out was to deny the possibility of any such
all-inclusive class. just why there should be such
limitation, except that it enables one to escape the
contradiction, is not clear from mr. russell's analysis
(cf. brown, "the logic of mr. russell," journ. of
phil., psych., and sci. meth., vol. viii, no. , pp.
-). furthermore, to pass to the theory of types
on this ground is to give up the value of the first claim
for the definition (quoted above), since the formal
properties of numbers now merely follow from the definition
because the terms of the definition are reinterpreted
from the properties of number, so that these
properties will follow from it. the definition has become
circular.
the real difficulty lies in the concept of the class.
dogmatic realism is prone to find here an entity for
which, as it is obviously not a physical thing, a home
must be provided in some region of "being." hence
arises the realm of subsistence, as for plato the world
of facts duplicated itself in a world of ideas. but
the subsistent realm of the mathematician is even more
astounding than the ideal realm of plato, for the latter
world is a prototype of the world of things, while the
world of the mathematician is peopled by all sorts of
entities that never were on land or sea. the transfinite
numbers of cantor have, without doubt, a definite
mathematical meaning, but they have no known representatives
in the world of things, nor in the imagination
of man, and in spite of the efforts of philosophers it
may even be doubted whether an entity correlative to
the mathematical infinite has ever been or can ever
be specified.
mr. russell now teaches that "classes are merely
symbolic" (sci. meth. in phil., p. ), but this expression
still needs elucidation. it does, to be sure,
avoid the earlier difficulty of admitting "new and mysterious
metaphysical entities" (loc. cit., p. ), but
the "feeling of oddity" that accompanies it seems not
without significance. what can be meant by a merely
symbolic class of similar classes themselves merely symbolical?
i do not know, unless it is that we are to
throw overboard the effort aimed at arbitrary and
creative definition and proceed in simple inductive and
interpretative fashion. with classes as entities abandoned,
we are left, until we have passed to a new point
of view as to arithmetical entities, in the position of
the intelligent ignoramus who defined a stock market
operation as buying what you can't get with money
you never had, and selling what you never owned for
more than it was ever worth.
the situation seems to be that we are now face to
face with new generalizations. just as number symbols
arose to denote operations gone through in counting
things when attention is diverted from the particular
characteristics of the things counted, and remained
a symbol for those operations with things, so now we
are becoming self-conscious of the character of the
operations we have been performing and are developing
new symbols to express possible operations with
operations. the infinity of the number series expresses
the fact that it is possible to continue the enumerating
process indefinitely, and when we are asked by certain
mathematicians to practise ourselves in such thoughts
as that for infinite series a proper part can be the equal
of the whole, where equality is defined through the
establishment of one-one correspondence, we are really
merely informed that among the group of symbols used
to denote the concrete steps of an ever open counting
process are groups of symbols that can be used to
indicate operations that are of the same type as the
given one in so far as the characteristic of being an
open series is concerned. if there were anywhere an
infinity of things to count, an unintelligible supposition,
it would by no means be true that any selection of
things from that series would be the equivalent of all
things in the series, except in so far as equivalence
meant that they could be arranged in the same type
of series as that from which they were drawn.
similarly the mathematical conception of the continuum
is nothing but a formulation of the manner in
which the cuts of a line or the numbers of a continuous
series must be chosen so that there shall remain no
possible cut or number of which the choice is not indicated.
correspondence is reached between elements
of such series when the corresponding elements can be
reached by an identical process. it seems to me, however,
a mistake to identify the number continuum with
the linear continuum, for the latter must include the
irrational numbers, whereas the irrational number can
never represent a spatial position in a series. for
example, the √ is by nature a decimal involving an
infinite, i.e., an ever increasing, number of digits to
express it and, by virtue of the infinity of these digits,
they can never be looked upon as all given. it is then
truly a number, for it expresses a genuine numerical
operation, but it is not a position, for it cannot be a
determinate magnitude but merely a quantity approaching
a determinate magnitude as closely as one
may please. that is, without its complete expression,
which would be analogous to the self-contradictory task
of finding a greatest cardinal number, there can be no
cut in the line which is symbolized by it. but the operations
of translating algebraic expressions into geometrical
ones and vice versa (operations which are so important
in physical investigations) are facilitated by
the notion of a one to one correspondence between number
and space.
when we pass to the transfinite numbers, we have
nothing in the alephs but the symbols of certain groupings
of operations expressible in ordinary number
series. and the many forms of numbers are all simply
the result of recognizing value in naming definite
groups of operations of a lower level, which may itself
be a complication of processes indicated by the simple
numerical signs. to create such symbols is by no
means illegitimate and no paradox results in any forms
as long as we remember that our numbers are not
things but are signs of operations that may be performed
directly upon things or upon other operations.
for example, let us consider such a symbol as √-.
- signifies the totality of a counting process carried
on in an opposite sense from that denoted by +.
to take the square root is to symbolize a number, the
totality of an operation, such that when the operation
denoted by multiplying it by itself is performed the
result is . consequently the √- is merely the symbol
of these processes combined in such a way that the
whole operation is to be considered as opposite in some
sense to that denoted by √. hence, an easy method
for the representation of such imaginaries is based on
the principle of analytic geometry and a system of co-ordinates.
the nature of this last generalization of mathematics
is well shown by mr. whitehead in his monumental
universal algebra. the work begins with the
definition of a calculus as "the art of manipulating
substitutive signs according to fixed rules, and the deduction
therefrom of true propositions" (loc. cit.,
p. ). the deduction itself is really a manipulation
according to rules, and the truth consists essentially
in the results being actually derived from the premises
according to rule. following stout, substitutive signs
are characterized thus: "a word is an instrument for
thinking about the meaning which it expresses; a substitutive
sign is a means of not thinking about the
meaning which it symbolizes." mathematical symbols
have, then, become substitutive signs. but this is only
possible because they were at an early stage of their
history expressive signs, and the laws which connected
them were derived from the relations of the things
for which they stood. first it became possible to
forget the things in their concreteness, and now they
have become mere terms for the relations that had been
generalized between them. consequently, the things
forgotten and the terms treated as mere elements of a
relational complex, it is possible to state such relational
complexes with the utmost freedom. but this does not
mean that mathematics can be created in a purely
arbitrary fashion. the mark of its origin is upon it in
the need of exhibiting some existing situation through
which the non-contradictory character of its postulates
can be verified. the real advantage of the generalization
is that of all generalizations in science, namely,
that by looking away from practical applications (as
appears in a historical survey) results are frequently
obtained that would never have been attained if our
labor had been consciously limited merely to those
problems where the advantages of a solution were obvious.
so the most fantastic forms of mathematics,
which themselves seem to bear no relation to actual
phenomena, just because the relations involved in them
are the relations that have been derived from dealing
with an actual world, may contribute to the solutions of
problems in other forms of calculus, or even to the creation
of new forms of mathematics. and these new forms
may stand in a more intimate connection with aspects
of the real world than the original mathematics.
in - there appeared in the gelehrte schriften
der universität kasan, lobatchewsky's epoch-making
"new elements of geometry, with a complete theory
of parallels." after proving that "if a straight line
falling on two other straight lines make the alternate
angles equal to one another, the two straight lines
shall be parallel to one another," euclid, finding himself
unable to prove that in every other case they
were not parallel, assumed it in an axiom. but it
had never seemed obvious. lobatchewsky's system
amounted merely to developing a geometry on the basis
of the contradictory axiom, that through a point outside
a line an indefinite number of lines can be drawn,
no one of which shall cut a given line in that plane.
in -, similar results were attained by johann
bolyai in an appendix to his father's "tentamen
juventutem studiosam in elementa matheseosos
puræ ... introducendi" entitled "the science of
absolute space." in  the dissertation of riemann,
under gauss, introduced the idea of an n-ply extended
magnitude, or a study of n-dimensional manifolds and
a new road was opened for mathematical intelligence.
at first this new knowledge suggested all sorts of
metaphysical hypotheses. if it is possible to build
geometries of n-dimensions or geometries in which the
axiom of parallels is no longer true, why may it not
be that the space in which we make our measurements
and on which we base our mechanics is some one of
these "non-euclidian" spaces? and indeed many experiments
were conducted in search of some clue that
this might be the case. such experiments in relation to
"curved spaces" seemed particularly alluring, but all
have turned out to be fruitless in results. failure leads
to investigation of the causes of failure. if our space
had been some one of these spaces how would it have
been possible for us to know this fact? the traditional
definition of a straight line has never been satisfactory
from a physical point of view. to define it as the shortest
distance between two points is to introduce the idea
of distance, and the idea of distance itself has no
meaning without the idea of straight line, and so the
definition moves in a vicious circle. on the metaphysical
side, lotze (metaphysik, p. ) and others (merz,
history of european thought in the nineteenth century,
vol. ii, p. ) criticized these attempts, on the
whole justly, but the best interpretation of the situation
has been given by poincaré.
two lines of thought now lead to a recasting of our
conceptions of the fundamental notions of geometry.
on the one hand, that very investigation of postulates
that had led to the discovery of the apparently strange
non-euclidian geometries was easily continued to an
investigation of the simplest basis on which a geometry
could be founded. then by reaction it was continued
with similar methods in dealing with algebra, and other
forms of analysis, with the result that conceptions of
mathematical entities have gradually emerged that represent
a new stage of abstraction in the evolution of
mathematics, soon to be discussed as the dominating
conceptions in contemporary thought. on the other
hand, there also developed the problem of the relations
of these geometrical worlds to one another, which has
been primarily significant in helping to clear up the
relations of mathematics in its "pure" and "applied"
forms.
geometry passed through a stage of abstraction like
that examined in connection with arithmetic. beginning
with the discovery of non-euclidian geometry, it
has been becoming more and more evident that a line
need not be a name for an aspect of a physical object
such as the ridge-pole line of a house and the like, nor
even for the more abstract mechanical characteristic
of direction of movement;—although the persistency
with which intuitionally minded geometers have sought
to adapt such illustrations to their needs has somewhat
obscured this fact. however, even a cursory examination
of a modern treatise on geometry makes clear
what has taken place. for example, professor hilbert
begins his grundlagen der geometrie, not with definition
of points, lines, and planes, but with the assumption
of three different systems of things (dinge) of
which the first, called points, are denoted a, b, c, etc.,
second, called straight lines (gerade), are denoted
a, b, c, etc., and the third, called planes, are denoted
by α, β, γ, etc. the relations between these things
then receive "genaue und vollständige beschreibung"
through the axioms of the geometry. and the fact
that these "things" are called points, lines, and planes
is not to give to them any of the connotations ordinarily
associated with these words further than are
determined by the axiom groups that follow. indeed,
other geometers are even more explicit on this point.
thus for peano (i principii di geometria, ) the
line is a mere class of entities, the relations amongst
which are no longer concrete relations but types of relations.
the plane is a class of classes of entities, etc.
and an almost unlimited number of examples, about
which the theorems of the geometry will express truths,
can be exhibited, not one of which has any close resemblance
to spatial facts in the ordinary sense.
philosophers, it seems to me, have been slow to recognize
the significance of the step involved in this last
phase of mathematical thought. we have been so
schooled in an arbitrary distinction between relations
and concepts, that while long familiar with general
ideas of concepts, we are not familiar with generalized
ideas of relations. yet this is exactly what
mathematics is everywhere presenting. a transition
has been made from relations to types of relations,
so that instead of speaking in terms
of quantitative, spatial and temporal relations,
mathematicians can now talk in terms of symmetrical,
asymmetrical, transitive, intransitive relational
types and the like. these present, however,
nothing but the empirical character that is common to
such relations as that of father and son; debtor and
creditor; master and servant; a is to the left of b,
b of c; c of d; a is older than b, b than c, c than d,
etc. hence this is not abandonment of experience
but a generalization of it, which results in a calculus
potentially applicable not only to it but also to other
subject-matter of thought. indeed, if it were not for
the possibility of this generalization, the almost unlimited
applicability of diagrams, so useful in the
classroom, to illustrate everything from the nature
of reality to the categorical imperative, as well as to
the more technical usages of the psychological and
social sciences, would not be understandable.
it would be a paradox, however, if starting out from
processes of counting and measuring, generalizations
had been attained that no longer had significance for
counting or measuring, and the non-euclidian hyper-dimensional
geometries seem at first to present this
paradox. but, as the outcome of our second line of
thought proves, this is not the case. the investigation
of the relations of different geometrical systems to
each other has shown (cf. brown, "the work of h.
poincaré," journ. of phil., psy., and sci. meth., vol.
xi, no. , p. ) that these different systems have a
correspondence with one another so that for any
theorem stated in one of them there is a corresponding
theorem that can be stated in another. in other
words, given any factual situation that can be stated
in euclidian geometry, the aspect treated as a straight
line in the euclidian exposition will be treated as a
curve in the non-euclidian, and a situation treated as
three-dimensional by euclid's methods can be treated
as of any number of dimensions when the proper fundamental
element is chosen, and vice versa, although of
course the element will not be the line or plane in our
empirical usage of the term. this is what poincaré
means by saying that our geometry is a free choice,
but not arbitrary (the value of science, pt. iii,
ch. x, sec. ), for there are many limitations imposed
by fact upon the choice, and usually there is some
clear indication of convenience as to the system chosen,
based on the fundamental ideal of simplicity.
it is evident, then, that geometry and arithmetic
have been drawing closer together, and that to-day the
distinction between them is somewhat hard to maintain.
the older arithmetic had limited itself largely
to the study of the relations involved in serial orders
as suggested by counting, whereas geometry had concerned
itself primarily with the relations of groups of
such series to each other when the series, or groups
of series, are represented as lines or planes. but partly
by interaction in analytic geometry, and partly in the
generalization of their own methods, both have come to
recognize the fundamental character of the relations
involved in their thought, and arithmetic, through the
complex number and the algebraic unknown quantities,
has come to consider more complex serial types, while
geometry has approached the analysis of its series
through interaction with number theory. for both,
the content of their entities and the relations involved
have been brought to a minimum. and this is true even
of such apparently essentially intuitional fields as projective
geometry, where entities can be substituted for
directional lines and the axioms be turned into relational
postulates governing their configurations.
nevertheless, geometry like arithmetic, has remained
true to the need that gave it initial impulse. as in
the beginning it was only a method of dealing with a
concrete situation, so in the end it is nothing but such
a method, although, as in the case of arithmetic, from
ever closer contact with the situation in question, it
has been led, by refinements that thoughtful and continual
contact bring, to dissect that situation and give
heed to aspects of it which were undreamed of at the
initial moment. in a sense, then, there are no such
things as mathematical entities, as scholastic realism
would conceive them. and yet, mathematics is not
dealing with unrealities, for it is everywhere concerned
with real rational types and systems where such types
may be exemplified. or we can say in a purely practical
way that mathematical entities are constituted
by their relations, but this phrase cannot here be
interpreted in the hegelian ontological sense in which
it has played so great and so pernicious a part in contemporary
philosophy. such metaphysical interpretation
and its consequences are the basis of paradoxical
absolutisms, such as that arrived at by professor
royce (world and the individual, vol. ii, supplementary
essay). the peculiar character of abstract
or pure mathematics seems to be that its own operations
on a lower level constitute material which serves
for the subject-matter with which its later investigations
deal. but mathematics is, after all, not fundamentally
different from the other sciences. the
concepts of all sciences alike constitute a special
language peculiarly adapted for dealing with certain
experience adjustments, and the differences in the
development of the different sciences merely express
different degrees of success with which such languages
have been formulated with respect to making it possible
to predict concerning not yet realized situations.
some sciences are still seeking their terms and fundamental
concepts, others are formulating their first
"grammar," and mathematics, still inadequate, yearly
gains both in vocabulary and flexibility.
but if we are to conceive mathematical entities as
mere terminal points in a relational system, it is necessary
that we should become clear as to just what is
meant by relation, and what is the connection between
relations and quantities. modern thought has shown
a strong tendency to insist, somewhat arbitrarily, on
the "internal" or "external" character of relations.
the former emphasis has been primarily associated
with idealistic ontology, and has often brought with it
complex dialectic questions as to the identity of an
individual thing in passing from one relational situation
to another. the latter insistence has meant primarily
that things do not change with changing relations
to other things. it has, however, often implied
the independent existence, in some curiously metaphysical
state, of relations that are not relating anything,
and is hardly less paradoxical than the older view.
in the field of physical phenomena, it seems to triumph,
while the facts of social life, on the other hand, lend
some countenance to the view of the "internalists."
like many such discussions, the best way around them
is to forget their arguments, and turn to a fresh and
independent investigation of the facts in question.
things, relations, and quantities
as i write, the way is paved for me by professor
cohen (journ. of phil., psy., and sci. meth., vol. xi,
no. , nov. , , pp. -), who outlines a
theory of relations closely allied to that which i have
in mind. professor cohen writes: "like the distinction
between primary and secondary qualities, the distinction
between qualities and relations seems to me a
shifting one because the 'nature' of a thing changes
as the thing shifts from one context to another....
to professors montague and lovejoy the 'thing' is
like an old-fashioned landowner and the qualities are
its immemorial private possessions. a thing may enter
into commercial relations with others, but these relations
are extrinsic. it never parts with its patrimony.
to me, the 'nature' of a thing seems not to be so
private or fixed. it may consist entirely of bonds,
stocks, franchises, and other ways in which public
credit or the right to certain transactions is represented....
at any rate, relations or transactions
may be regarded as wider or more primary than qualities
or possessions. the latter may be defined as internal
relations, that is, relations within the system
that constitutes the 'thing.' the nature of a thing
contains an essence, i.e., a group of characteristics
which, in any given system or context, remain invariant,
so that if these are changed the things drop out
of our system ... but the same thing may present
different essences in different contexts. as a thing
shifts from one context to another, it acquires new
relations and drops old ones, and in all transformations
there is a change or readjustment of the line
between the internal relations which constitute the
essence and the external relations which are outside the
inner circle...."
before continuing, however, i wish to make certain
interpretations of these statements for which, of course,
professor cohen is not responsible, and with which he
would not be wholly in agreement. my general attitude
will be shown by the first comment. concepts
are only means of denoting fragments of experience
directly or indirectly given. if we then try to speak
of a "nature of a thing" two interpretations of this
expression are possible. the "thing" as such is only
a bit of reality which some motive, that without undue
extension of the term can be called practical, has led
us to treat as more or less isolable from the rest of
reality. its nature, then, may consist of either its
relations to other practically isolated realities or
things, its actual effective value in its environment
(and hence shift with the environment as professor
cohen points out), or may consist of its essence, the
"relations within the system," considered from the
point of view of the potentialities implied by these for
various environments. in the first sense the nature
may easily change with change in environment, but if
it changes in the second sense, as professor cohen
remarks, it "drops out of our system." this i should
interpret as meaning that we no longer have that thing,
but some other thing selected from reality by a different
purpose and point of view. i should not say with
professor cohen that "the same thing may present
different essences in different contexts." every reality
is more than one thing—man is an aggregate of atoms,
a living being, an animal, and a thinker, and all of
these are different things in essence, although having
certain common characteristics. all attribution of
"thingship" is abstraction, and all particular things
may be said to participate in higher, i.e., more abstract,
levels of thingship. hence the effort to retain a thingship
through a changing of essence seems to me but
the echo of the motive that has so long deduced
ontological monism from the logical fact that to
conceive any two things is at least to throw them
into a common universe of discourse. consequently
i should part company from professor cohen on this
one point (which is perhaps largely a matter of definition,
though here not unimportant) and distinguish
merely the nature of a thing as actual and as potential.
of these the former alone changes with the environment,
while the latter changes only as the thing ceases
to be by passing into some other thing. in other
words, if the example does not do violence to professor
cohen's thought, i can quite understand this paper
as a stimulator of criticism, or as a means of kindling
a fire. professor cohen would, i suspect, take this
to mean that the same thing—this paper—must be
looked upon as having two different essences in two
different contexts, for "the same thing may possess
two different essences in different contexts," whereas
i should prefer to interpret the situation as meaning
that there are before me three (and as many more
as may be) different things having three different
essences: first, the paper as a physical object having
a considerable number of definite properties; second,
written words, which are undoubtedly in one sense mere
structural modifications of the physical object paper
(i.e., coloring on it by ink, etc.), but whose reality
for my purpose lies in the power of evoking ideas
acquired by things as symbols (things, indeed, but
things whose essence lies in the effects they produce
upon a reader rather than in their physical character);
and third, the chemical and combustion producing
properties of the paper. now it is simpler for me to
consider the situation as one in which three things
have a common point in thingship, i.e., an abstract
element in common, than to think of "a thing" shifting
contexts and thereby changing its essence.
but now my divergence from professor cohen becomes
more marked. he continues with the following
example (p. ): "our neighbor m. is tall, modest,
cheerful, and we understand a banker. his tallness,
modesty, cheerfulness, and the fact that he is a banker
we usually regard as his qualities; the fact that he is
our neighbor is a relation which he seems to bear to us.
he may move his residence, cease to be our neighbor,
and yet remain the same person with the same qualities.
if, however, i become his tailor, his tallness
becomes translated into certain relations of measurement;
if i become his social companion, his modesty
means that he will stand in certain social relations
with me, etc." in other words, we are illustrating the
doctrine that "qualities are reducible to relations"
(cf. p. ). this doctrine i cannot quite accept
without modification, for i cannot tell what it means.
without any presuppositions as to subjectivity or
consciousness (cf. p. , (a).) there are in the world
as i know it certain colored objects—let the expression
be taken naïvely to avoid idealistico-realistic discussion
which is here irrelevant. now it is as unintelligible
to me that the red flowers and green leaves of the
geraniums before my windows should be reducible to
mere relations in any existential sense, as it would be
to ask for the square root of their odor, though of
course it is quite intelligible that the physical theory
and predictions concerning green and red surfaces
(or odors) should be stated in terms of atomic distances
and ether vibrations of specific lengths. the
scientific conception is, after all, nothing more than
an indication of how to take hold of things and manipulate
them to get foreseen results, and its entities
are real things only in the sense that they are the
practically effective keynotes of the complex reality.
accordingly, instead of reducing qualities to relations,
it seems to me a much more intelligible view to consider
relations as abstract ways of taking qualities in
general, as qualities thought of in their function of
bridging a gap or making a transition between two
bits of reality that have previously been taken as
separate things. indeed, it is just because things are
not ontologically independent beings (but rather selections
from genuinely concatenated existence) that
relations become important as indications of the practical
significance of qualitative continuities which have
been neglected in the prior isolation of the thing.
thus, instead of an existential world that is "a network
of relations whose intersections are called terms"
(p. ), i find more intelligible a qualitatively heterogeneous
reality that can be variously partitioned into
things, and that can he abstractly replaced by systems
of terms and relations that are adequate to symbolize
their effective nature in particular respects. there is
a tendency for certain attributes to maintain their
concreteness (qualitativeness) in things, and for others
to suggest the connection of things with other things,
and so to emphasize a more abstract aspect of experience.
thus then arises a temporary and practical
distinction that tends to be taken as opposition between
qualities and relations. as spatial and temporal
characteristics possess their chief practical value in
the connection of things, so they, like professor cohen's
neighbor-character, are ordinarily assumed abstractly
as mere relations, while shapes, colors, etc., and professor
cohen's "modesty, tallness, cheerfulness," may
be thought of more easily without emphasis on other
things and so tend to be accepted in their concreteness
as qualities, but how slender is the dividing-line professor
cohen's easy translation of these things into
relations makes clear.
taken purely intellectualistically, there would be
first a fiction of separation in what is really already
continuous and then another fiction to bridge the gap
thus made. this would, of course, be the falsification
against which bergson inveighs. but this interpretation
is to misunderstand the nature of abstraction.
abstraction does not substitute an unreal for a real,
but selects from reality a genuine characteristic of it
which is adequate for a particular purpose. thus to
conceive time as a succession of moments is not to
falsify time, but to select from processes going on in
time a characteristic of them through which predictions
can be made, which may be verified and turned
into an instrument for the control of life or environment.
a similar misunderstanding of abstraction,
coupled with a fuller appreciation than bergson
evinces of the value of its results, has led to the neo-realistic
insistence on turning abstractions into existent
entities of which the real world is taken to be an
organized composite aggregate.
the practice of turning qualities into merely conscious
entities has done much to obscure the status
of scientific knowing, for it has left mere quantity as
the only real character of the actual world. but once
take a realistic standpoint, and quantity is no more
real than quality. for primitive man, the qualitative
aspect of reality is probably the first to which he gives
heed, and it is only through efforts to get along with
the world in its qualitative character that its quantitative
side is forced upon the attention. then so-called
"exact" science is born, but it does not follow that
qualities henceforth become insignificant. they are
still the basis of all relations, even of those that are
most directly construed as quantitative. quality and
quantity are only different aspects of the world which
the status of our practical life leads us to take separately
or abstractly. "thing" is no less an abstraction,
in which we disregard certain continuities with
the rest of the world because we are so constituted that
the demands of living make it expedient to do so.
things once given, further abstractions become possible,
among which are those leading to mathematical
thinking, in which higher abstractions are made,
guided always by the "generating problem" (cf. karl
schmidt, jour. of phil., psy., and sci. meth., vol. x,
no. , , pp. -).
the function of theory in science
the controlling factors for the progress of scientific
thought are inventions that lead the scientist into
closer contact with his data, and direct attention to
complexities which would otherwise have escaped observation.
this end is best fulfilled by conceiving
entities that under some point of view are practically
isolable from the context in which they occur. only
too often philosophic thought has confused this practical
segregation with ontological separation, and so
been obliged to introduce metaphysical and external
relations to bring these entities together again in a
real world, when in reality they have never been separated
from one another and hence not from the real
world. furthermore, the conceptual model, built on
the lines of a calculus of mathematics, is often considered
the truth par excellence after the analogy of
a camera's portrait. progress in science, however,
shows that these models have to be continually rebuilt.
each seems to lead to further knowledge that necessitates
its reconstruction, so that truth takes on an ideal
value as an ultimate but unattained, if not unattainable,
goal, while existing science becomes reduced to
working hypotheses. from a positivistic point of view,
however, the goal is not only practically unattainable,
but it is irrational, for there seems to be every
evidence that it expresses something contrary to the
nature of the real. yet scientific theory is not wholly
arbitrary. we cannot construe nature as constituted
of any sorts of entities that may suit our whim. and
this is because science itself recognizes that its entities
are not really isolated, but are endowed with all sorts
of properties that serve to connect them with other
entities. they are only symbols of critical points of
reality which, conceived in a certain way, make the
behavior of the whole intelligible. indeed, the only
significant sense in which they are true for the scientist
is that they indicate real connections that might otherwise
have been overlooked, and this is only possible
from the fact that reality has the characteristics that
they present and that, with their relations, they give
an approximate presentation of what is actually presented
just as a successful portrait painter considers
the individuality of the eyes, nose, mouth, etc., although
he does not imply that a face is compounded
of these separate features as a house is built of
boards.
the atomic theory, for example, has undoubtedly
been of the greatest service to chemistry, and atoms
undoubtedly denote a significant resting-place in the
analysis of the physical world. yet in the light of
electron theories, it is becoming more and more evident
that atoms are not ultimate particles, and are not even
all alike (becker, "isostasy and radioactivity," sci.,
jan. , ) when they represent a single substance.
again, while there is as yet no evidence to suggest
that the electron must itself be considered as
divisible (unless it be the distinction between the positive
and negative electron), there are suggestions that
electrons may themselves arise and pass away (cf.
moore, origin, and nature of life, p. ). "a wisely
positivistic mind," writes enriques (problems of
science, p. ), "can see in the atomic hypothesis only
a subjective representation," and, we might add, "in
any other hypothesis." he continues (pp. -):
"robbing the atom of the concrete attributes inherent
in its image, we find ourselves regarding it as a mere
symbol. the logical value of the atomic theory depends,
then, upon the establishment of a proper correspondence
between the symbols which it contains and
the reality which we are trying to represent.
"now, if we go back to the time when the atomic
theory was accepted by modern chemistry, we see that
the plain atomic formulæ contain only the representation
of the invariable relations in the combination of
simple bodies, in weight and volume; these last being
taken in relation to a well-defined gaseous state.
"but, once introduced into science, the atomic
phraseology suggested the extension of the meaning
of the symbols, and the search in reality for facts in
correspondence with its more extended conception.
"the theory advances, urged on, as it were, by its
metaphysical nature, or, if you wish, by the association
of ideas which the concrete image of the atom
carries with it.
"thus for the plain formulæ we have substituted,
in the chemistry of carbon compounds, structural formulæ,
which come to represent, thanks to the disposition
or grouping of atoms in a molecule, structural
relations of the second degree, that is to say, relations
inherent in certain chemical transformations with respect
to which some groups of elements have in some
way an invariant character. and here, because the
image of a simple molecule upon a plane does not
suffice to explain, for example, the facts of isomerism,
we must resort to the stereo-chemical representation of
van't hoff.
"must we further recall the kinetic theory of gases,
the facts explained by the breaking up of molecules
into ions, the hypothesis suggested, for example, by
van der waals by the view that an atom has an actual
bulk? must we point to a physical phenomenon of
quite a different class, for example, to the coloring of
the thin film forming the soap-bubbles which w.
thomson has taken as the measure of the size of a
molecule?
"such a résumé of results shows plainly that we
cannot help the progress of science by blocking the
path of theory and looking only at its positive aspects,
that is to say, at the collection of facts that it explains.
the value of a theory lies rather in the hypothesis
which it can suggest, by means of the psychological
representation of the symbols.
"we shall not draw from all this the conclusion that
the atomic hypothesis ought to correspond to the extremely
subtle sensations of a being resembling a perfected
man. we shall not even reason about the possibility
of those imaginary sensations, in so far as they
are conceived simply as an extension of our own. but
we shall repeat, in regard to the atomic theory, what
an illustrious master is said to have remarked as to
the unity of matter: if on first examination a fact
seems possible which contradicts the atomic view of
things, there is a strong probability that such a fact
will be disproved by experience.
"does not such a capacity for adaptation to facts,
thus furnishing a model for them, perhaps denote the
positive reality of a theory?"
and the above principles are as true of mathematical
concepts as of chemical. everywhere it is "capacity
of adaptation to facts" that is the criterion of a
branch of mathematics, except, of course, that in
mathematics the facts are not always physical facts.
mathematics has successfully accomplished a generalization
whereby its own methods furnish the material for
higher generalizations. the imaginary number and the
hyper-dimensional or non-euclidian geometries may be
absurd if measured by the standard of physical reality,
but they nevertheless have something real about them
in relation to certain mathematical processes on a
lower level. there is no philosophic paradox about
modern arithmetic or geometry, once it is recognized
that they are merely abstractions of genuine features
of simpler and more obviously practical manipulations
that are clearly derived from the dealing of a human
being with genuine realities.
in the light of these considerations, i cannot help
feeling that the frequent attempts of mathematicians
with a philosophical turn of mind, and philosophers
who are dipping into mathematics, to derive geometrical
entities from psychological considerations are
quite mistaken, and are but another example of those
traditional presuppositions of psychology which, professor
dewey has pointed out (jour. of phil., psy.,
and sci. meth., xi, no. , p. ), were "bequeathed
by seventeenth-century philosophy to psychology, instead
of originating within psychology" ... that
"were wished upon it by philosophy when it was as
yet too immature to defend itself."
henri poincaré (science and hypothesis, ch. iv,
the value of science, ch. iv) and enriques (problems
of science, ch. iv, esp. b—the psychological
acquisition of geometrical concepts) furnish two of
the most familiar examples of this sort of philosophizing.
each isolates special senses, sight, touch, or
motion, and tries to show how a being merely equipped
with one or the other of these senses might arrive at
geometrical conceptions which differ, of course, from
space as represented by our familiar euclidian geometry.
then comes the question of fusing these different
sorts of experience into a single experience of which
geometry may be an intelligible transcription. enriques
finds a parallel between the historical development
and the psycho-genetic development of the postulates
of geometry (loc. cit., p.  seq.). "the three
groups of ideas that are connected with the concepts
that serve as the basis for the theory of continuum
(analysis situs), of metrical, and of projective geometry,
may be connected, as to their psychological origin,
with three groups of sensations: with the general tactile-muscular
sensations, with those of special touch,
and of sight, respectively." poincaré even evokes ancestral
experience to make good his case (sci. and
hyp., ch. v, end). "it has often been said that if
individual experience could not create geometry, the
same is not true of ancestral experience. but what
does that mean? is it meant that we could not experimentally
demonstrate euclid's postulate, but that our
ancestors have been able to do it? not in the least.
it is meant that by natural selection our mind has
adapted itself to the conditions of the external world,
that it has adopted the geometry most advantageous
to the species: or in other words, the most convenient."
now undoubtedly there may be a certain modicum
of truth in these statements. as implied by the last
quotation from poincaré, the modern scientist can
hardly doubt that the fact of the adaptation of our
thinking to the world we live in is due to the fact that
it is in that world that we evolved. as is implied by
both writers, if one could limit human contact with the
world to a particular form of sense response, thought
about that world would take place in different terms
from what it now does and would presumably be less
efficient. but these admissions do not imply that any
light is thrown upon the nature of mathematical entities
by such abstractions. russell (scientific method in
philosophy) is in the curious position of raising arithmetic
to a purely logical status, but playing with
geometry and sensation after the manner of poincaré,
to whom he gives somewhat grudging praise on this
account.
the psychological methods upon which all such investigations
are based are open to all sorts of criticisms.
chiefly, the conceptions on which they are based, even
if correct, are only abstractions. there is not the
least evidence for the existence of organisms with a
single differentiated sense organ, nor the least evidence
that there ever was such an organism. indeed, according
to modern accounts of the evolution of the
nervous system (cf. g. h. parker, pop. sci. month.,
feb., ) different senses have arisen through a
gradual differentiation of a more general form of stimulus
receptor, and consequently, the possibility of the
detachment of special senses is the latter end of the
series and not the first. but, however this may be,
the mathematical concepts that we are studying have
only been grasped by a highly developed organism,
man, but they had already begun to be grasped by him
in an early stage of his career before he had analyzed
his experience and connected it with specific sense
organs. it may of course be a pleasant exercise, if
one likes that sort of thing, to assume with most
psychologists certain elementary sensations, and then
examine the amount of information each can give in
the light of possible mathematical interpretations, but
to do so is not to show that a being so scantily endowed
would ever have acquired a geometry of the type in
question, or any geometry at all. inferences of the
sort are in the same category with those from hypothetical
children, that used to justify all theories of
the pedagogue and psychologist, or from the economic
man, that still, i fear, play too great a part in the
world of social science.
mathematical intelligence
the real nature of intelligence as it appears in the
development of mathematics is something quite other
than that of sensory analysis. intelligence is fundamentally
skill, and although skill may be acquired in
connection with some sort of sensory contact of an
organism and environment, it is only determined by
that contact in the sense that if the sensory conditions
were different the needs of the organism might be
different, and the kind and degree of skill it could attain
would be other than under the conditions at first
assumed. whenever the beginnings of mathematics
appear with primitive people, we find a stage of development
that calls for the exercise of skill in dealing
with certain practical situations. hence we found early
in our investigations that it was impossible to affirm a
weak intelligence from limited achievements in counting,
just as it would be absurd to assume the feeble
intelligence of a philosopher from his inability to manipulate
a boomerang. the instance merely suggests
a kind of skill that he has never been led to
acquire.
yet it is possible to distinguish intellectual skill, or
better skills, from physical or athletic prowess. primarily,
it is directed at the formation and use of concepts,
and the concept is only a symbol that can be
substituted for experiences. a well-built concept is a
part of a system of concepts where relations have taken
the place of real connections in such a fashion that,
forgetting the actuality, it is possible to present situations
that have never occurred or at least are not
immediately given at the time and place of the presentation,
and to substitute them for actual situations
in such a fashion that these may be expediently met,
if or when such situations present themselves. an isolated
concept, that is, one not a part of any system, is as
mythical an entity as any savage ever dreamed. indeed,
it would add much to the clearness of our thinking
if we could limit the use of "intelligence" to skill
in constructing and using different systems of concepts,
and speak concretely of mathematical intelligence,
philosophical intelligence, economic intelligence, historic
intelligence, and the like. the problem of
creative intelligence is, after all, the problem of the
acquisition of certain forms of skill, and while the
general lines are the same for all knowledge (because
the instruments are everywhere symbolic presentations,
or concepts), in each field the situation studied makes
different types of difficulties to be overcome and suggest
different methods of attaining the object.
in mathematics, the formal impulse to reduce the
content of fundamental concepts to a minimum, and
to stress merely relations has been most successful.
we saw its results in such geometries as hilbert's and
peano's, where the empty name "entity" supplants
the more concrete "point," and the "" of arithmetic
has the same character. in the social sciences, however,
such examples as the "political" and the "economic"
man are signal failures, while, perhaps, the
"atom" and the "electron" approach the ideal in
physics and chemistry. in mathematics, all further
concepts can be defined by collections of these fundamental
entities constituted in certain specified ways.
and it is worth noting that both factually and logically
a collection of entities so defined is not a mere aggregate,
but possesses a differentiated character of its
own which, although the resultant of its constitution,
is not a property of any of its elements. a whole
number is thus a collection of s, but the properties of
the whole number are something quite different from
that of the elements through which it is constituted,
just as an atom may be composed of electrons and yet,
in valency, possess a property that is not the direct analogue
of any property possessed by electrons not so
organized.
natural science, however, considers such building
up of its fundamental entities into new entities as a
process taking place in time rather than as consequent
upon change of form of the whole rendering new
analytic forms expedient. hence it points to the occurrence
of genuine novelties in the realm of objective
reality. mathematics, on the other hand, has generalized
its concepts beyond the facts implied in spatial
and temporal observations, so that while significant
in both fields by virtue of the nature of its abstractions,
its novelties are the novelties of new conceptual formations,
a distinguishing of previously unnoted generalizations
of relations existent in the realm of facts.
but the fact that time has thus passed beyond its
empirical meaning in the mathematical realm is no
ground for giving mathematics an elevated position as
a science of eternal realities, of subsistent beings, or
the like. the generalization of concepts to cover both
spatial and temporal facts does not create new entities
for which a home must be provided in the partition of
realities. metaphysicians should not be the "needy
knife grinders" of m. anatole france (cf. garden of
epicurus, ch. "the language of the metaphysicians").
nevertheless, the success of abstraction for
mathematical intelligence has been immense.
no significant thinking is wholly the work of an
individual man. ideas are a product of social coöperation
in which some have wrested crude concepts from
nature, others have refined them through usage, and
still others have built them into an effective system.
the first steps were undoubtedly taken in an effort to
communicate, and progress has been in part the progress
of language. the original nature of man may
have as a part those reactions which we call curiosity,
but, as auguste comte long ago pointed out (lévy-bruhl,
a. comte, p. ), these reactions are among the
feeblest of our nature and without the pressure of practical
affairs could hardly have advanced the race beyond
barbarism. science was the plaything of the
greek, the consolation of the middle ages, and only
for the modern has it become an instrument in such
fashion as to mark an epoch in the still dawning discovery
of mind.
man is, after all, rational only because through his
nervous system he can hold his immediate responses
in check and finally react as a being that has had
experiences and profited by them. concepts are the
medium through which these experiences are in effect
preserved; they express not merely a fact recorded but
also the significance of a fact, not merely a contact
with the world but also an attitude toward the future.
it may be that the mere judgment of fact, a citation
of resemblances and differences, is the basis of scientific
knowledge, but before knowledge is worthy of the
name, these facts have undergone an ideal transformation
controlled by the needs of successful prediction
and motivated by that self-conscious realization of the
value of control which has raised man above the beasts
of the field.
the realm of mathematics, which we have been examining,
is but one aspect of the growth of intelligence.
but in theory, at least, it is among the most
interesting, since in it are reached the highest
abstractions of science, while its empirical beginnings
are not lost. but its processes and
their significance are in no way different in
essence from those of the other sciences. it marks
one road of specialization in the discovery of mind.
and in these terms we may read all history. to
quote professor woodbridge (columbia university
quarterly, dec., , p. ): "we may see man
rising from the ground, startled by the first dim intimation
that the things and forces about him are
convertible and controllable. curiosity excites him,
but he is subdued by an untrained imagination. the
things that frighten him, he tries to frighten in return.
the things that bless him, he blesses. he would scare
the earth's shadow from the moon and sacrifice his
dearest to a propitious sky. it avails not. but the
little things teach him and discipline his imagination.
he has kicked the stone that bruised him only to be
bruised again. so he converts the stone into a weapon
and begins the subjugation of the world, singing a song
of triumph by the way. such is his history in epitome—a
blunder, a conversion, a conquest, and a song.
that sequence he will repeat in greater things. he
will repeat it yet and rejoice where he now despairs,
converting the chaos of his social, political, industrial,
and emotional life into wholesome force. he will sing
again. but the discovery of mind comes first, and then,
the song."
the scientist in the ancient world found his test of
reality in the evidence of the presence of the essence
of the object. this evidence came by way of observation,
even to the platonist. plato could treat this
evidence as the awaking of memories of the ideal essence
of the object seen in a world beyond the heavens during
a former stage of the existence of the soul. in the
language of theatetus it was the agreement of fluctuating
sensual content with the thought-content imprinted
in or viewed by the soul. in aristotle it is again
the agreement of the organized sensuous experience
with the vision which the mind gets of the essence of
the object through the perceptual experience of a number
of instances. that which gives the stamp of reality
is the coincidence of the percept with a rational content
which must in some sense be in the mind to insure
knowledge, as it must be in the cosmos to insure existence,
of the object. the relation of this test of reality
to an analytical method is evident. our perceptual
world is always more crowded and confused than the
ideal contents by which the reality of its meaning is
to be tested. the aim of the analysis varies with the
character of the science. in the case of aristotle's
theoretical sciences, such as mathematics and metaphysics,
where one proceeds by demonstration from the
given existences, analysis isolates such elements as
numbers, points, lines, surfaces, and solids, essences
and essential accidents. aristotle approaches nature,
however, as he approaches the works of human art.
indeed, he speaks of nature as the artificer par excellence.
in the study of nature, then, as in the study
of the practical and productive arts, it is of the first
importance that the observer should have the idea—the
final cause—as the means of deciphering the nature of
living forms. here analysis proceeds to isolate characters
which are already present in forms whose functions
are assumed to be known. by analogy such identities
as that of fish fins with limbs of other vertebrates are
assumed, and some very striking anticipations of modern
biological conceptions and discoveries are reached.
aristotle recognizes that the theory of the nature of
the form or essence must be supported by observation
of the actual individual. what is lacking is any body
of observation which has value apart from some theory.
he tests his theory by the observed individual which
is already an embodied theory, rather than by what
we are wont to call the facts. he refers to other observers
to disagree with them. he does not present
their observations apart from their theories as material
which has existential value, independent for the
time being of any hypothesis. and it is consistent
with this attitude that he never presents the observations
of others in support of his own doctrine. his
analysis within this field of biological observation does
not bring him back to what, in modern science, are the
data, but to general characters which make up the
definition of the form. his induction involves a gathering
of individuals rather than of data. thus analysis
in the theoretical, the natural, the practical,
and the productive sciences, leads back to universals.
this is quite consistent with aristotle's metaphysical
position that since the matter of natural objects has
reality through its realization in the form, whatever
appears without such meaning can be accounted for
only as the expression of the resistance which matter
offers to this realization. this is the field of a blind
necessity, not that of a constructive science.
continuous advance in science has been possible
only when analysis of the object of knowledge has supplied
not elements of meanings as the objects have
been conceived but elements abstracted from those
meanings. that is, scientific advance implies a willingness
to remain on terms of tolerant acceptance of
the reality of what cannot be stated in the accepted
doctrine of the time, but what must be stated in the
form of contradiction with these accepted doctrines.
the domain of what is usually connoted by the term
facts or data belongs to the field lying between the old
doctrine and the new. this field is not inhabited by
the aristotelian individual, for the individual is but
the realization of the form or universal essence. when
the new theory has displaced the old, the new individual
appears in the place of its predecessor, but
during the period within which the old theory is being
dislodged and the new is arising, a consciously growing
science finds itself occupied with what is on the one
hand the débris of the old and on the other the building
material of the new. obviously, this must find its immediate
raison d'être in something other than the
meaning that is gone or the meaning that is not yet
here. it is true that the barest facts do not lack
meaning, though a meaning which has been theirs in
the past is lost. the meaning, however, that is still
theirs is confessedly inadequate, otherwise there would
be no scientific problem to be solved. thus, when
older theories of the spread of infectious diseases lost
their validity because of instances where these explanations
could not be applied, the diagnoses and accounts
which could still be given of the cases of the
sickness themselves were no explanation of the spread
of the infection. the facts of the spread of the infection
could be brought neither under a doctrine of
contagion which was shattered by actual events nor
under a doctrine of the germ theory of disease, which
was as yet unborn. the logical import of the dependence
of these facts upon observation, and hence
upon the individual experience of the scientist, i shall
have occasion to discuss later; what i am referring to
here is that the conscious growth of science is accompanied
by the appearance of this sort of material.
there were two fields of ancient science, those of
mathematics and of astronomy, within which very considerable
advance was achieved, a fact which would
seem therefore to offer exception to the statement just
made. the theory of the growth of mathematics is a
disputed territory, but whether mathematical discovery
and invention take place by steps which can be identified
with those which mark the advance in the experimental
sciences or not, the individual processes in which
the discoveries and inventions have arisen are almost
uniformly lost to view in the demonstration which presents
the results. it would be improper to state that
no new data have arisen in the development of mathematics,
in the face of such innovations as the minus
quantity, the irrational, the imaginary, the infinitesimal,
or the transfinite number, and yet the innovations
appear as the recasting of the mathematical theories
rather than as new facts. it is of course true that
these advances have depended upon problems such as
those which in the researches of kepler and galileo
led to the early concepts of the infinitesimal procedure,
and upon such undertakings as bringing the combined
theories of geometry and algebra to bear upon the
experiences of continuous change. for a century after
the formulation of the infinitesimal method men were
occupied in carrying the new tool of analysis into
every field where its use promised advance. the
conceptions of the method were uncritical. its applications
were the center of attention. the next
century undertook to bring order into the concepts,
consistency into the doctrine, and rigor into the
reasoning. the dominating trend of this movement
was logical rather than methodological. the development
was in the interest of the foundations of
mathematics rather than in the use of mathematics
as a method for solving scientific problems. of course
this has in no way interfered with the freedom of
application of mathematical technique to the problems
of physical science. on the contrary, it was on account
of the richness and variety of the contents which the
use of mathematical methods in the physical sciences
imported into the doctrine that this logical housecleaning
became necessary in mathematics. the movement
has been not only logical as distinguished from methodological
but logical as distinguished from metaphysical
as well. it has abandoned a euclidean space with its
axioms as a metaphysical presupposition, and it has
abandoned an aristotelian subsumptive logic for which
definition is a necessary presupposition. it recognizes
that everything cannot be proved, but it does not undertake
to state what the axiomata shall be; and it also
recognizes that not everything can be defined, and does
not undertake to determine what shall be defined implicitly
and what explicitly. its constants are logical
constants, as the proposition, the class and the relation.
with these and their like and with relatively
few primitive ideas, which are represented by symbols,
and used according to certain given postulates, it becomes
possible to bring the whole body of mathematics
within a single treatment. the development of this
pure mathematics, which comes to be a logic of the
mathematical sciences, has been made possible by such
a generalization of number theory and theories of the
elements of space and time that the rigor of mathematical
reasoning is secured, while the physical
scientist is left the widest freedom in the choice
and construction of concepts and imagery for his
hypotheses. the only compulsion is a logical compulsion.
the metaphysical compulsion has disappeared
from mathematics and the sciences whose techniques it
provides.
it was just this compulsion which confined ancient
science. euclidian geometry defined the limits of
mathematics. even mechanics was cultivated largely
as a geometrical field. the metaphysical doctrine
according to which physical objects had their own places
and their own motions determined the limits within
which astronomical speculations could be carried on.
within these limits greek mathematical genius achieved
marvelous results. the achievements of any period
will be limited by two variables: the type of problem
against which science formulates its methods, and the
materials which analysis puts at the scientist's disposal
in attacking the problems. the technical problems
of the trisection of an angle and the duplication
of a cube are illustrations of the problems which
characterize a geometrical doctrine that was finding
its technique. there appears also the method of analysis
of the problem into simpler problems, the
assumption of the truth of the conclusion to be proved
and the process of arguing from this to a known truth.
the more fundamental problem which appears first
as the squaring of the circle, which becomes that of
the determination of the relation of the circle to its
diameter and development of the method of exhaustion,
leads up to the sphere, the regular polyhedra, to conic
sections and the beginnings of trigonometry. number
was not freed from the relations of geometrical magnitudes,
though archimedes could conceive of a number
greater or smaller than any assignable magnitude.
with the method of exhaustion, with the conceptions
of number found in writings of archimedes and others,
with the beginnings of spherical geometry and trigonometry,
and with the slow growth of algebra finding
its highest expression in that last flaring up of greek
mathematical creation, the work of diophantes; there
were present all the conceptions which were necessary
for attack upon the problems of velocities and changing
velocities, and the development of the method of
analysis which has been the revolutionary tool of europe
since the renaissance. but the problems of a
relation between the time and space of a motion that
should change just as a motion, without reference to
the essence of the object in motion, were problems
which did not, perhaps could not, arise to confront
the greek mind. in any case its mathematics was firmly
embedded in a euclidian space. though there are
indications of some distrust, even in greek times, of
the parallel axiom, the suggestion that mathematical
reasoning could be made rigorous and comprehensive
independently of the specific content of axiom and
definition was an impossible one for the greek, because
such a suggestion could be made only on the
presupposition of a number theory and an algebra
capable of stating a continuum in terms which are
independent of the sensuous intuition of space and time
and of the motion that takes place within space and
time. in the same fashion mechanics came back to
fundamental generalizations of experience with reference
to motions which served as axioms of mechanics,
both celestial and terrestrial: the assumptions of the
natural motion of earthly substances to their own
places in straight lines, and of celestial bodies in circles
and uniform velocities, of an equilibrium where equal
weights operate at equal distances from the fulcrum.
the incommensurable of pythagoras and the paradoxes
of zeno present the "no thoroughfares" of ancient
mathematical thought. neither the continuum
of space nor of motion could be broken up into ultimate
units, when incommensurable ratios existed which
could not be expressed, and when motion refused to be
divided into positions of space or time since these are
functions of motion. it was not until an algebraic
theory of number led mathematicians to the use of
expressions for the irrational, the minus, and the imaginary
numbers through the logical development of
generalized expressions, that problems could be formulated
in which these irrational ratios and quantities
were involved, though it is also true that the effort
to deal with problems of this character was in no small
degree responsible for the development of the algebra.
fixed metaphysical assumptions in regard to number,
space, time, motion, and the nature of physical objects
determined the limits within which scientific investigation
could take place. thus though the hypothesis
of copernicus and in all probability of tycho brahe
were formulated by greek astronomers, their physical
doctrine was unable to use them because they were in
flagrant contradiction with the definitions the ancient
world gave to earthly and celestial bodies and their
natural motions. the atomic doctrine with democritus'
thoroughgoing undertaking to substitute a quantitative
for a qualitative conception of matter with the
location of the qualitative aspects of the world in the
experience of the soul appealed only to the epicurean
who used the theory as an exorcism to drive out of the
universe the spirits which disturbed the calm of the
philosopher.
there was only one field in which ancient science
seemed to break away from the fixed assumptions
of its metaphysics and from the definitions of natural
objects which were the bases for their scientific inferences,
this was the field of astronomy in the period
after eudoxus. up to and including the theories of
eudoxus, physical and mathematical astronomy went
hand in hand. eudoxus' nests of spheres within spheres
hung on different axes revolving in different uniform
periods was the last attempt of the mathematician
philosopher to state the anomalies of the heavens, and
to account for the stations, the retrogressions, and
varying velocities of planetary bodies by a theory resolving
all phenomena of these bodies into motions of
uniform velocities in perfect circles, and also placing
these phenomena within a physical theory consistent
with the prevailing conceptions of the science and philosophy
of the time. as a physicist aristotle felt the
necessity of introducing further spheres between the
nests of spheres assigned by eudoxus to the planetary
bodies, spheres whose peculiar motions should correct
the tendency of the different groups of spheres to pass
their motions on to each other. since the form of the
orbits of heavenly bodies and their velocities could not
be considered to be the results of their masses and of
their relative positions with reference to one another;
since it was not possible to calculate the velocities and
orbits from the physical characters of the bodies, since
in a word these physical characters did not enter into
the problem of calculating the positions of the bodies
nor offer explanations for the anomalies which the
mathematical astronomer had to explain, it was not
strange that he disinterested himself from the metaphysical
celestial mechanics of his time and concentrated
his attention upon the geometrical hypotheses
by means of which he could hope to resolve into uniform
revolutions in circular orbits the anomalous motions
of the planetary bodies. the introduction of the
epicycle with the deferent and the eccentric as working
hypotheses to solve the anomalies of the heavens is
to be comprehended largely in view of the isolation of
the mathematical as distinguished from the physical
problem of astronomy. in no sense were these conceptions
working hypotheses of a celestial mechanics.
they were the only means of an age whose mathematics
was almost entirely geometrical for accomplishing
what a later generation could accomplish by an algebraic
theory of functions. as has been pointed out,
the undertaking of the ancient mathematical astronomer
to resolve the motions of planetary bodies into
circular, uniform, continuous, symmetrical movements
is comparable to the theorem of fourier which allows
the mathematician to replace any one periodic function
by a sum of circular functions. in other words,
the astronomy of the alexandrian period is a somewhat
cumbrous development of the mathematical technique
of the time to enable the astronomer to bring the anomalies
of the planetary bodies, as they increased under
observation, within the axioms of a metaphysical
physics. the genius exhibited in the development of
the mathematical technique places the names of apollonius
of perga, hipparchus of nicaea, and ptolemy
among the great mathematicians of the world, but they
never felt themselves free to attack by their hypotheses
the fundamental assumptions of the ancient metaphysical
doctrine of the universe. thus it was said of
hipparchus by adrastus, a philosopher of the first
century a. d., in explaining his preference for the
epicycle to the eccentric as a means of analyzing the
motions of the planetary bodies: "he preferred and
adopted the principle of the epicycle as more probable
to his mind, because it ordered the system of the
heavens with more symmetry and with a more intimate
dependence with reference to the center of the universe.
although he guarded himself from assuming the rôle
of the physicist in devoting himself to the investigations
of the real movements of the stars, and in undertaking
to distinguish between the motions which nature has
adopted from those which the appearances present to
our eyes, he assumed that every planet revolved along
an epicycle, the center of which describes a circumference
concentric with the earth." even mathematical
astronomy does not offer an exception to the scientific
method of the ancient world, that of bringing to
consciousness the concepts involved in their world
of experience, organizing these concepts with reference
to each, analyzing and restating them within
the limits of their essential accidents, and assimilating
the concrete objects of experience to these typical
forms as more or less complete realizations.
at the beginning of the process of greek self-conscious
reflection and analysis, the mind ran riot among
the concepts and their characters until the contradictions
which arose from these unsystematized speculations
brought the greek mind up to the problems of
criticism and scientific method. criticism led to the
separation of the many from the one, the imperfect copy
from the perfect type, the sensuous and passionate from
the rational and the intrinsically good, the impermanent
particular from the incorruptible universal. the line
of demarcation ran between the lasting reality that
answered to critical objective thought and the realm
of perishing imperfect instances, of partially realized
forms full of unmeaning differences due to distortion
and imperfection, the realm answering to a sensuous
passionate unreflective experience. it would be a quite
inexcusable mistake to put all that falls on the wrong
side of the line into a subjective experience, for these
characters belonged not alone to the experience, but also
to the passing show, to the world of imperfectly developed
matter which belonged to the perceptual passionate
experience. while it may not then be classed
as subjective, the greeks of the sophistic period felt
that this phase of existence was an experience which
belongs to the man in his individual life, that life in
which he revolts from the conventions of society, in
which he questions accepted doctrine, in which he differentiates
himself from his fellows. protagoras seems
even to have undertaken to make this experience of the
individual, the stuff of the known world. it is difficult
adequately to assess protagoras' undertaking. he
seems to be insisting both that the man's experience as
his own must be the measure of reality as known and
on the other hand that these experiences present norms
which offer a choice in conduct. if this is true protagoras
conceived of the individual's experience in its
atypical and revolutionary form as not only real but
the possible source of fuller realities than the world
of convention. the undertaking failed both in philosophic
doctrine and in practical politics. it failed
in both fields because the subjectivist, both in theory
and practice, did not succeed in finding a place
for the universal character of the object, its meaning,
in the mind of the individual and thus in finding
in this experience the hypothesis for the reconstruction
of the real world. in the ancient world the
atypical individual, the revolutionist, the non-conformist
was a self-seeking adventurer or an anarchist, not
an innovator or reformer, and subjectivism in ancient
philosophy remained a skeptical attitude which could
destroy but could not build up.
hippocrates and his school came nearer consciously
using the experience of the individual as the actual
material of the object of knowledge. in the skeptical
period in which they flourished they rejected on the
one hand the magic of traditional medicine and on the
other the empty theorizing that had been called out
among the physicians by the philosophers. their practical
tasks held them to immediate experience. their
functions in the gymnasia gave their medicine an interest
in health as well as in disease, and directed their
attention largely toward diet, exercise, and climate
in the treatment even of disease. in its study they have
left the most admirable sets of observations, including
even accounts of acknowledged errors and the results
of different treatments of cases, which ancient science
can present. it was the misfortune of their science
that it dealt with a complicated subject-matter dependent
for its successful treatment upon the whole
body of physical, chemical, and biological disciplines
as well as the discovery and invention of complicated
techniques. they were forced after all to adopt a
hopelessly inadequate physiological theory—that of
the four humors—with the corresponding doctrine of
health and disease as the proper and improper mixture
of these fluids. their marvelously fine observation
of symptoms led only to the definition of types and a
medical practice which was capable of no consistent
progress outside of certain fields of surgery. thus
even greek medicine was unable to develop a different
type of scientific method except in so far as it kept alive
an empiricism which played a not unimportant part
in post-aristotelian philosophy. within the field of
astronomy in explaining the anomalies of the heavens
involved in their metaphysical assumptions, they built
up a marvelously perfect euclidian geometry, for here
refined and exhaustive definition of all the elements was
possible. the problems involved in propositions to be
proved appeared in the individual experience of the
geometrician, but this experience in space was uniform
with that of every one else and took on a universal not
an individual form. the test of the solution was given
in a demonstration which holds for every one living
in the same euclidian space. when the mathematician
found himself carried by his mathematical technique
beyond the assumptions of a metaphysical physics he
abandoned the field of physical astronomy and confined
himself to the development of his mathematical expressions.
in other fields greek science analyzed with varying
success and critical skill only the conceptions found in
the experience of their time and world. nor did greek
thought succeed in formulating any adequate method
by which the ultimate concepts in any field of science
were to be determined. it is in aristotle's statement of
induction and the process of definition that we appreciate
most clearly the inadequacy of their method. this
inadequacy lies fundamentally in aristotle's conception
of observation which, as i have already noted, implies
the recognition of an individual, that is, an object
which is an embodied form or idea. the function of
knowledge is to bring out this essence. the mind sees
through the individuals the universal nature. the
value of the observation lies, then, not in the controlled
perception of certain data as observed facts,
but in the insight with which he recognizes the nature
of the object. when this nature has been seen it is
to be analyzed into essential characters and thus
formulated into the definition. in aristotle's methodology
there is no procedure by which the mind can
deliberately question the experience of the community
and by a controlled method reconstruct its received
world. thus the natural sciences were as really fixed
by the conceptions of the community as were the exact
sciences by the conceptions of a euclidian geometry
and the mathematics which the greeks formulated
within it. the individual within whose peculiar experience
arises a contradiction to the prevailing conceptions
of the community and in whose creative
intelligence appears the new hypothesis which makes
possible a new heaven and a new earth could utilize
his individual experience only in destructive skepticism.
subjectivism served in ancient thought to invalidate
knowledge not to enlarge it.
zeller has sketched a parallelism between the ideal
state of plato and the social structure of the medieval
world. the philosopher-king is represented by the pope,
below him answering to the warrior class in the platonic
state stands the warrior class of the holy roman
empire, who in theory enforce the dictates of the
roman curia, while at the bottom in both communities
stand the mass of the people bound to obedience to the
powers above. there is, however, one profound difference
between the two, and that is to be found in the
relative positions of the ideal worlds that dominate
each. plato's ideal world beyond the heavens gives
what reality it has to this through the participation
by the world of becoming in the ideas. opinion dimly
sensed the ideas in the evanescent objects about it, and
though plato's memory theory of knowledge assumed
that the ideas had been seen in former existence and
men could thus recognize the copies here, the ideal
world was not within the mind but without. in a real
sense the kingdom of heaven was within men in the
medieval world, as was the holy roman empire. they
were ideal communities that ought to exist on earth,
and it was due to the depravity of men that they did
not exist. from time to time men undertook in various
upheavals to realize in some part these spiritual and
political ideals which they carried within them. and
men not only carried within them the ideas of a new
jerusalem in which the interest of one was the interest
of all and of an earthly state ordered by a divine
decree to fulfil this christian ideal, but the determining
causes of the present condition and the future
realization depended also upon the inner attitudes and
experiences of the individuals themselves.
without carrying the analogy here too far, this
relation between the experience of the individual and
the world which may arise through the realization of
his ideas is the basis of the most profound distinction
between the ancient world and the modern. before
the logic of this attitude could appear in science a long
period of intellectual and social growth was necessary.
the most essential part of this growth was the slow
but steady development of psychological doctrine which
placed the objective world in the experience of the
individual. it is not of interest here to bring out the
modern epistemological problem that grew out of this,
or to present this in the world of leibnitzian monads
that had no windows or in the berkeleyan subjective
idealism. what is of interest is to point out that this
attitude established a functional relationship between
even the subjective experience of the individual and the
object of knowledge. a skepticism based upon subjectivism
might thereafter question the justification of
the reference of experience beyond itself; it could not
question knowledge and its immediate object.
kant formalizes the relation of what was subjective
and what was objective by identifying the former with
the sensuous content of experience and the latter with
the application of the forms of sensibility and understanding
to this content. the relationship was formal
and dead. kant recognized no functional relationship
between the nature of the mannigfaltigkeit of sensuous
experience and the forms into which it was poured. the
forms remained external to the content, but the relationship
was one which existed within experience, not
without it, and within this experience could be found
the necessity and universality which had been located
in the world independent of experience. the melting
of these fixed kantian categories came with the spring
floods of the romantic idealism that followed kant.
the starting-point of this idealism was kantian.
within experience lay the object of knowledge. the
idealist's principal undertaking was to overcome the
skepticism that attached to the object of knowledge
because of its reference to what lies outside itself. if,
as kant had undertaken to prove, the reality which
knowledge implies must reach beyond experience, then,
on the kantian doctrine that knowledge lies within
experience, knowledge itself is infected with skepticism.
kant's practical bridge from the world of experience
to the world of things-in-themselves, which he walked
by faith and not by sight, was found in the postulates
of the conduct of the self as a moral being, as a personality.
the romantic idealists advance by the same
road, though as romanticists not critical philosophers,
they fashioned the world of reality, that transcends
experience, out of experience itself, by centering the
self in the absolute self and conceiving the whole infinite
universe as the experience of the absolute self.
the interesting phase of this development is that the
form which experience takes in becoming objective is
found in the nature and thought of the individual, and
that this process of epistemological experience becomes
thus a process of nature, if the objective is the natural.
in kant's terms our minds give laws to nature. but
this nature constantly exhibits its dependence upon
underlying noumena that must therefore transcend the
laws given by the understanding. the romanticist insists
that this other reality must be the same stuff as
that of experience, that in experience arise forms which
transcend those which bound the experience in its earlier
phase. if in experience the forms of the objective
world are themselves involved, the process of knowledge
sets no limits to itself, which it may not, does not, by
implication transcend. as further indication of the
shift by which thought had passed into possession of
the world of things in themselves stands the antinomy
which in kantian experience marks the limit of our
knowledge while in post-kantian idealism it becomes
the antithesis that leads to the synthesis upon the
higher plane. contradiction marks the phase at which
the spirit becomes creative, not simply giving an empty
formal law to nature, but creating the concrete universe
in which content and form merge in true actuality.
the relation of the sensuous content to the
conceptual form is not dead, as in kant's doctrine. it
is fused as perception into concept and carries its
immediacy and concreteness of detail into the concrete
universal as the complete organization of stimulation
and response pass into the flexible habit. and yet
in the hegelian logic, the movement is always away
from the perceptual experience toward the higher realm
of the idee. thought is creative in the movement, but
in its ultimate reality it transcends spatial and temporal
experience, the experience with which the natural
and mathematical sciences deal. thought is not a
means of solving the problems of this world as they
arise, but a great process of realization in which this
world is forever transcended. its abstract particularities
of sensuous detail belong only to the finite experience
of the partial self. this world is, therefore,
always incomplete in its reality and, in so far, always
untrue. truth and full reality belong not to the field
of scientific investigation.
in its metaphysics romantic idealism, though it
finds a place for scientific discovery and reconstruction,
leaves these disdainfully behind, as incomplete phases
of the ultimate process of reality, as infected with untruth
and deceptive unwarranted claims. the world is
still too much with us. we recognize here three striking
results of the development of reflective consciousness
in the modern world:—first, it is assumed that the
objective world of knowledge can be placed within
the experience of the individual without losing thereby
its nature as an object, that all characters of that
object can be presented as belonging to that experience,
whether adequately or not is another question;
and second, it is assumed that the contradictions in
its nature which are associated with its inclusion in
individual experience, its references beyond itself when
so included, may themselves be the starting-point of
a reconstruction which at least carries that object
beyond the experience within which these contradictions
arose; and third, it is assumed that this growth
takes place in a world of reality within which the
incomplete experience of the individual is an essential
part of the process, in which it is not a mere fiction,
destroying reality by its representation, but is a growing-point
in that reality itself.
these characters of philosophic interpretation, the
inclusion of the object of knowledge in the individual
experience and the turning of the conflicts in that experience
into the occasion for the creation of new
objects transcending these contradictions, are the
characters in the conscious method, of modern science,
which most profoundly distinguish it from the method
of ancient science. this, of course, is tantamount to
saying that they are those which mark the experimental
method in science.
that phase of the method upon which i have touched
already has been its occupation with the so-called data
or facts as distinguished from aristotelian individuals.
whenever we reduce the objects of scientific investigation
to facts and undertake to record them as such,
they become events, happenings, whose hard factual
character lies in the circumstance that they have taken
place, and this quite independently of any explanation
of their taking place. when they are explained they
have ceased to be facts and have become instances of
a law, that is, aristotelian individuals, embodied
theories, and their actuality as events is lost in the
necessity of their occurrence as expressions of the law;
with this change their particularity as events or happenings
disappears. they are but the specific values
of the equation when constants are substituted for
variables. before the equation is known or the law
discovered they have no such ground of existence. up
to this point they find their ground for existence in
their mere occurrence, to which the law which is to
explain them must accommodate itself.
there are here suggested two points of view from
which these facts may be regarded. considered with
reference to a uniformity or law by which they will
be ordered and explained they are the phenomena with
which the positivist deals; as existencies to be identified
and localized before they are placed within such a uniformity
they fall within the domain of the psychological
philosopher who can at least place them in their relation
to the other events in the experience of the individual
who observes them. considered as having
a residual meaning apart from the law to which they
have become exceptions, they can become the subject-matter
of the rationalist. it is important that we
recognize that neither the positivist nor the rationalist
is able to identify the nature of the fact or datum
to which they refer. i refer to such stubborn facts as
those of the sporadic appearance of infectious diseases
before the germ theory of the disease was discovered.
here was a fact which contradicted the doctrine of the
spread of the infection by contact. it appeared not as
an instance of a law, but as an exception to a law.
as such, its nature is found in its having happened
at a given place and time. if the case had appeared
in the midst of an epidemic, its nature as a case of the
infectious disease would have been cared for in the
accepted doctrine, and for its acceptance as an object
of knowledge its location in space and time as an event
would not have been required. its geographical and
historical traits would have followed from the theory
of the infection, as we identify by our calculations the
happy fulfilment of thales' prophecy. the happening
of an instance of a law is accounted for by the law.
its happening may and in most instances does escape
observation, while as an exception to an accepted law
it captures attention. its nature as an event is, then,
found in its appearance in the experience of some individual,
whose observation is controlled and recorded
as his experience. without its reference to this individual's
experience it could not appear as a fact
for further scientific consideration.
now the attitude of the positivist toward this fact
is that induced by its relation to the law which is subsequently
discovered. it has then fallen into place in
a series, and his doctrine is that all laws are but uniformities
of such events. he treats the fact when it
is an exception to law as an instance of the new law
and assumes that the exception to the old law and
the instance of the new are identical. and this
is a great mistake,—the mistake made also by the neo-realist
when he assumes that the object of knowledge
is the same within and without the mind, that nothing
happens to what is to be known when it by chance
strays into the realm of conscious cognition. any as
yet unexplained exception to an old theory can happen
only in the experience of an individual, and that which
has its existence as an event in some one's biography
is a different thing from the future instance which is
not beholden to any one for its existence. yet there
are, as i indicated earlier, meanings in this exceptional
event which, at least for the time, are unaffected by
the exceptional character of the occurrence. for example,
certain clinical symptoms by which an infectious
disease is identified have remained unchanged in diagnosis
since the days of hippocrates. these characters
remain as characters of the instance of the law of germ-origin
when this law has been discovered. this may
lead us to say that the exception which appears for
the time being as a unique incident in a biography
is identical with the instance of a germ-induced disease.
indeed, we are likely to go further and, in the assurance
of the new doctrine, state that former exceptions can
(or with adequate acquaintance with the facts could)
be proved to be necessarily an instance of a disease
carried by a germ. the positivist is therefore confident
that the field of scientific knowledge is made up
of events which are instances of uniform series, although
under conditions of inadequate information
some of them appear as exceptions to the statements
of uniformities, in truth the latter being no uniformities
at all.
that this is not a true statement of the nature of
the exception and of the instance, it is not difficult to
show if we are willing to accept the accounts which
the scientists themselves give of their own observation,
the changing forms which the hypothesis assumes during
the effort to reach a solution and the ultimate
reconstruction which attends the final tested solution.
wherever we are fortunate enough, as in the biographies
of men such as darwin and pasteur, to follow
a number of the steps by which they recognized problems
and worked out tenable hypotheses for their
solution, we find that the direction which is given to
attention in the early stage of scientific investigation
is toward conflicts between current theories and observed
phenomena, and that since the form which these
observations take is determined by the opposition, it is
determined by a statement which itself is later abandoned.
we find that the scope and character of the
observations change at once when the investigator sets
about gathering as much of the material as he can
secure, and changes constantly as he formulates tentative
hypotheses for the solution of the problem, which,
moreover, generally changes its form during the investigation.
i am aware that this change in the form
of the data will be brushed aside by many as belonging
only to the attitude of mind of the investigator, while
it is assumed that the "facts" themselves, however
selected and organized in his observation and thought,
remain identical in their nature throughout. indeed,
the scientist himself carries with him in the whole procedure
the confidence that the fact-structure of reality
is unchanged, however varied are the forms of the observations
which refer to the same entities.
the analysis of the fact-structure of reality shows
in the first place that the scientist undertakes to form
such an hypothesis that all the data of observation
will find their place in the objective world, and in the
second place to bring them into such a structure that
future experience will lead to anticipated results. he
does not undertake to preserve facts in the form in
which they existed in experience before the problem
arose nor to construct a world independent of experience
or that will not be subject itself to future reconstructions
in experience. he merely insists that future
reconstructions will take into account the old in re-adjusting
it to the new. in such a process it is evident
that the change of the form in the data is not due to
a subjective attitude of the investigator which can be
abstracted from the facts. when darwin, for instance,
found that the marl dressings which farmers
spread over their soil did not sink through the soil
by the force of gravity as was supposed, but that the
earthworm castings were thrown up above these dressings
at nearly the same rate at which they disappeared,
he did not correct a subjective attitude of mind. he
created in experience a humus which took the place
of a former soil, and justified itself by fitting it into
the whole process of disintegration of the earth's surface.
it would be impossible to separate in the earlier
experiences certain facts and certain attitudes of mind
entertained by men with reference to these facts. certain
objects have replaced other objects. it is only after
the process of analysis, which arose out of the conflicting
observations, has broken up the old object that what
was a part of the object, heavier-things-pushing-their
way-through-soil-of-lighter-texture, can become a mere
idea. earlier it was an object. until it could be
tested the earthworm as the cause of the disappearance
of the dressings was also darwin's idea. it became fact.
for science at least it is quite impossible to distinguish
between what in an object must be fact and what may
be idea. the distinction when it is made is dependent
upon the form of the problem and is functional to its
solution, not metaphysical. so little can a consistent
line of cleavage between facts and ideas be indicated,
that we can never tell where in our world of observation
the problem of science will arise, or what will be regarded
as structure of reality or what erroneous
idea.
there is a strong temptation to lodge these supposititious
fact-structures in a world of conceptual objects,
molecules, atoms, electrons, and the like. for these at
least lie beyond the range of perception by their very
definition. they seem to be in a realm of things-in-themselves.
yet they also are found now in the field
of fact and now in that of ideas. furthermore, a study
of their structure as they exist in the world of constructive
science shows that their infra-sensible character
is due simply to the nature of our sense-processes,
not to a different metaphysical nature. they occupy
space, have measurable dimensions, mass, and are subject
to the same laws of motion as are sensible objects.
we even bring them indirectly into the field of vision
and photograph their paths of motion.
the ultimate elements referred to above provide a
consistent symbolism for the finding and formulating of
applied mathematical sciences, within which lies the whole
field of physics, including euclidian geometry as well.
however, they have succeeded in providing nothing
more than a language and logic pruned of the obstinate
contradictions, inaccuracies, and unanalyzed sensuous
stuff of earlier mathematical science. such a rationalistic
doctrine can never present in an unchanged form
the objects with which natural science deals in any of
the stages of its investigation. it can deal only with
ultimate elements and forms of propositions. it is
compelled to fall back on a theory of analysis
which reaches ultimate elements and an assumption of
inference as an indefinable. such an analysis is actually
impossible either in the field of the conceptual objects
into which physical science reduces physical objects, or
in the field of sensuous experience. atoms can be reduced
into positive and negative electrical elements and
these may, perhaps do, imply a structure of ether that
again invites further analysis and so on ad infinitum.
none of the hypothetical constructs carry with themselves
the character of being ultimate elements unless
they are purely metaphysical. if they are fashioned
to meet the actual problems of scientific research they
will admit of possible further analysis, because they
must be located and defined in the continuity of space
and time. they cannot be the points and instants of
modern mathematical theory. nor can we reach ultimate
elements in sensuous experience, for this lies
also within a continuum. furthermore, our scientific
analyses are dependent upon the form that our objects
assume. there is no general analysis which research
in science has ever used. the assumption that psychology
provides us with an analysis of experience
which can be carried to ultimate elements or facts, and
which thereby provides the elements out of which the
objects of our physical world must be constructed,
denies to psychology its rights as a natural science of
which it is so jealous, turning it into a berkeleyan
metaphysics.
this most modern form of rationalism being unable
to find ultimate elements in the field of actual science
is compelled to take what it can find there. now the
results of the analysis of the classical english psychological
school give the impression of being what mr.
russell calls "hard facts," i.e., facts which cannot be
broken up into others. they seem to be the data of
experience. moreover, the term hard is not so uncompromising
as is the term element. a fact can be more
or less hard, while an ultimate element cannot be more
or less ultimate. furthermore, the entirely formal
character of the logic enables it to deal with equal
facility with any content. one can operate with the
more or less hard sense-data, putting them in to satisfy
the seeming variables of the propositions, and reach
conclusions which are formally correct. there is no
necessity for scrutinizing the data under these circumstances,
if one can only assume that the data are those
which science is actually using. the difficulty is that
no scientist ever analyzed his objects into such sense-data.
they exist only in philosophical text-books.
even the psychologists recognize that these sensations
are abstractions which are not the elements out of which
objects of sense are constructed. they are abstractions
made from those objects whose ground for isolation
is found in the peculiar problems of experimental
psychology, such as those of color or tone perception.
it would be impossible to make anything in terms of
berkeleyan sense-data and of symbolic logic out of any
scientific discovery. research defines its problem by
isolating certain facts which appear for the time being
not as the sense-data of a solipsistic mind, but as experiences
of an individual in a highly organized society,
facts which, because they are in conflict with accepted
doctrines, must be described so that they can be
experienced by others under like conditions. the
ground for the analysis which leads to such facts is
found in the conflict between the accepted theory and
the experience of the individual scientist. the analysis
is strictly ad hoc. as far as possible the exception is
stated in terms of accepted meanings. only where the
meaning is in contradiction with the experience does
the fact appear as the happening to an individual and
become a paragraph out of his biography. but as such
an event, whose existence for science depends upon the
acceptance of the description of him to whom it has
happened, it must have all the setting of circumstantial
evidence. part of this circumstantial evidence is found
in so-called scientific control, that is, the evidence that
conditions were such that similar experiences could
happen to others and could be described as they are
described in the account given. other parts of this
evidence which we call corroborative are found in the
statements of others which bear out details of this
peculiar event, though it is important to note that
these details have to be wrenched from their settings
to give this corroborative value. to be most conclusive
they must have no intentional connection with
the experience of the scientist. in other words,
those individuals who corroborate the facts are made,
in spite of themselves, experiencers of the same facts.
the perfection of this evidence is attained when the
fact can happen to others and the observer simply
details the conditions under which he made the observation,
which can be then so perfectly reproduced that
others may repeat the exceptional experience.
this process is not an analysis of a known world
into ultimate elements and their relations. such an
analysis never isolates this particular exception which
constitutes the scientific problems as an individual experience.
the extent to which the analysis is carried
depends upon the exigencies of the problem. it is the
indefinite variety of the problems which accounts for
the indefinite variety of the facts. what constitutes
them facts in the sense in which we are using the
term is their exceptional nature; formally they appear
as particular judgments, being denials of universal
judgments, whether positive or negative. this exceptional
nature robs the events of a reality which would
have belonged to them as instances of a universal law.
it leaves them, however, with the rest of their meaning.
but the value which they have lost is just that which
was essential to give them their place in the world as
it has existed for thought. banished from that universally
valid structure, their ground for existence is
found in the experience of the puzzled observer. such
an observation was that of the moons of jupiter made
possible by the primitive telescope of galileo. for
those who lived in a ptolemaic cosmos, these could have
existence only as observations of individuals. as moons
they had distinct meaning, circling jupiter as our
moon circles the earth, but being in contradiction with
the ptolemaic order they could depend for their existence
only on the evidence of the senses, until a copernican
order could give them a local habitation and a
name. then they were observed not as the experiences
of individuals but as instances of planetary order in
a heliocentric system. it would be palpably absurd to
refer to them as mere sense-data, mere sensations. they
are for the time being inexplicable experiences of certain
individuals. they are inexplicable because they
have a meaning which is at variance with the structure
of the whole world to which they belong. they are the
phenomena termed accidental by aristotle and rejected
as full realities by him, but which have become, in the
habitat of individual experience, the headstone of the
structure of modern research of science.
a rationalism which relegates implication to the
indefinables cannot present the process of modern
science. implication is exactly that process by which
these events pass from their individual existence into
that of universal reality, and the scientist is at pains
to define it as the experimental method. it is true that
a proposition implies implication. but the proposition
is the statement of the result of the process by which
an object has arisen for knowledge and merely indicates
the structure of the object. in discovery, invention,
and research the escape from the exceptional, from the
data of early stages of observation, is by way of an
hypothesis; and every hypothesis so far as it is tenable
and workable in its form is universal. no one would
waste his time with a hypothesis which confessedly was
not applicable to all instances of the problem. an
hypothesis may be again and again abandoned, it may
prove to be faulty and contradictory, but in so far as
it is an instrument of research it is assumed to be
universal and to perfect a system which has broken
down at the point indicated by the problem. implication
and more elaborated instances flow from the
structure of this hypothesis. the classical illustration
which stands at the door of modern experimental
science is the hypothesis which galileo formed of the
rate of the velocity of a falling body. he conceived
that this was in proportion to the time elapsed during
the fall and then elaborated the consequences of this
hypothesis by working it into the accepted mathematical
doctrines of the physical world, until it led to an
anticipated result which would be actually secured and
which would be so characteristic an instance of a falling
body that it would answer to every other instance
as he had defined them. in this fashion he defined his
inference as the anticipation of a result because this
result was a part of the world as he presented it
amended by his hypothesis. it is true that back of the
specific implication of this result lay a mass of other
implications, many not even presented specifically in
thought and many others presented by symbols which
generalized innumerable instances. these implications
are for the scientist more or less implicit meanings, but
they are meanings each of which may be brought into
question and tested in the same fashion if it should become
an actual problem. many of them which would
not have occurred to galileo as possible problems have
been questioned since his day. what has remained after
this period of determined questioning of the foundations
of mathematics and the structure of the world
of physical science is a method of agreement with oneself
and others, in (a) the identification of the object
of thought, in (b) the accepted values of assent and
denial called truth and falsehood, and in (c) referring
to meaning, in its relation to what is meant. in any
case the achievement of symbolic logic, with its indefinables
and axioms has been to reduce this logic to
a statement of the most generalized form of possible
consistent thought intercourse, with entire abstraction
from the content of the object to which it refers.
if, however, we abstract from its value in giving
a consistent theory of number, continuity, and infinity,
this complete abstraction from the content has
carried the conditions of thinking in agreement with
self and others so far away from the actual problem
of science that symbolic logic has never been used as
a research method. it has indeed emphasized the fact
that thinking deals with problems which have reference
to uses to which it can be put, not to a metaphysical
world lying beyond experience. symbolic logic has to
do with the world of discourse, not with the world of
things.
what russell pushes to one side as a happy guess
is the actual process of implication by which, for example,
the minute form in the diseased human system is
identified with unicellular life and the history of the
disease with the life history of this form. this identification
implies reclassification of these forms and a
treatment of the disease that answers to their life history.
having made this identification we anticipate the
result of this treatment, calling it an inference.
implication belongs to the reconstruction of the object.
as long as no question has arisen, the object
is what it means or means what it is. it does not
imply any feature of itself. when through conflict
with the experience of the individual some feature of
the object is divorced from some meaning the relationship
between these becomes a false implication. when
a hypothetically reconstructed object finds us anticipating
a result which accords with the nature of such
objects we assert an implication of this meaning. to
carry this relation of implication back into objects
which are subject to no criticism or question would of
course resolve the world into elements connected by
external relations, with the added consequence that
these elements can have no content, since every content
in the face of such an analysis must be subject
to further analysis. we reach inevitably symbols such
as x, y, and z, which can symbolize nothing. theoretically
we can assume an implication between any
elements of an object, but in this abstract assumption
the symbolic logician overlooks the fact that he is also
assuming some content which is not analyzed and which
is the ground of the implication. in other words this
logician confuses the scientific attitude of being ready
to question anything with an attitude of being willing
to question everything at once. it is only in an unquestioned
objective world that the exceptional instance
appears and it is only in such a world that an
experimental science tests the implications of the hypothetically
reconstructed object.
the guess is happy because it carries with it the consequences
which follow from its fitting into the world,
and the guess, in other words the hypothesis, takes on
this happy form solely because of the material reconstruction
which by its nature removes the unhappy
contradiction and promises the successful carrying out
of the conflicting attitudes in the new objective world.
there is no such thing as formal implication.
where no reconstruction of the world is involved in
our identification of objects that belong to it and
where, therefore, no readjustment of conduct is demanded,
such a logic symbolizes what takes place in
our direct recognition of objects and our response
to them. then "x is a man implies x is mortal for
all values of x" exactly symbolizes the attitude toward
a man subject to a disease supposedly mortal. but
it fails to symbolize the biological research which starting
with inexplicable sporadic cases of an infectious
disease carries over from the study of the life history
of infusoria a hypothetical reconstruction of the history
of disease and then acts upon the result of this
assumption. research-science presents a world whose
form is always universal, but this universal form is
neither a metaphysical assumption nor a fixed form of
the understanding. while the scientist may as a metaphysician
assume the existence of realities which lie
beyond a possible experience, or be a kantian or neo-kantian,
neither of these attitudes is necessary for his
research. he may be a positivist—a disciple of hume
or of john stuart mill. he may be a pluralist who
conceives, with william james, that the order which
we detect in parts of the universe is possibly one that
is rising out of the chaos and which may never be as
universal as our hypothesis demands. none of these
attitudes has any bearing upon his scientific method.
this simplifies his thinking, enables him to identify the
object in which he is interested wherever he finds it, and
to abstract in the world as he conceives it those features
which carry with them the occurrence he is endeavoring
to place. especially it enables him to make his thought
a part of the socially accepted and socially organized
science to which his thought belongs. he is far too
modest to demand that the world be as his inference
demands.
he asks that his view of the world be cogent and
convincing to all those whose thinking has made his
own possible, and be an acceptable premise for the
conduct of that society to which he belongs. the
hypothesis has no universal and necessary characters
except those that belong to the thought which preserves
the same meanings to the same objects, the same relations
between the same relata, the same attributes of
assent and dissent under the same conditions, the same
results of the same combinations of the same things.
for scientific research the meanings, the relations with
the relata, the assent and dissent, the combinations
and the things combined are all in the world of experience.
thinking in its abstractions and identifications
and reconstructions undertakes to preserve the values
that it finds, and the necessity of its thinking lies in its
ability to so identify, preserve, and combine what it
has isolated that the thought structure will have an
identical import under like conditions for the thinker
with all other thinkers to whom these instruments of
research conduct are addressed. whatever conclusions
the scientist draws as necessary and universal results
from his hypothesis for a world independent of his
thought are due, not to the cogency of his logic, but
to other considerations. for he knows if he reflects
that another problem may arise which will in its solution
change the face of the world built upon the present
hypothesis. he will defend the inexorableness of his
reasoning, but the premises may change. even the
contents of tridimensional space and sensuous time are
not essential to the cogency of that reasoning nor can
the unbroken web of the argument assure the content
of the world as invariable. his universals, when applied
to nature, are all hypothetical universals; hence
the import of experiment as the test of an hypothesis.
experience does not rule out the possible cropping up of
a new problem which may shift the values attained.
experience simply reveals that the new hypothesis fits
into the meanings of the world which are not shaken;
it shows that, with the reconstruction which the hypothesis
offers, it is possible for scientific conduct to
proceed.
but if the universal character of the hypothesis and
the tested theory belong to the instrumental character
of thought in so reconstructing a world that has proved
to be imperfect, and inadequate to conduct, the stuff
of the world and of the new hypothesis are the same.
at least this is true for the scientist who has no interest
in an epistemological problem that does not
affect his scientific undertakings in one way nor another.
i have already pointed out that from the standpoint
of logical and psychological analysis the things
with which science deals can be neither ultimate elements
nor sense-data; but that they must be phases and
characters and parts of things in some whole, parts
which can only be isolated because of the conflict between
an accepted meaning and some experience. i have
pointed out that an analysis is guided by the practical
demands of a solution of this conflict; that even that
which is individual in its most unique sense in the conflict
and in attempts at its solution does not enter into
the field of psychology—which has its own problems
peculiar to its science. certain psychological problems
belong to the problems of other sciences, as, for example,
that of the personal equation belongs to astronomy
or that of color vision to the theory of light. but they
bulk small in these sciences. it cannot be successfully
maintained that a scientific observation of the most
unique sort, one which is accepted for the time being
simply as a happening in this or that scientist's experience,
is as such a psychological datum, for the data in
psychological text-books have reference to psychological
problems. psychology deals with the consciousness
of the individual in its dependence upon the physiological
organism and upon those contents which detach
themselves from the objects outside the individual and
which are identified with his inner experience. it deals
with the laws and processes and structures of this consciousness
in all its experiences, not with exceptional
experiences. it is necessary to emphasize again that
for science these particular experiences arise within a
world which is in its logical structure organized and
universal. they arise only through the conflict of the
individual's experience with such an accepted structure.
for science individual experience presupposes the organized
structure; hence it cannot provide the material
out of which the structure is built up. this is the error
of both the positivist and of the psychological philosopher,
if scientific procedure gives us in any sense a
picture of the situation.
a sharp contrast appears between the accepted hypothesis
with its universal form and the experiences
which invalidate the earlier theory. the reality of
these experiences lies in their happening. they were
unpredictable. they are not instances of a law. the
later theory, the one which explains these occurrences,
changes their character and status, making them necessary
results of the world as that is conceived under
this new doctrine. this new standpoint carries with it
a backward view, which explains the erroneous doctrine,
and accounts for the observations which invalidated it.
every new theory must take up into itself earlier
doctrines and rationalize the earlier exceptions.
a generalization of this attitude places the scientist
in the position of anticipating later reconstructions.
he then must conceive of his world as subject to
continuous reconstructions. a familiar interpretation
of his attitude is that the hypothesis is thus
approaching nearer and nearer toward a reality which
would never change if it could be attained, or, from the
standpoint of the hegelian toward a goal at infinity.
the hegelian also undertakes to make this continuous
process of reconstruction an organic phase in reality
and to identify with nature the process of finding exceptions
and of correcting them. the fundamental
difference between this position and that of the scientist
who looks before and after is that the hegelian undertakes
to make the exception in its exceptional character
a part of the reality which transcends it, while the
scientist usually relegates the exception to the experience
of individuals who were simply caught in an error
which later investigation removes.
the error remains as an historical incident explicable
perhaps as a result of the conditions under which it
occurred, but in so far as it was an error, not a part
of reality. it is customary to speak of it as subjective,
though this implies that we are putting the man who
was unwittingly in error into the position of the one
who has corrected it. to entertain that error in the
face of its correction would be subjective. a result
of this interpretation is that the theories are abstracted
from the world and regarded as something outside it.
it is assumed that the theories are mental or subjective
and change while the facts remain unchanged. even
when it is assumed that theories and facts agree, men
speak of a correspondence or parallelism between idea
and the reality to which it refers. while this attitude
seems to be that of science toward the disproved theories
which lie behind it, it is not its attitude to the
theories which it accepts. these are not regarded as
merely parallel to realities, as abstracted from the
structure of things. these meanings go into the makeup
of the world. it is true that the scientist who looks
before and after realizes that any specific meaning
which is now accepted may be questioned and discarded.
if he carries his refection far enough he sees that a complete
elimination of all the meanings which might conceivably
be so discredited would leave nothing but logical
constants, a world with no facts in any sense. in this
position he may of course take an agnostic attitude
and be satisfied with the attitude of hume or mill or
russell. but if he does so, he will pass into the camp
of the psychological philosophers and will have left
the position of the scientist. the scientist always deals
with an actual problem, and even when he looks before
and after he does so in so far as he is facing in inquiry
some actual problem. no actual problem could
conceivably take on the form of a conflict involving
the whole world of meaning. the conflict always arises
between an individual experience and certain laws, certain
meanings while others are unaffected. these others
form the necessary field without which no conflict can
arise. they give the man of research his (που στω)
upon which he can formulate his problem and undertake
its solution. the possible calling in question of
any content, whatever it may be, means always that
there is left a field of unquestioned reality. the attitude
of the scientist never contemplates or could contemplate
the possibility of a world in which there
would be no reality by which to test his hypothetical
solution of the problem that arises. nor does this
attitude when applied to past discarded theories necessarily
carry with it the implication that these older
theories were subjective ideas in men's minds, while
the reality lay beside and beyond them unmingled with
ideas. it always finds a standpoint from which these
ideas in the earlier situation are still recognized as
reliable, for there are no scientific data without meanings.
there could be no history of science on any other
basis. no history of science goes back to ultimate elements
or sense-data, or to any combination of bare data
on one hand and logical elements on the other. the
world of the scientist is always there as one in which
reconstruction is taking place with continual shifting
of problems, but as a real world within which the problems
arise. the errors of the past and present appear
as untenable hypotheses which could not bear the test
of experiment if the experience were sufficiently enlarged
and interpreted. but they are not mere errors
to be thrown into the scrap heap. they become a part
of a different phase of reality which a fuller history
of the past records or a fuller account of the present
interprets, giving them thereby their proper place in
a real world.
the completion of this program, however, awaits the
solution of the scientific problem of the relation of the
psychical and the physical with the attendant problem
of the meaning of the so-called origin of consciousness
in the history of the world. my own feeling is that
these problems must be attacked from the standpoint
of the social nature of so-called consciousness. the
clear indications of this i find in the reference of our
logical constants to the structure of thought as a
means of communication, in the explanation of errors
in the history of science by their social determination,
and in the interpretation of the inner field of experience
as the importation of social intercourse into the
conscious conduct of the individual. but whatever
may be the solution of these problems, it must
carry with it such a treatment of the experience of the
individual that the latter will never be regarded merely
as a subjective state, however inadequate it may have
proved itself as a scientific hypothesis. this seems
to me to be involved in the conception of psychology
as a natural science and in any legitimate carrying
out of the hegelian program of giving reality and
creative import to individual experience. the experience
of the individual in its exceptional character is
the growing-point of science, first of all in the recognition
of data upon which the older theories break, and
second in the hypothesis which arises in the individual
and is tested by the experiment which reconstructs the
world. a scientific history and a scientific psychology
from which epistemology has been banished must place
these observations and hypotheses together with erroneous
conceptions and mistaken observations within the
real world in such a fashion that their reference to the
experience of the individual and to the world to which
he belongs will be comprehensible. as i have indicated,
the scientific theory of the physical and conscious individual
in the world implied in this problem has still
to be adequately developed. but there is implied in
the conception of such a theory such a location of the
process of thought in the process of reality as will
give it an import both in the meaning of things and
in the individual's thinking. we have the beginning of
such a doctrine in the conception of a functional value
of consciousness in the conduct of living forms, and the
development of reflective thought out of such a consciousness
which puts it within the act and gives it the
function of preparation where adjustment is necessary.
such a process creates the situation with reference to
which the form acts. in all adjustment or adaptation
the result is that the form which is adjusted finds that
by its adjustment it has created an environment. the
ancients by their formulation of the ptolemaic theory
committed themselves to the world in which the fixed
values of the heavenly over against the earthly obtained.
such a world was the interpretation of the experience
involved in their physical and social attitudes. they
could not accept the hypothesis of aristarchus because
it conflicted with the world which they had created, with
the values which were determining values for them. the
same was true of the hypothesis of democritus. they
could not, as they conceived the physical world, accept
its purely quantitative character. the conception of a
disinterested truth which we have cherished since the
middle ages is itself a value that has a social basis as
really as had the dogma of the church. the earliest
statement of it was perhaps that of francis bacon.
freeing investigation from the church dogma and its
attendant logic meant to him the freedom to find in
nature what men needed and could use for the amelioration
of their social and physical condition. the full
implication of the doctrine has been recognized as that
of freedom, freedom to effect not only values already
recognized, but freedom to attain as well such complete
acquaintance with nature that new and unrecognized
uses would be at our disposal; that is, that progress
should be one toward any possible use to which increased
knowledge might lead. the cult of increasing
knowledge, of continually reconstructing the world, took
the place both of the ancient conception of adequately
organizing the world as presented in thought,
and of the medieval conception of a systematic formulation
on the basis of the statement in church dogma of social
values. this modern conception proceeds from the
standpoint not of formulating values, but giving society
at the moment the largest possible number of alternatives
of conduct, i.e., undertaking to fix from moment
to moment the widest possible field of conduct. the purposes
of conduct are to be determined in the presence
of a field of alternative possibilities of action. the ends
of conduct are not to be determined in advance, but in
view of the interests that fuller knowledge of conditions
awaken. so there appears a conception of determining
the field that shall be quite independent of given
values. a real world which consists not of an unchanged
universe, but of a universe which may be continually
readjusted according to the problems arising
in the consciousness of the individuals within society.
the seemingly fixed character of such a world is found
in the generally fixed conditions which underlie the
type of problems which we find. we determine the
important conditions incident to the working out of
the great problems which face us. our conception of a
given universe is formed in the effort to mobilize all
the material about us in relation to these problems—the
structure of the self, the structure of matter, the
physical process of life, the laws of change and the
interrelation of changes. with reference to these
problems certain conditions appear fixed and become
the statement of the world by which we must determine
by experimental test the viability of our hypotheses.
there arises then the conception of a world
which is unquestioned over against any particular
problem. while our science continually changes that
world, at least it must be always realized as there.
on the other hand, these conceptions are after all
relative to the ends of social conduct which may
be formulated in the presence of any freedom of
action.
we postulate freedom of action as the condition of
formulating the ends toward which our conduct shall
be directed. ancient thought assured itself of its ends
of conduct and allowed these to determine the world
which tested its hypothesis. we insist such ends may
not be formulated until we know the field of possible
action. the formulation of the ends is essentially a
social undertaking and seems to follow the statement
of the field of possible conduct, while in fact the statement
of the possible field of conduct is actually dependent
on the push toward action. a moving end
which is continually reconstructing itself follows upon
the continually enlarging field of opportunities of
conduct.
the conception of a world of existence, then, is the
result of the determination at the moment of the conditions
of the solution of the given problems. these
problems constitute the conditions of conduct, and the
ends of conduct can only be determined as we realize
the possibilities which changing conditions carry with
them. our world of reality thus becomes independent
of any special ends or purposes and we reach an entirely
disinterested knowledge. and yet the value and
import of this knowledge is found in our conduct and
in our continually changing conditions. knowledge
for its own sake is the slogan of freedom, for it alone
makes possible the continual reconstruction and enlargement
of the ends of conduct.
the individual in his experiences is continually creating
a world which becomes real through his discovery.
in so far as new conduct arises under the
conditions made possible by his experience and his hypothesis
the world, which may be made the test of
reality, has been modified and enlarged.
i have endeavored to present the world which is an
implication of the scientific method of discovery with
entire abstraction from any epistemological or metaphysical
presuppositions or complications. scientific
method is indifferent to a world of things-in-themselves,
or to the previous condition of philosophic servitude of
those to whom its teachings are addressed. it is a
method not of knowing the unchangeable but of determining
the form of the world within which we live as
it changes from moment to moment. it undertakes to
tell us what we may expect to happen when we act in
such or such a fashion. it has become a matter of
serious consideration for a philosophy which is interested
in a world of things-in-themselves, and the epistemological
problem. for the cherished structures of
the metaphysical world, having ceased to house the
values of mankind, provide good working materials in
the hypothetical structures of science, on condition of
surrendering their metaphysical reality; and the epistemological
problem, having seemingly died of inanition,
has been found to be at bottom a problem of method
or logic. my attempt has been to present what seems
to me to be two capital instances of these transformations.
science always has a world of reality by which
to test its hypotheses, but this world is not a world
independent of scientific experience, but the immediate
world surrounding us within which we must act. our
next action may find these conditions seriously changed,
and then science will formulate this world so that in
view of this problem we may logically construct our
next plan of action. the plan of action should be
made self-consistent and universal in its form, not that
we may thus approach nearer to a self-consistent and
universal reality which is independent of our conduct,
but because our plan of action needs to be intelligent
and generally applicable. again science advances by
the experiences of individuals, experiences which are
different from the world in which they have arisen
and which refer to a world which is not yet in existence,
so far as scientific experience is concerned. but this
relation to the old and new is not that of a subjective
world to an objective universe, but is a process of
logical reconstruction by which out of exceptions the
new law arises to replace a structure that has become
inadequate.
in both of these processes, that of determining the
structure of experience which will test by experiment
the legitimacy of the new hypothesis, and that of formulating
the problem and the hypothesis for its solution,
the individual functions in his full particularity,
and yet in organic relationship with the society that
is responsible for him. it is the import for scientific
method of this relationship that promises most for the
interpretation of the philosophic problems involved.
if it is true that misery loves company, those persons
who feel despondent over the present situation in
philosophy may console themselves with the reflection
that things are not so bad as they might be. our
friends, the psychologists, are afflicted even as we are.
the disagreements of experts as to both the subject-matter
and the method of psychology are as fundamental
as anything that philosophy can show. a spirit
of revolt is abroad in the land, and psychology is once
more on trial. the compact which provided that
psychology should be admitted to the rank of a natural
science, on condition that it surrender its pretension
to be the science of the soul and confine itself to the
study of consciousness, is no longer considered binding.
the suspicion is growing that consciousness is nothing
more nor less than an attenuated form of the soul that
it pretends to displace. consequently the psychology
without a soul to which we have just become accustomed
is now attacked on behalf of a psychology without
a consciousness, on the ground that this latter
standpoint alone can give assurance against entangling
alliances between psychology and metaphysics.
from the side of philosophy this situation is interesting,
not only to such as may crave the comfort that
springs from the spectacle of distress, but also to those
who take a more hopeful view of present-day tendencies.
the question that is at issue is fundamentally
the question of the nature of consciousness, which is
quite as important to philosophy as to psychology.
on the one hand it is maintained that psychology has
to do with consciousness and that its distinctive method
is the method of introspection. on the other hand it
is urged that psychology is nothing more nor less than
a study of behavior, that it is not a science at all, unless
the existence of consciousness is denied or at least
ignored, and that the method of introspection is a
delusion and a snare. the two standpoints are not
always clearly formulated, nor can we say that every
system of psychology is true to type. it is, in fact,
the lack of clearness in the fundamental concepts that
makes the status of psychology a matter of so much
uncertainty.
the situation presents an apparent anomaly. both
parties profess to deal with facts of observation, yet
the claim of the introspectionist that he observes facts
of consciousness is met by the assertion of his rival that
there is no consciousness to be observed. how can this
be, unless we assume that introspection presupposes
an esoteric principle, like the principle of grace in
religion? it seems evident that we have to do here
with some deep-seated misconception regarding the
facts that are supposed to constitute the subject-matter
for observation and description.
a common procedure on the part of introspectionism
is to assert the existence of consciousness as something
which is indeed indefinable, but which admits of observation
and description. but this procedure is no longer
justified. in the first place, the assertion that consciousness
exists is not the statement of a fact but the
designation of a problem. what is the nature of the
fact that we call consciousness? if the common-sense
individual, who assents so readily to the proposition
that we all know consciousness, be asked to differentiate
between consciousness and the objects of consciousness,
he is dazed and helpless. and, secondly, the assertion
of indefinability involves us in a difficulty. the indefinability
of consciousness has sometimes been likened
to that of space, but in this latter case we find no such
confusion between space and the objects in space. it
is clear, however, that if consciousness is not something
distinguishable from objects, there is no need to
discuss consciousness, and if it is distinguishable, it
must be distinguished before we are entitled to proceed
with observation and description. definition is indispensable,
at least to the extent of circumscribing the
facts that are to be investigated. moreover, if consciousness
cannot be defined, neither can it be described.
what is definition, after all, but a form of description?
to assert, in effect, that consciousness is indefinable
because it is indescribable, and that for this reason we
must be content with description, is both a flagrant disregard
of consistency and an unwarranted abuse of our
good nature.
this difficulty leads on to another, for doubts, like
lies, have a singular propensity to breed more of their
kind. if consciousness is something that everybody
knows, why should it be necessary to look to the psychologist
for a description of it? if the study of consciousness
brings to light any new fact, that fact by
definition is not a conscious fact at all, and consequently
is not the kind of thing that we set out to describe.
consciousness, in short, cannot be analyzed; it cannot
be resolved into elements or constituents. it is
precisely what it is and not some product of
our after-thought that we are pleased to substitute
for it.
these familiar considerations do not, indeed, decide
the issue between the rival theories of psychology, but
they serve to suggest that our introspective psychology
has been too easily satisfied in the conception of its
specific problem or subject-matter. as a matter of
fact, the work that has been done in the name of psychology
has been peculiarly barren of results, so far
as a consciousness an sich is concerned, although it has
led to a wealth of material pertaining to adaptive behavior.
its solid achievements lie in the domain, not
of consciousness, but of instinctive, habitual, and intelligent
adaptation. it teaches us little that has to
do unequivocally with consciousness as distinct from
things, but it teaches us much concerning stimulus and
response, attention and habit, conflict and adjustment.
the doctrine that psychology is a science of behavior
is justified at least to the extent that it emphasizes a
factor, the importance of which introspectionism has
consistently refused to recognize. whatever conclusion
we may ultimately reach regarding the nature of
consciousness, the whole drift of psychological and
biological investigation seems to indicate that an adequate
conception of consciousness and of the distinctive
problem of psychology can be attained only on the
basis of a painstaking reflection on the facts of behavior.
it is evident that the attempt to ascertain the nature
of consciousness and of psychology from the standpoint
of behavior is committed to the assumption that
the behavior in question is of a distinctive kind. the
justification of this assumption will enable us to formulate
the definitions which we seek. discussions of
conscious behavior ordinarily emphasize the similarity
between conscious and reflex behavior rather than the
difference. an attitude of expectancy, for example,
is usually conceived as a sort of temporary reflex.
certain nervous connections are organized for the occasion,
so that, when a given stimulus arrives, it will
induce its appropriate response. this situation is
best exemplified, perhaps, in simple reaction-experiments,
in which the subject makes a certain predetermined
response upon presentation of the stimulus. the
process is supposed to be of the reflex type throughout,
the only difference being that ordinary reflexes are
relatively permanent and unvarying, whereas a prearranged
response to a stimulus has to do with a reflex
that is made to order so as to meet the exigencies
of the moment.
for certain purposes such a description of conscious
behavior is no doubt sufficiently accurate. our present
concern, however, is with the differences between these
temporary organizations and ordinary reflexes. in
order to bring out these differences, let us introduce
a slight complication into our reaction-experiment and
suppose that the subject is to make one of two alternative
responses, according to the nature of the stimulus.
his state of expectancy is accompanied by a certain
bodily "set" or preparedness for the coming event,
although the precise nature of the event is a matter of
uncertainty. his nervous system is in readiness to
respond this way or that, or rather, it has already
started to act in both of the alternative ways. if the
subject is to respond with the right hand to one stimulus
and with the left hand to the other, both hands
are in a state of activity before the stimulus appears.
the organization of the temporary reflex through the
agency of the cerebral cortex could not be achieved
were it not for the fact that all the movements entering
into the organization are nascently aroused before the
spring is touched which permits the act to unroll itself
in orderly sequence.
the various successive movements, then, which make
up our temporary reflex achieve their relationship to
one another from the fact that they are started simultaneously,
and this peculiarity constitutes a distinctive
feature. apparently this feature is absent from true
reflexes. an act of swallowing, performed unconsciously,
may start the complicated processes of digestion,
but it is merely the first act of a series. there
is no evidence that the movements of the stomach and
of the other organs concerned in digestion must be presupposed
before the act of swallowing can take place.
the swallowing may start the other processes, but we
cannot say that these other processes react back upon
the first act and make it one of swallowing rather than
something else. yet this "back stroke" is precisely
what is necessary in our reaction-experiment, for it is
by virtue of this fact that the organization of the temporary
reflex becomes a possibility. the first response
cannot take place until the last is provided for. thus
the immediate act of looking has embodied in it the
activity that is to follow later. the looking is not
simply with the eye, but with the hands that are to
complete the response. the optical response is a response
which, in the language of bergson, prefigures
or sketches out the act of a later moment. the nervous
system is enabled to act as a unit, because the movements
that are to occur at a later time are represented
in the first stage of the complete act. the first stage,
accordingly, does not occur independently, but as a
preliminary to the second. with an imperfect organization
of the entire response, it may happen that the
subsequent movements are not suppressed until their
proper moment arrives, but appear in advance of their
scheduled time. in writing, for example, we frequently
omit words or add to a word the final letter of some
word that belongs to a subsequent part of the sentence.
an error of this sort could hardly occur so readily in
the course of an act that belongs to the type of the
true reflex.
lest the reader suspect that this is a priori physiology,
i may quote the following from a prominent
neurologist: "no simple sensory impulse can, under
ordinary circumstances, reach the cerebral cortex without
first being influenced by subcortical association
centers, within which complex reflex combinations may
be effected and various automatisms set off in accordance
with their preformed structure. these subcortical
systems are to some extent modifiable by racial
and individual experience, but their reactions are chiefly
of the determinate or stereotyped character, with a
relatively limited range of possible reaction types for
any given stimulus complex.
"it is shown by the lower vertebrates, which lack
the cerebral cortex, that these subcortical mechanisms
are adequate for all of the ordinary simple processes
of life, including some degree of associative memory.
but here, when emergencies arise which involve situations
too complex to be resolved by these mechanisms,
the animal will pay the inevitable penalty of failure—perhaps
the loss of his dinner, or even of his
life.
"in the higher mammals with well-developed cortex
the automatisms and simple associations are likewise
performed mainly by the subcortical apparatus, but
the inadequacy of this apparatus in any particular situation
presents not the certainty of failure, but rather
a dilemma. the rapid preformed automatisms fail to
give relief, or perhaps the situation presents so many
complex sensory excitations as to cause mutual interference
and inhibition of all reaction. there is a stasis
in the subcortical centers. meanwhile the higher neural
resistance of the cortical pathways has been overcome
by summation of stimuli and the cortex is excited to
function. here is a mechanism adapted, not for a
limited number of predetermined and immediate responses,
but for a much greater range of combination
of the afferent impressions with each other and with
memory vestiges of previous reactions and a much
larger range of possible modes of response to any given
set of afferent impressions. by a process of trial and
error, perhaps, the elements necessary to effect the
adaptive response may be assembled and the problem
solved.
"it is evident here that the physiological factors
in the dilemma or problem as this is presented to the
cortex are by no means simple sensory impressions,
but definitely organized systems of neural discharge,
each of which is a physiological resultant of the reflexes,
automatisms, impulses, and inhibitions characteristic
of its appropriate subcortical centers. the
precise form which these subcortical combinations will
assume in response to any particular excitation is in
large measure determined by the structural connections
inter se....
"from the standpoint of the cerebral cortex considered
as an essential part of the mechanism of higher
conscious acts, every afferent stimulus, as we have seen,
is to some extent affected by its passage through various
subcortical association centers (i.e., it carries a
quale of central origin). but this same afferent impulse
in its passage through the spinal cord and brain
stem may, before reaching the cortex, discharge collateral
impulses into the lower centers of reflex coördination,
from which incipient (or even actually consummated)
motor responses are discharged previous to the
cortical reaction. these motor discharges may,
through the 'back stroke' action, in turn exert an
influence upon the slower cortical reaction. thus the
lower reflex response may in a literal physiological
sense act into the cortical stimulus complex and become
an integral part of it."
it seems clear, then, that conscious behavior involves
a certain process of organization which constitutes a
differential. the units entering into this process are
"definitely organized systems of neural discharge,"
the antecedent organization of these several systems
being due either to the inherited or to the acquired
structure of the nervous system. given a certain
amount of plasticity, the nervous system builds up
specific forms of response for certain objects or situations,
and these forms of response subsequently become
the material from which new organizations or new
modes of response are constructed. the achievements
of the past, accordingly, become stepping-stones to
new achievement. the new organization, moreover, is
not determined by a mechanism antecedently provided,
but has a peculiar flexibility, so as to meet the demands
of a new situation. that is, a new mode of procedure
is adopted. instead of being a purely mechanical
reaction, the response that results from the situation
is tentative or experimental in character, and "by a
process of trial and error, perhaps, the elements necessary
to effect the adaptive response may be assembled
and the problem solved."
we may add at once that the reorganization which is
required to constitute conscious behavior varies a great
deal in extent. in an act that is more or less habitual,
a comparatively slight modification of the corresponding
organized system of neural discharge will suffice
to harmonize the conflicting elements, whereas on other
occasions a more extensive modification is required.
but in any case it appears that there is a certain
impropriety in describing conscious behavior in terms
of a temporary reflex, since the study of this behavior
is concerned with the organization of the discordant
elements, not as a result, but primarily as a process.
in a reflex act we may suppose that the stimulus which
evokes the first stage in the response is like the first
in a row of upstanding bricks, which in falling knocks
down another. that is, the reflex arc is built up by
agencies that are quite independent of the subsequent
act. the arc is all set up and ready for use by the
time the reflex act appears upon the scene. in the case
of conscious activity, on the other hand, we find a very
different state of affairs. the arc is not first constructed
and then used, but is constructed as the act
proceeds; and this progressive organization is, in the
end, what is meant by conscious behavior. if the
course of a reflex act may be compared with traveling
in a railroad train, the progress of a conscious act is
more like that of a band of explorers, who hew their
path and build their bridges as they go along. the
direction of the act is not determined from without but
from within; the end is internal to the process.
this process of organization and purposive direction
is exemplified in every act of attention. is that noise,
for example, a horse in the street, or is it the rain on
the roof? what we find in such a situation is not a
paralysis of activity, but a redirection. the incompatibility
of responses is purely relative. there is
indeed a mutual inhibition of the responses for hoof-beats
and rain respectively, in the sense that neither
has undisputed possession of the field; but this very
inhibition sets free the process of attention, in which
the various responses participate and coöperate.
there is no static balancing of forces, but rather a
process in which the conflict is simply a condition for
an activity of a different kind. if i am near a window
facing the street, my eye turns thither for a clue; if
the appeal to vision be eliminated, the eye becomes
unseeing and coöperates with the ear by excluding all
that is irrelevant to the matter in hand. in this process
the nervous system functions as a unit, with reference
to the task of determining the source and character
of the sound. this task or problem dominates
the situation. a voice in an adjoining room may break
in, but only as something to be ignored and shut out;
whereas a voice in the street may become all-absorbing
as possibly indicating the driver of the hypothetical
horse. that is, the reason why the conflict of responses
does not end in a deadlock, but in a redirection,
is that a certain selectiveness of response comes into
play. out of the mass of more or less inchoate activities
a certain response is selected as a rallying-point
for the rest, and this selection is of a purposive character.
the selection is determined by reference to the
task in hand, which is to restore a certain harmony
of response. accordingly, that response is selected
which gives promise of forwarding the business of the
moment. by virtue of this selective character, one of the
constituents of the total activity becomes exalted among
its fellows and is entrusted with the function of determining
further behavior.
the purpose of the discussion, up to this point, is
to put forward this selective or teleological character
as the fundamental and differentiating trait of conscious
behavior; and our task, accordingly, is to give an account
of the nature and modus operandi of this purposive
control. this control, it is evident, consists in giving
direction to behavior with reference to results that
are still in the future. the basis for this anticipation
of the future is furnished by the nascent responses
which foreshadow further activity, even while they are
still under the thraldom of the inhibitions which hold
them back. these suppressed activities furnish a sort
of diagram or sketch of further possible behavior, and
the problem of consciousness is the problem of making
the result or outcome of these incipient responses effective
in the control of behavior. future results or
consequences must be converted into present stimuli;
and the accomplishment of this conversion is the miracle
of consciousness. to be conscious is to have a future
possible result of present behavior embodied as a present
existence functioning as a stimulus to further behavior.
thus the qualities of a perceptual experience may be
interpreted, without exception, as anticipations of the
results of activities which are as yet in an embryonic
stage. the results of the activity that is as yet partly
suppressed are already expressed or anticipated in the
perception. the present experience may, as james says,
"shoot its perspective far before it, irradiating in advance
the regions in which lie the thoughts as yet unborn."
a baseball player, for example, who is all
"set" to field a ball as a preliminary to a further play,
sees the ball, not simply as an approaching object,
but as ball-to-be-caught-and-then-thrown-to-first-base.
moreover, the ball, while still on the way, is a ball-that-may-bound-to-the-right-or-to-the-left.
the corresponding
movements of the player to the right or left, and
the act of throwing, although present only as inhibited
or incipient acts, are nevertheless embodied in the visual
experience. similarly my couch looks soft and inviting,
because the optical stimulation suggests or prompts, not
only the act of lying down, but also the kind of relaxation
that is made possible by a comfortable bed. so
likewise the tiger's jaws and claws look cruel and horrible,
because in that perception are reflected the incipient
movements of defense and recoil which are going on
in the body of the observer. perception, like our air-castles,
or like dreams in the freudian theory, presents
what is at best but a suggestion or program in the guise
of accomplished fact.
this projection, however, of our submerged activities
into our perceptions requires a more precise statement.
according to the foregoing contention, the appearance,
for example, of a razor's edge as sharp is the
sensory correlate of an incipient response which, if it
were to attain full-blown perfection, would be the
reaction to a cut. by hypothesis, however, the response
is inhibited, and it is this inhibition which calls forth
the perception of the object. if the response encountered
no obstruction, adaptation would be complete and
perception would not occur. since there is a blocking
of the response, nature resorts to a special device in
order to overcome the difficulty, and this device consists
in furnishing the organism with a new type of
stimulus. the razor as perceived does not actually
cut just now, but it bodies forth the quality 'will cut,'
i.e., the perceived attribute derives its character from
what the object will, or may, do at a future time. that
is, a perceived object is a stimulus which controls or
directs the organism by results which have not yet occurred,
but which will, or may, occur in the future.
the uniqueness of such a stimulus lies in the fact that
a contingent result somehow becomes operative as a
present fact; the future is transferred into the present
so as to become effective in the guidance of behavior.
this control by a future that is made present is what
constitutes consciousness. a living body may respond
to an actual cut by a knife on purely mechanical or
reflex principles; but to respond to a cut by anticipation,
i.e., to behave with reference to a merely possible
or future injury, is manifestly an exhibition of intelligence.
not that there need be any conscious reference
to the future as future in the act. merely to see the
object as "sharp" is sufficient to give direction to
conduct. but "sharp" is equivalent to "will cut";
the quality of sharpness is a translation of future possibility
into terms of present fact, and as thus
translated the future possibility becomes a factor
in the control of behavior. perception, therefore,
is a point where present and future coincide.
what the object will do is, in itself, just a contingency,
an abstract possibility, but in perception this possibility
clothes itself in the garments of present, concrete
fact and thus provides the organism with a different
environment. the environment provides a new
stimulus by undergoing a certain kind of change, i.e.,
by exercising a peculiar function of control. this control
is seeing, and the whole mystery of consciousness is
just this rendering of future stimulations or results into
terms of present existence. consciousness, accordingly,
is a name for a certain change that takes place in the
stimulus; or, more specifically, it is a name for the
control of conduct by future results or consequences.
to acquire such a stimulus and to become conscious
are one and the same thing. as was indicated previously,
the conscious stimulus is correlated with the various
inherited and acquired motor tendencies which have
been set off and which are struggling for expression,
and the uniqueness of the stimulus lies in the fact that
the adaptive value of these nascent motor tendencies becomes
operative as the determining principle in the
organization of the response. the response, for example,
to "sharp" or "will cut" is reminiscent of an
earlier reaction in which the organism engaged in certain
defensive movements as the result of an actual injury.
that is, the response to "sharp" is a nascent
or incipient form of a response which at the time of its
first occurrence was the expression of a maladaptation.
the response that is induced when an object is seen as
sharp would be biologically bad, if it were completed,
and the fact that the object is seen as sharp
means that this result is foreshadowed and operates
as a stimulus to prevent such maladaptation.
similarly the couch which meets my weary eye becomes
a stimulus to repose because the nascent activity which
is aroused would be biologically good if completed. in
any case the character of the stimulus is determined by
the adaptive value which the incipient activity would
have if it were carried out. consciousness, accordingly,
is just a future adaptation that has been set to
work so as to bring about its own realization. the
future thus becomes operative in the present, in much
the same way as the prospects for next year's crop may
be converted by the farmer into ready money with
which to secure the tools for its production.
to justify this conclusion by a detailed and extensive
application of this interpretation to every form of
quality and relation would carry us beyond the limits of
the present undertaking. it is a view, however, which
offers possibilities that have not as yet been properly
recognized. certain considerations, besides those already
discussed, may be mentioned as giving it an antecedent
plausibility. as regards simple sense-qualities,
there is abundant reason for believing that locke's doctrine
of "simple ideas" is a violent perversion of the
facts. to assume that the last results of analysis are the
first things in experience is to give a fatal twist to psychology
and to commit us to the fruitless agonies of
epistemology. the original "blooming, buzzing confusion"
with which experience starts becomes differentiated
into specific qualities only to the extent that
certain typical and organized forms of response are
built up within the body. sense-qualities, in other
words, are functionally not simple but extremely complex;
they owe their distinctiveness or individuality to
the fact that each of them embodies a specific set of
cues or anticipations, with reference to further experiences.
the difference between a quality like "sharpness"
and a quality like "red" lies in the fact that
the former is a translation of a relatively simple possibility,
viz., "will cut," whereas the latter embodies a
greater variety of anticipations. the perception of
red, being the outcome of many comparisons and associations,
presupposes a complex physical response
which contains multitudinous tendencies to reinstate
former responses; and the combined effect of these suppressed
tendencies is the perception of a color which
offers possibilities of control over behavior in such directions
as reminiscences, idle associations, or perhaps
scrutiny and investigation. a similar explanation evidently
applies to abstract ideas, which neither admit
of reduction to "revived sensations" nor compel the
adoption of a peculiarly "spiritual" or "psychic"
existence in the form of unanalyzable meanings. here
again a complex mode of response must be assumed,
having as its correlate an experience describable only
in terms of its functioning, which is such as to
enable the organism to act intelligently, i.e., with reference
to future results, which are sufficiently embodied
in the experience to secure appropriate behavior.
again, this point of view offers a satisfactory solution
for the time-worn puzzle of relativity. if perception is
just the translation of future possible stimulations into
present fact, there is assuredly no justification for
the notion that perception distorts the facts or that
discrepancies among different perceptions prove their
"subjectivity." there remains but one test by which
the correctness or validity of perception may be
judged, viz., whether the perceived object proves to be
the kind of stimulus which is reported or anticipated in
the present experience.
so far our discussion has emphasized the anticipatory
character of the conscious stimulus. future consequences
come into the present as conditions for further
behavior. these anticipations are based, indeed,
upon previous happenings, but they enter into the
present situation as conditions that must be taken into
account. but to take them into account means that
the conscious situation is essentially incomplete and in
process of transformation or reconstruction. this
peculiar incompleteness or contingency stands out
prominently when the situation rises to the level of
uncertainty and perplexity. to borrow the classical
illustration of the child and the candle, the child
is in a state of uncertainty because the neural
activity of the moment comprises two incompatible
systems of discharge, the one being a grasping and
holding, the other a withdrawal and such further
movements as may be induced by contact with fire.
hence the candle has the seductiveness of a prize,
but at the same time carries the suggestion of burning
the fingers. that is, the perceived object has
a unique character of uncertainty, which inheres in it
as a present positive quality. we are here confronted
with genuine contingency, such as is encountered nowhere
else. other modes of behavior may be uncertain
in the sense that the incoming stimulation finds no fixed
line of discharge laid down for itself within the organism.
in seeking to convert itself into response it may
either sweep away the obstructions in its path or work
itself out along lines of less resistance, in ways that no
man can foretell. there may be moments of equilibrium,
moments when it remains to be seen where the
dam will break and the current rush through. such
uncertainty, however, is the uncertainty of the bystander
who attempts to forecast what will happen
next. it is not the uncertainty that figures as an
integral part of conscious behavior.
this inherent uncertainty means that conscious
behavior, as contrasted with the mechanical character
of the reflexes, is essentially experimental. the uncertainty
exists precisely because an effort is under way
to clear up the uncertainty. the resort to eye or ear
or to reflective thinking is suggested by the corresponding
nascent responses and is an endeavor to secure
something which is still to seek, but which, when
found, will meet the requirements of the situation.
translating this process into terms of stimulus and
response, we may say that the conscious stimulus
of the moment induces the investigation or scrutiny
which presently results in the arrival of a stimulus that
is adequate to the situation. the stimulus, in other
words, provides for its own successor; or we may say
that the process as a whole is a self-directing, self-determining
activity. stimulus and response are not
successive stages or moments, but rather simultaneous
functions or phases of the total process. within this
process the given situation is the stimulus because
it is that aspect or function which guides the subsequent
course of the activity, while the bodily movements
are the response because they already embody the activity
that is to follow. the significant circumstance
here is that stimulus and response resist the temporal
separation that we find in a purely reflex act; stimulus
and response are bound together as correlated functions
in a unitary, self-directing process, so that these
twain are one flesh.
situations of uncertainty and expectancy, as exemplified
by the familiar child-candle incident, are of interest,
because they emphasize both the anticipatory
character of experience and the peculiar reconstruction
of the stimulus. these situations, however, differ
merely in degree, not in kind, from other experiences;
their merit is that in them the distinctive character of
conscious life is writ large. to say that they are conscious
situations is to say that they are so constituted
that the possibilities of a subsequent moment are embodied
in them as a positive quality. in them the
present moment embodies a future that is contingent.
and similarly the response has neither the predetermined
organization of the reflex nor the aimless character
of a response that issues in a set of random movements.
it is, so to speak, of a generalized character,
like the paleontological specimens that foreshadow in
their structure the advent of both fish and reptile. this
form of organization, however, while exemplified most
strikingly in situations of uncertainty, pertains to all
conscious behavior. in uttering a sentence, for example,
we know in advance what we are going to say, yet
the sentence shapes itself into definite form only as we
proceed; or perhaps we get "stuck," and by hemming
and hawing bear witness that a struggle for a certain
kind of organization is going on. the same word in
different contexts is a different word in each instance,
by virtue of the coloring that it takes on from what
is to follow after. and this is equally true of our
most casual experiences. the auditory or visual object
that we happen to notice and immediately afterwards
ignore is apprehended with reference to the possibility
of warranting further attention, or else it presents
itself as an intruder that is to be excluded in order that
we may go on with the concern of the moment. all experience
is a kind of intelligence, a control of present
behavior with reference to future adjustment. to be
in experience at all is to have the future operate in the
present.
this reference to the future may be in the nature of
an end or goal that controls a series of activities or it
may be of a momentary and casual kind. in any case
the character of the stimulus changes with the progress
of the act. the book on the table must become successively
book-to-be-reached-for, book-to-be-picked-up, and
book-to-be-opened, unless the process is to drop back to
the type of reflex. this development of the stimulus
gives genuine continuity, since every moment in the
process comes as a fulfilment of its predecessor and as
a transition-point to its successor. in a purely mechanical
act response follows stimulus like the successive
strokes of a clock. it is a touch-and-go affair;
the stimulus presses the button and then subsides,
while the neural organization does the rest. in
conscious behavior, on the other hand, stimulus and
response keep step with each other. a mere succession
of stimuli would reduce conscious behavior
to a series of explosive jerks, on the principle
of the gasoline engine. to be conscious at all is to
duplicate in principle the agility of the tight-rope performer,
who continuously establishes new co-ordinations
according to the exigencies of the moment and
with constant reference to the controlling consideration
of keeping right side up. the sensory stimulus
provides continuously for its own rehabilitation or appropriate
transformation, and in a similar way the
neural organization is never a finished thing, but is in
constant process of readjustment to meet the demands
of an adaptation that still lies in the future.
it is this relationship of present response to the response
of the next moment that constitutes the distinctive
trait of conscious behavior. the relatively unorganized
responses of the present moment, in becoming
reflected in the experienced object, reveal their outcome
or meaning before they have become overt, and thus
provide the conditions of intelligent action. in other
words, future consequences become transformed into a
stimulus for further behavior. we are confronted here
with a distinctive mode of operation, which must be
properly recognized, if we are to give a consistent and
intelligent account of conscious behavior. on the other
hand, if we refuse to recognize the advent here of a
new category, intelligence becomes an anomaly and
mystery deepens into contradiction. since intelligence
or consciousness must be provided for somehow, we are
forced back upon either interactionism or else epiphenomenalism,
more or less disguised under a euphonious
name, such as psycho-physical parallelism or the double-aspect
theory. that is, the relation of stimulus and
response is either reduced to plain cause and effect or
else is rejected altogether and supplanted by a bare concomitance
of the physical and mental series. in either
case conscious behavior is reduced to the type of reflex
action, the only issue between the two doctrines being
the question whether or not it is necessary or permissible
to interpolate mental links in the causal chain.
according to the doctrine of parallelism, conscious
behavior is nothing more than a complicated form of
reflex, which goes on without any interference on the
part of mind or intelligence. intelligence adds nothing
to the situation except itself; it carries no implications
or new significance with regard to conduct. the
psychic correlate is permitted to tag along, but the
explanations of response remain the same in kind as
they were before they reached the level of consciousness.
"mere complexity should not becloud the issue. every
brain process, like every reflex activity, is presumably
the result of physico-chemical processes. the assumption
of a mysterious intuition or 'psychic force' adds
nothing to the mechanistic explanation, even when the
latter is most fragmentary. the interactionists go out
of their way unnecessarily in assuming a special activity
of consciousness to account for the dislocation of
reactions from sensations. the nervous organization
suffices to explain it. distant-stimuli and central
stimuli co-operate to bring about anticipatory reactions;
foresight is but the conscious side of this process.
the phenomenon is both physical and mental."
the passage just quoted is fairly typical. since the
mental is an aspect or concomitant of the physical it
is clearly entitled to an occasional honorable mention,
but the fact remains that the explanation of behavior
is to be given wholly in terms of neural organization.
the mental is quite literally an "also ran." to say
that a physico-chemical process is also mental is of no
particular significance as long as it is implied that the
end or goal of the process plays no part in shaping the
course of events. the mental simply gives dignity to
the occasion, like the sedan chair with no bottom, in
which the irishman's admirers, according to james's
story, ran him along to the place of banquet and which
prompted the hero to remark: "faith, if it wasn't for
the honor of the thing, i might as well have come on
foot."
it is this empty show of respect which the interactionists
seek to avoid when they make the mental a distinct
link in the causal sequence. the physical first
causes the mental, and the mental in turn brings about
a change in the physical. in this way a certain importance
is indeed secured to mental facts, but it appears
that, so far as purposive action is concerned, we
are no better off than we were before. the mental is
simply another kind of cause; it has as little option
regarding its physical effect as the physical cause has
with regard to its mental effect. non-mechanical behavior
is again ruled out, or else a vain attempt is made
to secure a place for it through the introduction of an
independent psychic agency.
it is true, indeed, that we are under no antecedent
obligation to maintain the existence of an activity that
is not entirely reducible to the type of everyday cause
and effect. but neither does scientific zeal and incorruptibility
require us to do violence to the facts in order
to secure this uniformity of type. not to speak at all
of the difficulties inherent in this dualism, it seems undeniable
that some facts persistently refuse to conform
to the type of mechanism, unless they are previously
clubbed into submission. foresight and the sense of
obligation, for example, must learn to regard themselves
as nothing more than an interesting indication
of the way in which the neural machinery is operating
before they will fit into the scheme. and similarly the
progress of an argument is no way controlled or directed
by the end in view, or by considerations of logical
coherence, but by the impact of causation. ideas lose
their power to guide conduct by prevision of the future,
and truth and error consequently lose their significance,
save perhaps as manifestations of cerebral
operations. since reasoning involves association, it
must be reducible to bare association; the sequence of
the process is just sequence and nothing more. a
description of this kind is on a par with the celebrated
opinion that violin music is just a case of scraping
horse-hair on catgut. everything that is distinctive in
the facts is left out of account, and we are forced to
the conclusion that no conclusion has any logical significance
or value.
in the end these difficulties, and in fact most of our
philosophic ills, may be traced back to the prejudice
that experience or knowing is a process in which the
objects concerned do not participate and have no share.
this assumption commits us at once to various corollaries
and thus breeds a set of abstractions that pass
themselves off as entities and add themselves to the world
of our experience as demonstrable facts. in philosophy,
as in the financial world, there is a constant temptation
to do business on a basis of fictitious capitalization.
our abstract physico-chemical processes, with their
correlates, such as passive, independent objects, souls,
minds, or absolutes, do not represent actual working
capital, but watered stock, and their inevitable tendency
is to convert the legitimate business of philosophy
into a campaign of exploitation, which is none the less
exploitation because it is frequently done in the interests
of what are supposed to be the spiritual values of
man. a careful inventory of our assets brings to light
no such entities as those which have been placed to our
credit. we do not find body and object and consciousness,
but only body and object. we do not find objects
that remain indifferent to the experiential process,
but rather objects that exhibit a flexibility and
mobility which defy all description. we do not find a
self-sufficient environment or absolute to which intelligence
must needs adjust itself, but an environment that
is at odds with itself and struggling in the throes of a
reconstruction. the process of intelligence is something
that goes on, not in our minds, but in things; it
is not photographic, but creative. from the simplest
perception to the most ideal aspiration or the wildest
hallucination, our human experience is reality engaged
in the guidance or control of behavior. things undergo
a change in becoming experienced, but the change consists
in a doing, in the assumption of a certain task or
duty. the experiential object hence varies with the
response; the situation and the motor activity fit together
like the sections of a broken bowl.
the bearing of this standpoint on the interpretation
of psychology is readily apparent. if it be granted
that consciousness is just a name for behavior that is
guided by the results of acts not yet performed but reflected
beforehand in the objects of experience, it
follows that this behavior is the peculiar subject-matter
of psychology. it is only by reference to
behavior that a distinctive field can be marked off
for psychological enterprise. when we say that
the flame is hot, the stone hard, and the ice cold and
slippery, we are describing objects and nothing more.
these qualities are, indeed, anticipations of future possibilities,
but this means simply that the objects are
described in terms of their properties or capacities as
stimuli of the organism. such an account leaves out
of consideration certain changes which things undergo
when they exercise the function of controlling or
directing changes in the adjustment of the body. a
quality, such as "sharp" or "hot," is not mental or
constituted by consciousness, but the function of the
quality in giving direction to behavior through certain
changes which it undergoes is consciousness. the
changes that take place in things as a result of association,
attention, or memory, are changes that have
no significance, save with regard to their function as
stimuli to new adjustments. psychology, therefore,
is properly a study of the conditions which determine
the change or development of stimuli; more specifically
it is a study of the conditions which govern such processes
as those by which problems are solved, lessons are
memorized, habits and attitudes are built up, and decisions
are reached. to call such study "applied"
psychology is to misunderstand the proper scope and
purpose of the subject. psychology frequently has
occasion to draw extensively upon physics and physiology,
but it has its own problem and its own method
of procedure.
that this view of conscious behavior should involve
an extensive reinterpretation of familiar facts is altogether
natural and inevitable. if consciousness is a
form of control, the question, for example, what is
"in" consciousness and what is not must be interpreted
with reference to this function of control. in a
sense we perceive many things to which we are not paying
attention, such as the light in the room or the
familiar chairs and bookcases. these are perceived
"marginally," as we say, in the sense that the presence
of these objects affects the total adjustment of the
moment in such a way that the experience would become
a clue to these objects if they were withdrawn.
and similarly we may speak of marginal sensations of
strain or movement, to indicate possible clues to certain
bodily activities which are factors in the process. these
marginal perceptions or images are not actual existences,
but are symbols and nothing more. the significance
of these symbols is that they point to certain
conditions by which the experiences in question are
determined. thus the question whether a given experience
involves certain "sensations" is just a question
whether certain bodily or extra-bodily conditions
are involved in the experience. if this reference
to conditions is ignored and experience is explained
in terms of sensory material that blends and
fuses and otherwise disposes itself, the explanation
is no longer science but sleight-of-hand. psychology
has no proper concern with such mythical constituents
of consciousness; its business is with things as
related to conduct, which is to say that psychology
is a science of behavior.
according to the standpoint set forth in the preceding
discussion, the key to a consistent and fruitful
interpretation of consciousness and psychology lies in
behavior. if we turn now to the psychology of introspection,
which has been dominant so many years, we
find a standpoint and mode of procedure which, on the
surface at least, is of a radically different kind. it
behooves us, therefore, to consider this standpoint in
some detail in order to justify the attempt to reinterpret
and "evaluate" it in the light of our own doctrine.
the point of departure for introspective psychology
is to be found, so it seems, not in the facts of behavior,
but in the distinction between focal and marginal experience.
it is on this distinction that the introspective
psychologist bases the attempt to give a psychological
analysis and description of the contents of
experience. to analyze and describe the facts of consciousness
is to bring the marginal constituents of
experience into the white light of attention. analysis
and description are possible just because experience
is so largely a welter of elements that disguise their
identity and character. in some way these unrecognized
and unidentified elements are constituents of the
total experience. to borrow the language of a writer
quoted by james, "however deeply we may suppose
the attention to be engaged by any thought, any considerable
alteration of the surrounding phenomena
would still be perceived; the most abstruse demonstration
in this room would not prevent a listener, however
absorbed, from noticing the sudden extinction of
the lights." or, as james remarks: "it is just like
the overtones in music. different instruments give the
'same note,' namely, various upper harmonics of it
which differ from one instrument to another. they are
not separately heard by the ear; they blend with the
fundamental note and suffuse it, and alter it." let
the attention be directed to these overtones, however,
and they at once detach themselves from their surroundings
and step forth into the light of day. even so the
ticking of the clock may pass unnoticed in the sense
that it is an undiscriminated element in the background
of our consciousness; but if the ticking comes to a sudden
stop, the feeling of a void in our consciousness proclaims
the fact that something has gone out from it.
the observation and description of the facts of consciousness,
then, is based directly on the fact that experience,
as the psychologist deals with it, possesses a
focus and margin. nature as conceived by the physical
sciences presents no such distinction. the facts are
what they are, and their character as focal or marginal,
as clear or obscure, depends altogether upon their relation
to an intelligence. or we may say that if the
facts of experience were always focal and never marginal,
it would never occur to us to speak of consciousness
as we do at present. as long as we confine
ourselves to a given color, shape or temperature, as
experienced focally, we are not dealing with consciousness,
but with objects. an analysis of such facts that
does not bring in the marginal is not an analysis of
consciousness, but an analysis of physical reality. even
if we consider non-physical objects, such as mathematical
or economic concepts, we find that our analysis
is not psychological as long as the marginal is left out.
the consideration of the margin, however, brings us
into the presence of facts which are of a distinctive
kind and which warrant a new science. let the margin
be eliminated and psychology disappears at the same
time.
the psychological doctrine of focus and margin,
then, is a matter of fundamental importance. on the
interpretation of this doctrine depend our systems of
psychology and of philosophy. what, then, is meant
by focus and margin? if we turn to our psychologies,
we seem to be confronted once more with something
that everybody knows and nobody can define. but
since we have to do with a distinction, the obligation to
differentiate cannot be wholly ignored. consciousness
is sometimes likened to a visual field and sometimes to
the waves of the sea. like the visual field it has a foreground
and a background, a near and a remote, a
center and a margin or periphery. the contents of
consciousness are vivid or clear in the center of this
field and fade away into vagueness or obscureness in
proportion to their approach to the periphery. or, to
take the other comparison, the focus may be represented
by the crest of a wave and the margin by what we
may call its base. this illustration has the advantage
that it indicates the difference between higher and lower
degrees of concentration. as concentration increases,
the crest of the wave rises higher and its width
decreases, while the reverse is true where the concentration
of attention is less intense. all consciousness possesses
the distinction of focus and margin in some
degree; however much we may be absorbed in an object
or topic, there is always an indirect mental vision
that informs us of other facts, which for the time being
are in the background of our consciousness.
for purposes of description a metaphor is at best a
clumsy device. it has a tendency to substitute itself
for the thing to be described and thus to conceal its
limitations and inaccuracies. the present case is no
exception. i am forced to think that the visual field in
particular is a thoroughly vicious metaphor when employed
to body forth the distinction of focus and
margin. whatever this distinction may in the end turn
out to be, it is not such as this comparison would lead
one to suppose. objects seen in indirect vision appear
obscure and blurred precisely because they are in the
focus of consciousness. we get pretty much the same
sort of obscureness or blur on a printed page when we
look at it in indirect vision as we do when we look at
it from a distance that is just too great to make out
the words or characters. what the illustration shows
is that things look different according as the circumstances
under which we see them are different, but what
bearing this has on marginal consciousness is not at all
obvious to an unsophisticated intelligence.
when we speak of a focus and margin in consciousness,
we are presumably dealing with conscious fact.
now this illustration of the visual field does not represent
conscious fact. ordinary perception carries with
it no sense of obscureness at all, and when it does we
have exactly the same kind of situation as when an
object is too distant or in some other way inaccessible
to satisfactory perception. that is, the object perceived
is in the 'focus' and not in the margin. the
obscureness of objects when seen with the margin of the
retina has no more to do with the margin of consciousness
than the obscureness caused by an attack of dizziness
or by a morning fog.
it will be said, perhaps, that consciousness may be
unclear even though there be no sense of unclearness,
that there is such a thing as intrinsic clearness, quite
apart from obstacles and problems. in other words,
the same sensation is capable of realizing various degrees
of clearness. it is not at all obvious, however,
why the different experiences that are concerned in such
a comparison should be called the same sensation. as
long as we abstract from objective reference, each sensation
is just what it is and there is no opportunity to
make comparisons on the basis of clearness. a sensation
as such—if we are bound to speak of sensations—can
by no possibility be an obscure sensation, for the
trait that we call obscureness or vagueness constitutes
the intrinsic being of that sensation. if we permit ourselves
to speak of clearness at all, we should rather say
that it possesses a maximum of clearness, since it has
managed to express or present its whole nature with
not one trait or feature lacking. what more could be
demanded, in the way of clearness, of any conscious
fact than that it should body forth every detail that it
possesses?
if sensations or states of consciousness possess degrees
of clearness, it seems to follow that we may
scrutinize them for the purpose of discovering characteristics
that were present though scarcely perceived,
in much the same way that the polishing of old furniture
brings out the grain in the wood. but such a
parallel, i submit, is plain nonsense. the supposition
that consciousness is something that in due time and
with good fortune may attain consciousness is too absurd
for discussion, even though it is a supposition that
plays a considerable rôle in present-day psychology.
the purpose of the discussion, up to this point, has
not been to deny the validity of the distinction between
focus and margin, but to insist upon the necessity of
reconsidering the meaning of this distinction, if we are
to attain to a workable definition of consciousness and
a fruitful or even intelligible conception of the problem
of psychology. i have endeavored to show, in the
first place, that the doctrine of focus and margin involves
the raison d'être of psychology. apart from
this doctrine we have no task or problem that psychology
can claim as its distinctive possession. the
analysis of what is in the focus of consciousness is adequately
provided for in the other sciences; it is only
with the introduction of what is called the margin that
an enterprise of a different kind becomes necessary.
but, secondly, this distinction of focus and margin cannot
be drawn on the basis of the experienced contrast
between clearness and obscureness. the very fact that
anything is experienced as obscure means that it is an
object of attention, or, in other words, that it is in the
focus of consciousness and not in the margin. the
comparison of focus and margin with direct and indirect
vision is misleading, because it suggests that experiences
are marginal in proportion as they are felt
as obscure. and, thirdly, if we undertake to distinguish
between focus and margin on the basis of a difference
in clearness or vividness of which no note is
taken at the time, we encounter the difficulty that experience
or consciousness, taken abstractly, does not
admit of such variations in degree, and so this criterion
likewise goes by the board.
the situation is indeed peculiar. that there is a
realm of psychological fact is universally conceded. as
a consequence of this conviction a great body of fact
and of doctrine has been built up. it would be folly
to deny either the distinctiveness or the significance of
this achievement. and yet james's description of psychology
as "a string of raw facts; a little gossip and
wrangle about opinions; a little classification and generalization
on the mere descriptive level; a strong prejudice
that we have states of mind and that our brain conditions
them," is not wholly untrue even today. it is
even possible for a present-day critic to outdo james
and maintain that the legitimacy of psychology as a
separate inquiry is a matter of faith rather than of
sight. the 'raw facts' of which james speaks resolve
themselves into physical and physiological material on
the one hand and metaphysical dogmas on the other;
the gossip and wrangle are largely over fictitious problems;
the classifications and generalizations as a rule
involve trespassing on other fields; the prejudice that
we have states of mind has less standing-ground today
than it had twenty years ago. in other words, there
is still plausible ground for james's pessimistic comment:
"this is no science, it is only the hope of a
science." a situation such as this carries with it the
insistent suggestion that the trouble lies, not primarily
in the nature of the subject-matter, but in our conception
of the problem. "the matter of a science,"
as james says, "is with us." and if the distinction
of focus and margin constitutes the starting-point and
justification for a science of psychology, a better understanding
of this distinction will mean a more adequate
appreciation of the problem with which psychology
has to deal.
as a starting-point for a reconsideration of focus
and margin, we may take those experiences in which the
distinction of clearness and obscureness is presented as
an experienced fact. let us then turn once more to the
familiar illustration of the visual field. "when we look
at a printed page, there is always some one portion
of it, perhaps a word, which we see more clearly than
we do the rest; and out beyond the margin of the page
we are still conscious of objects which we see only in
a very imperfect way." that is, we appreciate the
distinction between what lies in the center of our visual
field and what is more remote, just because in this experiment
we are trying to see what lies beyond the
center without turning our eyes in that direction. we
set ourselves the task of seeing what is on the page,
and at the same time we interpose an artificial obstacle.
hence the sense of effort, and the contrast between
what is clear and what is obscure. the present experience
is obscure, not inherently, but only with reference
to a certain problem or question. it is inadequate as
an anticipation of further experience. the contrast
between clear and obscure is created by our attempt to
overcome the difficulty, and is therefore absent from
ordinary, unobstructed visual perception.
the situation described in the following familiar
quotation from james is an illustration of the same
thing: "suppose we try to recall a forgotten name.
the state of our consciousness is peculiar. there is
a gap therein; but no mere gap. it is a gap that is
intensely active. a sort of wraith of the name is in
it, beckoning us in a given direction, making us at
moments tingle with the sense of our closeness, and
then letting us sink back without the longed-for term."
'i met this man on the train, and later at the reception;
but what is his name?' the struggle rends our
consciousness in twain. the occasions of our meeting,
his appearance, his conversation, are solid fact, yet all
suffused with the pervasive, evanscent "wraith" that
tantalizes us with glimpses which half reveal and half
conceal the name we seek to grasp.
to account for such experiences simply in terms of
half-submerged "sensations" and "images" is to do
violence to all the requirements for clear thinking. if
we rule out explanations of this kind, we are evidently
forced to the conclusion that these experiences are obscure,
not in themselves or in the abstract, but with
reference to the function of putting us in possession
of the name to which they are inadequate clues. it is
the subsequent, satisfactory experience of the name
which furnishes our standard for clearness; in other
words, the implications of obscureness are of a functional,
and not of a static or structural, kind. the
marginal character of an experience is simply a reference
to its function as a clue or cue to some further experience,
i.e., a reference to its character as a changing
stimulus. or we may say that the distinction between
focus and margin is just another aspect of the distinction
between the conditions for further activity and the
incompleteness which leads to further adjustment.
the transfer of the future into the present gives us a
fact, here and now, and in this respect the experience is
entirely focal in character, and as such it is subject-matter
for the various sciences. whatever the nature
of the experience, it is just what it is, and not something
else. with respect to the further experience,
however, which it conditions or for which it prepares
the way, the present experience is entirely marginal,
i.e., in its character as a changing stimulus it is subject-matter
for psychology. the distinction of focus
and margin, then, is based ultimately upon the function
of experience in the control of behavior. the
given situation is a present fact and is in functional
change; or, in terms of our present discussion, it
has both a focus and a margin. as present fact it
is a reality which requires recognition in the form of
adjustment; as in functional change it provides opportunity
for bringing the adjustment to fruition. that is,
the experience both sets a task or makes a demand and
it points the way. the distinction is a distinction of
function, not of static existence, and it is this distinction
which is represented by the contrast of focus and
margin.
if we compare this interpretation of focus and margin
with that of traditional psychology, we find that
the latter construes the relation of the present to the
future experience wholly in static terms, the functional
relation being left out of account. the later experience
is read back into its predecessor in the form of dim or
marginal images, which need but show themselves more
completely to make the two identical. if these sensations
were intended only as symbols of a functional
relationship, it would perhaps be scarcely worth while
to enter a protest against them. but when the functional
relationship is quite overlooked, the explanation
that is given becomes exceedingly dubious. the ticking
of the clock, for example, that is present, though unnoticed,
the overtones of the note that suffuse the whole
without diverting attention to their individual qualities,—in
what precise way are facts of this kind concerned
in the description of the experience which they
modify? a study of the clock or of the overtones
can hardly pass as an analysis of consciousness; it is
too obviously an affair of physics. such a study becomes
merely an excuse for repeating the analyses of
physics and reading them off in terms of sensations
and images. moreover, the transfer of all this material
to consciousness looks suspiciously like a transaction
in mental chemistry. where, then, is psychology
to gain a foothold? what is the meaning of these uncanny
sensations and images, which nobody experiences,
unless it be their character as symbols of
adjustment? they have no legitimate status, and psychology,
by consequence, has no legitimate problem,
except in so far as they represent those possible acts
of adaptation which are the sole and proper concern
of psychology.
it remains to point out briefly the bearing of these
results on what is called "the method of introspection."
we are sometimes assured that introspection has discarded
the belief in a separate mental stuff or subject-matter,
but there is ground for the suspicion that such
protestations are made in the same spirit that we affirm
our belief in the ten commandments or the golden
rule, with no thought of being taken seriously. at all
events, without a literal "looking within" it seems to
become exceedingly difficult to differentiate introspection
from ordinary observation as practised in the
other sciences. the reason for this difficulty is that
there is nothing left in introspection by which it can
be differentiated. the term introspection properly
designates, not a method but a problem; the problem,
namely, of interpreting given facts with reference to
their function in the control of behavior. if psychology
is to justify its claim to the status of a science,
it is in duty bound to secure for itself both an objective
criterion for the adjudication of disputes which otherwise
are of necessity interminable, and a subject-matter
that is not simply a heritage of metaphysical prejudice,
but a realm of fact that is attested by everyday observation
and experience.
within recent years the doctrine that psychology
is a science of behavior has acquired a certain prominence.
it is presupposed, of course, that the behavior
with which psychology is concerned is of a distinctive
sort; but the differentia is unfortunately the very thing
that the "behaviorist" has hitherto left out of account.
in his revolt against introspectionism, which has
been accustomed to give to its subject-matter a subjectivistic
and "psychic" interpretation, he goes to
the other extreme and relies on behavior pure and simple.
being without a serviceable differentia, he is
unable to mark off the field of psychology from contiguous
territory. the selection of certain problems
within the general range of behavior, with no recognition
of any distinctive trait to guide and justify the
selection, is hardly enough to warrant a new science.
even an arbitrary principle of selection is better than
none, and it would, therefore, be quite as reasonable
to subdivide the field of botany in the interests of a
new science, and group together for separate botanical
study those flowers which have enabled poets to give
symbolic expression to the beauty of women.
that the principle of selection is, in the end, the
ability to modify behavior through the anticipation of
possible consequences, appears from the fact that the
category of stimulus and response is otherwise found
to be unworkable. it is true that in the simpler forms
of behavior stimulus and response may be correlated
without practical difficulty. but when we deal with
what has been called "delayed overt response," the
matter becomes more complicated and the theoretical
difficulty becomes more prominent. the behaviorist
would not seriously undertake to record everything
that happens between stimulus and response. he proceeds
selectively, taking the relation of stimulus and
response as his clue. he is properly interested in the
movements which result from the application of the
stimulus only in so far as they constitute response.
otherwise his study is not a study of behavior, but a
study of movements. but when does a movement constitute
a response? do we label as stimulus the spoken
word which results in overt action a week later, or the
visual perception which sets a complicated and long-drawn-out
problem, for no other reason than that it
appears somewhere as an antecedent in the causal chain
of events? if so, there is no obvious reason why the
event which occurred just before or immediately after
the soi-disant stimulus should not be regarded as the
true stimulus. unless a satisfactory reason is forthcoming,
it would seem better to substitute cause and
effect for stimulus and response and to drop the term
behavior from our vocabulary. psychology then becomes
a study of certain causal relationships, but is
still without a principle for the selection of those causal
events which are supposed to constitute its peculiar
subject-matter.
even if we manage to become reconciled to this situation,
however, our troubles are not yet at an end.
there still remains the difficulty in certain cases of
showing that the event which is selected as stimulus
or cause bears any significant relationship to the event
which figures in our scheme as the response. the
stimulus is supposed to have a causal connection with
the response, but how are we to know that this is the
fact? how are we to know that the engineer who
solves a problem for me at my request might not have
done so anyway? no behaviorist can possibly show that
the air waves set in motion by my vocalization were an
indispensable stimulus. we doubtless believe that the
spoken word was in fact the spark which lit the fuse
and finally exploded the mine, but this belief involves
a complication of causes which it is wholly beyond
our power to control or to verify.
it is true, of course, that we are able, as a matter
of fact, to correlate stimulus and response. i know
that it was the spoken word which caused the commission
to be executed, for the expert reminds me of the
fact and presents a bill. but neither of us makes any
pretense that his belief is derived from a scrutiny of
the causal sequence. memory furnishes us with a shortcut
to the result. while our present acts are doubtless
connected with the past through causation, we do
not regard them as simply the effects of antecedent
causes. they are rather responses to present stimuli.
the expert presents his bill, being moved thereto by
a stimulus which may be indicated by saying that it
is the spoken-word-constituting-a-commission-now-completed-and-entitling-me-to-compensation.
that is, the
stimulus cannot be pushed back and anchored at a
fixed point in the past, but is a present factor at the
moment of response and is operative by virtue of its
anticipation of future events.
if, then, psychology is to be regarded as a study
of behavior, it is plainly necessary to reinterpret the
category of behavior. for example, a purely mechanical
response to a light-stimulus may properly be
viewed as response to the ether-vibration or wave-length
upon which it follows in temporal sequence. but if
this stimulation results in what is commonly called consciousness,
a different kind of response ensues. the
light-stimulus becomes a cause or occasion for the act
of looking. but why look, unless it be to secure a
new stimulus for further response? we stop to look,
precisely because the first stimulus does not run
smoothly off the reel. the response will not go forward,
but is halted and expends itself in the effort to
secure a further stimulus. this is the moment of attention,
in which the stimulus undergoes a process of
transformation, concomitantly with the process of reorganization
in the motor responses, and in the direction
of ends or results that are foreshadowed in it. this
change in the stimulus takes place under certain specifiable
conditions, and the study of these conditions is
a study of such processes as perceiving, attending, remembering,
and deliberating, which are distinctively
psychological in their nature. processes of this kind,
if taken as changes in stimuli, find an objective criterion
in the adaptive behavior for the sake of which
they occur, and they provide psychology with a distinctive
task and subject-matter.
as against the introspectionist, then, the behaviorist
is justified in his contention that psychological procedure
must be objective and experimental in character.
the danger to which he has exposed himself is the
failure to differentiate his problem from that of physiology
and physics. it is only by a proper recognition
of both the objective and the distinctive character of
conscious behavior that psychology can free itself of
the reproach which is heaped upon it by members of its
own household and take the place that rightfully belongs
to it in the community of the sciences.
according to the preceding exposition, the current
psychological doctrine of focus and margin is an attempt
to reduce the changes in the stimulus to terms
of static entities denominated sensations and images.
by abstracting from change we convert the new
stimulus that is already on the way into inert sensory
material, which lends itself to purely analytic treatment.
in this way the suggested hardness of the rock
becomes a "centrally aroused sensation" of a stubbed
toe, the heat of the candle becomes an image of a
burn, etc. as was said before, the sensations are not
existences, but representatives or symbols of our
nascent activities; they are the static equivalents of
this foreshadowing or reference to the future. the explanation
of experience that we find in james and
bergson approximates this view so closely in one respect
and departs from it so widely in another as to
warrant a brief discussion.
a prominent characteristic of the doctrine advocated
by james and bergson is the emphasis given to
the foreshadowings or anticipations of the future. experiences
of conflict, such as the struggle to recall a
name, take on their peculiar coloring, so these writers
contend, from their relationship to a beyond, to something
which is yet to be. if we are to understand
experience as it really is, we must guard against the
besetting temptation to translate everything into
spatial equivalents. this forward reference is usually
read off as a distinction and contrast between simultaneously
existing components. some constituent is
first set apart as the nucleus or focus and is then enveloped
with an elusive, intangible wraith of meaning,
which is called the margin. we have been taught to
think of the focus as made up of sensory material of
some sort and silhouetted against a background lit up
by the fitful, inconsequential heat-lightning of meaning.
but this is a perversion of the facts. when we are
engaged in a problem it is precisely these unformed
meanings that are of interest and importance. they
are in the focus of consciousness, in so far as we can
speak of a focus at all. they absorb our attention
and direct our energies. they inform us of a margin,
not by refusing to compete for our attention with more
important or more interesting facts, but by bodying
forth the unfinished character of the situation. hence
this beckoning, this tingling with the sense of closeness,
this sinking back when our efforts meet with defeat.
focus and margin, in short, have to do with
movement, with transition, and not with a static field.
these situations are felt as inherently unstable and in
process of reconstruction. there is a peculiar sense
of activity, of "something doing," of a future knocking
on the door of the present. what is thus on its
way to the present we can designate only in terms of
the object as it is after it has arrived. to call it
marginal is to immerse the object in this temporal
flux, which embodies perfectly the characteristics of
bergsonian duration.
but this is only a first step. if we turn now to
those experiences from which this inner diremption
of fact and meaning is absent, we find a process that
is essentially the same in kind. they likewise constitute
a temporal flow, even though there be no sense of
duration or of change as such. the different moments
of these experiences are not mechanically juxtaposed,
but blend together in much the same way as when the
process is experienced as a process. in principle we
have the same transition, the same becoming, the same
growth from less to more, the same activity of continuous
reconstruction. conscious life, we find, is a continuous
adjustment; each of its moments is a "transitive
state." the more evenly flowing experiences
are likewise endowed with a focus and margin, not in
the form of static elements, but as a dynamic relationship
of what is with what is to be.
such an interpretation of experience, moreover,
opens the way for a proper valuation of the psychologist's
procedure. the concept of sensation is methodology
pure and simple. granted that focus and
margin are such as was indicated a moment ago, how
are they to be described, unless we resort to some
hilfsbegriff such as sensations? james's description of
the effort to recall a forgotten name is not description
at all in a scientific sense, since the "wraith of
the name" that we are trying to recover is of too unearthly
a fabric to be weighed and measured by accepted
scientific standards. it makes us "tingle," it
lets us "sink back," but such portrayal is literature
rather than science. our first step must be to resolve
our material into components. these components we
identify with genuine elements if we can, with pious
fictions if we must; but until this is done there can
be no exact description. there can be no precision in
our statement of the facts and no formulation of the
laws that govern their changes.
this view undeniably has a certain plausibility. as
long as the results are attained which the psychologist
sets out to reach, we need not be hypersensitive on the
score of methods. in the field of natural science, at
all events, this jesuitical principle is not incompatible
with respectability. if it be true, however, that sensation
is but a tool or artifact, a means to an end, what
is the end that is to be attained by this device? it
is at this point that we come to the parting of the ways.
according to the view previously elaborated, the anticipations
of the future have to do with the results
of our possible acts, and sensations are simply symbols
for the various elements in our complex motor responses.
in the case of bergson and james, however,
the clue that is furnished by response is discarded.
the reference to the future, being dissociated from
behavior, is taken as evidence of an abstract or metaphysical
duration, so that experience is somehow other
than it seems; and sensation is regarded as the translation
of duration into the language of space. associationism
is justified in its belief that reality is different
from its appearance in our experience, but is
criticized for attempting to interpret the real in terms
of space rather than time. in both cases the lead of
the subject-matter is abandoned in favor of an explanation
that is derived from a fourth-dimensional plane
of existence.
the suspicion that these two positions have a deep-seated
affinity is strengthened if we call to mind that
the concept of sensation was originated, not in the
interests of methodology, but as the expression of a
historic preconception that mistook fiction for fact.
the fundamental error back of it was the preposterous
notion that consciousness consists of subconscious or
unconscious constituents, which by their mechanical or
chemical combinations make our experience what it is.
the question which it raises and which has afflicted us
even to the present day is not primarily the question
of fact, but the question of intelligibility, as the controversy
over mindstuff abundantly attests. whether
we regard experience as made up of sensory material,
however, or as constituted in a bergsonian fashion, is
a matter of detail; the primary question is whether
a distinction between consciousness as it appears and
as it "really" is has any meaning. in so far as this
distinction is maintained, we are beating the thin air
of mythology, despite our reinterpretations and justifications.
true conversion does not consist in a renaming
of old gods, but demands a humble and a contrite
heart. to call sensation an artifact, a methodological
device, without a surrender of the metaphysical assumption
that lies back of associationism is not to correct
the evil, but is more likely to be treated as an indulgence
for sins that are yet to be committed.
this fundamental identity is presumably the reason
for certain other similarities, which would perhaps not
be readily anticipated. both doctrines undertake to
tell us what is going on behind the scenes, what consciousness
or experience "really" is. the descriptions
present an astonishing difference of vocabulary, but
if we take care not to be misled by superficial differences,
we find an equally astonishing agreement as to
content. from the one side consciousness is explained
as a juxtaposition of elements; from the other as an
interpenetration of elements so complete that the parts
can be neither isolated nor distinguished from the whole.
on the one hand we find a multiplicity without unity,
on the other a unity without multiplicity. in the one
account the temporal unit is a sensation devoid of
internal temporal diversity; in the other duration as
such is a unity in which past, present, and future blend
into an undifferentiated whole. the one position gathers
its facts by a mystifying process called introspection;
the other obtains its results from a mystical
faculty of intuition. the difference in language remains,
but both accounts lead us away into a twilight
region where words substitute themselves for facts.
as was suggested a moment ago, the contrast between
ordinary experience and something else of which it is
the appearance is the result of the failure to give
proper recognition to the facts of behavior. if we
connect the forward reference of experience with the
operations of our nascent activities, we have no need
of a pure duration or of bridging the gulf between
reality and its appearances. in the same way, if we
construe sensations as just symbols of our responses,
we rid ourselves of problems that are insoluble because
they are unintelligible. such problems constitute metaphysics
in the bad sense of the word, whether they show
themselves in the domain of science or of philosophy.
to describe experience by reference to such a real is
to explain what we know in terms of what we do not
know. the question what is real is absolutely sterile.
our descriptions and explanations must remain on the
same plane as the experiences with which they deal,
and not seek after a real of a different order. if we
are to have an explanation of consciousness at all, the
explanation must not take us back to hypothetical sensations
that are almost but not quite experienced, nor
to a duration in which all distinctions are swallowed
up, but must be rendered in terms of other facts that
dwell in the light of common day.
by way of conclusion i venture to urge once more
that a proper consideration of the facts of behavior
will furnish us with a key that will unlock many a door.
the conception of stimulus and response gives us a
differentia for experience and also enables us to distinguish
within experience between consciousness and
object. if, however, we disregard behavior, we are
bound to lose our way. the distinction between the
experienced and the unexperienced is either wiped out
or else is permitted to convert itself into a distinction
between appearance and reality that leads nowhere and
explains nothing. the significance of truth as the
successful guidance of behavior, in accordance with
the program laid down in the organization of stimulus
and response, is lost to sight and recourse is had to
a fourth-dimensional truth or reality for the miracle
of breathing life into the dead bones of our philosophic
abstractions. the study of behavior constitutes a
mode of approach that holds out the hope of deliverance
from questions that should never have been asked.
we are on a different and, let us hope, a higher level
when we cease to ask how consciousness can lay hold
of passive objects, or how knowledge überhaupt is possible,
and concern ourselves rather with the wondrous
activity whereby this plastic dance of circumstance
that we call the universe transcends the domain of
mechanism and embodies itself in the values of conscious
life.
§ . in the logic of instrumentalism, truth has been
identified with usefulness and the good with the satisfactory.
classifying critics have seen in this the damaging
mark of utilitarianism, certain of them deeming
"amerikanismus" an even shrewder and more specific
diagnosis. the association of these terms together
and the aptness of either to express what the critics
have in mind are matters of small interest. it is of
more importance to discover, behind the reproach implied,
the assumptions which may have made the reproach
seem pertinent. one cannot, of course, suppose
it to express a sheer general aversion to the useful or
an ascetic abhorrence of all satisfaction on principle.
puritanism, æstheticism, and pedantry should be last
resorts in any search for an interpretative clue.
the distrust of utilitarianism need be ascribed to
none of these. it comes instead from a conception of
the true utilitarian as a dull and dogmatic being with
no interests beyond the range of his own uninquiring
vision, no aspiration beyond the complacent survey
of his own perfections and no standards beyond the
inventory of his own bourgeois tastes and prejudices.
the type is indeed not yet extinct in our day: but is
it plausible to charge a "new" philosophy with conspiring
to perpetuate it? is instrumentalism only
philistinism called by a more descriptive name? it professes
at least to be a logic of hypothesis and experiment,
whereas for the perfect philistine there are no
ultimate problems and hence no logic but the logic of
self-evidence. when instrumentalism speaks of needs
and interests in its analysis of truth and goodness does
it then mean the needs and interests that define the individual
in what is sometimes invidiously termed a
"biological" sense—interests that control him before
his conduct becomes in any way a problem for himself?
quite as a matter of course, just this has been the assumption.
the satisfactoriness of prompt and cogent
classification has had a hand in the vindication of truth's
supremacy over satisfaction. in the view of instrumentalism
this ready interpretation of its meaning
is nothing less than the thinking of the unthinkable
and the bodying-forth of what is not. the
man who has solved a problem simply is not the man
he was before—if his problem was a genuine one and
it was he who solved it. he cannot measure and judge
the outcome by his earlier demands for the very good
reason that the outcome of real deliberation empties
these earlier demands of their interest and authority
for him.
can the conception thus suggested of personal
growth through exercise of creative or constructive intelligence
be in any measure verified by a general survey
of the economic side of life? has it any important
bearings upon any parts of economic theory? these
are the questions to which this essay is addressed.
§ . how have the real or fancied needs of the average
person of today come to be what they are? for
all sorts and conditions of men, the ways and means of
living have, during the past century or two—even during
the past decade or two—undergone revolutionary
changes. it is true that many of these changes have been
relatively superficial, touching only certain externalities
and entering in no important way into life's underlying
and dominant motives. others, no doubt, may fairly
be held to confuse and disperse the energies of men,
instead of making for wholeness, sanity and development
of human interest and power. and critics of industrial
and social progress who have felt the need
for reservations of this sort fall easily into a certain
mood of historic homesickness for the supposed "simplicity"
of an earlier age. but our interest, in this
discussion, is in the genesis, the actual process of becoming,
of our present "standards of living," not their
value as rated by any critical (or uncritical) standard.
and accordingly we shall take it for a fact that on
the whole the average person of today is reasonably,
perhaps unreasonably, well satisfied with his telephone,
his typewriter, and his motor-car; with his swift and
easy journeyings over land and sea; with his increasingly
scientific medical attendance and public sanitation;
with his virtually free supplies of literature and
information, new and old, and with his electric light
or his midnight oil (triple distilled) to aid in the
perusal. more than this, he is so well satisfied with
all these modern inventions that, historical or æsthetical
or other "holidays" apart, he would never for a
moment dispense with any one of them as a matter of
free choice. grossly material and humbly instrumental
though they are, these things and their like constitute
the framework sustaining the whole system of spiritual
functions that make up the life we live today, as a
society and as individuals. and our present problem
simply is the way in which they were first received by
those who were to use them, and passed into their present
common acceptance. to put the matter in general
terms, how is it that novel means of action or enjoyment,
despite their novelty, are able to command fair
scrutiny and hearing and can contrive to make their
way, often very speedily, into a position of importance
for industry and life?
there is an easy and not unnatural way of thinking
of this process as we see it going on about us that may
keep us long unmindful of even the possibility of such
a question. in every field of action, we habitually
look back upon accomplished changes from some present
well-secured vantage-point, and as we trace the steps
by which they have come to pass it is almost inevitable
that we should first see the sequence as an approach,
direct or devious but always sure, to the stage on
which we happen to have taken our stand. it seems
clear to us that what we have attained is better than
aught that has gone before—if it were not distinctly
satisfactory on its own merits we should not
now be taking it as the standpoint for a survey.
but once it is so taken, our recognition of its
appreciable and satisfying superiority passes over insensibly
into metaphysics. what we now find good we
find ourselves perceiving to have been all the while predestined
in the eternal scheme of things! we pause in
retrospect like the wayfarer who has reached the turning
of a mountain road or the man of middle age who
for the first time feels that his professional position
is assured. this, we say, justifies the effort it has cost,
this at last is really living! and the next step in retrospective
reconstruction follows easily; this was my
true goal from the first, the dim and inexpressible hope
of which would not let me pause and kept me until now
dissatisfied. the end was present in the beginning,
provoking the first groping efforts and affording progressively
the test and measure by which their results
were found ever wanting.
this retrospective logic may explain the presence
and perennial charm of those panoramic pages in our
encyclopædias purporting to show forth the gradual
perfecting of great instrumentalities upon which our
modern life depends. we survey the "evolution" of
printing, for example, from the wooden blocks of the
chinese or of laurens coster down to the hoe press,
the stereotype plate, and the linotype machine. or we
see the forms of written record from pictured papyrus,
cuneiform brick, and manuscript scroll down to the
printed book and the typewritten page; the means of
carriage by land from the ox-cart of the patriarchs to
the stage-coach, the cannonball limited, the motor-truck,
and the twelve-cylinder touring-car. and as one
contemplates these cheerfully colored exhibits there is in
each case an almost irresistible suggestion of a constant
and compelling need of "universal man" seeking in
more and more marvellously ingenious ways an adequate
expression and satisfaction. this need seems
never to have lapsed or changed its nature. all along
both driving power and direction, it has been the
one fixed factor in a long process in which all else has
been fluctuating, contingent, and imperfect—all else except
the nature of the materials and the principles of
mechanics, which, too, are seen in the end to have been
mutely conspiring toward the result. essential human
nature, it seems clear, does not and happily cannot
change. spiritual progress, in this ultimate optimism,
means simply clearer vision, completer knowledge, and
a less petulant and self-assertive habit of insistence
upon the details of particular purposes as individual
"impulse" and "idiosyncrasy" define them. we fortunate
beings of today have available, in the various departments
of our life, certain instrumentalities, and to
these our interests attach. these interests of ours in
their proportional strength (so the argument runs) express
our native and generic constitution in so far as this
constitution has been able as yet to achieve outward
expression and embodiment. and accordingly, in interpreting
the long history of technological evolution,
we take what we conceive ourselves now to be as normative
and essential. we project back into the lives of
primitive man, of our own racial ancestors, or of our
grandfathers, the habits and requirements which we acknowledge
in ourselves today and we conceive the men
of the past to have been driven forward on the ways
of progress by the identical discontent that would presumably
beset ourselves if we were to be suddenly carried
back to their scale and manner of existence.
§ . whatever else may be thought of it, there is
at least this to be said for the cult of historic homesickness
to which reference has just been made: it happens
to be at one with modern ethnology and history in
suggesting that earlier cultures were on the whole not
less content and self-satisfied in their condition than our
own. it is primitive man, not the modern, who is slow
to move and is satisfied, as a matter of course, with the
manner of life in which he fancies his people to have
lived from time immemorial. change in early social
groups is tragic when it is not insensible. it comes
through conquest and enslavement by outsiders or
through stress of the dread of these, or by gradual
adaptation of custom to failing environmental resources
or to increasing wealth. assent to change is in general
grudging or tacit at best and is commonly veiled by some
more or less transparent fiction.
and our suspicion of fallacy lurking somewhere in
the type of retrospective idealism we have been considering
is strengthened when we come to look a little
closely to details. to take a commonplace example—can
it be held that the difference between using a typewriter
and "writing by hand" is purely and simply
a matter of degree—that the machine serves the same
purpose and accomplishes the same kind of result as
the pen, but simply does the work more easily, rapidly,
and neatly? undoubtedly some such impression may
easily be gathered from an external survey of the ways
that men have used at different times for putting
their ideas on record. but it ignores important
aspects of the case. for one thing, the modern invention
effects a saving of the writer's time which can be
used in further investigation or in more careful revision
or in some way wholly unrelated to literary work,
and if the machine makes any part of the writer's
task less irksome, or the task as a whole less engrossing,
the whole matter of literary effort becomes less
forbidding and its place and influence as a social or
a personal function may for better or for worse be
altered. the difference brought to pass transcends
mere technical facility—it ramifies into a manifold of
differences affecting the entire qualitative character
and meaning of the literary function. and only by
an arbitrary sophistication of the facts can this complexity
of new outcome be thought of as implicit and
dynamic in the earlier stage.
in the same way precisely, the motor-car, as every
one knows, has "vanquished distance" and has "revolutionized
suburban life." in england it is said to
have made acute the issue of plural voting. in america
it is hailed by the optimistic as the solution of the
vexed problem of urban concentration and the decline
of agriculture. even as a means of recreation it is
said by the initiated to transform the whole meaning
of one's physical environment, exploiting new values
in sky and air and the green earth, which pass the
utmost possibilities of family "carry-all" or coach
and four. or consider the ocean steamship and its
influence: today we travel freely over the world, for all
manner of reasons, sufficient or otherwise. a hundred
years ago distant journeyings by sea or land were
arduous and full of peril, undertaken only by the most
adventurous or the most curious or for urgent need.
now commodities of every sort can be transported to
virtually every quarter of the globe—rails and locomotives,
cement and structural steel, machinery of all
kinds from the motor and the dynamo to the printing
press and the cinematograph, in a word whatever is
necessary to recreate the waste places of the earth and
to make life in these regions humanly liveable. the
sheer scale and magnitude of such operations lifts them
above the level of the international trade of five hundred
or even a hundred years ago. and their far-reaching
results of every sort in the lives of nations and of individuals
the world over can in no intelligible sense be understood
as mere homogeneous multiples of what trade
meant before our age of steam, iron, and electricity.
finally, we may think of modern developments in printing
as compared, for example, with the state of the
craft in the days when the new england primer served
to induct juvenile america into the pleasant paths of
"art and literature." and it is clear that the mechanical
art that makes books and reading both widely
inviting and easily possible of enjoyment today is not
merely a more perfect substitute for the quill and ink-horn
of the mediæval scribe or even for the printing
press of caxton or of benjamin franklin. the enormously
and variously heightened "efficiency" of the
mechanical instrumentalities nowadays available has for
good and for evil carried forward the whole function
of printing and publication into relations and effects
which are qualitatively new and beyond the possible
conception of the earlier inventors and readers.
§ . the real evolution in such cases of the coming
of a new commodity or a new instrument into
common and established use is an evolution of a
more radical, more distinctly epigenetic type than
the pictured stories of the encyclopædia-maker serve
to suggest. at each forward step the novelty makes
possible not merely satisfactions more adequate as
measured by existing requirements or more economical
in terms of cost, but new satisfactions also for which
no demand or desire before existed or could possibly
exist—satisfactions which, once become habitual,
make the contentment of former times in the lack of
them hard to understand or credit. and indeed the
story is perhaps never quite one-sided; the gain we
reckon is perhaps never absolutely unmixed. there
may be, perhaps must in principle be, not only gain
but loss. the books we read have lost something of
the charm of the illuminated manuscript; our compositors
and linotypers, it may be, have forgotten something
of the piety and devotion of the mediæval scribe
and copyist. so everywhere in industry the machine
depreciates and pushes out the skilled artisan and
craftsman, summoning into his place the hired operative
whose business is to feed and serve instead of to conceive
and execute. for cheapness and abundance, for
convenience of repair and replacement we everywhere
sacrifice something of artistic quality in the instrumentalities
of life and action and something of freedom
and self-expression in the processes of manufacture.
thus again, to change the venue, there are those who
miss in democratic government or in an ethical type
of religion the poignant and exalting spiritual quality
of devotion to a personal sovereign or a personal god.
whatever one's judgment may be in particular cases,
there can be no reason for disputing that in epigenetic
or creative evolution there is, in a sense, loss as well as
gain. there is no more reason for supposing that all
that was wholesome or ennobling or beautiful in an
earlier function must somehow have its specific compensation
in kind infallibly present in the new than for
supposing that all that is desirable in the new must
surely have been present discernibly or indiscernibly in
the old.
if we are on the whole satisfied with the new on its
intrinsic merits as a present complex fact, we have
therein sufficient ground for saying that it marks
a stage in progress. this, in fact, is what such a
proposition means. and the old then appears more
or less widely discontinuous with the new—not merely
that it shows, in units of measure, less of the acceptable
quality or qualities which the new fact or
situation is found to possess, but that it belongs for us
to a qualitatively different level and order of existence.
how, we wonder, could our ancestors have found life
tolerable in their undrained and imperfectly heated
dwellings, without the telephone, the morning's news of
the world by cable, and the phonograph? how, again,
could feudal homage and fealty have ever been the
foundation of social order in countries where today
every elector is wont to think and to act in his
public relations no longer as a subject but as a citizen.
and how, in still a different sphere, could the father
or the mother of a happy family of children ever have
found the freedom and irresponsibility of bachelorhood
endurable? shall we say that in changes like
these we have to do simply with the quantitative increase
of some quality, present in small measure in
the earlier stages and in larger measure in the
later? or shall we evade the issue with the general
admission that of course, as every schoolboy knows,
there are in this world many differences of degree that
somehow "amount to differences of kind"? as a matter
of fact what has happened in every case like these
is an actual change of standard, a new construction in
the growing system of one's norms of value and behavior.
provisionally, though hopefully, a step has
been taken—a real event in personal and in social history
has been given place and date. from some source
beyond the scope and nature of the earlier function a
suggestion or an impulsion has come by which the
agent has endeavored to move forward. the change
wrought is a transcendence of the earlier level of
experience and valuation, not a widening and clarification
of vision on that level. and the standards
which govern on the new level serve not so much to
condemn the old as to seal its consignment to disuse
and oblivion. least of all can a judgment or appraisal
of the old from the standpoint of the new be taken
for a transcript of the motives which led to the
transition.
we must confine ourselves more closely, however,
to the sphere of material goods and their uses. and
in this sphere objection to the view proposed will run
in some such terms as the following: take our ancestors,
for example, and their household arrangements
to which invidious reference has been made: why should
we suppose that their seeming contentment was anything
more (or less) than a dignified composure in which
we might well imitate them—an attitude in no way
precluding a definite sense of specific discomforts and
embarrassments and a distinct determination to be rid
of them as soon as might be? and, in fact, if they were
satisfied with what they had why did they receive the
new when it was offered? if, on the other hand, they
were not satisfied, how is the fact intelligible except
upon the assumption that they had distinct and definite
wants not yet supplied, and were wishing (but patiently)
for conveniences and comforts of a sort not
yet existent. and this latter hypothesis, it will be
urged, is precisely what the foregoing argument has
sought to discredit as an account of the moving
springs in the evolution of consumption.
§ . any adequate discussion of the central issue
thus presented would fall into two parts. in the first
place, before a consumption good can come into general
acceptance and currency it must have been in some way
discovered, suggested or invented, and the psychology
of invention is undoubtedly a matter of very great
complexity and difficulty. but for the purposes of the
present inquiry all this may be passed over. the other
branch of a full discussion of our problem has to do
with the reception of the newly invented commodity
or process into wider and wider use—and this again is
a social phenomenon not less complex than the other.
it is this phenomenon of increasing extension and vogue,
of widening propagation from person to person, that
is directly of present concern for us—and in particular
the individual person's attitude toward the new thing
and the nature of the interest he takes in it.
it has recently been argued by a learned and acute
investigator of economic origins that "invention is the
mother of necessity," and not the child. such a complete
reversal of all our ordinary thought about the
matter seems at first sheer paradox. what, one may
ask, can ever suggest an invention and what can give
it welcome and currency but an existing need—which,
if it happens to be for the time being latent and unconscious,
needs only the presentation of its appropriate
means of satisfaction to "arouse" and "awaken" it
fully into action? but this paradox as to invention
is at all events not more paradoxical than the view as
to the reception of new commodities and the rise of
new desires that has been above suggested. what it
appears to imply is in principle identical with what
has seemed, from our consideration of the other aspect
of the general situation, to be the simple empirical fact;
neither the existence of the new commodity nor our
interest in it when it is presented admits of explanation
as an effect on each particular occasion of a preëxisting
unsatisfied desire for it. what both sides of the
problem bring to view is a certain original bent or
constitutive character of human nature—a predisposition,
an élan vital perhaps, which we must recognize
as nothing less than perfectly general and comprehensive—finding
expression in inventive effort and likewise
in the readiness with which the individual meets a new
commodity halfway and gives it opportunity to become
for him, if it can, a new necessity and the source of
a new type of satisfaction.
from the point of view of "logic," as william
james might have said, such a version of psychological
fact may seem essentially self-contradictory. unless,
it may be argued, a novelty when presented excites
some manner of desire for itself in the beholder, the
beholder will make no effort towards it and thus
take no step away from his existing system of life
to a new system in which a new desire and a new
commodity shall have a place. so much would seem
clear enough but the question immediately follows:
how can a thing that is new arouse desire? in so
far as it is new it must ex vi termini be unknown
and wanting definition in terms of remembered past
experiences; and how can a thing unknown make that
connection with the present character of the individual
which must be deemed necessary to the arousal of desire
in him? a new thing would seem, then, from this
point of view, to be able to arouse desire only in so
far as it is able to conceal or subordinate its aspects
of novelty and appear as known and well-accredited—either
this or there must be in the individual some
definite instinctive mechanism ready to be set in action
by the thing's presentment. and on neither of these
suppositions can having to do with the new thing effect
any fundamental or radical difference in the individual—it
can serve at most only to "bring out" what was
already "there" in him in a "latent" or "implicit"
status. whatever new developments of power or desire
may be attained and organized into the individual's
character through his commerce with the novelty must
be new in only a superficial sense—they will be new only
as occurrences, only as the striking of the hour by
the clock and the resulting abrasion of the bell and
hammer are new events. but the clock was made to
strike; it is the nature of metal to wear away and
likewise these changes in the individual are in deeper
truth not new at all but only a disclosure of the agent's
character, a further fulfilment along preëstablished
and unalterable lines which all along was making headway
in the agent's earlier quests and efforts and
attainments.
there is a sense, no doubt, in which some such version
of the facts as this is unanswerable, but controversial
advantage is paid for, here as elsewhere in the
logic of absolute idealism, at the cost of tangible meaning
and practical importance. just what does the contention
come to? let us say, for example, that one
has learned to use a typewriter. what has happened
is like an illiterate person's learning to read and write.
correspondence with one's friends begins to take on
new meaning and to acquire new value; one begins to
find a new pleasure and stimulation taking the place
of the ineffectual drivings of an uneasy conscience. all
this, let us say, has come from the moderate outlay for
a superior mechanical instrument. and now let it be
granted that it would not have come if the fortunate
individual had not been "what he was." if it has come
it is because the individual and the rest of the world
were "of such a sort" that the revival and new growth
of interest could take its rise with the provision of the
new instrumentality. but what, precisely, does such a
statement mean? what sort of verification does it admit
of? what fruitful insight into the concrete facts
of the case does it convey? of what sort, prior to the
event, does it show the individual to have been?
the truth is, of course, that he was of no sort, then
and there and with reference to the purchase—he was
of no sort decisively. he was neither purchaser nor
rejector. he was neither a convinced "typist" nor
piously confirmed in his predilection for writing "by
hand." he was neither wholly weary of his correspondence
nor fully cognizant of the importance of
intercourse with his friends for his soul's good. he
may have been dissatisfied and rebellious or he may
have been comfortably persuaded that letter-writing,
though an irksome labor, was even at that sufficiently
worth while. the most that can be said is simply that
he must have been willing and desirous to try the experiment
for the sake of any good, imaginable or beyond
present imagination, that might come of it. but being
of "such a sort" as this could not prejudge the issue—although,
undoubtedly, in willingness to raise an issue
there lies always the possibility of change. all the
plausibility of the dogma we are here considering comes
from its hasty inclusion of this general attitude of
constructively experimental inquiry and effort, this
essential character of creative intelligence, as one among
the concrete interests which constitute and define our
particular problems in their inception. to say ex post
facto that the individual must have been "of such a
sort" as to do what he has in fact done is a purely
verbal comment which, whatever may be its uses, can
assuredly be of no use whatever in suggesting either
solution or method for the next situation to arise. it
may be comfortably reassuring afterwards, but it is an
empty oracle beforehand.
§ . if then "logic" is unable to express the nature
of our forward looking interest in the unexperienced
and unpredictable, perhaps the empirical fact will speak
for itself. we call things new; we recognize their
novelty and their novelty excites our interest. but just
as we are sometimes told that we can only know the
new in terms of its resemblances to what we have known
before, so it may be held that in the end we can desire
it only on the like condition. are we, then, to conclude
that the seeming novelty of things new is an
illusion, or shall we hold, on the contrary, that novelty
need not be explained away and that a spontaneous
constructive interest stands more or less constantly
ready in us to go out to meet it and possess it?
unquestionably, let us say the latter. any new
commodity will, of course, resemble in part or in a
general way some old one. it is said that bath-tubs
are sometimes used in "model tenements" as coal-bins.
old uses persist unchanged in the presence of new possibilities.
but in general new possibilities invite interest
and effort because our experimental and constructive
bent contrives on the whole to make head against habituation
and routine. we recognize the new as new.
and if it be contended that novelty in its own right
cannot be a ground of interest, that novelty must first
get restatement as the old with certain "accidents"
externally adhering, the answer is that the "accidents"
interest us nevertheless. they may prove their right
to stand as the very essence of some new "kind" that
one may wish to let take form and character for him.
instead of the chips and shavings, they are in fact the
raw material of the logical process. for if we can
know the new as new, if we can know the "accident"
as accidental in a commodity before us, the fact betrays
an incipient interest in the quality or aspect that its
novelty or contingency at least does not thwart. and
is this quite all? will it be disputed that a relation
of a quality or feature to ourselves which we can know,
name, and recognize—like "novelty"—must be known,
as anything else is known, through an interest of which
it is the appropriate terminus?
and
there is no difficulty in pointing to instances
in which the character of novelty seems fundamental.
consider, for example, the interest one feels in spending
a day with a friend or in making a new acquaintance
or, say, in entering on the cares of parenthood.
or again, take the impulse toward research, artistic
creation, or artistic study and appreciation. or again,
take the interest in topography and exploration. that
there is in such phenomena as these a certain essentially
and irreducibly forward look, a certain residual freedom
of our interest and effort from dependence on the
detail of prior experience down to date, probably few
persons without ulterior philosophical prepossessions
will dispute. if we call these phenomena instinctive
we are using the term in a far more loose and general
sense than it seems to have in the best usage of animal
psychology. if we call them attitudes or dispositions,
such a term has at least the negative merit of setting
them apart from the class of instinctive acts, but it may
carry with it a connotation of fixity and unconsciousness
that after all surrenders the essential distinction.
it will suffice to look at a single one of these instances.
in friendship, for example, there is undoubtedly
strongly operative a desire for the mere recurrence, in
our further friendly intercourse, of certain values that
have become habitual and familiar. we may have long
known and become attached to a friend's tones of voice,
peculiarities of manner and external appearance, turns
of speech and thought and the like, which we miss in
absence and which give us pleasure when we meet the
friend again. but if the friendship is not one of "pleasure"
or "utility" simply, but of "virtue" as well,
there is also present on both sides a constructive or progressive
or creative interest. and this interest, stated
on its self-regarding and introspective side, is more
than a desire for the mere grateful recurrence of the old
looks and words "recoined at the old mint." it is an
interest looking into the "undone vast," an interest
in an indefinite prolongation, an infinite series, of joint
experiences the end of which cannot and need not be
foreseen and the nature of which neither can nor need
be forecasted. and there is the same characteristic
in all the other instances mentioned in this connection.
it is not a desire for recurrent satisfactions of a determinate
type, but an interest in the active development
of unexperienced and indeterminate possibilities.
if finally the question be pressed, how there can be an
interest of this seemingly self-contradictory type in
human nature, the answer can only be that we must take
the facts as we find them. is such a conception
inherently more difficult than the view that all ramifications
and developments of human interest are concretely
predetermined and implicit a priori? to ignore
or deny palpable fact because it eludes the reach
of a current type of conceptual analysis is to part
company with both science and philosophy. we are
in fact here dealing with the essential mark and trait
of what is called self-conscious process. if there are
ultimates and indefinables in this world of ours, self-consciousness
may as fairly claim the dignity or avow
the discredit as any other of the list.
§ . does our interest in economic goods on occasion
exhibit the trait of which we are here speaking?
precisely this is our present contention. and yet it
seems not too much to say that virtually all economic
theory, whether the classical or the present dominant
type that has drawn its terminology and working concepts
from the ostensible psychology of the austrian
school, is founded upon the contradictory assumption.
the economic interest, our desire and esteem for solid
and matter-of-fact things like market commodities and
standardized market services, has been conceived as
nothing visionary and speculative, as no peering into
the infinite or outreaching of an inexpressible discontent,
but an intelligent, clear-eyed grasping and holding
of known satisfactions for measured and acknowledged
desires. art and religion, friendship and love, sport
and adventure, morality and legislation, these all may
be fields for the free play and constructive experimentation
of human faculty, but in our economic efforts
and relations we are supposed to tread the solid
ground of fact. business is business. waste not,
want not. first a living, then (perhaps) a "good
life." and we are assured one need not recoil from
the hard logic of such maxims, for they do not dispute
the existence of spacious (and well-shaded) suburban
regions fringing the busy areas of industry and commerce.
such is the assumption. we have said that it precludes
the admission of speculation as an economic
factor. speculation for economic theory is a purely
commercial phenomenon, a hazarding of capital on the
supposition that desires will be found ready and waiting
for the commodity produced—with a sufficient offering
of purchasing power to afford a profit. and the
"creation of demand," where this is part of the program
of speculative enterprise, means the arousal
of a "dormant" or implicit desire, in the sense above
discussed—there is nothing, at all events, in other parts
of current theory to indicate a different conception.
the economist will probably contend that what the
process of the creation of demand may be is not his
but the psychologist's affair; that his professional concern
is only whether or not the economic demand, as an
objective market fact, be actually forthcoming. but
what we here contend for as a fact of economic experience
is a speculation that is in the nature of personal
adventure and not simply an "adventuring of stock."
§ . for what is the nature of the economic "experience"
or situation, considered as a certain type of
juncture in the life of an individual? it may be shortly
described as the process of determining how much of
one's time, strength, or external resources of any sort
shall be expended for whatever one is thinking of doing
or acquiring. two general motives enter here to govern
the estimate and each may show the routine or the
innovative phase. in any work there is possible, first,
more or less of the workman's interest—an interest not
merely in a conventional standard of excellence in the
finished result but also in betterment of the standard
and in a corresponding heightened excellence of
technique and spirit in the execution. these interests,
without reference to the useful result and "for
their own sake" (i.e., for the workman's sake, in ways
not specifiable in advance), may command a share of
one's available time, strength, and resources. in the
second place, any work or effort or offer to give
in exchange has a nameable result of some kind in
view—a crop of wheat, a coat, a musical rendition,
or the education of a child. why are such things
"produced" or sought for? verbally and platitudinously
one may answer: for the sake of the "satisfactions"
they are expected to afford. but such an
answer ignores the contrast of attitudes that both workmanship
and productive or acquisitive effort in the ordinary
sense display. as the workman may conform
to his standard or may be ambitious to surpass it, so
the intending consumer may be counting on known
satisfactions or hoping for satisfactions of a kind that
he has never known before. both sorts of effort
may be of either the routine or the innovative type.
in neither workmanship nor acquisition can one fix upon
routine as the "normal" type, hoping to derive or to
explain away the inevitable residue of "outstanding
cases." for as a matter of fact the outstanding cases
prove to be our only clue to a knowledge of how
routine is made.
the above formula will apply, with the appropriate
changes of emphasis, to buyers and sellers in an organized
market, as well as to the parties to a simple transaction
of barter. two main empirical characteristics
of the economic situation are suggested in putting
the statement in just these terms. in the first place,
the primary problem in such a situation is that of
"exchange valuation," the fixation of a "subjective"
(or better, a "personal") price ratio between what
the agent wishes to acquire and whatever it is that
he offers in exchange. the agent thus is engaged
in determining what shall be the relative importance
for himself of two commodities or exchangeable goods.
and in the second place these goods get their values
determined together and in relation to each other,
never singly and with a view to subsequent comparison.
these values when they have been determined
will be measured in terms of marginal utility in accordance
with familiar principles, but the marginal utilities
that are to express the attained and accepted ratio at
which exchange eventually takes place are not known
quantities at all in the inception of the process of comparison.
if these dogmatic statements seem to issue in
hopeless paradox or worse, then let us not fear to face
the paradox and fix its lines with all possible distinctness.
can a man decide to offer so much of one commodity
for so much of another unless he first has settled
what each is worth to him in some intelligible terms
or other? and is not this latter in point of fact the real
decision—at all events clearly more than half the battle?
does not the exchange ratio to which one can agree
"leap to the eyes," in fact, as soon as the absolute
values in the case have been once isolated and given
numerical expression?
in a single word we here join issue. for the comparison
in such a case is constructive comparison, not
a mechanical measuring of fixed magnitudes, as the above
objection tacitly assumes. and constructive comparison
is essentially a transitive or inductive operation
whereby the agent moves from one level to another,
altering his standard of living in some more or less
important way, embarking upon a new interest, entering
upon the formation of a new habit or upon a new accession
of power or effectiveness—making or seeking to
make, in short, some transformation in his environment
and in himself that shall give his life as an entire system
a changed tenor and perspective. the term "constructive
comparison" is thus intended, among other
things, to suggest that the process is in the nature of
adventure, not calculation, and, on the other hand,
that though adventurous it is not sheer hazard
uncontrolled. and the motive dominant throughout
the process—the economic motive in its constructive
phase—is neither more nor less than a supposition,
on the agent's part, that there may be
forthcoming for him in the given case in hand just
such an "epigenetic" development of new significance
and value as we have found actual history to disclose
as a normal result of economic innovation. it is the
gist of hedonism, in economic theory as in its other
expressions, that inevitably the agent's interests and
motives are restricted in every case to the precise range
and scope of his existing tendencies and desires; he
can be provoked to act only by the hope of just those
particular future pleasures or means of pleasure which
the present constitution of his nature enables him to
enjoy. idealism assumes that the emergent new interest
of the present was wrapped up or "implied," in some
sense, in the interests of the remote and immediate past—interests
of which the agent at the time could of
course be but "imperfectly" aware. such differences
as one can discern between the two interpretations seem
small indeed—like many others to which idealism has
been wont to point in disparagement of the hedonistic
world view. for in both philosophies the agent is without
initiative and effect; he is in principle but the convergence
of impersonal motive powers which it is, in
the one view, absurdly futile, in the other misguidedly
presumptuous, to try to alter or control.
§ . a commodity sought or encountered may then
be of interest to us for reasons of the following three
general sorts. in the first place it may simply be the normal
and appropriate object of some established desire
of ours. we may be seeking the commodity because
this desire has first become active, or encountering
the commodity in the market may have suddenly
awakened the desire. illustration seems superfluous;
tobacco for the habitual smoker, clothing of most
sorts for the ordinary person, regular supplies of the
household staples—these will suffice. this is the province
within which a hedonistic account of the economic
motive holds good with a cogency that anti-hedonistic
criticism has not been able to dissolve. our outlays for
such things as these may as a rule be held in their due
and proper relation to each other—at all events in their
established or "normal" relation—simply by recalling
at critical times our relative marginal likes and dislikes
for them. that these likes and dislikes are not self-explanatory,
that they are concrete expectations and
not abstract affective elements, does not seem greatly
to matter where the issue lies between maintaining or
renouncing an existing schedule of consumption. and
in this same classification belong also industrial and
commercial expenditures of a similarly routine sort.
even where the scale of operations is being enlarged,
expenditures for machines, fuel, raw materials, and
labor may have been so carefully planned in advance
with reference to the desired increase of output or pecuniary
profit that no special problem of motivation attaches
directly to them. and these outlays are so important
in industry and commerce that the impression
comes easily to prevail that all business undertaking,
and then all consumption of finished goods, fall under
the simple hedonistic type.
but if we keep to the plane of final consumption,
there appears a second sort of situation. our interest
in the commodity before us may be due to a suggestion
of some sort that prompts us to take a step beyond
the limits that our present formed desires mark out.
the suggestion may be given by adroit advertising,
by fashion, by the habits of another class to which one
may aspire or by a person to whom one may look as
guide, philosopher, and friend. an authority of one
sort or another invites or constrains us to take the
merits of the article on trust. actual trial and use
may show, not so much that it can minister to a latent
desire as that we have been able through its use to form
a habit that constitutes a settled need.
and, finally, in the third place, there is a more spontaneous
and intrinsically personal type of interest which
is very largely independent of suggestion or authority.
a thing of beauty, a new author, a new acquaintance,
a new sport or game, a new convenience or mechanical
device may challenge one's curiosity and powers of
appreciation, may seem to offer a new facility in action
or some unimagined release from labor or restriction.
the adventure of marriage and parenthood, the intimate
attraction of great music, the mystery of an unknown
language or a forbidden country, the disdainful
aloofness of a mountain peak dominating a landscape
are conspicuous instances inviting a more spontaneous
type of constructive interest that finds abundant expression
also in the more commonplace situations and
emergencies of everyday life. it is sheer play upon
words to speak in such cases of a pleasure of adventurousness,
a pleasure of discovery, a pleasure of conquest
and mastery, assigning this as the motive in order to
bring these interests to the type that fits addiction to
one's particular old coat or easy-chair. the specific
"pleasure" alleged could not exist were the tendency
not active beforehand. while the same is true in a
sense for habitual concrete pleasures in relation to their
corresponding habits, the irreducible difference in constructive
interest as a type lies in the transition which
this type of interest purposes and effects from one
level of concrete or substantive desire and pleasure to
another. here one consciously looks to a result that
he cannot foresee or foretell; in the other type his interest
as interest goes straight to its mark, sustained
by a confident forecast.
but constructive interests, whether provoked
by suggestion or of the more freely imaginative type,
may, as has been said, be held to lie outside the scope of
economic theory. how a desire for a certain thing has
come to get expression may seem quite immaterial—economically
speaking. economics has no concern with human
folly as such or human imitativeness, or human
aspiration high or low or any other of the multitude of
motives that have to do with secular changes in the
"standard of living" and in the ideals of life at large.
it has no concern with anything that lies behind the fact
that i am in the market with my mind made up to buy or
sell a thing at a certain price. and the answer to this
contention must be that it first reverses and then distorts
the true perspective of our economic experience.
let it be admitted freely—indeed, let it be insisted on—that
the definition of a science must be determined by
the pragmatic test. if an economist elects to concern
himself with the problems of what has been called the
"loose mechanics of trade" there can be no question
of his right to do so or of the importance of the services
he may render thereby, both to theory and to practice.
but on the other hand economic theory cannot be therefore,
once and for all, made a matter of accounting—to
the effacement of all problems and aspects of problems
of which the accountant has no professional
cognizance. just this, apparently, is what it means to
level down all types of interest to the hedonistic, leaving
aside as "extra-economic" those that too palpably
resist the operation. it is acknowledged that freshly
suggested modes of consumption and ends of effort require
expenditure and sacrifice no less than the habitual,
that the exploration of tibet or of the polar seas
affects the market for supplies not less certainly than
the scheduled voyages of oceanic liners. moreover,
behind these scheduled voyages there are all the varied
motives that induce people to travel and the desires
that lead to the shipment of goods. shall it be said
that all of these motives and desires must be traceable
back to settled habits of behavior and consumption?
and if this cannot be maintained is it not hazardous to
assume that such general problems of economic theory
as the determination of market values or of the shares
in distribution require no recognition of the other empirical
types of interest? these types, if they are
genuine, are surely important; they may well prove
to be, in many ways, fundamentally important. for a
commodity that has become habitual must once have
been new and untried.
§ . the economic demands which make up the
budget of a particular person at a particular time are
clearly interdependent. a man's income or the greater
part of it is usually distributed among various channels
of expenditure in a certain fairly constant way.
in proportion to the definiteness of this distribution
and the resoluteness with which it is maintained does
the impression gain strength that the man is carrying
out a consistent plan of some sort. such a regular
plan of expenditure may be drawn out into a schedule,
setting forth the amounts required at a certain price
for the unit of each kind. and such a schedule is an
expression in detail, in terms of ways and means, of
the type of life one has elected to lead. for virtually
any income above the level of bare physical subsistence,
there will be an indefinite number of alternative budgets
possible. a little less may be spent for household
conveniences and adornments and a little more for food.
some recreations may be sacrificed for an occasional
book or magazine. one may build a house or purchase
a motor-car instead of going abroad. and whichever
choice is made, related expenditures must be made in
consequence for which, on the assumption of a definite
amount of income, compensation must be made by curtailment
of outlay at other points. what seems clear
in general is that one's total budget is relative to
the general plan and manner of life one deems for
him the best possible and that this plan, more or less
definitely formulated, more or less steadily operative,
is what really determines how far expenditure shall go
in this direction and in that. the budget as a whole
will define for the individual an equilibrium among his
various recognized wants; if the work of calculating it
has been carefully done there will be for the time being
no tendency to change in any item.
if, then, we choose to say in such a case that the individual
carries his expenditure along each line to the
precise point at which the last or marginal utility enjoyed
is precisely equal to the marginal utility on every
other line, it seems not difficult to grasp what such a
statement means. quite harmlessly, all that it can mean
is that the individual has planned precisely what he has
planned and is not sorry for it, and for the time being
does not think he can improve upon it. as there is one
earth drawing toward its center each billiard ball of the
dozen in equilibrium in a bowl, so there is behind the
budget of the individual one complex personal conception
of a way of life that fixes more or less certainly
and clearly the kinds and intensities of his wants
and assigns to each its share of purchasing power.
that the units or elements in equilibrium hold their
positions with reference to each other for reasons capable
of separate statement for each unit seems a supposition
no less impossible in the one case than in the other. to
think of each kind of want in the individual's nature
as holding separately in fee simple and clamoring for
full and separate "satisfaction" in its separate kind,
is the characteristic illusion of a purely formal type
of analysis. the permanence of a budget and its carrying
out no doubt require the due and precise realization
of each plotted marginal utility—to go further than
this along any one line would inevitably mean getting
not so far along certain others, and thus a distorted
and disappointing total attainment in the end. but
to say that one actually plans and controls his expenditures
along various lines by the ultimate aim of attaining
equivalent terminal utilities on each is quite another
story. it is much like saying that the square inches of
canvas assigned in a picture to sky and sea and crannied
wall are arranged upon the principle of identical and
equal effects for artist or beholder from the last inches
painted of each kind. the formula of the equality of
marginal effects is no constructive principle; it is only a
concise if indeed somewhat grotesque way of phrasing
the essential fact that no change of the qualitative whole
is going to be made, because no imperfection in it as a
whole is felt.
we come, then, to the problem of the individual's
encounter with a new commodity. in general, a
purchase in such a case must amount to more or less of
a departure from the scheme of life in force and a
transition over to a different one. and a new commodity
(in the sense in which the term has been used
above) is apt to be initially more tempting than an
addition along some line of expenditure already represented
in the budget. the latter, supposing there
has been no change of price and no increase of income,
is usually a mere irregularity, an insurgent departure
from some one specification of a total plan without preliminary
compensating adjustment or appropriate
change at other points. the erratic outlay, if considerable,
will result in sheer disorder and extravagance—indefensible
and self-condemned on the principles of
the individual's own economy. but with a new commodity
the case stands differently. it is more interesting
to consider a really new proposal than to reopen
a case once closed when no evidence distinctly new is
offered. a sheer "temptation" or an isolated impulse
toward new outlay along a line already measured in
one's scheme has the force of habit and a presumption of
un-wisdom to overcome. if the case is one not of temptation
but of "being urged" one is apt to answer, "no,
i can make no use of any more of that." but a new commodity
has the charm of its novelty, a charm consisting
in the promise, in positive fashion, of new qualitative
values about which a new entire schedule will have to be
organized. partly its strength of appeal lies in its
radicalism; it gains ready attention not only by its
promise but by its boldness. "preparedness" gains a
more ready acclaim than better schools or the extirpation
of disease. the automobile and the "moving picture"
probably have a vogue today far surpassing any
use of earlier "equivalents" that a mere general augmentation
of incomes could have brought about. indeed,
the economic danger of the middle classes in
present-day society lies not in mere occasional excess at
certain points but in heedless commitment to a showy
and thinned-out scheme of life in which the elements
are ill-chosen and ill-proportioned and from which, as a
whole, abiding satisfaction cannot be drawn. it is where
real and thoroughgoing change in the manner of life is
hopeless that irregular intemperance of various sorts
appears to bulk relatively largest as an economic
evil.
shall we not say, however, that the superior attraction
of the new in competition with established lines
of expenditure only indicates the greater "satiation"
of the wants the latter represent and the comparative
freshness of the wants the novelty will satisfy? on the
contrary the latter wants are in the full sense not yet
existent, the new satisfactions are untried and unmeasured;
the older wants have the advantage of position,
and if satiated today, will reassert themselves
with a predictable strength tomorrow. the new wants,
it is true, if they are acquired, will be part of a new
system, but the present fact remains that their full
meaning cannot be known in advance of trial and the
further outlines of the new scheme of uses and values
cannot be drawn up until this meaning has been learned.
if, then, the new commodity is taken, it is not because
the promised satisfaction and the sum of known utilities
to be sacrificed are found equal, nor again because the
new commodity will fit neatly into a place in the existing
schedule that can be vacated for it. this latter is the
case of substitution. such an interpretation of the
facts is retrospective only; it is a formal declaration that
the exchange has been deemed on the whole worth while,
but the reasons for this outcome such a formula is powerless
to suggest.
in general the new commodity and the habits it
engenders could not remain without effect upon a system
into which they might be mechanically introduced.
certain items in the schedule, associated in use with
those dispensed with for the new, must be rendered obsolete
by the change. the new interests called into
play will draw to themselves and to their further development
attention which may be in large measure
diverted from the interests of older standing. and in
the new system all interests remaining over from the
old will accordingly stand in a new light and their
objects will be valued, will be held important, for reasons
that will need fresh statement.
in similar fashion it might be argued that the commodities
or uses which one sacrifices for the sake of a
new venture are inevitably more than a simple deduction
that curtails one's schedule in a certain kind and amount.
such a deduction or excision must leave the remaining
lines of the original complex hanging at loose ends. the
catching-up of these and their coördination with the
new interest must in any event amount, as has been contended,
to a thoroughgoing reorganization. what must
really happen then, in the event of action, is in principle
nothing less than the disappearance of the whole from
which the sacrificed uses are dissevered. these latter,
therefore, stand in the process of decision as a symbol
for the existing personal economy as a whole. the old
order and the new confront each other as an accepted
view of fact and a plausible hypothesis everywhere confront
each other and the issue for the individual is the
practical issue of making the transition to a new working
level. to declare that the salient elements of the
confronting complexes are quantitatively equivalent is
only to announce in symbolic terms that the transition
has been effected, the die cast.
the statement thus given has been purposely
made, for many transactions of the sort referred to,
something of an over-statement. if i contemplate purchasing
a typewriter or a book on an unfamiliar but
inviting subject it may well seem somewhat extravagant
to describe the situation as an opposition between two
schemes of life. is the issue so momentous; is the act
so revolutionary? but the purpose of our over-statement
was simply to make clear the type of situation
without regard to the magnitudes involved. no novelty
that carries one in any respect beyond the range of
existing habits can be wholly without its collateral
effects nor can its proximate and proper significance
be measured in advance. this is in principle as true
of a relatively slight innovation as of a considerable
one. and our present conscious exaggeration departs
less widely from the truth than the alternative usual
preoccupation of economic theory with the logic of
routine desire and demand. for the phenomena of routine
and habit are thereby made a standard by which
all others, if indeed recognized as real at all, must be
judged "exceptional." and, as we shall see, to do this
introduces difficulty into certain parts of substantive
economic theory.
again, objection may attach to the view that equivalence
of the "salient members" of the opposing systems
is only another name for the comprehensive fact
of the novelty's acceptance. for if we hesitate in such
a case, is this not because we judge the price too high?
what can this signify but that the service or satisfaction
we expect from the novelty falls short of sufficing
to convince us? and unless we are dealing with measured
quantities, how can we come to this conclusion?
moreover, if the novel commodity is divided into units
we may take a smaller quantity when the price demanded
is "high" than if the price were lower. and
does this not suggest predetermined value-magnitudes
as data? but if one takes thus a smaller amount, as
the argument contends, it is because there is a presumption
of being able to make some important total
use of it and there is no general reason apparent for
supposing that this will be merely a fractional part
of a larger but like significance that might be hoped
for from a larger quantity. and on the other hand,
the prospect simply may not tempt at all; the smaller
quantity may be deemed an improbable support for a
really promising total program and the present program
will hold its ground, not seriously shaken. the
total demand of a market for a given commodity is
no doubt in some sort a mathematical function of the
price. the lower the price the greater in some ratio
will be the number of persons who will buy and in
general the greater the number of units taken by those
who are already buyers. but that such a proposition
admits of statistical proof from the observation of a
series of price changes in a market affords no presumption
concerning the nature of the reasons that move
any individual person to his action. the theoretical
temptation is strong, here as elsewhere, in passing from
the study of markets to the personal economy of the
individual forthwith to find this also a trafficking in unit-quantities
and marginal satisfactions to which the concepts
and notation of market analysis will readily apply.
it remains to consider certain implications of this
view of economic desire and demand.
§ . it is evident that the issue finally at stake in
any economic problem of constructive comparison, is an
ethical issue. two immediate alternatives are before
one—to expend a sum of money in some new and interesting
way, or to keep it devoted to the uses of one's
established plan. upon the choice, one recognizes,
hinge consequences of larger and more comprehensive
importance than the mere present enjoyment or non-enjoyment
of the new commodity. and these "more
important" consequences are important because there
appears to lie in them the possibility of a type of personal
character divergent from the present type and
from any present point of view incommensurable with
it. the ethical urgency of such a problem will impress
one in the measure in which one can see that such an
issue really does depend upon his present action and
irretrievably depends. and we are able now to see
what that economic quality is that attaches to ethical
problems at a certain stage of their development and
calls for a supplementary type of treatment.
let us first consider certain types of juncture in
conduct that will be recognized at once as ethical and
in which any economic aspect is relatively inconspicuous.
temperance or intemperance, truth or falsehood,
idleness or industry, honesty or fraud, social justice or
class-interest—these will serve. what makes such
problems as these ethical is their demand for creative
intelligence. in each, alternative types of character
or manners of life stand initially opposed. if the concrete
issue is really problematical, if there is no rule
that one can follow in the case with full assurance, constructive
comparison, whether covertly or openly, must
come into play. how long, then, will a problem of temperance
or intemperance, idleness or industry, preserve
its obviously ethical character without admixture?
just so long, apparently, as the modes of conduct that
come into view as possible solutions are considered and
valued with regard to their directly physiological and
psychological consequences alone. any given sort of
conduct, that is to say, makes inevitably for the formation
of certain habits of mind or muscle, weakening, or
precluding the formation of, certain others. attention
is engrossed that is thereby not available elsewhere,
time and strength are expended, discriminations are
dulled and sharpened, sympathies and sensitivities are
narrowed and broadened, every trait and bent of character
is directly or indirectly affected in some way by
every resolve concluded and every action embarked upon.
if one moves a certain way along a certain line he can
never return to the starting-point and set out unchanged
along any other. if one does one thing one
cannot do another. and when the sufficient reasons
for this mutual exclusion lie in the structure and
organization of the human mind and body our deliberation
as between the two alternatives, our constructive
comparison of them remains upon the ethical
plane.
if one does one thing one cannot do another. if we
substitute the well-worn saying "one cannot eat his
cake and have it" we indicate the economic plane of
constructive comparison with all needful clearness.
this is in fact the situation that has been already
under discussion at such length above and the economic
quality of which we are just now in quest arises from
neither more nor less than the fact of our dependence
in the working out of our personal problems upon
limited external resources. the eventual solution sought
under these circumstances remains ethical as before.
but to reach it, it is necessary to bring into consideration
not only such other interests and ends as the psycho-physical
structure of human nature and the laws of
character-development show to be involved, but a still
wider range of interests less intimately or "internally"
related to the focal interest of the occasion but
imperatively requiring to be heard. if my acquisition
of a phonograph turns upon the direct psychological
bearing of the new interest upon my other
interests, its probable effects whether good or bad
upon my musical tastes and the diplomatic complications
with my neighbors in which the possession
of the instrument may involve me, the problem of
its purchase remains clearly in the ethical phase. but
when i count the cost in terms of sacrifices which the
purchase price makes necessary, from literature down to
food and fuel, and must draw this whole range of fact
also into the adjustment if i can, the economic phase
is reached. in principle two entire and very concrete
schemes of life now stand opposed. just what concrete
sacrifices i shall make i do not know—this, in fact, is one
way of stating my problem. nor, conversely, do i know
just what i shall be able to make the phonograph worth
to me. it is my task to come to a conclusion in the case
that shall be explicit and clear enough to enable me to
judge in the event whether my expectation has been realized
and i have acted wisely or unwisely. thus a problem
is economic when the fact of the limitation of my
external resources must be eventually and frankly faced.
the characteristic quality of a problem grown economic
is a certain vexatiousness and seeming irrationality in
the ill-assorted array of nevertheless indisputable interests,
prosaic and ideal, that have to be reduced to order.
it is perhaps this characteristic emotional quality
of economic problems that has insensibly inclined economists
to favor a simpler and more clear-cut analysis.
as for ethical problems—they have been left to "conscience"
or to the jurisdiction of a "greatest happiness"
principle in which the ordinary individual or legislator
has somehow come to take an interest. that
they arise and become urgent in us of course does human
nature unimpeachable credit and economics must by
all means wait respectfully upon their settlement. so
much is conceded. but economics is economics, when all
is said and done. what we mean by the economic interest
is an interest in the direct and several satisfactions
that a man can get from the several things he
shrewdly finds it worth his while to pay for. and
shrewdness means nicety of calculation, accuracy of
measurement in the determination of tangible loss and
gain. here, then, is no field for ethics but a field of fact.
thus ethics on her side must also wait until the case is
fully ready for her praise or blame. such is the modus
vivendi. but its simplicity is oversimple and unreal.
it pictures the "economic man" as bound in the chains
of a perfunctory deference that he would throw off if he
could. for the theory of constructive comparison or
creative intelligence, on the other hand, instead of a
seeker and recipient of "psychic income" and a calculator
of gain and loss, he is a personal agent maintaining
continuity of action in a life of discontinuously
changing levels of interest and experience. his measure
of attainment lies not in an accelerating rate
of "psychic income," but in an increasing sense of
personal effectiveness and an increasing readiness and
confidence before new junctures.
the possession and use of commodities are, then, not
in themselves and directly economic facts at all. as
material things commodities serve certain purposes and
effect certain results. they are means to ends and
their serving so is a matter of technology. but do i
seriously want their services? this is a matter of
my ethical point of view. do i want them at the
price demanded or at what price and how many? this
is the economic question and it obviously is a question
wholly ethical in import—more broadly and inclusively
ethical, in fact, than the ethical question in its earlier
and more humanly inviting form. and what we have
now to see is the fact that no consideration that has
a bearing upon the problem in its ethical phase can
lose its importance and relevance in the subsequent
phase.
there can be no restriction of the economic interest,
for example, to egoism. if on general principles i would
really rather use goods produced in safe and cleanly
factories or produced by "union labor," there is no
possible reason why this should not incline me to pay
the higher prices that such goods may cost and make
the needful readjustment in my budget. is there reason
why my valuation of these goods should not thus
be the decisive act that takes me out of one relation to
industrial workers and sets me in another—can anything
else, indeed, quite so distinctly do this? for economic
valuation is only the fixation of a purchase price,
or an exchange relation in terms of price and quantity,
upon which two schemes of life, two differing perspectives
of social contact and relationship converge—the
scheme of life from which i am departing and the one
upon which i have resolved to make my hazard. it is this
election, this transition, that the purchase price expresses—drawing
all the strands of interest and action
into a knot so that a single grasp may seize them. the
only essential egoism in the case lies in the "subjectivism"
of the fact that inevitably the emergency
and the act are mine and not another's. this is the
"egocentric predicament" in its ethical aspect. and
the egocentric predicament proves hobbes and la
rochefoucauld as little as it proves berkeley or karl
pearson. no social interest, no objective interest of
any sort, is shown ungenuine by my remembering in
season that if i cannot fill my coal-bin i shall freeze.
this logical and psychological continuity of the
ethical and economic problems suggests certain general
considerations of some practical interest. in the first
place as to "egoism." i am, let us say, an employer.
if i am interested in procuring just "labor," in the
sense of foot-pounds of energy, then undoubtedly labor
performed under safe and healthful conditions is worth
no more to me than other labor (provided it does not
prove more efficient). but is this attitude of interest
in just foot-pounds of energy the attitude par excellence
or solely entitled to be called economic? and just this
may be asserted for the reason that an exclusive interest
in just labor is the only interest in the case that men
of business, or at least many of them, can entertain
without going speedily to the wall. if, then, i do in
fact pay more than i must in wages or if i expend more
than a bare minimum for conveniences and safety-guards
this is not because of the valuation i put upon
labor, but only because i take pleasure in the contentment
and well-being of others. and this is not
"business" but "uplift"—or else a subtle form of
emotional self-indulgence. suppose, however, that by
legislation similar working conditions have been made
mandatory for the entire industry and suppose that
the community approves the law, even to the extent
of cheerfully paying so much of the additional cost
thereby imposed as may be shifted upon them.
shall we say that this is an ethical intrusion into the
sphere of economics or shall we say that the former
economic demand for labor "as such" has given place
to an economic demand for labor better circumstanced
or better paid? the community at all events is paying
the increase of price or a part of the increase. it
seems arbitrary to insist that the old price is still the
economic price of the commodity and the increase only
the price of a quiet conscience. the notion of a strictly
economic demand for labor pure and simple seems in
fact a concept of accounting. to meet the community's
demand for the commodity a number of producers were
required. the least capable of these could make both
ends meet at the prevailing price only by ignoring all
but the severely impersonal aspects of the process.
taking these costs as a base, other more capable or
more fortunate producers may have been able to make
additional expenditures of the sort in question, charging
these perhaps to "welfare" account. the law then
intervenes, making labor in effect more expensive for
all by requiring the superior conveniences or by compelling
employers' insurance against accidents to workmen
or by enforcing outright a higher minimum wage.
the old basic labor cost becomes thus obsolete. and
without prejudging as to the expediency of such legislation
in particular industrial or business situations
may we not protest against a priori and wholesale condemnation
of such legislation as merely irresponsibly
"ethical" and "unscientific"? is it not, rather, economically
experimental and constructive, amounting in
substance to a simple insistence that henceforth the
hiring and paying of labor shall express a wider range
of social interests—shall signalize a more clearly self-validating
level of comprehension, on the part of employers
and consumers, of the social significance of
industry than the old? and may we not protest also,
as a matter of sheer logic, against carrying over a producer's
distinction of accounting between "labor" cost
and "welfare" cost into the consumer's valuation of the
article? how and to what end shall a distinction be
drawn between his "esteem" for the trimmed and
isolated article and his esteem for the men who made it—which,
taken together, dispose him to pay a certain
undivided price for it?
for the egoism of men is no fixed and unalterable
fact. taking it as a postulate, a mathematical theory
of market phenomena may be erected upon it, but such
a postulate is purely formal, taking no note of the
reasons which at any given time lie behind the individuals'
"demand" or "supply schedules." it amounts
simply to an assumption that these schedules will not
change during the lapse of time contemplated in the
problem in hand. and it therefore cannot serve as the
basis for a social science. as an actual social phenomenon
egoism is merely a disclosure of a certain present
narrowness and inertness in the nature of the individual
which may or may not be definitive for him. it is precisely
on a par with anemia, dyspepsia or fatigue, or
any other like unhappy fact of personal biography.
there is another suggestion of ethical and
economic continuity that may be briefly indicated. if
our view of this relation is correct, a problem, by becoming
economic, may lose something in dramatic interest
and grandiosity but gains in precision and complexity.
in the economic phase an issue becomes
sensibly crucial. it is in this phase that are chiefly
developed those qualities of clear-headedness, temperateness
of thought and action, and well-founded self-reliance
that are the foundation of all genuine personal
morality and social effectiveness. and one may question
therefore the ethical consequences of such measures
as old age, sickness, and industrial accident insurance
or insurance against unemployment. in proportion as
these measures are effective they amount to a constant
virtual addition to the individual's income from year
to year without corresponding effort and forethought on
his part. they may accordingly be condemned as systematic
pauperization—the "endowment of the unfit."
there is evidently a fundamental problem here at issue,
apart from all administrative difficulties. clearly this
type of criticism assumes a permanent incapacity in
"human nature" or in most actual beings therewith
endowed, to recognize as seriously important other interests
than those upon which hinge physical life and
death. the ordinary man, it is believed, is held back
from moral quixotism as from material extravagance by
the fear of starvation alone; and it is assumed that
there are no other interests in the "normal" man that
can or ever will be so wholesomely effective to these
ends. and two remarks in answer appear not without
a measure of pertinence. first, if what is alleged be
true (and there is evidence in malthus' essay and elsewhere
to support it) it seems less a proof of original sin
and "inperfectibility" than a reproach to a social order
whose collective tenor and institutions leave the mass
untouched and unawakened above the level of animal reproduction
and whose inequalities of opportunity prevent
awakened life from growing strong. and second,
the democratic society of the future, if it exempts the
individual in part or wholly from the dread of premature
physical extinction must leave him on higher levels of
interest similarly dependent for success or failure upon
his ultimate personal discretion. and is it inconceivable
that on higher levels there should ever genuinely be such
a persisting type of issue for the multitude of men?
§ . we have held constructive comparison in its
economic phase to be a reciprocal evaluating of the
"salient members" of two budgets. the respective
budgets in such a case express in the outcome () the
plane of life to which one is to move and () the plane
one is forsaking. it was the salient member of the
former that presented the problem at the outset. in the
course of the process its associates were gathered about
it in their due proportions and perspective. the salient
member of the latter (i.e., whatever the purchase is to
oblige one to do without), it was the business of constructive
comparison to single out from among its associates
and designate for sacrifice. in any case at all
departing from the type of substitution pure and simple,
the commodities sacrificed will come to have a
certain "value in exchange" that clearly is a new
fact, a new judgment, in experience. this value in exchange,
this "subjective" or "personal" exchange
value, may fittingly be termed a "value for transition."
the transition once made, the exchange once concluded,
i shall deem the motor-car, for example, that i have not
bought to replace one used-up, to be worth less than the
piano i have bought instead. this indeed (in no disparaging
sense) is a tautology. but does this lesser relative
value equal or exceed or fall short of the value the car
would have had if no question of a piano had been raised
at all and i had bought it in replacement of the old one
as a matter of course? how can one say? the question
seems unmeaning, for the levels of value referred to are
different and discontinuous and the magnitudes belong
to different orders. in a word, because a "value for
transition" marks a resolve and succinctly describes an
act, it cannot be broken in two and expressed as an
equating of two magnitudes independently definable
apart from the relation. the motor-car had its value
as a member of the old system—the piano has its value
as a member of the new. "the piano is worth more than
the car"; "the car is worth less than the piano"—these
are the prospective and retrospective views across
a gulf that separates two "specious presents," not
judgments of static inequality in terms of a common
measure.
is value, then, absolute or relative? is value or
price the prior notion? was the classical english
economics superficial in its predilection for the relative
conception of value? or is the reigning austrian economics
profound in its reliance upon marginal utility?
by way of answer let us ask—what in our world can
be more absolute a fact than a man's transition from
one level of experience and action to another? can the
flight of time be stayed or turned backward? and if
not can the acts by whose intrinsic uniqueness and successiveness
time becomes filled for me and by which i
feel time's sensible passage as swift or slow, lose their
individuality? but it is not by a mere empiric temporalism
alone that the sufficient absoluteness of the
present act is attested. my transition from phase to
phase of "finitude" is a thing so absolute that idealism
itself has deemed an absolute indispensable to assure
its safe and sane achievement. and with all idealism's
distrust of immediate experience for every evidential
use, the idealist does not scruple to cite the "higher
obviousness" of personal effort, attainment, and fruition
as the best of evidence for his most momentous
truth of all. and accordingly (in sharp descent) we
need not hesitate to regard value in exchange as a
primary fact in its own right, standing in no need of
resolution into marginal pseudo-absolutes. a price
agreed to and paid marks a real transition to another
level. there are both marginal valuation and werthaltung
on this level, but they are subordinate incidents
to this level's mapping and the conservation of its resources.
on this level every marginal utility is relative,
as we have seen, to every other through their common
relation to the complex plan of organization as a
whole.
§ . in conclusion one more question closely related
to the foregoing may be briefly touched upon. we have
held that the individual's attitude toward a commodity
is in the first instance one of putting a price-estimate
upon it and only secondarily that of holding it in a
provisionally settled marginal esteem. if this principle
of the priority of price-estimation or exchange value is
true, it seems evident that there can be no line of demarcation
drawn (except for doubtfully expedient pedagogical
purposes) between () "subjective valuations"
with which individuals are conceived to come to a
market and () a mechanical equilibration of demand
and supply which it is the distinctive and sole function
of market concourse to effect. in such a view the
market process in strict logic must be timeless as it is
spaceless; a superposition of the two curves is effected
and they are seen to cross in a common point which
their shapes geometrically predetermine. discussion,
in any proper sense, can be no inherent part of a
market process thus conceived. once in the market,
buyers and sellers can only declare their "subjective
exchange valuations" of the commodity and await the
outcome with a dispassionate certainty that whoever
may gain by exchanging at the price to be determined,
those who cannot exchange will at all events not lose.
but considered as a typical likeness of men who have
seen a thing they want and are seeking to possess it,
this picture of mingled hope and resignation is not
convincing. most actual offering of goods for sale
that one observes suggests less the dispassionate manner
of the physiologist or psychologist taking the
measure of his subject's reactions, sensibilities, and
preferences than the more masterful procedure of the
physician or the hypnotist who seeks to uproot or
modify or reconstruct them. this is the process known
in economic writing since adam smith as "the higgling
and bargaining of the market."
in
fact, the individual's ante-market valuation, when
there temporarily is one, is an exchange valuation of
the constructive or experimental and therefore (in any
significant sense of the word) perfectly objective type,
and the market process into which this enters is only
a perfectly homogeneous temporal continuation of it
that carries the individual forward to decisive action.
there is no more reason for a separation here than for
sundering the ante-experimental sketching out of an
hypothesis in any branch of research from the work of
putting the hypothesis to experimental test. the results
of experiment may serve in a marked way in both
sorts of process to elucidate or reconstruct the hypothesis.
the "higgling and bargaining of the market" has
been accorded but scant attention by economists. it
has apparently been regarded as a kind of irrelevance—a
comedy part, at best, in the serious drama of industry
and trade, never for a moment hindering the significant
movement and outcome of the major action.
as if to excuse the incompetence of this treatment (or
as another phase of it) theory has tended to lay stress
upon, and mildly to deplore, certain of the less amiable
and engaging aspects of the process. the very term
indeed as used by adam smith, imported a certain
æsthetic disesteem, albeit tempered with indulgent approbation
on other grounds. in böhm-bawerk's more
modern account this approbation has given place to a
neutral tolerance. a certain buyer, he says (in his discussion
of simple "isolated" exchange), will give as
much as thirty pounds for a horse; the horse's owner will
take as little as ten pounds—these are predetermined
and fixed valuations brought to the exchange negotiations
and nothing that happens in the game of wits is
conceived to modify them. the price will then be fixed
somewhere between these limits. but how? "here
..." we read, "is room for any amount of 'higgling.'
according as in the conduct of the transaction the buyer
or the seller shows the greater dexterity, cunning, obstinacy,
power-of-persuasion, or such like, will the price
be forced either to its lower or to its upper limit." but
the higgling cannot touch the underlying attitudes.
even "power of persuasion" is only one part of "skill
in bargaining," with all the rest and like all the rest;
if it were more than this there would be for böhm-bawerk
no theoretically grounded price limits to define
the range of accidental settlement and the whole explanation,
as a theory of price, would reduce to nullity.
with this, then, appears to fall away all ground for
a one-sided, or even a sharply two-sided, conception of
the process of fixation of market-values. a "marginal
utility" theory and a "cost of production" theory
of market price alike assume that the factor chosen
as the ultimate determinant is a fixed fact defined by
conditions which the actual spatial and temporal meeting-together
of buyers and sellers in the market cannot
affect. in this logical sense, the chosen determinant
is in each case an ante-market or extra-market fact and
the same is true of the blades of marshall's famous pair
of scissors.
the price of a certain article let us say is $. according
to the current type of analysis this is the price
because, intending buyers' and sellers' valuations of the
article being just what they are, it is at this figure
that the largest number of exchanges can occur. were
the price higher there would be more persons willing
to sell than to buy; were it lower there would be more
persons willing to buy than to sell. at $ no buyer
or seller who means what he says about his valuation
when he enters the market goes away disappointed or
dissatisfied. with this price established all sellers
whose costs of production prevent their conforming to
it must drop out of the market; so must all buyers
whose desire for the article does not warrant their paying
so much. more fundamentally then, why is $ the
price? is it because intending buyers and the marginal
buyer in particular do not desire the article more
strongly? or is it because conditions of production,
all things considered, do not permit a lower marginal
unit cost? the argument might seem hopeless. but
the advantage is claimed for the principle of demand.
without demand arising out of desires expressive of
wants there would simply be no value, no production,
and no price. demand evokes production and sanctions
cost. but cost expended can give no value to a product
that no one wants.
does it follow, however, that the cost of a commodity
in which on its general merits i have come to take a
hypothetical interest can in no wise affect my actual
price-offer for it? can it contribute nothing to the
preciser definition of my interest which is eventually to
be expressed in a price offer? if the answer is "no,
for how can this external fact affect the strength of
your desire for the object?"—then the reason given
begs the question at issue. is my interest in the object
an interest in the object alone? and is the cost of the
object a fact for me external and indifferent? it is,
at all events, not uncommon to be assured that an article
"cannot be produced for less," that one or another
of its elements of cost is higher than would be natural
to suppose. not always scientifically accurate, such
assurances express an evident confidence that they will
not be without effect upon a hesitant but fair-minded
purchaser. and in other ways as well, the position
of sellers in the market is not so defenseless as a strict
utility theory of price conceives—apart from the standpoint
of an abstract "normality" that can never contrive
to get itself realized in empirical fact. it is true
that, in general, one tends to purchase an article of a
given familiar kind where its price, all things considered,
is lowest. in consequence the less "capable" producers
or sellers must go to the wall. but the fact
seems mainly "regulative" and of subordinate importance.
is it equally certain that as between branches
of expenditure, such as clothing, food, and shelter,
children, books, and "social" intercourse, the shares
of income we expend upon them or the marginal prices
we are content to pay express the original strength of
separate and unmodified extra-market interests? on
the contrary we have paid in the past what we have
had to pay, what we have deemed just and reasonable,
what we have been willing experimentally to hazard
upon the possibility of the outlay's proving to have
been worth while. in these twilight-zones of indetermination,
cost as well as other factors of supply have
had their opportunity. shall we nevertheless insist that
our "demands" are ideally fixed, even though in fallible
human fact they are more or less indistinct, yielding
and modifiable? on the contrary they are "in principle
and for the most part" indeterminate and expectant
of suggested experimental shaping from the supply side
of the market. it is less in theory than in fact that
they have a salutary tendency (none too dependable)
toward rigidity.
§ . the argument may now be summarily reviewed.
i. how are we to understand the acquisition, by an
individual, of what are called new economic needs and
interests? except by a fairly obvious fallacy of retrospection
we cannot regard this phenomenon as a
mere arousal of so-called latent or implicit desires.
new products and new means of production afford
"satisfactions" and bring about objective results
which are unimaginable and therefore unpredictable, in
any descriptive fashion, in advance. in a realistic or
empirical view of the matter, these constitute genuinely
new developments of personality and of social function,
not mere unfoldings of a preformed logical or vital
system. "human nature" is modifiable and economic
choice and action are factors in this indivisible process
(§§ -). now "logically" it would seem clear that
unless a new commodity is an object of desire it will
not be made or paid for. on the other hand, with
equal "logic," a new commodity, it would seem, cannot
be an object of desire because all desire must be
for what we already know. we seem confronted with
a complete impasse (§ ). but the impasse is conceptual
only. we have simply to acknowledge the patent
fact of our recognition of the new as novel and our
interest in the new in its outstanding character of
novelty. we need only express and interpret this fact,
instead of fancying ourselves bound to explain it away.
it is an interest not less genuine and significant in
economic experience than elsewhere (§§ , ). its
importance lies in the fact that it obliges us to regard
what is called economic choice not as a balancing of
utilities, marginal or otherwise, but as a process of
"constructive comparison." the new commodity and
its purchase price are in reality symbols for alternatively
possible systems of life and action. can the old
be relinquished for the new? before this question is
answered each system may be criticized and interpreted
from the standpoint of the other, each may be supplemented
by suggestion, by dictate of tradition and by
impulsive prompting, by inference, and by conjecture.
finally in experimental fashion an election must be
made. the system as accepted may or may not be, in
terms, identical with one of the initial alternatives; it
can never be identical in full meaning and perspective
with either one. and in the end we have not chosen the
new because its value, as seen beforehand, measured more
than the value of the old, but we now declare the old,
seen in retrospect, to have been worth less (§§ -).
there are apparently no valid objections to this view to
be drawn from the current logical type of marginal-utility
analysis (§ ).
ii. because so-called economic "choice" is in reality
"constructive comparison" it must be regarded as essentially
ethical in import. ethics and economic theory,
instead of dealing with separate problems of conduct,
deal with distinguishable but inseparable stages belonging
to the complete analysis of most, if not all, problems
(§ ). this view suggests, (a) that no reasons in experience
or in logic exist for identifying the economic
interest with an attitude of exclusive or particularistic
egoism (§ ), and (b) that social reformers are justified
in their assumption of a certain "perfectibility" in
human nature—a constructive responsiveness instead of
an insensate and stubborn inertia (§ ). again, in
the process of constructive comparison in its economic
phase, price or exchange value is, in apparent accord
with the english classical tradition, the fundamental
working conception. value as "absolute" is essentially
a subordinate and "conservative" conception, belonging
to a status of system and routine, and is "absolute" in
a purely functional sense (§ ). and finally constructive
comparison, with price or exchange value as
its dominant conception, is clearly nothing if not a market
process. in the nature of the case, then, there can
be no such ante-market definiteness and rigidity of demand
schedules as a strictly marginal-utility theory of
market prices logically must require (§ ).
§ . in at least two respects the argument falls
short of what might be desired. no account is given of
the actual procedure of constructive comparison and
nothing like a complete survey of the leading ideas and
problems of economic theory is undertaken by way of
verification. but to have supplied the former in any
satisfactory way would have required an unduly extended
discussion of the more general, or ethical,
phases of constructive comparison. the other deficiency
is less regrettable, since the task in question
is one that could only be hopefully undertaken
and convincingly carried through by a professional
economist.
for the present purpose, it is perhaps enough to
have found in our economic experience and behavior the
same interest in novelty that is so manifest in other departments
of life, and the same attainment of new self-validating
levels of power and interest, through the acquisition
and exploitation of the novel. in our economic
experience, no more than elsewhere, is satisfaction an
ultimate and self-explanatory term. satisfaction carries
with it always a reference to the level of power and
interest that makes it possible and on which it must be
measured. to seek satisfaction for its own sake or to
hinge one's interest in science or art upon their ability
to serve the palpable needs of the present moment—these,
together, make up the meaning of what is called
utilitarianism. and utilitarianism in this sense (which
is far less what mill meant by the term than a tradition
he could never, with all his striving, quite get free of),
this type of utilitarianism spells routine. it is the
surrender of initiative and control, in the quest for
ends in life, for a philistine pleased acceptance of the
ends that nature, assisted by the advertisement-writers,
sets before us. but this type of utilitarianism is less
frequent in actual occurrence than its vogue in popular
literature and elsewhere may appear to indicate. as
a matter of fact, we more often look to satisfaction,
not as an end of effort or a condition to be preserved, but
as the evidence that an experimental venture has been
justified in its event. and this is a widely different
matter, for in this there is no inherent implication of
a habit-bound or egoistic narrowness of interest in the
conceiving or the launching of the venture.
the economic interest, as a function of intelligence,
finds its proper expression in a valuation set upon one
thing in terms of another—a valuation that is either
a step in a settled plan of spending and consumption
or marks the passing of an old plan and our embarkation
on a new. from such a view it must follow that
the economic betterment of an individual or a society
can consist neither in the accumulation of material
wealth alone nor in a more diversified technical knowledge
and skill. for the individual or for a collectivist
state there must be added to these things alertness and
imagination in the personal quest and discovery of
values and a broad and critical intelligence in making
the actual trial of them. without a commensurate
gain in these qualities it will avail little to make technical
training and industrial opportunity more free or
even to make the rewards of effort more equitable and
secure. but it has been one of the purposes of this
discussion to suggest that just this growth in outlook
and intelligence may in the long run be counted on—not
indeed as a direct and simple consequence of increasing
material abundance but as an expression of
an inherent creativeness in man that responds to
discipline and education and will not fail to recognize
the opportunity it seeks.
real economic progress is ethical in aim and outcome.
we cannot think of the economic interest as restricted
in its exercise to a certain sphere or level of
effort—such as "the ordinary business of life" or the
gaining of a "livelihood" or the satisfaction of our
so-called "material" wants, or the pursuit of an
enlightened, or an unenlightened, self-regard. economics
has no special relation to "material" or even
to commonplace ends. its materialism lies not in its
aim and tendency but in its problem and method. it
has no bias toward a lower order of mundane values.
it only takes note of the ways and degrees of dependence
upon mundane resources and conditions that
values of every order must acknowledge. it reminds us
that morality and culture, if they are genuine, must
know not only what they intend but what they cost.
they must understand not only the direct but the indirect
and accidental bearing of their purposes upon
all of our interests, private and social, that they are
likely to affect. the detachment of the economic interest
from any particular level or class of values is
only the obverse aspect of the special kind of concern
it has with values of every sort. the very generality
of the economic interest, and the abstractness of the
ideas by which it maintains routine or safeguards
change in our experience, are what make it unmistakably
ethical. without specific ends of its own, it affords
no ground for dogmatism or apologetics. and
this indicates as the appropriate task of economic
theory not the arrest and thwarting but the steadying
and shaping of social change.
writing about ethics has tended to take one of two
directions. on the one hand we have description of
conduct in terms of psychology, or anthropology. on
the other a study of the concepts right and wrong,
good and bad, duty and freedom. if we follow the
first line we may attempt to explain conduct psychologically
by showing the simple ideas or feelings
and the causal connections or laws of habit and association
out of which actions arise. or anthropologically
we may show the successive stages of custom
and taboo, or the family, religious, political, legal, and
social institutions from which morality has emerged.
but we meet at once a difficulty if we ask what is the
bearing of this description and analysis. will it aid
me in the practical judgment "what shall i do?" in
physics there is no corresponding difficulty. to analyze
gravity enables us to compute an orbit, or aim a
gun; to analyze electric action is to have the basis for
lighting streets and carrying messages. it assumes
the uniformity of nature and takes no responsibility as
to whether we shall aim guns or whether our messages
shall be of war or of peace. whereas in ethics it is
claimed that the elements are so changed by their
combination—that the process is so essential a factor—that
no prediction is certain. and it is also claimed
that the ends themselves are perhaps to be changed as
well as the means. stated otherwise, suppose that mankind
has passed through various stages, can mere observation
of these tell me what next? perhaps i don't care
to repeat the past; how can i plan for a better future?
or grant that i may discover instinct and emotion, habit
and association in my thinking and willing, how will
this guide me to direct my thinking and willing to right
ends?
the second method has tended to examine concepts.
good is an eternal, changeless pattern; it is to be discovered
by a vision; or right and good are but other
terms for nature's or reason's universal laws which are
timeless and wholly unaffected by human desires or passions;
moral nature is soul, and soul is created not
built up of elements,—such were some of the older absolutisms.
right and good are unique concepts not to
be resolved or explained in terms of anything else,—this
is a more modern thesis which on the face of it
may appear to discourage analysis. the ethical world
is a world of "eternal values." philosophy "by taking
part in empirical questions sinks both itself and
them." these doctrines bring high claims, but are they
more valuable for human guidance than the empirical
method?
"the
knowledge that is superhuman only is ridiculous
in man." no man can ever find his way home
with the pure circle unless he has also the art of the
impure. it is the conviction of this paper that
in ethics, as in knowledge, thoughts without contents
are empty; percepts without concepts are blind. description
of what has been—empiricism—is futile in
itself to project and criticize. intuitions and deductions
a priori are empty. the "thoughts" of ethics
are of course the terms right, good, ought, worth, and
their kin. the "percepts" are the instincts and emotions,
the desires and aspirations, the conditions of
time and place, of nature, and institutions.
yet it is misleading to say that in studying the history
of morals we are merely empiricists, and can hope
to find no criterion. this would be the case if we were
studying non-moral beings. but moral beings have to
some degree guided life by judgments and not merely
followed impulse or habit. early judgments as to
taboos, customs, and conduct may be crude and in need
of correction; they are none the less judgments. over
and over we find them reshaped to meet change from
hunting to agriculture, from want to plenty, from war
to peace, from small to large groupings. much more
clearly when we consider civilized peoples, the interaction
between reflection and impulse becomes patent. to
study this interaction can be regarded as futile for the
future only if we discredit all past moral achievement.
those writers who have based their ethics upon concepts
have frequently expressed the conviction that the
security of morality depends upon the question whether
good and right are absolute and eternal essences independent
of human opinion or volition. a different
source of standards which to some offers more promise
for the future is the fact of the moral life as a constant
process of forming and reshaping ideals and of
bringing these to bear upon conditions of existence.
to construct a right and good is at least a process
tending to responsibility, if this construction is to be
for the real world in which we must live and not merely
for a world of fancy or caprice. it is not the aim of
this paper to give a comprehensive outline of ethical
method. four factors in the moral life will be pointed
out and this analysis will be used to emphasize especially
certain social and constructive aspects of our
concepts of right and good.
the four factors which it is proposed to emphasize
are these:
() life as a biological process involving relation
to nature, with all that this signifies in the equipment
of instincts, emotions, and selective activity by which
life maintains itself.
() interrelation with other human beings, including
on the one hand associating, grouping, mating,
communicating, coöperating, commanding, obeying,
worshiping, adjudicating, and on the psychological
side the various instincts, emotions, susceptibilities to
personal stimulation and appropriate responses in language
and behavior which underlie or are evoked by the
life in common.
() intelligence
and reason, through which experience
is interrelated, viewed as a whole, enlarged in
imagination.
() the process of judgment and choice, in which
different elements are brought together, considered in
one conscious universe, evaluated or measured, thereby
giving rise reciprocally to a self on the one hand and
to approved or chosen objects on the other.
() life. life is at least the raw material of all
values, even if it is not in itself entitled to be called
good without qualification. for in the process of
nourishing and protecting itself, the plant or animal
selects and in the case of higher animals, manipulates;
it adapts itself to nature and adapts nature to itself;
it shows reciprocal relation of means to end, of whole to
part. it foreshadows the conscious processes in so
many ways that men have always been trying to read
back some degree of consciousness. and life in the
animal, at least, is regarded as having experiences of
pleasure and pain, and emotions of fear, anger, shame,
and sex, which are an inseparable aspect of values. if
it is not the supreme or only good, if men freely sacrifice
it for other ends, it is none the less an inevitable
factor. pessimistic theories indeed have contended
that life is evil and have sought to place good in a will-less
nirvana. yet such theories make limited appeal.
their protest is ultimately not against life as life but
against life as painful. and their refutation is rather
to be intrusted to the constructive possibilities of
freer life than to an analysis of concepts.
another
class of theories which omit life from the
good is that which holds to abstractly ontological concepts
of good as an eternal essence or form. it must
be remembered, however, that the idea of good was not
merely a fixed essence. it was also for plato the self-moving
and the cause of all motion. and further,
plato evidently believed that life, the very nature of
the soul, was itself in the class of supreme values along
with god and the good. the prize of immortality was
καλόν and the hope great. and with aristotle and his
followers the good of contemplation no less truly than
the good of action had elements of value derived from
the vital process. such a mystic as spinoza, who finds
good in the understanding values this because in it man
is "active," and would unite himself with the all because
in god is power and freedom. the hebrew
prophet found a word capable of evoking great ethical
values when he urged his countrymen to "choose life,"
and christian teaching found in the conception of "eternal
life" an ideal of profound appeal. it is not surprising
that with his biological interests spencer should
have set up life of greatest length and breadth as a goal.
the struggle of the present war emphasizes tremendously
two aspects of this factor of life. national
life is an ideal which gets its emotional backing largely
from the imagery of our physical life. for any one of
the small nations involved to give up its national life—whatever
the possibilities of better organized industry
or more comfortable material conditions—seems
to it a desperate alternative. self-defense is regarded
by the various powers at war as a complete
justification not merely for armed resistance or attack
but for ruthless acts. and if we are tempted to say
that the war involves a prodigal waste of individual
life on a scale never known before, we are at the same
time compelled to recognize that never before has the
bare destruction of life aroused such horror.
for never before has peace set its forces so determinedly
to protect life. the span of human life has
been lengthened: the wastefulness of accident and disease
has been magnified. the dumb acquiescence with
which former generations accepted the death of infants
and children and those in the prime of life has given
way to active and increasingly successful efforts to
preserve. the enormous increase in scientific study of
biology, including eugenics, reflects not only an advance
of science but a trend in morality. it is scarcely
conceivable that it should grow less in absolute importance,
whatever crises may temporarily cause its depreciation
relatively to other values.
one exception to the growing appreciation calls for
notice—the interest in immortality appears to be less
rather than greater. the strong belief in life beyond
the grave which since the days of ancient egypt has
prevailed in the main stream of western culture seems
not only to be affected by the scientific temper of the
day, but also to be subject to a shift in interest. this
may be in part a reaction from other-worldliness. in
part it may be due to loss of fervor for a theological
picture of a future heaven of a rather monotonous sort
and may signify not so much loss of interest in life
as desire for a more vital kind of continuance. it is
not true that all that a man hath will he give for his
life, yet it is true that no valuing process is intelligible
that leaves out life with its impulses, emotions, and
desires as the first factor to be reckoned with.
() the second factor is the life in common, with
its system of relations, and its corresponding instincts,
emotions, and desires.
so much has been written in recent years on the social
nature of man that it seems unnecessary to
elaborate the obvious. protest has even been raised
against the exaggeration of the social. but i believe
that in certain points at least we have not yet penetrated
to the heart of the social factor, and its significance
for morals.
so far as the moral aspect is concerned i know
nothing more significant than the attitude of the common
law as set forth by professor pound. this has
sought to base its system of duties on relations. the
relation which was prominent in the middle ages was
that of landlord and tenant; other relations are those
of principal and agent, of trustee, etc. an older relation
was that of kinship. the kin was held for the
wergeld; the goël must avenge his next of kin; the
father must provide for prospective parents-in-law;
the child must serve the parents. duty was the legal
term for the relation. in all this there is no romanticism,
no exaggeration of the social; there is a fair
statement of the facts which men have recognized and
acted upon the world over and in all times. individualistic
times or peoples have modified certain phases.
the roman law sought to ground many of its duties
in the contract, the will of the parties. but covenants
by no means exhaust duties. and according to professor
pound the whole course of english and american
law today is belying the generalization of sir
henry maine, that the evolution of law is a progress
from status to contract. we are shaping law of insurance,
of public service companies, not by contract
but by the relation of insurer and insured, of public
utility and patron.
psychologically, the correlate of the system of relations
is the set of instincts and emotions, of capacity
for stimulation and response, which presuppose society
for their exercise and in turn make society possible.
there can be no question as to the reality and strength
of these in both animals and men. the bear will fight
for her young more savagely than for her life. the
human mother's thoughts center far more intensely
upon her offspring than upon her own person. the
man who is cut dead by all his acquaintance suffers
more than he would from hunger or physical fear. the
passion of sex frequently overmasters every instinct of
individual prudence. the majority of men face poverty
and live in want; relatively few prefer physical
comfort to family ties. aristotle's φιλία is the oftenest
quoted recognition of the emotional basis of common
life, but a statement of kant's earlier years is particularly
happy. "the point to which the lines of direction
of our impulses converge is thus not only in ourselves,
but there are besides powers moving us in the
will of others outside of ourselves. hence arise the
moral impulses which often carry us away to the discomfiture
of selfishness, the strong law of duty, and the
weaker of benevolence. both of these wring from us
many a sacrifice, and although selfish inclinations now
and then preponderate over both, these still never fail
to assert their reality in human nature. thus we recognize
that in our most secret motives, we are dependent
upon the rule of the general will."
the "law of duty," and i believe we may add, the
conception of right, do arise objectively in the social
relations as the common law assumes and subjectively
in the social instincts, emotions, and the more intimate
social consciousness which had not been worked out in
the time of kant as it has been by recent authors.
this point will receive further treatment later, but i
desire to point out in anticipation that if right and
duty have their origin in this social factor there is at
least a presumption against their being subordinate
ethically to the conception of good as we find them in
certain writers. if they have independent origin and
are the outgrowth of a special aspect of life it is at
least probable that they are not to be subordinated to
the good unless the very notion of good is itself reciprocally
modified by right in a way that is not usually
recognized in teleological systems.
() intelligence and reason imply (a) considering
the proposed act or the actually performed act as a
whole and in its relations. especially they mean considering
consequences. in order to foresee consequences
there is required not only empirical observation
of past experience, not only deduction from already
formulated concepts—as when we say that injustice
will cause hard feelings and revolt—but that
rarer quality which in the presence of a situation discerns
a meaning not obvious, suggests an idea, "injustice,"
to interpret the situation. situations are
neither already labeled "unjust," nor are they obviously
unjust to the ordinary mind. analysis into
elements and rearrangement of the elements into a new
synthesis are required. this is eminently a synthetic
or "creative" activity. further it is evident that the
activity of intelligence in considering consequences implies
not only what we call reasoning in the narrower
sense but imagination and feeling. for the consequences
of an act which are of importance ethically are
consequences which are not merely to be described but
are to be imagined so vividly as to be felt, whether they
are consequences that affect ourselves or affect others.
(b) but it would be a very narrow intelligence that
should attempt to consider only consequences of a single
proposed act without considering also other possible
acts and their consequences. the second important
characteristic of intelligence is that it considers either
other means of reaching a given end, or other ends, and
by working out the consequences of these also has the
basis for deliberation and choice. the method of
"multiple working hypotheses," urged as highly important
in scientific investigation, is no less essential
in the moral field. to bring several ends into the field
of consideration is the characteristic of the intelligent,
or as we often say, the open-minded man. such consideration
as this widens the capacity of the agent and
marks him off from the creature of habit, of prejudice,
or of instinct.
(c) intelligence implies considering in two senses
all persons involved, that is, it means taking into account
not only how an act will affect others but also
how others look at it. it is scarcely necessary to say
that this activity of intelligence cannot be cut off from
its roots in social intercourse. it is by the processes
of give and take, of stimulus and response, in a social
medium that this possibility of looking at things from a
different angle is secured. and once more this different
angle is not gained by what in the strict sense could
be called a purely intellectual operation, although
it has come to be so well recognized as the necessary
equipment for dealing successfully with conditions that
we commonly characterize the person as stupid who does
not take account of what others think and feel and how
they will react to a projected line of conduct. this social
element in intelligence is to a considerable degree implied
in the term "reasonable," which signifies not merely that
a man is logical in his processes but also that he is ready
to listen to what others say and to look at things from
their point of view whether he finally accepts it or not.
the broad grounds on which it is better to use the
word intelligence than the word reason in the analysis
with which we are concerned are two. () it is not a
question-begging term which tends to commit us at the
outset to a specific doctrine as to the source of our
judgments. () the activity of intelligence which is
now most significant for ethical progress is not suggested
by the term reason, for unless we arbitrarily
smuggle in under the term practical reason the whole
activity of the moral consciousness without inquiry as
to the propriety of the name we shall be likely to omit
the constructive and creative efforts to promote morality
by positive supplying of enlarged education, new
sources of interest, and more open fields for development,
by replacing haunting fears of misery with positive
hopes, and by suggesting new imagery, new ambitions
in the place of sodden indifference or sensuality.
the term reason as used by the stoics and by kant
meant control of the passions by some "law"—some authority
cosmic or logical. it prepared for the inevitable;
it forbade the private point of view. but as thus
presenting a negative aspect the law was long ago characterized
by a profound moral genius as "weak." it
has its value as a schoolmaster, but it is not in itself
capable of supplying the new life which dissolves the
old sentiment, breaks up the settled evil habit, and supplies
both larger ends and effective motives.
if we state human progress in objective fashion we
may say that although men today are still as in earlier
times engaged in getting a living, in mating, in rearing
of offspring, in fighting and adventure, in play, and
in art, they are also engaged in science and invention,
interested in the news of other human activities all
over the world; they are adjusting differences by judicial
processes, coöperating to promote general welfare,
enjoying refined and more permanent friendships and
affections, and viewing life in its tragedy and comedy
with enhanced emotion and broader sympathy. leaving
out of consideration the work of the religious or
artistic genius as not in question here, the great objective
agencies in bringing about these changes have
been on the one hand the growth of invention, scientific
method, and education, and on the other the increase
in human intercourse and communication. reason
plays its part in both of these in freeing the mind from
wasteful superstitious methods and in analyzing situations
and testing hypotheses, but the term is inadequate
to do justice to that creative element in the formation
of hypotheses which finds the new, and it tends to leave
out of account the social point of view involved in the
widening of the area of human intercourse. more will
be said upon this point in connection with the discussion
of rationalism.
() the process of judgment and choice. the elements
are not the sum. the moral consciousness is not
just the urge of life, plus the social relations, plus intelligence.
the process of moral deliberation, evaluation,
judgment, and choice is itself essential. in this process
are born the concepts and standards good and right,
and likewise the moral self which utters the judgment.
it is in this twofold respect synthetic, creative. it is
as an interpretation of this process that the concept of
freedom arises. four aspects of the process may be
noted.
(a) the process involves holding possibilities of action,
or objects for valuation, or ends for choice, in
consciousness and measuring them one against another
in a simultaneous field—or in a field of alternating objects,
any of which can be continually recalled. one
possibility after another may be tried out in anticipation
and its relations successively considered, but the
comparison is essential to the complete moral consciousness.
(b) the process yields a universe of valued objects
as distinguished from a subjective consciousness of desires
and feelings. we say, "this is right," "that is
good." every "is" in such judgments may be denied
by an "is not" and we hold one alternative to be true,
the other false. as the market or the stock exchange
or board of trade fixes values by a meeting of buyers
and sellers and settles the price of wheat accurately
enough to enable farmers to decide how much land to
seed for the next season, so the world of men and
women who must live together and coöperate, or fight
and perish, forces upon consciousness the necessity of
adjustment. the preliminary approaches are usually
hesitant and subjective—like the offers or bids in the
market—e.g., "i should like to go to college; i believe
that is a good thing"; "my parents need my help; it
does not seem right to leave them." the judgments
finally emerge. "a college education is good;" "it
is wrong to leave my parents"—both seemingly objective
yet conflicting, and unless i can secure both i must
seemingly forego actual objective good, or commit actual
wrong.
(c) the process may be described also as one of
"universalizing" the judging consciousness. for it is
a counterpart of the objective implication of a judgment
that it is not an affirmation as to any individual's
opinion. this negative characterization of the judgment
is commonly converted into the positive doctrine
that any one who is unprejudiced and equally well informed
would make the same judgment. strictly
speaking the judgment itself represents in its completed
form the elimination of the private attitude rather
than the express inclusion of other judges. but in the
making of the judgment it is probable that this elimination
of the private is reached by a mental reference to
other persons and their attitudes, if not by an actual
conversation with another. it is dubious whether an
individual that had never communicated with another
would get the distinction between a private subjective
attitude and the "general" or objective.
moreover, one form of the moral judgment: "this
is right," speaks the language of law—of the collective
judgment, or of the judge who hears both sides
but is neither. this generalizing or universalizing is
frequently supposed to be the characteristic activity of
"reason." i believe that a comparison with the kindred
value judgments in economics supports the doctrine
that in judgments as to the good as well as in those
as to right, there is no product of any simple faculty,
but rather a synthetic process in which the social factor
is prominent. a compelling motive toward an objective
and universal judgment is found in the practical
conditions of moral judgments. unless men
agree on such fundamental things as killing, stealing,
and sex relations they cannot get on together. not
that when i say, "killing is wrong," i mean to affirm
"i agree with you in objecting to it"; but that the
necessity (a) of acting as if i either do or do not approve
it, and (b) of either making my attitude agree
with yours, or yours agree with mine, or of fighting
it out with you or with the whole force of organized
society, compels me to put my attitude into objective
terms, to meet you and society on a common platform.
this is a synthesis, an achievement. to attribute the
synthesis to any faculty of "practical reason," adds
nothing to our information, but tends rather to obscure
the facts.
(d) the process is thus a reciprocal process of
valuing objects and of constructing and reconstructing
a self. the object as first imaged or anticipated
undergoes enlargement and change as it is put into relations
to other objects and as the consequences of
adoption or rejection are tried in anticipation. the
self by reflecting and by enlarging its scope is similarly
enlarged. it is the resulting self which is the final
valuer. the values of most objects are at first fixed
for us by instinct or they are suggested by the ethos
and mores of our groups—family, society, national religions,
and "reign under the appearance of habitual
self-suggested tendencies." the self is constituted accordingly.
collisions with other selves, conflicts between
group valuations and standards and individual
impulses or desires, failure of old standards as applied
to new situations, bring about a more conscious definition
of purposes. the agent identifies himself with
these purposes, and values objects with reference to
them. in this process of revaluing and defining, of
comparing and anticipation, freedom is found if anywhere.
for if the process is a real one the elements
do not remain unaffected by their relation to each
other and to the whole. the act is not determined by
any single antecedent or by the sum of antecedents.
it is determined by the process. the self is not made
wholly by heredity, or environment. it is itself creating
for each of its elements a new environment, viz., the
process of reflection and choice. and if man can
change the heredity of pigeons and race horses by
suitable selection, if every scientific experiment is a
varying of conditions, it is at least plausible that man
can guide his own acts by intelligence, and revise his
values by criticism.
the self is itself creating for each of its elements a
new environment—this is a fact which if kept in mind
will enable us to see the abstractness and fallacies not
merely of libertarianism and determinism, but of subjectivism
and objectivism. subjective or "inward"
theories have sought standards in the self; but in regarding
the self as an entity independent of such a
process as we have described they have exposed themselves
to the criticism of providing only private, variable,
accidental, unauthoritative sources of standards—instincts,
or emotions, or intuitions. the self of the
full moral consciousness, however,—the only one which
can claim acceptance or authority—is born only in the
process of considering real conditions, of weighing and
choosing between alternatives of action in a real world
of nature and persons. its judgments are more than
subjective. objectivism in its absolutist and abstract
forms assumes a standard—nature, essence, law—independent
of process. such a standard is easily shown
to be free from anything individual, private, or changing.
it is universal, consistent, and eternal, in fact it
has many good mathematical characteristics, but unfortunately
it is not moral. as mathematical, logical,
biological, or what not, it offers no standard that appeals
to the moral nature as authoritative or that can
help us to find our way home.
if we are dissatisfied with custom and habit and seek
to take philosophy for the guide of life we have two possibilities:
() we may look for the good, and treat
right and duty as subordinate concepts which indicate
the way to the good, that is, consider them as good as
a means, or () we may seek first to do right irrespective
of consequences, in the belief that in willing to do
right we are already in possession of the highest good.
in either case we may consider our standards and
values either as in some sense fixed or as in the making.
we may suppose that good is objective and absolute,
that right is discovered by a rational faculty, or
we may consider that in regarding good as objective
we have not made it independent of the valuing process
and that in treating right as a standard we have not
thereby made it a fixed concept to be discovered by the
pure intellect. the position of this paper will be ()
that good while objective is yet objective as a value and
not as an essence or physical fact; () that a social
factor in value throws light upon the relation between
moral and other values; () that right is not merely a
means to the good but has an independent place in the
moral consciousness; () that right while signifying
order does not necessarily involve a timeless, eternal
order since it refers to an order of personal relations;
() that the conception of right instead of being a
matter for pure reason or even the "cognitive faculty"
shows an intimate blending of the emotional and intellectual
and that this appears particularly in the conception
of the reasonable.
() we begin with the question of the synthetic and
objective character of the good. with g. e. moore
as with the utilitarians the good is the ultimate concept.
right and duty are means to the good. moore
and rashdall also follow sidgwick in regarding good
as unique, that is, as "synthetic." sidgwick emphasized
in this especially the point that moral value cannot
be decided by physical existence or the course of
evolution, nor can the good be regarded as meaning the
pleasant. moore and russell reinforce this. however
true it may be that pleasure is one among other good
things or that life is one among other good things,
good does not mean either pleasure or survival. good
means just "good."
a similar thought underlies croce's division of the
practical into the two spheres of the economic and
the ethical. "the economic activity is that which
wills and effects only what corresponds to the conditions
of fact in which a man finds himself; the ethical
activity is that which, although it correspond to these
conditions, also refers to something that transcends
them. to the first correspond what are called individual
ends, to the second universal ends; the one gives
rise to the judgment concerning the greater or less coherence
of the action taken in itself, the other to that
concerning its greater or less coherence in respect to
the universal end, which transcends the individual.
utilitarianism is according to croce an attempt to reduce
the ethical to the economic form, although the
utilitarians as men attempt in various ways to make
a place for that distinction which as philosophers they
would suppress. "man is not a consumer of pleasures.
he is a creator of life." with this claim of the distinctive,
synthetic, character of the moral consciousness
and of the impossibility of testing the worth of ideals
by cosmic laws, or by gratification of particular wants
as measured by pleasure, i have no issue. the
analysis of the moral judgment made above points out
just how it is that good is synthetic. it is synthetic
in that it represents a measuring and valuing of ends—instinctive
and imagined, individual and social—against
each other and as part of a whole to which a
growing self corresponds. it is synthetic in that it
represents not merely a process of evaluating ends
which match actually defined desires, but also a process
in which the growing self, dissatisfied with any ends already
in view, gropes for some new definition of ends
that shall better respond to its living, creative capacity,
its active synthetic character. good is the concept
for just this valuing process as carried on by a
conscious being that is not content to take its desire
as ready made by its present construction, but is
reaching out for ends that shall respond to a growing,
expanding, inclusive, social, self. it expresses value as
value.
value as value! not as being; nor as independent
essence; nor as anything static and fixed. for a synthetic
self, a living personality, could find no supreme
value in the complete absence of valuing, in the cessation
of life, in the negation of that very activity of projection,
adventure, construction, and synthesis in which
it has struck out the concept good. a theory of ethics
which upholds the synthetic character of the good may
be criticized as being not synthetic enough if it fails
to see that on the basis of the mutual determination
of percepts and concepts, of self and objects, the synthetic
character of the process must be reflected in the
ultimate meaning of the category which symbolizes and
incorporates the process.
() we may find some light upon the question how
moral value gets its distinctive and unique character,
and how it comes to be more "objective" than economic
value if we consider some of the social factors
in the moral judgment. for although the concept
good is rooted in the life process with its selective activity
and attending emotions it involves a subtle social
element, as well as the more commonly recognized factors
of intelligence.
within the fundamental selective process two types
of behavior tend to differentiate in response to two general
sorts of stimulation. one sort is simpler, more
monotonous, more easily analyzable. response to such
stimulation, or treatment of objects which may be described
under these terms of simple, analyzable, etc., is
easily organized into a habit. it calls for no great
shifts in attention, no sudden readjustments. there is
nothing mysterious about it. as satisfying various
wants it has a certain kind of value. it, however,
evokes no consciousness of self. toward the more variable,
complex sort of stimuli, greater attention, constant
adjustment and readjustment, are necessary.
objects of the first sort are treated as things, in the
sense that they do not call out any respect from us
or have any intrinsic value. we understand them
through and through, manipulate them, consume them,
throw them away. we regard them as valuable only
with reference to our wants. on the other hand, objects
of the second sort take their place in a bi-focal
situation. our attention shifts alternately to their behavior
and to our response, or, conversely, from our
act to their response. this back and forth movement
of attention in the case of certain of these objects is
reinforced by the fact that certain stimuli from them
or from the organism, find peculiar responses already
prepared in social instincts; gesture and language play
their part. such a bi-focal situation as this, when
completely developed, involves persons. in its earlier
stages it is the quasi-personal attitude which is found
in certain savage religious attitudes, in certain æsthetic
attitudes, and in the emotional attitudes which we all
have toward many of the objects of daily life.
economic values arise in connection with attitudes
toward things. we buy things, we sell them. they
have value just in that they gratify our wants, but
they do not compel any revision or change in wants or
in the self which wants. they represent a partial interest—or
if they become the total interest we regard
them as now in the moral sphere. values of personal
affection arise as we find a constant rapport in thought,
feeling, purpose, between the two members of our social
consciousness. the attitude is that of going along
with another and thereby extending and enriching our
experiences. we enter into his ideas, range with his
imagination, kindle at his enthusiasms, sympathize with
his joys or sorrows. we may disagree with our
friend's opinions, but we do not maintain a critical attitude
toward him, that is, toward his fundamental
convictions and attitudes. if "home is the place
where, when you have to go there, they have to take
you in," as frost puts it, a friend is one who, when
you go to him, has to accept you.
moral values also arise in a social or personal relation—not
in relation to things. this is on the surface
in the form of judgment; "he is a good man," "that
is a good act." if it is less obvious in the practical
judgment, "this is the better course of action," i.e.,
the course which leads to the greater good, or to the
good, this is because we fail to discern that the good
in these cases is a something with which i can identify
myself, not a something which i merely possess and
keep separate from my personality. it is something
i shall be rather than have. or if i speak of a share
or participation it is a sharing in the sense of entering
into a kindred life. it is an ideal, and an ideal for
a conscious personal being can hardly be other than
conscious. it may be objected that however personal
the ideal it is not on this account necessarily social.
it embodies what i would be, but does not necessarily
imply response to any other personality. this, however,
would be to overlook the analyses which recent
psychology has made of the personal. the ideal does
not develop in a vacuum. it implies for one thing individuality
which is conceivable only as other individuals
are distinguished. it implies the definition of
purposes, and such definition is scarcely if ever attempted
except as a possible world of purposes is
envisaged.
æsthetic valuation is in certain respects intermediate
between the valuation of things on the one hand
and the moral evaluation of acts of persons or conscious
states on the other. æsthetic objects are in
many cases seemingly things and yet even as things
they are quasi-personal; they are viewed with a certain
sympathy quite different from that which we feel
for a purely economic object. if it is a work of art
the artist has embodied his thought and feeling and
the observer finds it there. the experience is that of
einfühlung. yet we do not expect the kind of response
which we look for in friendship, nor do we take the object
as merely a factor for the guidance or control of
our own action as in the practical judgment of
morality. the æsthetic becomes the object of contemplation,
not of response; of embodied meaning, not
of individuality. it is so far personal that no one of
æsthetic sensibility likes to see a thing of beauty destroyed
or mistreated. the situation in which we recognize
in an object meaning and embodied feeling, or
at least find sources of stimulation which appeal to our
emotions, develops an æsthetic enhancement of conscious
experience. the æsthetic value predicate is the
outcome of this peculiar enhancement.
it seems that the social nature of the judgment plays
a part also in the varying objectivity of values. it is
undoubtedly true that some values are treated as belonging
to objects. if we cannot explain this fully we
may get some light upon the situation by noticing the
degree to which this is true in the cases of the kinds
of values already described.
economic values are dubiously objective. we use
both forms of expression. we say on the one hand,
"i want wheat," "there is a demand for wheat," or,
on the other, "wheat is worth one dollar a bushel."
conversely, "there is no demand for the old-fashioned
high-framed bicycle" or "it is worthless." the middle
ages regarded economic value as completely objective.
a thing had a real value. the retailer could not
add to it. the mediæval economist believed in the externality
of relations; he prosecuted for the offenses of
forestalling and regrating the man who would make a
profit by merely changing things in place. he condemned
usury. we have definitely abandoned this
theory. we recognize that it is the want which makes
the value. to make exchange possible and socialize
to some degree the scale of prices we depend upon a
public market or a stock exchange.
in values of personal affection we may begin with a
purely individual attitude, "i love or esteem my
friend." if i put it more objectively i may say, "he
is an honored and valued friend." perhaps still more
objectively, we—especially if we are feminine—may
say "is not x dear?" we may then go on to seek a social
standard. we perhaps look for reinforcement in
a small group of like-minded. we are a little perplexed
and, it may be, aggrieved if other members of
the circle do not love the one whom we love. in such
a group judgment of a common friend there is doubtless
greater objectivity than in the economic judgment.
the value of a friend does not depend upon his adjustment
to our wants. as aristotle pointed out, true
friendship is for its own sake. its value is "disinterested."
if a man does not care for an economic good
it does not reflect upon him. he may be careless of
futures, neglectful of corn, indifferent to steel. it lessens
the demand, lowers the values of these goods, an
infinitesimal, but does not write him down an inferior
person. to fail to prize a possible friend is a reflection
upon us. however the fact that in the very nature
of the case one can scarcely be a personal friend
to a large, not to say a universal group, operates to
limit the objectivity.
in the æsthetic and moral attitudes we incorporate
value in the object decisively. we do not like to think
that beauty can be changed with shifting fashions or to
affirm that the firmament was ever anything but sublime.
it seems to belong to the very essence of right
that it is something to which the self can commit itself
in absolute loyalty and finality. and, as for good, we
may say with moore in judgments of intrinsic value,
at least, "we judge concerning a particular state of
things that it would be worth while—would be a good
thing—that that state of things should exist, even if
nothing else were to exist besides."
with regard to this problem of objectivity it is significant
in the first place that the kind of situation out
of which this object value is affirmed in æsthetic and
moral judgments is a social situation. it contrasts in
this respect with the economic situation. the economic
is indeed social in so far as it sets exchange values, but
the object valued is not a social object. the æsthetic
and moral object is such an object. not only is there
no contradiction in giving to the symbolic form or the
moral act intrinsic value: there is entire plausibility in
doing so. for in so far as the situation is really personal,
either member is fundamentally equal to the
other and may be treated as embodying all the value
of the situation. the value which rises to consciousness
in the situation is made more complete by eliminating
from consideration the originating factors, the
plural agents of admiration or approval, and incorporating
the whole product abstractly in the object.
in thus calling attention to the social or personal character
of the æsthetic or moral object it is not intended
to minimize that factor in the judgment which we
properly speak of as the universalizing activity of
thought, much less to overlook the importance of the
judgmental process itself. the intention is to point
out some of the reasons why in one case the thinking
process does universalize while in the other it does not,
why in one case the judgment is completely objective
while in the other it is not. in both æsthetic and moral
judgments social art, social action, social judgments,
through collective decisions prepare the way for the
general non-personal, objective form. it is probable
that man would not say, "this is right," using the
word as an adjective, if he had not first said, as member
of a judicially acting group, "this is right," using
the word as a noun. and finally whatever we may
claim as to the "cognitive" nature of the æsthetic and
moral judgment, the only test for the beauty of an object
is that persons of taste discover it. the only test
for the rightness of an act is that persons of good
character approve it. the only test for goodness is
that good persons on reflection approve and choose it—just
as the test for good persons is that they choose
and do the good.
() right is not merely a means to good but has
a place of its own in the moral consciousness. many
of our moral choices or judgments do not take the
form of choice between right and wrong, or between
duty and its opposite; they appear to be choices between
goods. that is, we do not always consider our
value as crystallized into a present standard or feel a
tension between a resisting and an authoritative self.
but when they do emerge they signify a distinct factor.
what moore says of good may be said also of
right. right means just "right," nothing else.
that is, we mean that acts so characterized correspond
exactly to a self in a peculiar attitude, viz., one of adequate
standardizing and adjustment, of equilibrium, in
view of all relations. the concept signifies that in finding
our way into a moral world into which we are born
in the process of valuing and judging, we take along
the imagery of social judgment in which through language
and behavior the individual is constantly adjusting
himself, not only to the social institutions, and
group organization but far more subtly and unconsciously
to the social consciousness and attitudes.
this conception of an order to which the act must
refer has usually been regarded as peculiarly a "rational"
factor. it is, however, rather an order of
social elements, of a nature of persons, than of a
"nature of things." in savage life the position of
father, wife, child, guest, or other members of the household,
is one of the most prominent facts of the situation.
the relationship of various totem groups and inter-marrying
groups is the very focus of moral consciousness.
even in the case of such a cosmic conception of
order as dike and themis, rita and tao, the "way"
is not impersonal cosmos. it is at least quasi-personal.
and if we say such primitive myth has no bearing on
what the "nature" of right or the "true" meaning
of right is, it is pertinent to repeat that concepts without
percepts are empty; that the term means nothing
except the conceptual interpretation of a unique synthetic
process in which an act placed in relation to a
standard is thereby given new meaning. so long as
custom or law forms the only or the dominant factor
in the process, we have little development of the ideal
concept right as distinct from a factual standard.
but when reason and intelligence enter, particularly
when that creative activity of intelligence enters which
attempts a new construction of ends, a new ordering
of possible experience, then the standardizing process
is set free; a new self with new possibilities of relation
seeks expression. the concept "right" reflects the
standardizing, valuing process of a synthetic order and
a synthetic self. duty born similarly in the world of
social relations and reflecting especially the tension between
the individual and the larger whole is likewise
given full moral significance when it becomes a tension
within the synthetic self. and as thus reflecting the
immediate attitudes of the self to an ideal social order
both right and duty are not to be treated merely as
means to any value which does not include as integrant
factors just what these signify.
this view is contrary to that of moore, for whom
"right does and can mean nothing but 'cause of a
good result,' and is thus identical with useful."
the right act is that which has the best consequences.
similarly duty is that action which will cause more
good to exist in the universe than any possible alternative.
it is evident that this makes it impossible for
any finite mind to assert confidently that any act is
right or a duty. "accordingly it follows that we never
have any reason to suppose that an action is our duty:
we can never be sure that any action will produce the
greatest value possible.
whatever the convenience of such a definition of right
and duty for a simplified ethics it can hardly be claimed
to accord with the moral consciousness, for men have
notoriously supposed certain acts to be duty. to say
that a parent has no reason to suppose that it is his
duty to care for his child is more than paradox. and
a still greater contradiction to the morality of common
sense inheres in the doctrine that the right act is that
which has the best consequences. considering all the
good to literature and free inquiry which has resulted
from the condemnation of socrates it is highly probable—or
at least it is arguable—that the condemnation had
better results than an acquittal would have yielded. but
it would be contrary to our ordinary use of language
to maintain that this made the act right. or to take
a more recent case: the present war may conceivably
lead to a more permanent peace. the "severities,"
practised by one party, may stir the other to greater
indignation and lead ultimately to triumph of the latter.
will the acts in question be termed right by the second
party if they actually have this effect? on this hypothesis
the more outrageous an act and the greater
the reaction against it, the better the consequences are
likely to be and hence the more reason to call the act
right and a duty. the paradox results from omitting
from right the elements of the immediate situation and
considering only consequences. the very meaning of
the concept right, implies focussing attention upon the
present rather than upon the future. it suggests a
cross-section of life in its relations. if the time process
were to be arrested immediately after our act i think
we might still speak of it as right or wrong. in trying
to judge a proposed act we doubtless try to discover
what it will mean, that is, we look at consequences. but
these consequences are looked upon as giving us the
meaning of the present act and we do not on this account
subordinate the present act to these consequences.
especially we do not mean to eliminate the significance
of this very process of judgment. it is significant that
in considering what are the intrinsic goods moore
enumerates personal affection and the appreciation of
beauty, and with less positiveness, true belief, but does
not include any mention of the valuing or choosing or
creative consciousness.
() if we regard right as the concept which reflects
the judgment of standardizing our acts by some ideal
order, questions arise as to the objectivity of this order
and the fixed or moving character of the implied standard.
rashdall lays great stress upon the importance
of objectivity: "assuredly there is no scientific problem
upon which so much depends as upon the answer
we give to the question whether the distinction which
we are accustomed to draw between right and wrong
belongs to the region of objective truth like the laws
of mathematics and of physical science, or whether it
is based upon an actual emotional constitution of individual
human beings." the appraisement of the
various desires and impulses by myself and other men
is "a piece of insight into the true nature of things."
while these statements are primarily intended to oppose
the moral sense view of the judgment, they also bear
upon the question whether right is something fixed.
the phrase "insight into the true nature of things"
suggests at once the view that the nature of things
is quite independent of any attitude of human beings
toward it. it is something which the seeker for moral
truth may discover but nothing which he can in
any way modify. it is urged that if we are to have any
science of ethics at all what was once right must be
conceived as always right in the same circumstances.
i hold no brief for the position—if any one holds the
position—that in saying "this is right" i am making
an assertion about my own feelings or those of any one
else. as already stated the function of the judging
process is to determine objects, with reference to which
we say "is" or "is not." the emotional theory of
the moral consciousness does not give adequate recognition
to this. but just as little as the process of the
moral consciousness is satisfied by an emotional theory
of the judgment does it sanction any conception of
objectivity which requires that values are here or there
once for all; that they are fixed entities or "a nature
of things" upon which the moral consciousness may
look for its information but upon which it exercises no
influence. the process of attempting to give—or discover—moral
values is a process of mutual determination
of object and agent. we have to do in morals not
with a nature of things but with natures of persons.
the very characteristic of a person as we have understood
it is that he is synthetic, is actually creating
something new by organizing experiences and purposes,
by judging and choosing. objectivity does not necessarily
imply changelessness.
whether right is a term of fixed and changeless character
depends upon whether the agents are fixed units,
either in fact or in ideal. if, as we maintain, right is
the correlate of a self confronting a world of other
persons conceived as all related in an order, the vital
question is whether this order is a fixed or a moving
order. "straight" is a term of fixed content just because
we conceive space in timeless terms; it is by its very
meaning a cross-section of a static order. but a world
of living intelligent agents in social relations is in its
very presuppositions a world of activity, of mutual
understanding and adjustment. rationalistic theory,
led astray by geometrical conceptions, conceived that
a universal criterion must be like a straight line, a fixed
and timeless—or eternal—entity. but in such an order
of fixed units there could be no selection, no adjustment
to other changing agents, no adventure upon the new
untested possibility which marks the advance of every
great moral idea, in a word, no morality of the positive
and constructive sort. and if it be objected that the
predicate of a judgment must be timeless whatever
the subject, that the word "is" as plato insists cannot
be used if all flows, we reply that if right=the correlate
of a moving order, of living social intelligent beings,
it is quite possible to affirm "this is according to
that law." if our logic provides no form of judgment
for the analysis of such a situation it is inadequate for
the facts which it would interpret. but in truth mankind's
moral judgments have never committed themselves
to any such implication. we recognize the futility of
attempting to answer simply any such questions as
whether the israelites did right to conquer canaan or
hamlet to avenge his father.
() the category of right has usually been closely
connected, if not identified, with reason or "cognitive"
activity as contrasted with emotion. professor dewey
on the contrary has pointed out clearly the impossibility
of separating emotion and thought. "to put ourselves
in the place of another ... is the surest way to
attain universality and objectivity of moral knowledge."
"the only truly general, the reasonable as distinct
from the merely shrewd or clever thought, is the
generous thought." but in the case of certain judgments
such as those approving fairness and the general
good sidgwick finds a rational intuition. "the principle
of impartiality is obtained by considering the
similarity of the individuals that make up a logical
whole or genus." rashdall challenges any but a
rationalistic ethics to explain fairness as contrasted with
partiality of affection.
there is without question a properly rational or intellectual
element in the judgment of impartiality,
namely, analysis of the situation and comparison of the
units. but what we shall set up as our units—whether
we shall treat the gentile or the barbarian or negro as
a person, as end and not merely means, or not, depends
on something quite other than reason. and this other
factor is not covered by the term "practical reason."
in fact no ethical principle shows better the subtle
blending of the emotional and social factors with the
rational. for the student of the history of justice is
aware that only an extraordinarily ingenious exegesis
could regard justice as having ever been governed by
a mathematical logic. the logic of justice has been
the logic of a we-group gradually expanding its area.
or it has been the logic of a magna charta—a document
of special privileges wrested from a superior by a strong
group, and gradually widening its benefits with the
admission of others into the favored class. or it has
been the logic of class, in which those of the same level
are treated alike but those of different levels of birth
or wealth are treated proportionately. yet it would
seem far-fetched to maintain that the countrymen of
euclid and aristotle were deficient in the ability to
perform so simple a reasoning process as the judgment
one equals one, or that men who developed the roman
law, or built the cathedrals of the middle ages, were
similarly lacking in elementary analysis. inequality
rather than equality has been the rule in the world's
justice. it has not only been the practice but the approved
principle. it still is in regard to great areas
of life. in the united states there is no general disapproval
of the great inequalities in opportunity for
children, to say nothing of inequalities in distribution
of wealth. in england higher education is for the
classes rather than for the masses. in prussia the inequality
in voting strength of different groups and the
practical immunity of the military class from the constraints
of civil law seem to an american unfair. the
western states of the union think it unfair to restrict
the suffrage to males and give women no voice in the
determination of matters of such vital interest to them
as the law of divorce, the guardianship of children, the
regulation of women's labor, the sale of alcoholic liquors,
the protection of milk and food supply. are all these
differences of practice and conviction due to the fact
that some people use reason while others do not? of
course in every case excellent reasons can be given for
the inequality. the gentile should not be treated as a
jew because he is not a jew. the slave should not
be treated as a free citizen because he is not a free
citizen. the churl should not have the same wergeld
as the thane because he is lowborn. the more able
should possess more goods. the woman should not vote
because she is not a man. the reasoning is clear and
unimpeachable if you accept the premises, but what
gives the premises? in every case cited the premise
is determined largely if not exclusively by social or
emotional factors. if reason can then prescribe equally
well that the slave should be given rights because he is
a man of similar traits or denied rights because he has
different traits from his master, if the jew may either
be given his place of equality because he hath eyes,
hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions,
or denied equality because he differs in descent, if a
woman is equal as regards taxpaying but unequal as
regards voting, it is at least evident that reason is no
unambiguous source of morality. the devil can quote
scripture and it is a very poor reasoner who cannot
find a reason for anything that he wishes to do. a
partiality that is more or less consistently partial to
certain sets or classes is perhaps as near impartiality
as man has yet come, whether by a rational faculty or
any other.
is it, then, the intent of this argument merely to
reiterate that reason is and ought to be the slave of
the passions? on the contrary, the intent is to substitute
for such blanket words as reason and passions
a more adequate analysis. and what difference will
this make? as regards the particular point in controversy
it will make this difference: the rationalist
having smuggled in under the cover of reason the whole
moral consciousness then proceeds to assume that because
two and two are always four, or the relations of
a straight line are timeless, therefore ethics is similarly
a matter of fixed standards and timeless goods.
a legal friend told me that he once spent a year trying
to decide whether a corporation was or was not a person
and then concluded that the question was immaterial.
but when the supreme court decided that a
corporation was a person in the meaning of the fourteenth
amendment it thereby made the corporation
heir to the rights established primarily for the negro.
can the moral consciousness by taking the name
"reason" become heir to all the privileges of the
absolute idea and to the timelessness of space and
number?
suppose i am to divide an apple between my two
children—two children, two pieces—this is an analysis
of the situation which is obvious and may well be called
the analytic activity of reason. but shall i give to
each an equal share on the ground that both are equally
my children or shall i reason that as john is older or
larger or hungrier or mentally keener or more generous
or is a male, he shall have a larger piece than jane?
to settle this it may be said that we ought to see
whether there is any connection between the size of the
piece and the particular quality of john which is considered,
or that by a somewhat different use of reason
we should look at the whole situation and see how we
shall best promote family harmony and mutual affection.
to settle the first of these problems, that of
the connection between the size of the piece and the
size of the hunger or the sex of the child, is seemingly
again a question of analysis, of finding identical units,
but a moment's thought shows that the case is not so
simple; that the larger child should have the larger
piece is by no means self-evident. this is in principle
doubtless the logic, to him that hath shall be given.
it is the logic of the survival of the strong, but over
against that the moral consciousness has always set another
logic which says that the smaller child should
have the larger piece if thereby intelligent sympathy can
contribute toward evening up the lot of the smaller.
now it is precisely this attitude of the moral consciousness
which is not suggested by the term reason, for it
is quite different from the analytic and identifying activity.
this analytical and identifying activity may
very well rule out of court the hypothesis that i should
give john the larger piece because he has already eaten
too much or because he has just found a penny or because
he has red hair; it has undoubtedly helped in
abolishing such practices as that of testing innocence
by the ordeal. but before the crucial question of justice
which divides modern society, namely, whether we shall
lay emphasis upon adjustment of rewards to previous
abilities, habits, possessions, character, or shall lay
stress upon needs, and the possibility of bringing about
a greater measure of equality, the doctrine which would
find its standard in an a priori reason is helpless.
if we look at the second test suggested, namely, that
of considering the situation as a whole with a view to
the harmony of the children and the mutual affection
within the family, there can be even less question that
this is no mere logical problem of the individuals in a
logical genus. it is the social problem of individuals
who have feelings and emotions as well as thought and
will. the problem of distributing the apple fairly is
then a complex in which at least the following processes
enter. () analysis of the situation to show all the
relevant factors with the full bearing of each; () putting
yourself in the place of each one to be considered
and experiencing to the full the claims, the difficulties
and the purposes of each person involved; () considering
all of these as members of the situation so
that no individual is given rights or allowed claims
except in so far as he represents a point of view which
is comprehensive and sympathetic. this i take it is
the force of president wilson's utterance which has
commanded such wide acceptance: "america asks nothing
for herself except what she has a right to ask in
the name of humanity." kant aimed to express a high
and democratic ideal of justice in his doctrine that we
should treat every rational being as end. the defect
in his statement is that the rational process as such has
never treated and so far as can be foreseen never will
treat human beings as ends. to treat a human being
as an end it is necessary to put oneself into his place
in his whole nature and not simply in his universalizing,
and legislative aspects: kant's principle is profound
and noble, but his label for it is misleading and leaves
a door open for appalling disregard of other people's
feelings, sympathies, and moral sentiments, as professor
dewey has indicated in his recent lectures on "german
philosophy and politics."
the term "reasonable," which is frequently used in
law and common life as a criterion of right, seems to
imply that reason is a standard. as already stated,
common life understands by the reasonable man one who
not only uses his own thinking powers but is willing to
listen to reason as presented by some one else. he
makes allowance for frailties in human nature. to be
reasonable means, very nearly, taking into account all
factors of the case not only as i see them but as men
of varying capacities and interests regard them. the
type of the "unreasonable" employer is the man who
refuses to talk over things with the laborers; to put
himself in their place; or to look at matters from the
point of view of society as a whole.
just as little does the term reasonable as used in
law permit a purely intellectualistic view of the process
or an a priori standard. the question as to what is
reasonable care or a reasonable price is often declared
to be a matter not for the court but for the jury to
decide, i.e., it is not to be deduced from any settled
principle but is a question of what the average thoughtful
man, who considers other people as well as himself,
would do under the circumstances. a glance at some
of the judicial definitions of such phrases as "reasonable
care," "reasonable doubt," "reasonable law," as
brought together in words and phrases judicially defined,
illustrates this view. we get a picture not of
any definite standard but of such a process as we have
described in our analysis, namely, a process into which
the existing social tradition, the mutual adjustments
of a changing society and the intelligent consideration
of all facts, enter. the courts have variously defined
the reasonable () as the customary, or ordinary, or
legal, or () as according with the existing state of
knowledge in some special field, or () as proceeding
on due consideration of all the facts, or () as offering
sufficient basis for action. for example, () reasonable
care means "according to the usages, habits, and
ordinary risks of the business," () "surgeons should
keep up with the latest advances in medical science,"
() a reasonable price "is such a price as the jury
would under all the circumstances decide to be reasonable."
"if, after an impartial comparison and consideration
the jury can say candidly they are not satisfied
with the defendant's guilt they have a reasonable
doubt." under () falls one of various definitions of
"beyond reasonable doubt." "the evidence must be
such as to produce in the minds of prudent men such
certainty that they would act without hesitation in
their own most important affairs." there is evidently
ground for the statement of one judge that "reasonable"
(he was speaking the phrase "reasonable care,"
but his words would seem to apply to other cases) "cannot
be measured by any fixed or inflexible standard."
professor freund characterizes "reasonable" as "the
negation of precision." in the development of judicial
interpretation as applied to the sherman law the tendency
is to hold that the "rule of reason" will regard as
forbidden by the statute (a) such combinations as have
historically been prohibited and (b) such as seem to
work some definite injury.
the above view of the function of intelligence, and of
the synthetic character of the conscious process may be
further defined in certain aspects by comparison with
the view of professor fite, who likewise develops the significance
of consciousness and particularly of intelligence
for our ethical concepts and social program.
professor fite insists that in contrast with the "functional
psychology" which would make consciousness
merely a means to the preservation of the organic individual
in mechanical working order, the whole value
of life from the standpoint of the conscious agent consists
in its being conscious. creative moments in which
there is complete conscious control of materials and
technique represent high and unique individuality. extension
of range of consciousness makes the agent "a
larger and more inclusive being," for he is living in the
future and past as well as in the present. consciousness
means that a new and original force is inserted
into the economy of the social and the physical world."
on the basis of the importance of consciousness professor
fite would ground his justification of rights, his
conception of justice, and his social program. the
individual derives his rights simply from the fact that
he knows what he is doing, hence as individuals differ
in intelligence they differ in rights. the problem of
justice is that of according to each a degree of recognition
proportioned to his intelligence, that is, treat
others as ends so far as they are intelligent; so far
as they are ignorant treat them as means. "the
conscious individual when dealing with other conscious
individuals will take account of their aims, as of other
factors in his situation. this will involve 'adjustment,'
but not abandonment of ends, i.e., self-sacrifice.
obligation to consider these ends of others is based
on 'the same logic that binds me to get out of the way
of an approaching train.'"
the point in which the conception of rights and
justice and the implied social program advocated in
this paper differs as i view it from that of professor
fite is briefly this. i regard both the individual and
his rights as essentially synthetic and in constant process
of reconstruction. therefore what is due to any
individual at a moment is not measured by his present
stage of consciousness. it is measured rather by his
possibilities than his actualities. this does not mean
that the actual is to be ignored, but it does mean that
if we take our stand upon the actual we are committed
to a program with little place for imagination, with an
emphasis all on the side of giving people what they
deserve rather than of making them capable of deserving
more. professor fite's position i regard as conceiving
consciousness itself too largely in the category
of the identical and the static rather than in the more
"conscious" categories of constant reconstruction.
when by virtue of consciousness you conceive new ends
in addition to your former particular ideas of present
good the problem is, he says, "to secure perfect fulfilment
of each of them." the "usefulness" or "advantage"
or "profitableness" of entering into social
relations is the central category for measuring their
value and their obligation.
now the conception of securing perfect fulfilment
of all one's aims by means of society rather than of
putting one's own aims into the process for reciprocal
modification and adjustment with the aims of others
and of the new social whole involves a view of these ends
as fixed, an essentially mechanical view. the same is
the implication in considering society from the point
of view of use and profit. as previously suggested
these economic terms apply appropriately to things
rather than to intrinsic values. to consider the uses
of a fellow-being is to measure him in terms of some
other end than his own intrinsic personal worth. to
consider family life or society as profitable implies in
ordinary language that such life is a means for securing
ends already established rather than that it proves a
good to the man who invests in it and thereby becomes
himself a new individual with a new standard of values.
any object to be chosen must of course have value to
the chooser. but it is one thing to be valued because
it appeals to the actual chooser as already constituted;
it is another thing to be valued because it appeals to a
moving self which adventures upon this new unproved
objective. this second is the distinction of taking
an interest instead of being interested.
the second point of divergence is that professor fite
lays greater stress upon the intellectual side of intelligence,
whereas i should deny that the intellectual activity
in itself is adequate to give either a basis for
obligation or a method of dealing with the social problem.
the primary fact, as professor fite well states
it, is "that men are conscious beings and therefore
know themselves and one another." it involves "a
mutual recognition of personal ends." "that very
knowledge which shows the individual himself shows him
also that he is living in a world with other persons and
other things whose mode of behavior and whose interests
determine for him the conditions through which his own
interests are to be realized."
what kind of "knowledge" is it "which shows the
individual himself"? professor fite has two quite different
ways of referring to this. he uses one set of
terms when he would contrast his view with the sentimental,
or the "oriental," or justify exploitation by
those who know better what they are about than the
exploited. he uses another set of terms to characterize
it when he wishes to commend his view as human, and
fraternal, and as affording the only firm basis for social
reform. in the first case he speaks of "mere knowing";
of intelligence as "clear," and "far-sighted," of higher
degrees of consciousness as simply "more in one."
"our test of intelligence would be breadth of vision
(in a coherent view), fineness and keenness of insight."
in the second case it is "generous," it will show an
"intelligent sympathy"; it seeks "fellowship," and
would not "elect to live in a social environment in
which the distinction of 'inferiors' were an essential
part of the idea." the type of intelligence is found
not in the man seeking wealth or power, nor in the legal
acumen which forecasts all discoverable consequences
and devises means to carry out purposes, but in literature
and art.
the terms which cover both these meanings are the
words "consider" and "considerate." "breadth of
consideration" gives the basis for rights. the selfish
man is the "inconsiderate." this term plays the
part of the amor intellectualis in the system of spinoza,
which enables him at once to discard all emotion and yet
to keep it. for "consideration" is used in common
life, and defined in the dictionaries, as meaning both
"examination," "careful thought," and "appreciative
or sympathetic regard." the ambiguity in the term
may well have served to disguise from the author himself
the double rôle which intelligence is made to play.
the broader use is the only one that does justice to the
moral consciousness, but we cannot include sympathy
and still maintain that "mere knowing" covers the
whole. the insistence at times upon the "mere knowing"
is a mechanical element which needs to be removed
before the ethical implications can be accepted.
once more, how does one know himself and others?
is it the same process precisely as knowing a mechanical
object? thoughts without percepts are empty, and
what are the "percepts" in the two cases? in the first
case, that of knowing things, the percepts are colors,
sounds, resistances; in the case of persons the percepts
are impulses, feelings, desires, passions, as well as
images, purposes, and the reflective process itself. in
the former case we construct objects dehumanized;
in the latter we keep them more or less concrete. but
now, just as primitive man did not so thoroughly de-personalize
nature, but left in it an element of personal
aim, so science may view human beings as objects whose
purposes and even feelings may be predicted, and hence
may, as professor fite well puts it, view them mechanically.
what he fails to note is that just this mechanical
point of view is the view of "mere knowing"—if
"mere" has any significance at all, it is meant to shut
out "sentiment." and this mechanical view is entirely
equal to the adjectives of "clear," "far-sighted," and
even "broad" so far as this means "more in one."
for it is not essential to a mechanical point of view
that we consider men in masses or study them by statistics.
i may calculate the purposes and actions, yes,
and the emotions and values of one, or of a thousand,
and be increasingly clear, and far-sighted, and broad,
but if it is "mere" knowing—scientific information—it
is still "mechanical," i.e., external. on the other
hand, if it is to be a knowledge that has the qualities
of humaneness, or "intelligent sympathy," it must
have some of the stuff of feeling, even as in the realm
of things an artist's forest will differ from that of the
most "far-sighted," "clear," and "broad" statistician,
by being rich with color and moving line.
and this leads to a statement of the way in which my
fellow-beings will find place in "my" self. i grant that
if they are there i shall take some account of them.
but they may be there in all sorts of ways. they
may be there as "population" if i am a statistician,
or as "consumers," or as rivals, or as enemies, or
as fellows, or as friends. they will have a "value"
in each case, but it will sometimes be a positive value,
and sometimes a negative value. which it will be, and
how great it will be, depends not on the mere fact of
these objects being "in consciousness" but on the
capacity in which they are there. and this capacity
depends on the dominant interest and not on mere
knowing. the trouble with the selfish man, says professor
fite, is that he "fails to consider," "he fails
to take account of me." well, then, why does he
fail? why does he not take account of me? he probably
does "consider" me in several of the ways that
are possible and in the ways that it suits him to consider
me. i call him selfish because he does not consider
me in the one particular way in which i wish to be
considered. and what will get me into his consideration
from this point of view? in some cases it may be
that i can speak: "sir, you are standing on my toe,"
and as the message encounters no obstacle in any fixed
purpose or temperamental bent the idea has no difficulty
in penetrating his mind. in other cases it may
interfere with his desire to raise himself as high as
possible, but i may convince him by the same logic
as that of an "approaching railway train"—that he
must regard me. in still other cases—and it is these
that always test individualism—i am not myself aware
of the injury, or i am too faint to protest. how shall
those who have no voice to speak get "consideration"?
only by "intelligent sympathy," and by just those
emotions rooted in instinctive social tendencies which
an intellectualistic individualism excludes or distrusts.
what practical conclusion, if any, follows from this
interpretation of the moral consciousness and its categories?
moral progress involves both the formation of
better ideals and the adoption of such ideals as actual
standards and guides of life. if our view is correct
we can construct better ideals neither by logical deduction
nor solely by insight into the nature of things—if
by this we mean things as they are. we must rather
take as our starting-point the conviction that moral
life is a process involving physical life, social intercourse,
measuring and constructive intelligence. we
shall endeavor to further each of these factors with the
conviction that thus we are most likely to reconstruct
our standards and find a fuller good.
physical life,
which has often been depreciated from
the moral point of view, is not indeed by itself supreme,
but it is certain that much evil charged to a bad will
is due to morbid or defective conditions of the physical
organism. one would be ashamed to write such a truism
were it not that our juvenile courts and our prison
investigations show how far we are from having sensed
it in the past. and our present labor conditions show
how far our organization of industry is from any decent
provision for a healthy, sound, vigorous life of all the
people. this war is shocking in its destruction, but
it is doubtful if it can do the harm to great britain
that her factory system has done. and if life is in
one respect less than ideals, in another respect it is
greater; for it provides the possibility not only of
carrying out existing ideals but of the birth of new
and higher ideals.
social interaction likewise has been much discussed
but is still very inadequately realized. the great possibilities
of coöperation have long been utilized in war.
with the factory and commercial organization of the
past century we have hints of their economic power.
our schools, books, newspapers, are removing some of
the barriers. but how far different social classes are
from any knowledge, not to say appreciation, of each
other! how far different races are apart! how easy
to inculcate national hatred and distrust! the fourth
great problem which baffles wells's hero in the research
magnificent is yet far from solution. the great danger
to morality in america lies not in any theory as to the
subjectivity of the moral judgment, but in the conflict
of classes and races.
intelligence and reason are in certain respects advancing.
the social sciences are finding tools and
methods. we are learning to think of much of our
moral inertia, our waste of life, our narrowness, our
muddling and blundering in social arrangements, as
stupid—we do not like to be called stupid even if we
scorn the imputation of claiming to be "good." but
we do not organize peace as effectively as war. we
shrink before the thought of expending for scientific
investigation sums comparable with those used for military
purposes. and is scholarship entitled to shift the
blame entirely upon other interests? perhaps if it
conceived its tasks in greater terms and addressed itself
to them more energetically it would find greater support.
and finally the process of judgment and appraisal,
of examination and revaluation. to judge for the
sake of judging, to analyze and evaluate for the sake
of the process hardly seems worth while. but if we
supply the process with the new factors of increased
life, physical, social, intelligent, we shall be compelled
to new valuations. such has been the course of moral
development; we may expect this to be repeated. the
great war and the changes that emerge ought to set
new tasks for ethical students. as medievalism, the
century of enlightenment, and the century of industrial
revolution, each had its ethics, so the century
that follows ought to have its ethics, roused by the
problem of dealing fundamentally with economic, social,
racial, and national relations, and using the resources
of better scientific method than belonged to the ethical
systems which served well their time.
only wilful misinterpretation will suppose that the
method here set forth is that of taking every want
or desire as itself a final justification, or of making
morality a matter of arbitrary caprice. but some may
in all sincerity raise the question: "is morality then
after all simply the shifting mores of groups stumbling
forward—or backward, or sidewise—with no fixed
standards of right and good? if this is so how can we
have any confidence in our present judgments, to say
nothing of calling others to an account or of reasoning
with them?" what we have aimed to present as a
moral method is essentially this: to take into our reckoning
all the factors in the situation, to take into
account the other persons involved, to put ourselves
into their places by sympathy as well as conceptually,
to face collisions and difficulties not merely in terms
of fixed concepts of what is good or fair, and what
the right of each party concerned may be, but with
the conviction that we need new definitions of the ideal
life, and of the social order, and thus reciprocally of
personality. thus harmonized, free, and responsible,
life may well find new meaning also in the older intrinsic
goods of friendship, æsthetic appreciation and true
belief. and it is not likely to omit the satisfaction in
actively constructing new ideals and working for their
fulfilment.
frankly,
if we do not accept this method what remains?
can any one by pure reason discover a single
forward step in the treatment of the social situation
or a single new value in the moral ideal? can any
analysis of the pure concept of right and good teach
us anything? in the last analysis the moral judgment
is not analytic but synthetic. the moral life is not
natural but spiritual. and spirit is creative.
he who assiduously compares the profound and the
commonplace will find their difference to turn merely
on the manner of their expression; a profundity is a
commonplace formulated in strange or otherwise obscure
and unintelligible terms. this must be my excuse
for beginning with the trite remark that the world
we live in is not one which was made for us, but one
in which we happened and grew. i am much aware
that there exists a large and influential class of persons
who do not think so; and i offer this remark with
all deference to devotees of idealism, and to other such
pietists who persist in arguing that the trouble which
we do encounter in this vale of tears springs from the
inwardness of our own natures and not from that of
the world. i wish, indeed, that i could agree with them,
but unhappily their very arguments prevent me, since,
if the world were actually as they think it, they could
not think it as they do. in fact, they could not think.
thinking—worse luck!—came into being as response
to discomfort, to pain, to uncertainty, to problems,
such as could not exist in a world truly made for us;
while from time immemorial pure as distinct from human
consciousness has been identified with absolute certainty,
with self-absorption and self-sufficiency; as a god, a
goal to attain, not a fact to rest in. it is notable
that those who believe the world actually to have been
made for us devote most of their thinking to explaining
away the experiences which have made all men feel that
the world was actually not made for us. their chief
business, after proving the world to be all good, is
solving "the problem of evil." yet, had there really
been no evil, this evil consequence could not have ensued:
existence would have emerged as beatitude and
not as adjustment; thinking might in truth have
been self-absorbed contemplation, blissful intuition,
not painful learning by the method of trial and
error.
alas that what "might have been" cannot come into
being by force of discursive demonstration! if it could,
goodness alone would have existed and been real, and
evil would have been non-existence, unreality, and appearance—all
by the force of the word. as it is, the
appearance of evil is in so far forth no less an evil
than its reality; in truth, it is reality and its best witnesses
are the historic attempts to explain it away. for
even as "appearance" it has a definite and inexpugnable
character of its own which cannot be destroyed by subsumption
under the "standpoint of the whole," "the
absolute good," the "over-individual values." nor, since
only sticks and stones break bones and names never
hurt, can it be abolished by the epithet "appearance."
to deny reality to evil is to multiply the evil. it is
to make two "problems" grow where only one grew
before, to add to the "problem of evil" the "problem
of appearance" without serving any end toward the
solution of the real problem how evil can be effectively
abolished.
i may then, in view of these reflections, hold myself
safe in assuming that the world we live in was not made
for us; that, humanly speaking, it is open to improvement
in a great many directions. it will be comparatively
innocuous to assume also, as a corollary, that
in so far as the world was made for mind, it has been
made so by man, that civilization is the adaptation of
nature to human nature. and as a second corollary
it may be safely assumed that the world does not stay
made; civilization has brought its own problems and
peculiar evils.
i realize that, in the light of my title, much of what
i have written above must seem irrelevant, since the
"problem of evil" has not, within the philosophic tradition,
been considered part of a "problem of values"
as such. if i dwell on it, i do so to indicate that the
"problem of evil" can perhaps be best understood in
the light of another problem: the problem, namely, of
why men have created the "problem of evil." for
obviously, evil can be problematic only in an absolutely
good world, and the idea that the world is absolutely
good is not a generalization upon experience, but a
contradiction of experience. if there exists a metaphysical
"problem of evil," hence, it arises out of this
generalization; it is secondary, not primary; and the
primary problem requires solution before the secondary
one can be understood. and what else, under the circumstances,
can the primary one be than this: "why
do men contradict their own experience?"
so put, the problem suggests its own solution. it
indicates, first of all, that nature and human nature
are not completely compatible, that consequently, conclusions
are being forced by nature on human nature
which human nature resents and rejects, and that traits
are being assigned to nature by human nature which
nature does not possess, but which, if possessed, would
make her congenial to human needs. all this is so
platitudinous that i feel ashamed to write it; but then,
how can one avoid platitudes without avoiding truth?
and truth here is the obvious fact that since human
nature is the point of existence to which good and evil
refer, what is called value has its seat necessarily in
human nature, and what is called existence has its seat
necessarily in the nature of which human nature is a
part and apart. value, in so far forth, is a content of
nature, having its roots in her conditions and its life
in her force, while the converse is not true. all nature
and all existence is not spontaneously and intrinsically
a content of value. only that portion of it which is
human is such. humanly speaking, non-human existences
become valuable by their efficacious bearing
on humanity, by their propitious or their disastrous
relations to human consciousness. it is these relations
which delimit the substance of our goods and evils, and
these, at bottom, are indistinguishable from consciousness.
they do not, need not, and cannot connect all
existence with human life. they are inevitably implicated
only with those which make human life possible
at all. of the environment, they pertain only to that
portion which is fit by the implicated conditions of life
itself. it may therefore be said that natural existence
produces and sustains some values,—at least the minimal
value which is identical with the bare existence of
mankind—on its own account, but no more. the residual
environment remains—irrelevant and menacing, wider
than consciousness and independent of it. value, hence,
is a specific kind of natural existence among other existences.
to say that it is non-existent in nature, is
to say that value is not coincident and coexistent with
other existences, just as when it is said that a thing
is not red, the meaning is that red is not copresent
with other qualities. conversely, to say that value
exists in nature is to say that nature and human nature,
things and thoughts, are in some respect harmonious
or identical. hence, what human nature tries to force
upon nature must be, by implication, non-existent in
nature but actual in mind, so that the nature of value
must be held inseparable from the nature of mind.
it follows that value is, in origin and character,
completely irrational. at the foundations of our existence
it is relation of their conditions and objects to
our major instincts, our appetites, our feelings, our
desires, our ambitions—most clearly, to the self-regarding
instinct and the instincts of nutrition, reproduction,
and gregariousness. concerning those, as william
james writes, "science may come and consider their
ways and find that most of them are useful. but it is
not for the sake of their utility that they are followed,
but because at the moment of following them we feel
that it is the only appropriate and natural thing to
do. not a man in a billion when taking his dinner,
ever thinks of utility. he eats because the food tastes
good and makes him want more. if you ask him why
he should want to eat more of what tastes like that,
instead of revering you as a philosopher, he will probably
laugh at you for a fool. the connection between
the savory sensation and the act it awakens is for him
absolute and selbstverständlich, an a priori synthesis of
the most perfect sort, needing no proof but its own
evidence.... to the metaphysician alone can such
questions occur as 'why do we smile when pleased, and
not scowl? why are we unable to talk to a crowd as
we talk to a single friend? why does a particular
maiden turn our wits upside down?' the common man
can only say 'of course we smile, of course our heart
palpitates at the sight of a crowd, of course we love
the maiden, that beautiful soul clad in that perfect
form, so palpably and flagrantly made from all eternity
to be loved.' and so, probably, does each animal
feel about the particular things it tends to do in the
presence of particular objects.... to the broody
hen the notion would probably seem monstrous that
there should be a creature in the world to whom a nestful
of eggs was not the utterly fascinating and precious
and never-to-be-too-much-set-upon object it is to her."
in sum, fundamental values are relations, responses,
attitudes, immediate, simple, subjectively obvious, and
irrational. but everything else becomes valuable or
rational only by reference to them.
study
them or others empirically, and they appear
as types of specific behavior, simple or complicated,
consisting of a given motor "set" of the organism,
strong emotional tone, and aggregates of connected
ideas, more or less systematized. in the slang of the
new medical psychology which has done so much to
uncover their method and mechanism, they are called
"complexes"; ethics has called them interests, and
that designation will do well enough. they are the
primary and morally ultimate efficacious units of which
human nature is compounded, and it is in terms of the
world's bearing upon their destiny that we evaluate
nature and judge her significance and worth.
now in interest, the important delimiting quality is
emotional tone. whatever else is sharable, that is not.
it is the very stuff of our attitudes, of our acceptances
and rejections of the world and its contents, the very
essence of the relations we bear to these. that these
relations shall be identical for any two human beings
requires that the two shall be identical: two persons
cannot hold the same relation to the same or different
objects any more than two objects can occupy absolutely
the same space at the same time. hence, all our
differences and disagreements. however socially-minded
we may be, mere numerical diversity compels us to act
as separate centers, to value things with reference to
separate interests, to orient our worlds severally, and
with ourselves as centers. this orienting is the relating
of the environment to our interests, the establishment
of our worlds of appreciation, the creation of our orders
of value. however much these cross and interpenetrate,
coincide they never can.
our interests, furthermore, are possibly as numerous
as our reflex arcs. each may, and most do, constitute
distinct and independent valuations of their objects, to
which they respond, and each, with these objects, remains
an irreducible system. but reflex arcs and interests
do not act alone. they act like armies; they
compound and are integrated, and when so integrated
their valuations fuse and constitute the more complex
and massive feelings, pleasures and pains, the emotions
of anger, of fear, of love; the sentiments of respect, of
admiration, of sympathy. they remain, through all
degrees of complexity, appraisements of the environment,
reactions upon it, behavior toward it, as subject to
empirical examination by the psychologist as the environment
itself by the physicist.
with a difference, however, a fundamental difference.
when you have an emotion you cannot yourself examine
it. effectively as the mind may work in sections,
it cannot with sanity be divided against itself nor long
remain so. a feeling cannot be had and examined in
the same time. and though the investigator who
studies the nature of red does not become red, the investigator
who studies the actual emotion of anger does
tend to become angry. emotion is infectious; anger
begets anger; fear, fear; love, love; hate, hate; actions,
relations, attitudes, when actual, integrate and fuse;
as feelings, they constitute the sense of behavior, varying
according to a changing and unstable equilibrium
of factors within the organism; they are actually underneath
the skin, and consequently, to know them alive is to
have them. on the other hand, to know things is simply
to have a relation to them. the same thing may
be both loved and hated, desired or spurned, by different
minds at the same time or by the same mind at
different times. one, for example, values whiskey positively,
approaches, absorbs it, aims to increase its quantity
and sale; another apprehends it negatively, turns
from it, strives to oust it from the world. then, according
to these direct and immediate valuations of
whiskey, its place in the common world of the two minds
will be determined. to save or destroy it, they may
seek to destroy each other. even similar positive valuations
of the object might imply this mutual repugnance
and destruction. thus, rivals in love: they enhance
and glorify the same woman, but as she is not
otherwise sharable, they strive to eliminate each other.
throughout the world of values the numerical distinctness
of the seats or centers of value, whatever their
identity otherwise, keeps them ultimately inimical.
they may terminate in the common object, but they
originate in different souls and they are related to the
object like two magnets of like polarity to the same
piece of iron that lies between them. most of what is
orderly in society and in science is the outcome of the
adjustment of just such oppositions: our civilization
is an unstable equilibrium of objects, through the coöperation,
antipathy, and fusion of value-relations.
individuals are no better off; personality is constructed
in the same way. if, indeed, the world had
been made for us, we might have been spared this
warfare to man upon earth. life might have been the
obvious irrational flow of bliss so vividly described by
william james; nature and human nature would have
been one; bridging the gulf between them would never
have been the task of the tender-minded among philosophers.
unfortunately our mere numerical difference,
the mere numerical difference of the interests which
compose our egos, makes the trouble, so that we are
compelled to devote most of our lives to converting the
different into the same. the major part of our instincts
serve this function recognizably, e.g., nutrition,
and the "higher powers" do so no less, if not so
obviously. generalization is nothing more, thinking
nothing else. it is the assimilation of many instances
into one form, law, or purpose; the preservation of
established contents of value, just as nutrition is the
preservation of life by means of the conversion of foreign
matter into the form and substance of the body.
by bowels and by brain, what is necessary, what will
feed the irrationally given interest, is preserved and
consumed: the rest is cast off as waste, as irrelevance,
as contradiction.
the relation may, of course, also reverse itself. face
to face with the immovable and inexorable, the mind
may accept it with due resignation, or it may challenge
its tyranny and exclude it from its world. it may
seek or create or discover a substitute that it is content
to accept, though this will in turn alter the course
and character of the interest which in such an instance
defines the mind's action. thus, a way out for one of
the lovers of the same girl might be to become a depressed
and yearning bachelor, realizing his potential
sexuality in the vicarious reproduction of reverie and
sentiment; another might be to divert the stream of
his affections to another girl, reorganizing his life about
a different center and acquiring a new system of practical
values determined by this center; a third might
be a complete redirection of his sexual energies upon
objects the interest in which we would call, abnormal
and anti-social in one case, and in another lofty and
spiritual. in the latter case sexuality would have been
depersonalized; it would have changed into poetic and
humanitarian passion; it would have become love as
plato means us to take the word. but each of these
processes would have been a conversion, through the
need defined by an identical instinct, of the same into
the different; the human nature which existed at the
beginning of the change would be deeply other than
the human nature in which the change culminated. in
each case a condition thrust upon the spirit by its
environment would have occasioned the creation and
maintenance of an environment demanded by the spirit.
yet in so far as it was not truly the same as that
envisaged in the primitive demand, it would still imply
the tragedy of the world not made for us and the "problem
of evil," in which the life of the spirit is persistently
a salvage of one of two always incompatible goods, a
saving by surrender.
and this is all that a mind is—an affair of saving
and rejecting, of valuing with a system of objects of
which a living body and its desires and operations, its interests,
are focal and the objects marginal, for its
standard. mind, thus, is neither simple, nor immutable,
nor stable; it is a thing to be "changed," "confused,"
"cleared," "made-up," "trained." one body, i have
written elsewhere, "in the course of its lifetime, has
many minds, only partially united. men are all too
often "of two minds." the unity of a mind depends on
its consistent pursuit of one interest, although we then
call it narrow; or on the coöperation and harmony of
its many interests. frequently, two or more minds
may struggle for the possession of the same body; that
is, the body may be divided by two elaborately systematized
tendencies to act. the beginning of such division
occurs wherever there is a difficulty in deciding between
alternative modes of behavior; the end is to be
observed in those cases of dual or multiple personality
in which the body has ordered a great collection of
objects and systematized so large a collection of interests
in such typically distinct ways as to have set up
for itself different and opposed "minds." on the other
hand, two or fifty or a million bodies may be "of the
same mind."
unhappily, difference of mind, diversity and conflict
of interests is quite as fundamental, if not more so,
as sameness of mind, coöperation and unity of interests.
this the philosophical tradition sufficiently attests. to
plato man is at once a protean beast, a lion, and an
intellect; the last having for its proper task to rule
the first and to regulate the second, which is always
rebellious and irruptive. according to the christian
tradition man is at once flesh and spirit, eternally in
conflict with one another, and the former is to be mortified
that the latter may have eternal life. common
sense divides us into head and heart, never quite at
peace with one another. there is no need of piling
up citations. add to the inward disharmonies of mind
its incompatibilities with the environment, and you perceive
at once how completely it is, from moment to
moment, a theater and its life a drama of which the
interests that compose it are at once protagonists and
directors. the catastrophe of this unceasing drama
is always that one or more of the players is driven from
the stage of conscious existence. it may be that the
environment—social conditions, commercial necessity,
intellectual urgency, allies of other interests—will drive
it off; it may be that its own intrinsic unpleasantness
will banish it, will put it out of mind; whatever the
cause, it is put out. putting it out does not, however,
end the drama; putting it out serves to complicate the
drama. for the "new psychology" shows that whenever
an interest or a desire or impulsion is put out of
the mind, it is really, if not extirpated, put into the
mind; it is driven from the conscious level of existence
to the unconscious. it retains its force and direction,
only its work now lies underground. its life henceforward
consists partly in a direct oppugnance to the
inhibitions that keep it down, partly in burrowing beneath
and around them and seeking out unwonted channels
of escape. since life is long, repressions accumulate,
the mass of existence of feeling and desire tends to
become composed entirely of these repressions, layer
upon layer, with every interest in the aggregate striving
to attain place in the daylight of consciousness.
now, empirically and metaphysically, no one interest
is more excellent than any other. repressed or patent,
each is, whether in a completely favorable environment
or in a completely indifferent universe, or before the
bar of an absolute justice, or under the domination of
an absolute and universal good, entitled to its free fulfilment
and perfect maintenance. each is a form of
the good; the essential content of each is good. that
any are not fulfilled, but repressed, is a fact to be recorded,
not an appearance to be explained away. and
it may turn out that the existence of the fact may
explain the effort to explain it away. for where interests
are in conflict with each other or with reality,
and where the loser is not extirpated, its revenge may
be just this self-fulfilment in unreality, in idea, which
philosophies of absolute values offer it. dreams, some
of the arts, religion, and philosophy may indeed be considered
as such fulfilments, worlds of luxuriant self-realization
of all that part of our nature which the
harsh conjunctions with the environment overthrow and
suppress. sometimes abortive self-expressions of frustrated
desires, sometimes ideal compensations for the
shortcomings of existence, they are always equally ideal
reconstructions of the surrounding evil of the world
into forms of the good. and because they are compensations
in idea, they are substituted for existence,
appraised as "true," and "good," and "beautiful,"
and "real," while the experiences which have suppressed
the desires they realize are condemned as illusory and
unreal. in them humanity has its freest play and amplest
expression.
this has been, and still to a very great extent remains,
most specifically true of philosophy. the environment
with which philosophy concerns itself is nothing
less than the whole universe; its content is, within
the history of its dominant tradition, absolutely general
and abstract; it is, of all great human enterprises, even
religion, least constrained by the direction and march
of events or the mandate of circumstance. like music,
it expresses most truly the immediate and intrinsic interests
of the mind, its native bias and its inward goal.
it has been constituted, for this reason, of the so-called
"normative" sciences, envisaging the non-existent as
real, forcing upon nature pure values, forms of the
spirit incident to the total life of this world, unmixed
with baser matter. to formulate ultimate standards,
to be completely and utterly lyrical has been the prerogative
of philosophy alone. since these standards
reappear in all other reconstructions of the environment
and most clearly in art and in religion, it is pertinent
to enumerate them, and to indicate briefly their
bearing on existence.
the foremost outstanding is perhaps "the unity of
the world." confronted by the perplexing menace of
the variation of experience, the dichotomies and oppositions
of thoughts and things, the fusion and diversifications
of many things into one and one into many,
mankind has, from the moment it became reflective, felt
in the relation of the one and the many the presence
of a riddle that engendered and sustained uneasiness,
a mystery that concealed a threat. the mind's own
preference, given the physiological processes that condition
its existence, constitution, and operation, could
hardly come to rest in a more fundamental normation
than unity. a world which is one is easier to live in
and with; initial adjustment therein is final adjustment;
in its substance there exists nothing sudden and in
its character nothing uncontrollable. it guarantees
whatever vital equilibrium the organism has achieved
in it, ill or good. it secures life in attainment and
possession, insuring it repose, simplicity, and spaciousness.
a world which is many complicates existence: it
demands watchful consideration of irreducible discrete
individualities: it necessitates the integration and humanization
in a common system of adjustment of entities
which in the last analysis refuse all ordering and
reject all subordination, consequently keeping the mind
on an everlasting jump, compelling it to pay with eternal
vigilance the price of being. the preference for
unity, then, is almost inevitable, and the history of
philosophy, from the vedas to the brahma somaj and
from thales to bergson, is significantly unanimous in
its attempts to prove that the world is, somehow,
through and through one. that the oneness requires
proof is prima facie evidence that it is a value, a desiderate,
not an existence. and how valuable it is may
be seen merely in the fact that it derealizes the inner
conflict of interests, the incompatibilities between nature
and man, the uncertainties of knowledge, and the
certainties of evil, and substitutes therefore the ultimate
happy unison which "the identity of the different"
compels.
unity is the common desiderate of philosophic systems
of all metaphysical types—neutral, materialistic,
idealistic. but the dominant tradition has tended to
think this unity in terms of interest, of spirit, of
mentality. it has tended, in a word, to assimilate nature
to human nature, to identify things with the values
of things, to envisage the world in the image of man.
to it, the world is all spirit, ego, or idea; and if not
such through and through, then entirely subservient,
in its unhumanized parts, to the purposes and interests
of ego, idea, or spirit. why, is obvious. a world of
which the one substance is such constitutes a totality
of interest and purpose which faces no conflict and has
no enemy. it is fulfilment even before it is need, and
need, indeed, is only illusion. even when its number
is many, the world is a better world if the stuff of these
many is the same stuff as the spirit of man. for mind
is more at home with mind than with things; the pathetic
fallacy is the most inevitable and most general. although
the totality of spirit is conceived as good, that
is, as actualizing all our desiderates and ideals, it would
still be felt that, even if the totality were evil, and not
god, but the devil ruled the roost, the world so constituted
must be better than one utterly non-spiritual.
we can understand and be at home with malevolence:
it offers at least the benefits of similarity, of companionship,
of intimateness, of consubstantiality with will;
its behavior may be foreseen and its intentions influenced;
but no horror can be greater than that of utter
aliency. how much of religion turns with a persistent
tropism to the consideration of the devil and his works,
and how much it has fought his elimination from the
cosmic scheme! yet never because it loved the devil.
the deep-lying reason is the fact that the humanization
of evil into devil mitigates evil and improves the
world. philosophy has been least free from this corrective
and spiritizing bias. though it has cared less
for the devil, it has predominantly repudiated aliency,
has sought to prove spirit the cause and substance of
the world, and in that degree, to transmute the aliency
of nature into sameness with human nature.
with unity and spirituality, eternity makes a third.
this norm is a fundamental attribute of the one god
himself, and interchangeable with his ineffable name:
the lord is eternal, and the eternal, even more than the
one, receives the eulogium of exclusive realness. to
the philosophical tradition it is the most real. once
more the reason should be obvious. the underlying
urge which pushes the mind to think the world as a
unity pushes it even more inexorably to think the world
as timeless. for unity is asserted only against the perplexities
of a manyness which may be static and
unchanging, and hence comparatively simple. but eternity
is asserted and set against mutability: it is the negation
of change, of time, of novelty, of the suddenness and
slaughter of the flux of life itself, which consumes what
it generates, undermines what it builds and sweeps to
destruction what it founds to endure. change is the
arch-enemy of a life which struggles for self-preservation,
of an intellect which operates spontaneously by
the logic of identity, of a will which seeks to convert
others into sames. it substitutes a different self for
the old, it falsifies systems of thought and deteriorates
systems of life. it makes unity impossible and manyness
inevitable. it upsets every actual equilibrium that
life attains. it opens the doors and windows of every
closed and comfortable cosmos to all transcosmic winds
that blow, with whatever they carry of possible danger
and possible ill. it is the very soul of chaos in which
the pleasant, ordered world is such a little helpless
thing. of this change eternity is by primary intention
the negation, as its philological form shows. it is not-time,
without positive intrinsic content, and in its secondary
significances, i.e., in those significances which
appear in metaphysical dialectic, without meaning;
since it is there a pure negation, intrinsically affirming
nothing, of the same character as "not-man" or "not-donkey,"
standing for a nature altogether unspecific
and indeterminable in the residual universe. by a sort
of obverse implication it does, however, possess, in the
philosophic tradition, a positive content which accrues
to it by virtue of what it denies. this content makes
it a designation for the persistence and perdurability
of desiderated quality—from metaphysical unity and
spirituality to the happy hunting-grounds or a woman's
affection. at bottom it means the assurance that the
contents of value cannot and will not be altered or
destroyed, that their natures and their relations to
man do not undergo change. there is no recorded attempt
to prove that evil is eternal: eternity is eternity
of the good alone.
unity, spirituality, and eternity, then, are the forms
which contents of value receive under the shaping hands
of the philosophic tradition, to which they owe their
metaphysical designation and of which the business has
so largely and uniquely been to prove them the foundations
and ontological roots of universal nature. but
"the problem of evil" does not come to complete solution
with these. even in a single, metaphysically spiritual
and unchanging world, man himself may still be
less than a metaphysical absolute and his proper individuality
doomed to absorption, his wishes to obstruction
and frustration. of man, therefore, the
tradition posits immortality and freedom, and even the
materialistic systems have sought to keep somehow room
for some form of these goods.
to turn first to immortality. its source and matrix
is less the love of life than the fear of death—that fear
which lucretius, dour poet of disillusion, so nobly deplored.
that he had ever himself been possessed of it
is not clear, but it is perfectly clear that his altogether
sound arguments against it have not abolished its operation,
nor its effect upon human character, society, and
imagination. fear which made the gods, made also the
immortality of man, the denial of death. what the
fear's unmistakable traits may be has never been articulately said, perhaps never can be said. most of us
never may undergo the fear of death; we undergo comfort
and discomfort, joy and sorrow, intoxication and
reaction, love and disgust; we aim to preserve the one
and to abolish the other, but we do not knowingly undergo
the fear of death. indeed, it is logically impossible
that we should, since to do so would be to acquire
an experience of death such that we should be conscious
of being unconscious, sensible of being insensible, aware
of being unaware. we should be required to be and
not to be at the same instant, in view of which lucretius
both logically and wisely advises us to remember
that when death is, we are not; and when we are, death
is not.
experience and feeling are, however, neither logical
nor wise, and to these death is far from the mere non-being
which the poet would have us think it. to these
it has a positive reality which makes the fear of it a
genuine cause of conduct in individuals and in groups,
with a basis in knowledge such as is realized in the diminishing
of consciousness under anæsthetic, in dreams of
certain types, and most generally in the nascent imitation
of the rigor mortis which makes looking upon
the dead such a horror to most of us. even then, however,
something is lacking toward the complete realization
of death, and children and primitive peoples never
realize it at all. its full meaning comes out as an unsatisfied
hunger in the living rather than as a condition
of the dead, who, alive, would have satisfied this hunger.
and the realization of this meaning requires sophistication,
requires a lengthy corporate memory and
the disillusions which civilization engenders. primitive
peoples ask for no proof of immortality because they
have no notion of mortality; civilized thinking has
largely concerned itself about the proof of immortality
because its assurance of life has been shaken by the
realization of death through the gnawing of desire which
only the dead could still. the proof which in the history
of thought is offered again and again, be it noted,
is not of the reality of life, but of the unreality and
inefficacy of death. immortality is like eternity, a negative
term; it is immortality. the experienced fact is
mortality; and the fear of it is only an inversion of the
desire which it frustrates, just as frustrated love becomes
hatred. the doctrine of immortality, hence,
springs from the fear of death, not from the love of life,
and immortality is a value-form, not an existence. now,
although fear of death and love of life are in constant
play in character and conduct, neither constitutes the
original, innocent urge of life within us. "will to
live," "will to power," "struggle for existence," and
other germanic hypostases of experienced events which
the great civil war in europe is just now giving such
an airing, hardly deserve, as natural data, the high
metaphysical status that schopenhauer, nietzsche, and
company have given them. they follow in fact upon a
more primary type of living, acting form, a type to
which the "pathetic fallacy" or any other manner of
psychologizing may not apply. the most that can
be said about this type is that its earlier stages
are related to its later ones as potential is to kinetic
energy. if, since we are discussing a metaphysical issue,
we must mythologize, we might call it the "will to self-expression."
had this "will" chanced to happen in
a world which was made for it, or had it itself been the
substance of the world, "struggle for existence," "will
to live," and "will to power," never could have supervened.
all three of these expressions designate data
which require an opposite, a counter-will, to give them
meaning. there can be a struggle for existence only when
there are obstacles thereto, a will to live only when
there are obstructions to life, a will to power only
when there is a resistance against which power may be
exercised. expression alone is self-implying and self-sufficient,
and in an altogether favorable environment
we might have realized our instincts, impulses, interests,
appetites and desires, expressed and actualized our
potentialities, and when our day is done, have ceased,
as unconcerned about going on as about starting.
metchnikoff speaks somewhere of an instinct toward
death and the euphoria which accompanies its realization.
he cites, i think, no more than two or three cases.
to most of us the mere notion of the existence and
operation of such an instinct seems fanciful and uncanny.
yet from the standpoint of biology nothing
should be more natural. each living thing has its span,
which consists of a cycle from birth through maturation
and senescence to dissolution, and the latter half
of the process is as "fateful" and "inevitable" as the
former! dying is itself the inexpugnable conclusion
of that setting free of organic potentialities which we
call life, and if dying seems horrid and unnatural, it
seems so because for most of us death is violent, because
its occasion is a shock from without, not the realization
of a tendency from within. in a completely favorable
environment we should not struggle to exist, we
should simply exist; we should not will to live, we
should simply live, i.e., we should actualize our potentialities
and die.
but, once more alas, our environment is not completely
favorable, and there's the rub. that disorderly
constellation of instincts and appetites and interests
which constitutes the personality of the best of us does
not work itself out evenly. at the most favorable, our
self-realizations are lopsided and distorted. for every
capacity of ours in full play, there are a score at least
mutilated, sometimes extirpated, always repressed. they
never attain the free fullness of expression which is
consciousness, or when they do, they find themselves
confronted with an opponent which neutralizes their
maturation at every point. hence, as i have already
indicated, they remain in, or revert to, the subterranean
regions of our lives, and govern the making of our
biographies from their seats below. what they fail
to attain in fact they succeed in generating in imagination
to compensate for the failure; they realize themselves
vicariously. the doctrine of immortality is the
generic form of such vicarious self-realization, as frequently
by means of dead friends and relatives to whose
absolute non-being the mind will not assent, as by
means of the everlasting heaven in which the mind may
forever disport itself amid those delights it had to
forego on earth. much of the underlying motive of
the doctrine is a sehnsucht and nostalgia after the
absent dead; little a concern for the continuity of the
visible living. and often this passion is so intense
that system after system in the philosophic tradition
is constructed to satisfy it, and even the most disillusioned
of systems—for example, spinoza's—will preserve
its form if not its substance.
that the "freedom of the will" shall be a particularized
compensatory desiderate like the immortality
of the soul, the unity, the spirituality, and the eternity
of the world is a perversion worked upon this ideal
by the historic accident we call christianity. the assumptions
of that theory concerning the nature of the
universe and the destiny of man, being through and
through compensatory, changed freedom from the possible
fact and actual hope of hellenic systems into the
"problem" of the christian ones. the consequent
controversy over "free-will," the casuistic entanglement
of this ideal with the notion of responsibility, its
theological development in the problem of the relation
of an omnipotent god to a recalcitrant creature, have
completely obscured its primal significance. for the
ancients, the free man and the "wise man" were identical,
and the wise man was one who all in all had so
mastered the secrets of the universe that there was no
desire of his that was not actually realized, no wish
the satisfaction of which was obstructed. his way in
the world was a way without let or hindrance. now
freedom and wisdom in this sense is never a fact and
ever a value. its attainment ensues upon created distinctions
between appearance and reality, upon the
postulation of the metaphysical existence of the value-forms
of the unity, spirituality, and the eternity of the
world, in the realization of which the wise man founded
his wisdom and gained his freedom. freedom, then,
is an ideal that could have arisen only in the face of
obstruction to action directed toward the fulfilling and
satisfying of interests. it is the assurance of the smooth
and uninterrupted flow of behavior; the flow of desire
into fulfilment, of thought into deed, of act into fact.
it is perhaps the most pervasive and fundamental of
all desiderates, and in a definite way the others may be
said to derive from it and to realize it. for the soul's
immortality, the world's unity and spirituality and
eternity, are but conditions which facilitate and assure
the flow of life without obstruction. they define a
world in which danger, evil, and frustration are non-existent;
they so reconstitute our actual environment
that the obstructions it offers to the course of life are
abolished. they make the world "rational," and in
the great philosophic tradition the freedom of man is
held to be a function of the rationality of the world.
thus, even deterministic solutions of the "problem of
freedom" are at bottom no more than the rationalization
of natural existence by the dialectical removal of
obstructions to human existence. once more, spinoza's
solution is typical, and its form is that of all idealisms
as well. it ensues by way of identification of the obstruction's
interest with those of the obstructee: the
world becomes ego or the ego the world, with nothing
outside to hinder or to interfere. in the absolute, existence
is declared to be value de facto; in fact, de jure.
and by virtue of this compensating reciprocity the
course of life runs free.
is any proof necessary that these value-forms are
not the contents of the daily life? if there be, why this
unvarying succession of attempts to prove that they
are the contents of daily life that goes by the name
of history of philosophy? in fact, experience as it
comes from moment to moment is not one, harmonious
and orderly, but multifold, discordant, and chaotic. its
stuff is not spirit, but stones and railway wrecks and
volcanoes and mexico and submarines, and trenches,
and frightfulness, and germany, and disease, and
waters, and trees, and stars, and mud. it is not eternal,
but changes from instant to instant and from season
to season. actually, men do not live forever; death
is a fact, and immortality is literally as well as in
philosophic discourse not so much an aspiration for the
continuity of life as an aspiration for the elimination
of death, purely immortality. actually the will is not
free, each interest encounters obstruction, no interest
is completely satisfied, all are ultimately cut off by
death.
such are the general features of all human experience,
by age unwithered, and with infinite variety forever
unstaled. the traditional philosophic treatment
of them is to deny their reality, and to call them appearance,
and to satisfy the generic human interest
which they oppose and repress by means of the historical
reconstruction in imaginative dialectic of a world
constituted by these most generalized value-forms and
then to eulogize the reconstruction with the epithet
"reality." when, in the course of human events, such
reconstruction becomes limited to the biography of
particular individuals, is an expression of their concrete
and unique interest, is lived and acted on, it is
called paranoia. the difference is not one of kind, but
of concreteness, application, and individuality. such
a philosophy applied universally in the daily life is a
madness, like christian science: kept in its proper
sphere, it is a fine art, the finest and most human of
the arts, a reconstruction in discourse of the whole
universe, in the image of the free human spirit. philosophy
has been reasonable because it is so unpersonal,
abstract, and general, like music; because, in spite of
its labels, its reconstructions remain pure desiderates
and value-forms, never to be confused with and substituted
for existence. but philosophers even to this
day often have the delusion that the substitutions are
actually made.
it is the purity of the value-forms imagined in philosophy
that makes philosophy "normative." the
arts, which it judges, have an identical origin and an
indistinguishable intent, but they are properly its subordinates
because they have not its purity. they, too,
aim at remodeling discordant nature into harmony with
human nature. they, too, are dominated by value-forms
which shall satisfy as nearly as possible all interests,
shall liberate and fulfil all repressions, and
shall supply to our lives that unity, eternity, spirituality,
and freedom which are the exfoliations of our
central desire—the desire to live. but where philosophy
has merely negated the concrete stuff of experience and
defined its reality in terms of desire alone, the arts
acknowledge the reality of immediate experience, accept
it as it comes, eliminating, adding, molding, until the
values desiderated become existent in the concrete immediacies
of experience as such. art does not substitute
values for existence by changing their rôles and
calling one appearance and the other reality: art converts
values into existences, it realizes values, injecting
them into nature as far as may be. it creates truth
and beauty and goodness. but it does not claim for
its results greater reality than nature's. it claims for
its results greater immediate harmony with human interests
than nature. the propitious reality of the philosopher
is the unseen: the harmonious reality of the
artist must be sensible. philosophy says that apparent
actual evil is merely apparent: art compels potential
apparent good actually to appear. philosophy realizes
fundamental values transcendentally beyond experience:
art realizes them within experience. thus, men
cherish no illusions concerning the contents of a novel,
a picture, a play, a musical composition. they are
taken for what they are, and are enjoyed for what
they are. the shopgirl, organizing her life on the
basis of eight dollars a week, wears flimsy for broadcloth
and the tail feather of a rooster for an ostrich plume.
she is as capable of wearing and enjoying broadcloth
and ostrich plume as my lady, whose income is eight
dollars a minute. but she has not them, and in all
likelihood, without a social revolution she never will
have them. in the novels of mr. robert chambers,
however, or of miss jean libbey, which she religiously
reads in the street-car on her way to the shop; in the
motion picture theater which she visits for ten cents
after her supper of corned beef, cabbage, and cream
puffs, she comes into possession of them forthwith,
vicariously, and of all my lady's proper perquisites—the
prince charming, the motor-car, the chinese pug,
the flowers, and the costly bonbons. for the time being
her life is liberated, new avenues of experience are actually
opened to her, all sorts of unsatisfied desires are
satisfied, all sorts of potentialities realized. all that she
might have been and is not, she becomes through art,
here and now, and continuously with the drab workaday
life which is her lot, and she becomes this without any
compensatory derealization of that life, without any
transcendentalism, without any loss of grip on the necessities
of her experience: strengthened, on the contrary,
and emboldened, to meet them as they are.
i might multiply examples: for every object of fine
art has the same intention, and if adequate, accomplishes
the same end—from the sculptures of phidias and the
dramas of euripides, to the sky-scrapers of sullivan
and the dances of pavlowa. but there is need only to
consider the multitude of abstract descriptions of the
æsthetic encounter. the artist's business is to create
the other object in the encounter, and this object, in
miss puffer's words, which are completely representative
and typical, is such that "the organism is in a
condition of repose and of the highest possible tone,
functional efficiency, enhanced life. the personality is
brought into a state of unity and self-completeness."
the object, when apprehended, awakens the active functioning
of the whole organism directly and harmoniously
with itself, cuts it off from the surrounding world, shuts
that world out for the time being, and forms a complete,
harmonious, and self-sufficient system, peculiar and
unique in the fact that there is no passing from this
deed into further adaptation with the object. struggle
and aliency are at end, and whatever activity now goes
on feels self-conserving, spontaneous, free. the need
of readjustment has disappeared, and with it the feeling
of strain, obstruction, and resistance, which is its
sign. there is nothing but the object, and that is
possessed completely, satisfying, and as if forever.
art, in a word, supplies an environment from which
strife, foreignness, obstruction, and death are eliminated.
it actualizes unity, spirituality, and eternity
in the environment; it frees and enhances the life of the
self. to the environment which art successfully creates,
the mind finds itself completely and harmoniously
adapted by the initial act of perception.
in the world of art, value and existence are one.
if art may be said to create values, religion has been
said to conserve them. but the values conserved are
not those created: they are the values postulated by
philosophy as metaphysical reality. whereas, however,
philosophy substitutes these values for the world
of experience, religion makes them continuous with the
world of experience. for religion value and existence
are on the same level, but value is more potent and
environs existence, directing it for its own ends. the
unique content of religion, hence, is a specific imaginative
extension of the environment with value-forms: the
visible world is extended at either end by heaven and
hell; the world of minds, by god, satan, angels, demons,
saints, and so on. but where philosophy imaginatively
abolishes existence in behalf of value, where art realizes
value in existence, religion tends to control and to escape
the environment which exists by means of the
environment which is postulated. the aim of religion
is salvation from sin. salvation is the escape from
experience to heaven and the bosom of god; while hell
is the compensatory readjustment of inner quality to
outer condition for the alien and the enemy, without
the knowledge of whose existence life in heaven could
not be complete.
in religion, hence, the conversion of the repressed
array of interests into ideal value-forms is less radical
and abstract than in philosophy, and less checked by
fusion with existence than in art. religion is, therefore,
at one and the same time more carnal and less reasonable
than philosophy and art. its history and protagonists
exhibit a closer kinship to what is called insanity—that
being, in essence, the substitution in
actual life of the creatures of the imagination which
satisfy repressed needs for those of reality which repress
them. it is a somnambulism which intensifies
rather than abolishes the contrast between what is desired
and what must be accepted. it offers itself ultimately
rather as a refuge from reality than a control
of it, and its development as an institution has turned
on the creation and use of devices to make this escape
feasible. for religion, therefore, the perception that
the actual world, whatever its history, is now not
adapted to human nature, is the true point of departure.
thus religion takes more account of experience
than compensatory philosophy; it does not de-realize
existent evil. the outer conflict between human
nature and nature, primitively articulated in consciousness
and conduct by the distress engendered through
the fact that the food supply depends upon the march
of the seasons, becomes later assimilated to the inner
conflict between opposing interests, wishes, and desires.
finally, the whole so constituted gets expressed in the
idea of sin. that idea makes outward prosperity dependent
upon inward purity, although it often transfers
the locus of the prosperity to another world. through
its operation fortune becomes a function of conscience
and the one desire of religious thinking and religious
practice becomes to bring the two to a happy outcome,
to abolish the conflicts. this desiderated abolition
is salvation. it is expressed in the ideas of a fall,
or a separation from heaven and reunion therewith.
the machinery of this reunion of the divided, the reconversion
of the differentiated into the same, consists
of the furniture of religious symbols and
ceremonials—myths, baptisms, sacraments, prayers, and
sacrifices: and all these are at the same time instruments
and expressions of desires. god is literally "the conservation
of values." "god's life in eternity," writes
aristotle, who here dominates the earlier tradition, "is
that which we enjoy in our best moments, but are unable
to possess permanently: its very being is delight.
and as actual being is delight, so the various functions
of waking, perceiving, thinking, are to us the pleasantest
parts of our life. perfect and absolute thought is
just this absolute vision of perfection."
even the least somnambulistic of the transcendental
philosophies has repeated, not improved upon aristotle.
"the highest conceptions that i get from experience
of what goodness and beauty are," royce declares, "the
noblest life that i can imagine, the completest blessedness
that i can think, all these are but faint suggestions
of a truth that is infinitely realized in the divine,
that knows all truth. whatever perfection there is suggested
in these things, that he must fully know and
experience."
but this æsthetic excellence, this maximum of ideality
is in and by itself inadequate. god, to be god, must
work. he is first of all the invisible socius, the ever-living
witness, in whose eyes the disharmonies and injustices
of this life are enregistered, and who in the
life everlasting redresses the balances and adjusts the
account. even his grace is not unconditional; it requires
 a return, in deed or faith; a payment by which
the fact of his salvation is made visible. but this payment
is made identical by the great religions of disillusion
with nothing other than the concrete condition
from which the faithful are to be saved. if the self
is not impoverished, unkempt, and hungry, in fact, it
is made so. cleanliness may be next to godliness, but
self-defilement is godliness; sainthood, if we are to trust
the lives of saints, whether in asia or in europe, is coincident
with insanitation; saintly virtues are depressed
virtues,—humility, hope, meekness, pity; and such conditions
of life which define the holy ones are unwholesome—poverty,
asceticism, squalor, filth. hence, by
an ironic inversion, religions of disillusion, being other-worldly,
identify escape from an actual unpropitious
environment with submergence in it; that being the
visible and indispensable sign of an operative grace. so
the beatitudes: the blessed are the poor, the mourners,
the meek. beginning as a correction of the evils of
existence, religion ends by offering an infallible avenue
of escape from them through postulating a desiderated
type of existence which operates to gather the spirit to
itself. for this reason the value-forms of the spirituality
or spiritual control of the universe and of the
immortality of the soul have been very largely the practical
concern of religion alone, since these are the
instruments indispensable to the attainment of salvation.
in so far forth religion has been an art and its
institutional association with the arts has been made
one of its conspicuous justifications. so far, however,
as it has declared values to be operative without making
them actually existent it has been only a black art,
a magic. it has ignored the actual causes in the nature
and history of things, and has substituted for them
non-existent desirable causes, ultimately reducible to a
single, eternal, beneficent spirit, omnipotent and free.
to convert these into existence, an operation which is
the obvious intent of much contemporary thinking in
religion, it must, however, give up the assumption that
they already exist qua spirit. but when religion gives
up this assumption, religion gives up the ghost.
what it demands of the ghost, and of all hypostatized
or anthropomorphized ultimate value-forms, is that they
shall work, and its life as an institution depends
upon making them work. christian science becomes
a refuge from the failure of science, magic from mechanism,
and by means of them and their kind, blissful immortality,
complete self-fulfilment is to be attained—after
death. there is a "beautiful land of somewhere,"
a happy life beyond, but it is beyond life. in fact,
although religion confuses value and existence, it localizes
the great value-forms outside of existence. its
history has been an epic of the retreat and decimation
of the gods from the world, a movement from animism
and pluralism to transcendentalism and monism; and
concomitantly, of an elaboration and extension of institutional
devices by which the saving value-forms are
to be made and kept operative in the world.
let us consider this history a little.
consciousness of feeling, psychologists are agreed, is
prior to consciousness of the objects of feeling. the
will's inward strain, intense throbs of sensation, pangs
and pulses of pleasure and pain make up the
bulk of the undifferentiated primal sum of sentience.
the soul is aware of herself before she
is aware of her world. a childish or primeval
mind, face to face with an environment actual,
dreamt, or remembered, does not distinguish from
its privacy the objective or the common. all is
shot through with the pathos and triumph which come
unaccountably as desired good or evaded evil; all has
the same tensions and effects ends in the same manner
as the laboring, straining, volitional life within. these
feelings, residuary qualities, the last floating, unattached
sediment of a world organized by association
and classified by activity, these subtlest of all its beings,
finally termed mind and self, at first suffuse and dominate
the whole. even when objects are distinguished
and their places determined these are not absent; and
the so-called pre-animistic faiths are not the less suffused
with spirit because the spiritual has not yet received
a local habitation and name. they differ from
animism in this only, not in that their objects are characterized
by lack of animation and vital tonality. and
this is necessary. for religion must be anthropopathic
before it becomes anthropomorphic; since feeling, eloquent
of good and evil, is the first and deepest essence
of consciousness, and only by its wandering from home
are forms distinguished and man's nature separated
from that of things and beasts.
when practice has coördinated activity, and reflection
distinguished places, animism proper arises. first
the environment is felt as the soul's kindred; then its
operations are fancied in terms dramatic and personal.
the world becomes almost instinctively defined as a
hegemony of spirits similar to man, with powers and
passions like his, and directed for his destruction or conservation,
but chiefly for their own glory and self-maintenance.
the vast "pathetic fallacy" makes religion
of the whole of life. it is at this point indistinguishable
from science or ethics. it is, in fact, the pregnant
matrix of all subsequent discourse about the universe.
its character is such that it becomes the determinating
factor of human adaptations to the conditions
imposed by the environment, by envisaging the
enduring and efficacious elements among these conditions
as persons. the satisfaction of felt needs is rendered
thereby inevitably social; and in a like manner fear
of their frustration cannot be unsocial. life is conceived
and acted out as a miraculous traffic with the
universe; and the universe as a band of spirits who
monopolize the good and make free gifts of evil, who
can be feared, threatened, worshiped, scolded, wheedled,
coaxed, bribed, deceived, enslaved, held in awe, and
above all, used for the prosecution of desiderated
ends and the fulfilment of instinctive desires. the first
recorded cognized order is a moral order in which fragmentary
feelings, instinctive impulsions, and spontaneous
imaginings are hypostatized, ideas are identified
with their causes, all the contents of the immature, sudden,
primitive, blundering consciousness receive a vital
figure and a proper name. so man makes himself more
at home in the world without,—that world which enslaves
the spirit so fearfully and with such strangeness,
and which just as miraculously yields such ecstasy, such
power, such unaccountable good! in this immediate sense
the soul controls the world by becoming symbolic of it;
it is the world's first language. it is, however, an inarticulate,
blundering, incoherent thing and the cues
which it furnishes to the nature of the environment are
as often as not dangerous and misleading. when bows
and arrows, crystals and caves, clouds and waters, dung
and dew, mountains and trees, beasts and visions, are
treated as chiefs and men must be treated, then the
moral regimen initiated, taking little account of the
barest real qualities manifested by these things, and
attributing the maximum importance to the characters
postulated and foreign, is successful neither in allaying
evil nor in extending good. its benefits are adventitious
and its malfeasance constant. food buried with the
dead was food lost; blood smeared upon the bow to
make it shoot better served only to make the hands
unskilful by impeding their activity. initiation, ceremony,
sacrificial ritual, fasting, and isolation involved
privations for which no adequate return was recovered,
even by the medicine-man whose absolute and ephemeral
power needed only the betrayal of circumstances for its
own destruction, taking him along with it, oftener than
not, to disgrace or death.
as the cumulus of experience on experience grew
greater, chance violations of tradition, or custom, or
ritual, or formula achieving for the violator a mastery
or stability which performance and obedience failed to
achieve, the new heresy became the later orthodoxy, for
in religion, as in all other matters human, nothing succeeds
like success. an impotent god has no divinity;
