 reserved to the priestly caste. this was carried out to the letter, except
 that "achan, the son of carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of zerah, of the
 tribe of judah, took of the accursed thing"—that is, he hid some
 gold and silver in his tent; whereupon the army met with a defeat, and
 everybody knew that something was wrong, and joshua rent his clothes and
 fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the lord, and got
 another message from jehovah, to the effect that the guilty man should be
 burned with fire, "he and all that he hath."
 and joshua, and all israel with him, took achan the son of zerah, and the
 silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his
 daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and
 all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of achor. and
 joshua said, why hast thou troubled us? the lord shall trouble thee this
 day. and all israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire,
 after they had stoned him with stones.
 we have no means of knowing what was the character of the unfortunate
 inhabitants of the city of jericho, nor of the hittites and the
 girgashites and the amorites and all the rest of the victims of jehovah.
 to be sure, we are told by the hebrew priests that they sacrificed their
 children to their gods; but then, consider what we should believe about
 the hebrew religion, if we took the word of rival priestly castes!
 consider, for example, that in this twentieth century we saw an orthodox
 jew tried in a russian court of law for having made a sacrifice of
 christian babies; nevertheless we know that the jews represent a
 considerable part of the intelligence and idealism of russia. we know in
 the same way that the moors had most of the culture and all of the
 scientific knowledge of spain; that the huguenots had most of the
 conscience and industry of france; and we know that they were massacred or
 driven out to death by the priestly castes of the middle ages.
 the holy inquisition
 let us have one glimpse of the conditions in those mediaeval times, so
 that we may know what we ourselves have escaped. in the fifteenth century
 there was established in europe the cult of a three-headed god, whose
 priests had won lordship over a continent. they were enormously wealthy,
 and unthinkably corrupt; they sold to the rich the license to commit every
 possible crime, and they held the poor in ignorance and degradation. among
 the comparatively intelligent and freedom-loving people of bohemia there
 arose a great reformer, john huss, himself a priest, protesting against
 the corruptions of his order. they trapped him into their power by means
 of a "safe-conduct"—which they repudiated because no promise to a
 heretic could have validity. they found him guilty of having taught the
 hateful doctrine that a priest who committed crimes could not give
 absolution for the crimes of others; and they held an auto de fe—which
 means a "sentence of faith." as we read in lea's "history of the
 inquisition":
 the cathedral of constance was crowded with sigismund (the emperor) and
 his nobles, the great officers of the empire with their insignia, the
 prelates in their splendid robes. while mass was sung, huss, as an
 excommunicate, was kept waiting at the door; when brought in he was placed
 on an elevated bench by a table on which stood a coffer containing
 priestly vestments. after some preliminaries, including a sermon by the
 bishop of lodi, in which he assured sigismund that the events of that day
 would confer on him immortal glory, the articles of which huss was
 convicted were recited. in vain he protested that he believed in
 transubstantiation and in the validity of the sacrament in polluted hands.
 he was ordered to hold his tongue, and on his persisting the beadles were
 told to silence him, but in spite of this he continued to utter protests.
 the sentence was then read in the name of the council, condemning him both
 for his written errors and those which had been proven by witnesses. he
 was declared a pertinacious and incorrigible heretic who did not desire to
 return to the church; his books were ordered to be burned, and himself to
 be degraded from the priesthood and abandoned to the secular court. seven
 bishops arrayed him in priestly garb and warned him to recant while yet
 there was time. he turned to the crowd, and with broken voice declared
 that he could not confess the errors which he never entertained, lest he
 should lie to god, when the bishops interrupted him, crying that they had
 waited long enough, for he was obstinate in his heresy. he was degraded in
 the usual manner, stripped of his sacerdotal vestments, his fingers
 scraped; but when the tonsure was to be disposed of, an absurd quarrel
 arose among the bishops as to whether the head should be shaved with a
 razor or the tonsure be destroyed with scissors. scissors won the day, and
 a cross was cut in his hair. then on his head was placed a conical paper
 cap, a cubit in height, adorned with painted devils and the inscription,
 "this is the heresiarch."
 the place of execution was a meadow near the river, to which he was
 conducted by two thousand armed men, with palsgrave louis at their head,
 and a vast crowd, including many nobles, prelates, and cardinals. the
 route followed was circuitous, in order that he might be carried past the
 episcopal palace, in front of which his books were burning, whereat he
 smiled. pity from man there was none to look for, but he sought comfort on
 high, repeating to himself, "christ jesus, son of the living god, have
 mercy upon us!" and when he came in sight of the stake he fell on his
 knees and prayed. he was asked if he wished to confess, and said that he
 would gladly do so if there were space. a wide circle was formed, and
 ulrich schorand, who, according to custom, had been providently empowered
 to take advantage of final weakening, came forward, saying, "dear sir and
 master, if you will recant your unbelief and heresy, for which you must
 suffer, i will willingly hear your confession; but if you will not, you
 know right well that, according to canon law, no one can administer the
 sacrament to a heretic." to this huss answered, "it is not necessary: i am
 not a mortal sinner." his paper crown fell off and he smiled as his guards
 replaced it. he desired to take leave of his keepers, and when they were
 brought to him he thanked them for their kindness, saying that they had
 been to him rather brothers than jailers. then he commenced to address the
 crowd in german, telling them that he suffered for errors which he did not
 hold, and he was cut short. when bound to the stake, two cartloads of
 fagots and straw were piled up around him, and the palsgrave and vogt for
 the last time adjured him to abjure. even yet he could save himself, but
 only repeated that he had been convicted by false witnesses on errors
 never entertained by him. they clapped their hands and then withdrew, and
 the executioners applied the fire. twice huss was heard to exclaim,
 "christ jesus, son of the living god, have mercy upon me!" then a wind
 springing up and blowing the flames and smoke into his face checked
 further utterances, but his head was seen to shake and his lips to move
 while one might twice or thrice recite a paternoster. the tragedy was
 over; the sorely-tried soul bad escaped from its tormentors, and the
 bitterest enemies of the reformer could not refuse to him the praise that
 no philosopher of old had faced death with more composure than he had
 shown in his dreadful extremity. no faltering of the voice had betrayed an
 internal struggle. palsgrave louis, seeing huss's mantle on the arm of one
 of the executioners, ordered it thrown into the flames lest it should be
 reverenced as a relic, and promised the man to compensate him. with the
 same view the body was carefully reduced to ashes and thrown into the
 rhine, and even the earth around the stake was dug up and carted off; yet
 the bohemians long hovered around the spot and carried home fragments of
 the neighboring clay, which they reverenced as relies of their martyr. the
 next day thanks were returned to god in a solemn procession in which
 figured sigismund and his queen, the princes and nobles, nineteen
 cardinals, two patriarchs, seventy-seven bishops, and all the clergy of
 the council. a few days later sigismund, who had delayed his departure for
 spain to see the matter concluded, left constance, feeling that his work
 was done.
 hell-fire
 if such a scene could be witnessed in the world today, it would only be in
 some remote and wholly savage place, such as the mountains of hayti, or
 the solomon islands. it could no longer happen in any civilized country;
 the reason being, not any abatement of the pretensions of the priesthood,
 but solely the power of science, embodied in the physical arm of a secular
 state. the advance of that arm the church has fought systematically, in
 every country, and at every point. to quote buckle: "a careful study of
 the history of religious toleration will prove that in every christian
 country where it has been adopted, it has been forced upon the clergy by
 the authority of the secular classes." the wolf of superstition has been
 driven into its lair; but it has backed away snarling, and it still
 crouches, watching for a chance to spring. the church which burned john
 huss, which burned giordano bruno for teaching that the earth moves round
 the sun—that same church, in the name of the same three-headed god,
 sent out francesco ferrer to the firing-squad; if it does not do the same
 thing to the author of this book, it will be solely because of the police.
 not being allowed to burn me here, the clergy will vent their holy
 indignation by sentencing me to eternal burning in a future world which
 they have created, and which they run to suit themselves.
 it is a fact, the significance of which cannot be exaggerated, that the
 measure of the civilization which any nation has attained is the extent to
 which it has curtailed the power of institutionalized religion. those
 peoples which are wholly under the sway of the priesthood, such as
 thibetans and koreans, siamese and caribbeans, are peoples among whom the
 intellectual life does not exist. farther in advance are hindoos, and
 turks, who are religious, but not exclusively. still farther on the way
 are spaniards and irish; here, for example, is a flashlight of the irish
 peasantry, given by one of their number, patrick macgill:
 the merchant was a great friend of the parish priest, who always told the
 people if they did not pay their debts they would burn for ever and ever
 in hell. "the fires of eternity will make you sorry for the debts that you
 did not pay," said the priest. "what is eternity?" he would ask in a
 solemn voice from the altar steps. "if a man tried to count the sands on
 the sea-shore and took a million years to count every single grain, how
 long would it take him to count them all? a long time, you'll say. but
 that time is nothing to eternity. just think of it! burning in hell while
 a man, taking a million years to count a grain of sand, counts all the
 sand on the sea-shore. and this because you did not pay farley mckeown his
 lawful debts, his lawful debts within the letter of the law." that
 concluding phrase, "within the letter of the law," struck terror into all
 who listened, and no one, maybe not even the priest himself, knew what it
 meant.
 there is light in ireland to-day, and hope for an irish culture; the thing
 to be noted is that it comes from two movements, one for agricultural
 co-operation and the other for political independence—both of them
 definitely and specifically non-religious. this same thing has been true
 of the movements which have helped on happier nations, such as the
 republics of france and america, which have put an end to the power of the
 priestly caste to take property by force, and to dominate the mind of the
 child without its parents' consent.
 this is as far as any nation has so far gone; it has apparently not yet
 occurred to any legislature that the state may owe a duty to the child to
 protect its mind from being poisoned, even though it has the misfortune to
 be born of poisoned parents. it is still permitted that parents should
 terrify their little ones with images of a personal devil and a hell of
 eternal brimstone and sulphur; it is permitted to found schools for the
 teaching of devil-doctrines; it is permitted to organize gigantic
 campaigns and systematically to infect whole cities full of men, women and
 children with hell-fire phobias. in the american city where i write one
 may see gatherings of people sunk upon their knees, even rolling on the
 ground in convulsions, moaning, sobbing, screaming to be delivered from
 such torments. i open my morning paper and read of the arrest of five men
 and seven women in los angeles, members of a sect known as the "church of
 the living god", upon a charge of having disturbed the peace of their
 neighbors. the police officers testified that the accused claimed to be
 possessed of the divine spirit, and that as signs of this possession they
 "crawled on the floor, grunted like pigs and barked like dogs." there were
 "other acts, even more startling", about which the newspapers did not go
 into details. and again, a week or two later, i read how a woman has been
 heard screaming, and found tied to a bedpost, being whipped by a man. she
 belonged to a religious sect which had found her guilty of witchcraft.
 another woman was about to shoot her, but this woman's nerve failed, and
 the "high priest" was called in, who decreed a whipping. the victim
 explained to the police that she would have deserved to be whipped had she
 really been a witch, but a mistake had been made—it was another
 woman who was the witch. and again in the los angeles "times" i read a
 perfectly serious news item, telling how a certain man awakened one
 morning, and found on his pillow where his head had lain a perfect
 reproduction of the head of christ with its crown of thorns. he called in
 his neighbors to witness the miracle, and declared that while he was not
 superstitious, he knew that such a thing could not have happened by
 chance, and he knew what it was intended to signify—he would buy
 more liberty bonds and be more ardent in his support of the war!
 and this is the world in which our scientists and men of culture think
 that the battle of the intellect is won, and that it is no longer
 necessary to spend our energies in fighting "religion!"
 book two — the church of good society
 within the house of mammon his priesthood stands alert
 by mysteries attended, by dusk and splendors girt,
 knowing, for faiths departed, his own shall still endure,
 and they be found his chosen, untroubled, solemn, sure.
 within the house of mammon the golden altar lifts
 where dragon-lamps are shrouded as costly incense drifts—
 a dust of old ideals, now fragrant from the coals,
 to tell of hopes long-ended, to tell the death of souls
 sterling.
 the rain makers
 i begin with the church of good society, because it happens to be the
 church in which i was brought up. reading this statement, some of my
 readers suspected me of snobbish pride. i search my heart; yes, it brings
 a hidden thrill that as far back as i can remember i knew this atmosphere
 of urbanity, that twice every sunday those melodious and hypnotizing
 incantations were chanted in my childish ears! i take up the book of
 ritual, done in aristocratic black leather with gold lettering, and the
 old worn volume brings me strange stirrings of recollected awe. but i
 endeavor to repress these vestigial emotions and to see the volume—not
 as a message from god to good society, but as a landmark of man's age-long
 struggle against myth and dogma used as a source of income and a shield to
 privilege.
 in the beginning, of course, the priest and the magician ruled the field.
 but today, as i examine this "book of common prayer", i discover that
 there is at least one spot out of which he has been cleared entirely;
 there appears no prayer to planets to stand still, or to comets to go
 away. the "church of good society" has discovered astronomy! but if any
 astronomer attributes this to his instruments with their marvelous
 accuracy, let him at least stop to consider my "economic interpretation"
 of the phenomenon—the fact that the heavenly bodies affect the
 destinies of mankind so little that there has not been sufficient
 emolument to justify the priest in holding on to his job as astrologer.
 but when you come to the field of meteorology, what a difference! has any
 utmost precision of barometer been able to drive the priest out of his
 prerogatives as rainmaker? not even in the most civilized of countries;
 not in that most decorous and dignified of institutions, the protestant
 episcopal church of america! i study with care the passage wherein the
 clergyman appears as controller of the fate of crops. i note a chastened
 caution of phraseology; the church will not repeat the experience of the
 sorcerer's apprentice, who set the demons to bringing water, and then
 could not make them stop! the spell invokes "moderate rain and showers";
 and as an additional precaution there is a counter-spell against
 "excessive rains and floods": the weather-faucet being thus under exact
 control.
 i turn the pages of this "book of common prayer", and note the remnants of
 magic which it contains. there are not many of the emergencies of life
 with which the priest is not authorized to deal; not many natural
 phenomena for which he may not claim the credit. and in case anything
 should have been overlooked, there is a blanket order upon providence:
 "graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft or subtilty of the
 devil or man worketh against us, be brought to nought!" i am reminded of
 the idea which haunted my childhood, reading fairy-stories about the hero
 who was allowed three wishes that would come true. i could never
 understand why the hero did not settle the matter once for all—by
 wishing that everything he wished might come true!
 most of these incantations are harmless, and some are amiable; but now and
 then you come upon one which is sinister in its implications. the volume
 before me happens to be of the church of england, which is even more
 forthright in its confronting of the great magic. many years ago i
 remember talking with an english army officer, asking how he could feel
 sure of his soldiers in case of labor strikes; did it never occur to him
 that the men had relatives among the workers, and might some time refuse
 to shoot them? his answer was that he was aware of it, the military had
 worked out its technique with care. he would never think of ordering his
 men to fire upon a mob in cold blood; he would first start the spell of
 discipline to work, he would march them round the block, and get them in
 the swing, get their blood moving to military music; then, when he gave
 the order, in they would go. i have never forgotten the gesture, the
 animation with which he illustrated their going—i could hear the
 grunting of bayonets in the flesh of men. the social system prevailing in
 england has made necessary the perfecting of such military technique;
 also, you discover, english piety has made necessary the providing of a
 religious sanction for it. after the job has been done, and the bayonets
 have been wiped clean, the company is marched to church, and the officer
 kneels in his family pew, and the privates kneel with the parlor-maids,
 and the clergyman raises his hands to heaven and intones: "we bless thy
 holy name, that it hath pleased thee to appease the seditious tumults
 which have been lately raised up among us!"
 and sometimes the clergyman does more than bless the killers—he even
 takes part in their bloody work. in the home office records of the british
 government i read (vol , page ) how certain miners were on strike
 against low wages and the "truck" system, and the vicar of abergavenny put
 himself at the head of the yeomanry and the greys. he wrote the home
 office a lively account of his military operations. all that remained was
 to apprehend certain of the strikers, "and then i shall be able to return
 to my clerical duties." later he wrote of the "sinister influences" which
 kept the miners from returning to their work, and how he had put half a
 dozen of the most obstinate in prison.
 the babylonian fire-god
 so we come to the most important of the functions of the tribal god, as an
 ally in war, an inspirer to martial valour. when in ancient babylonia you
 wished to overcome your enemies, you went to the shrine of the firegod,
 and with awful rites the priest pronounced incantations, which have been
 preserved on bricks and handed down for the use of modern churches.
 "pronounce in a whisper, and have a bronze image therewith," commands the
 ancient text, and runs on for many strophes in this fashion:
 let them die, but let me live!
 let them be put under a ban, but let me prosper!
 let them perish, but let me increase!
 let them become weak, but let me wax strong!
 o, fire-god, mighty, exalted among the gods,
 thou art the god, thou art my lord, etc.
 this was in heathen babylon, some three thousand years ago. since then,
 the world has moved on—
 three thousand years of war and peace and glory,
 of hope and work and deeds and golden schemes,
 of mighty voices raised in song and story,
of huge inventions and of splendid dreams—
 and in one of the world's leading nations the people stand up and bare
 their heads, and sing to their god to save their king and punish those who
 oppose him—
 o lord our god, arise, scatter his enemies,
 and make them fall;
 confound their politics,
 frustrate their knavish tricks,
 on him our hopes we fix,
 god save us all.
 recently, i understand, it has become the custom to omit this stanza from
 the english national anthem; but it is clear that this is because of its
 crudity of expression, not because of objection to the idea of praying to
 a god to assist one nation and injure others; for the same sentiment is
 expressed again and again in the most carefully edited of prayer-books:
 abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound their devices.
 defend us, thy humble servants, in all assaults of our enemies. strengthen
 him (the king) that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies. there is
 none other that fighteth for us, but only thou, o god.
 prayers such as these are pronounced in every so-called civilized nation
 today. behind every battle-line in europe you may see the priests of the
 babylonian fire-god with their bronze images and their ancient
 incantations; you may see magic spells being wrought, magic standards
 sanctified, magic bread eaten and magic wine drunk, fetishes blessed and
 hoodoos lifted, eternity ransacked to find means of inciting soldiers to
 the mood where they will "go in". throughout all civilization, the phobias
 and manias of war have thrown the people back into the toils of the
 priest, and that church which tortured galileo in the dungeons of the
 inquisition, and shot ferrier beneath the walls of the fortress of
 montjuich, is rejoicing in a "rebirth of religion".
 the medicine-men
 andrew d. white tells us that
 it was noted that in the th century, after the great plague, the black
 death, had passed, an immensely increased proportion of the landed and
 personal property of every european country was in the hands of the
 church. well did a great ecclesiastic remark that "pestilences are the
 harvests of the ministers of god."
 and so naturally the clergy hold on to their prerogative as banishers of
 epidemics. who knows what day the lord may see fit to rebuke the upstart
 teachers of impious and atheistical inoculation, and scourge the people
 back into his fold as in the good old days of moses and aaron? viscount
 amberley, in his immensely learned and half-suppressed work, "the analysis
 of religious belief", quotes some missionaries to the fiji islanders,
 concerning the ideas of these benighted heathen on the subject of a
 pestilence. it was the work of a "disease-maker", who was burning images
 of the people with incantations; so they blew horns to frighten this
 disease-maker from his spells. the missionaries undertook to explain the
 true cause of the affliction—and thereby revealed that they stood
 upon the same intellectual level as the heathen they were supposed to
 instruct! it appeared that the natives had been at war with their
 neighbors, and the missionaries had commanded them to desist; they had
 refused to obey, and god had sent the epidemic as punishment for savage
 presumption!
 and on precisely this same fijian level stands the "book of common prayer"
 of our most decorous and cultured of churches. i remember as a little
 child lying on a bed of sickness, occasioned by the prevalence in our home
 of the southern custom of hot bread three times a day; and there came an
 amiable clerical gentleman and recited the service proper to such pastoral
 calls: "take therefore in good part the visitation of the lord!" and
 again, when my mother was ill, i remember how the clergyman read out in
 church a prayer for her, specifying all sickness, "in mind, body or
 estate". i was thinking only of my mother, and the meaning of these words
 passed over my childish head; i did not realize that the elderly plutocrat
 in black broadcloth who knelt in the pew in front of me was invoking the
 aid of the almighty so that his tenements might bring in their rentals
 promptly; so that his little "flyer" in cotton might prove successful; so
 that the children in his mills might work with greater speed.
 somebody asked voltaire if you could kill a cow by incantations, and he
 answered, "yes, if you use a little strychnine with it." and that would
 seem to be the attitude of the present-day anglican church-member; he
 calls in the best physician he knows, he makes sure that his plumbing is
 sound, and after that he thinks it can do no harm to let the lord have a
 chance. it makes the women happy, and after all, there are a lot of things
 we don't yet know about the world. so he repairs to the family pew, and
 recites over the venerable prayers, and contributes his mite to the
 maintenance of an institution which, fourteen sundays every year,
 proclaims the terrifying menaces of the athanasian creed:
 whoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he hold the
 catholick faith. which faith, except one do keep whole and undefiled;
 without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.
 for the benefit of the uninitiated reader, it may be explained that the
 "catholick faith" here referred to is not the roman catholic, but that of
 the church of england and the protestant episcopal church of america. this
 creed of the ancient alexandrian lays down the truth with grim and
 menacing precision—forty-four paragraphs of metaphysical minutiae,
 closing with the final doom: "this is the catholick faith: which except a
 man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved."
 you see, the founders of this august institution were not content with
 cultured complacency; what they believed they believed really, with their
 whole hearts, and they were ready to act upon it, even if it meant burning
 their own at the stake. also, they knew the ceaseless impulse of the mind
 to grow; the terrible temptation which confronts each new generation to
 believe that which is reasonable. they met the situation by setting out
 the true faith in words which no one could mistake. they have provided,
 not merely the creed of athanasius, but also the "thirty-nine articles"—which
 are thirty-nine separate and binding guarantees that one who holds orders
 in the episcopal church shall be either a man of inferior mentality, or
 else a sophist and hypocrite. how desperate some of them have become in
 the face of this cruel dilemma is illustrated by the tale which is told of
 dr. jowett, of balliol college, oxford: that when he was required to
 recite the "apostle's creed" in public, he would save himself by inserting
 the words "used" between the words "i believe", saying the inserted words
 under his breath, thus, "i used to believe in the father, the son, and the
 holy ghost." perhaps the eminent divine never did this; but the fact that
 his students told it, and thought it funny, is sufficient indication of
 their attitude toward their "religion." the son of william george ward
 tells in his biography how this leader of the "tractarian movement" met
 the problem with cynicism which seems almost sublime: "make yourself clear
 that you are justified in deception; and then lie like a trooper!"
 the canonization of incompetence
 the supreme crime of the church to-day is that everywhere and in all its
 operations and influences it is on the side of sloth of mind; that it
 banishes brains, it sanctifies stupidity, it canonizes incompetence.
 consider the power of the church of england and its favorite daughter here
 in america; consider their prestige with the press and in politics, their
 hold upon literature and the arts, their control of education and the
 minds of children, of charity and the lives of the poor: consider all
 this, and then say what it means to society that such a power must be, in
 every new issue that arises, on the side of reaction and falsehood. "so it
 was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be," runs the church's
 formula; and this per se and a priori, of necessity and in the nature of
 the case.
 turn over the pages of history and read the damning record of the church's
 opposition to every advance in every field of science, even the most
 remote from theological concern. here is the reverend edward massey,
 preaching in  on "the dangerous and sinful practice of inoculation";
 declaring that job's distemper was probably confluent small-pox; that he
 had been inoculated doubtless by the devil; that diseases are sent by
 providence for the punishment of sin; and that the proposed attempt to
 prevent them is "a diabolical operation". here are the scotch clergy of
 the middle of the nineteenth century denouncing the use of chloroform in
 obstetrics, because it is seeking "to avoid one part of the primeval curse
 on woman". here is bishop wilberforce of oxford anathematizing darwin:
 "the principle of natural selection is absolutely incompatible with the
 word of god"; it "contradicts the revealed relation of creation to its
 creator"; it "is inconsistent with the fulness of his glory"; it is "a
 dishonoring view of nature". and the bishop settled the matter by asking
 huxley whether he was descended from an ape through his grandmother or
 grandfather.
 think what it means, friends of progress, that these ecclesiastical
 figures should be set up for the reverence of the populace, and that every
 time mankind is to make an advance in power over nature, the pioneers of
 thought have to come with crow-bars and derricks and heave these figures
 out of the way! and you think that conditions are changed to-day? but
 consider syphilis and gonorrhea, about which we know so much, and can do
 almost nothing; consider birth-control, which we are sent to jail for so
 much as mentioning! consider the divorce reforms for which the world is
 crying—and for which it must wait, because of st. paul! realize that
 up to date it has proven impossible to persuade the english church to
 permit a man to marry his deceased wife's sister! that when the war broke
 upon england the whole nation was occupied with a squabble over the
 disestablishment of the church of wales! only since  has it been
 legally possible for an unbeliever to hold a seat in parliament; while up
 to the present day men are tried for blasphemy and convicted under the
 decisions of lord hale, to the effect that "it is a crime either to deny
 the truth of the fundamental doctrines of the christian religion or to
 hold them up to contempt or ridicule." said mr. justice horridge, at the
 west riding assizes, : "a man is not free in any public place to use
 common ridicule on subjects which are sacred."
 the purpose, as outlined by the public prosecutor in london, is "to
 preserve the standard of outward decency." and you will find that the one
 essential to prosecution is always that the victim shall be obscure and
 helpless; never by any chance is he a duke in a drawing-room. i will
 record an utterance of one of the obscure victims of the british "standard
 of outward decency", a teacher of mathematics named holyoake, who presumed
 to discuss in a public hall the starvation of the working classes of the
 country. a preacher objected that he had discussed "our duty to our
 neighbor" and neglected "our duty to god"; whereupon the lecturer replied:
 "our national church and general religious institutions cost us, upon
 accredited computation, about twenty million pounds annually. worship
 being thus expensive, i appeal to your heads and your pockets whether we
 are not too poor to have a god. while our distress lasts, i think it would
 be wise to put deity upon half pay." and for that utterance the
 unfortunate teacher of mathematics served six months in the common gaol at
 gloucester!
 while men were being tried for publishing the "free-thinker", the premier
 of england was william ewart gladstone. and if you wish to know what an
 established church can do by way of setting up dullness in high places,
 get a volume of this "grand old man's" writings on theological and
 religious questions. read his "juventus mundi", in the course of which he
 establishes, a mystic connection between the trident of neptune and the
 christian trinity! read his efforts to prove that the writer of genesis
 was an inspired geologist! this writer of genesis points out in nature "a
 grand, fourfold division, set forth in an orderly succession of times:
 first, the water population; secondly, the air population; thirdly, the
 land population of animals; fourthly, the land population consummated in
 man." and it seems that this division and sequence "is understood to have
 been so affirmed in our time by natural science that it may be taken as a
 demonstrated conclusion and established fact." hence we must conclude of
 the writer of genesis that "his knowledge was divine"! consider that this
 was actually published in one of the leading british monthlies, and that
 it was necessary for professor huxley to answer it, pointing out that so
 far is it from being true that "a fourfold division and orderly sequence"
 of water, air and land animals "has been affirmed in our time by natural
 science", that on the contrary, the assertion is "directly contradictory
 to facts known to everyone who is acquainted with the elements of natural
 science". the distribution of fossils proves that land animals originated
 before sea-animals, and there has been such a mixing of land, sea and air
 animals as utterly to destroy the reputation of both genesis and gladstone
 as possessing a divine knowledge of geology.
 gibson's preservative
 i have a friend, a well-known "scholar", who permits me the use of his
 extensive library. i stand in the middle and look about me, and see in the
 dim shadows walls lined from floor to ceiling with decorous and
 grave-looking books, bound for the most part in black, many of them fading
 to green with age. there are literally thousands of such, and their theme
 is the pseudo-science of "divinity". i close my eyes, to make the test
 fair, and walk to the shelves and put out my hand and take a book. it
 proves to be a modern work, "a history of the english prayer-book in
 relation to the doctrine of the eucharist". i turn the pages and discover
 that it is a study of the variations of one minute detail of church
 doctrine. this learned divine—he has written many such works, as the
 advertisements inform us—fills up the greater part of his pages with
 foot-notes from hundreds of authorities, arguments and counter-arguments
 over supernatural subtleties. i will give one sample of these footnotes—asking
 the reader to be patient:
 i add the following valuable observation, of dean goode: ("on eucharist",
 ii p . see also archbishop ware in gibson's "preservative", vol x, chap
 ii) "one great point for which our divines have contended, in opposition
 to romish errors, has been the reality of that presence of christ's body
 and blood to the soul of the believer which is affected through the
 operation of the holy spirit notwithstanding the absence of that body and
 blood in heaven. like the sun, the body of christ is both present and
 absent; present, really and truly present, in one sense—that is, by
 the soul being brought into immediate communion with—but absent in
 another sense—that is, as regards the contiguity of its substance to
 our bodies. the authors under review, like the romanists, maintain that
 this is not a real presence, and assuming their own interpretation of the
 phrase to be the only true one, press into their service the testimony of
 divines who, though using the phrase, apply it in a sense the reverse of
 theirs. the ambiguity of the phrase, and its misapplication by the church
 of rome, have induced many of our divines to repudiate it, etc."
 realize that of the work from which this "valuable observation" is quoted,
 there are at least two volumes, the second volume containing not less than
  pages! realize that in gibson's "preservative" there are not less than
 ten volumes of such writing! realize that in this twentieth century a
 considerable portion of the mental energies of the world's greatest empire
 is devoted to that kind of learning!
 i turn to the date upon the volume, and find that it is . i was in
 england within a year of that time, and so i can tell what was the
 condition of the english people while printers were making and papers were
 reviewing and book-stores were distributing this work of ecclesiastical
 research. i walked along the embankment and saw the pitiful wretches, men,
 women and sometimes children, clad in filthy rags, starved white and
 frozen blue, soaked in winter rains and shivering in winter winds,
 homeless, hopeless, unheeded by the doctors of divinity, unpreserved by
 gibson's "preservative". i walked on hampstead heath on easter day, when
 the population of the slums turns out for its one holiday; i walked,
 literally trembling with horror, for i had never seen such sights nor
 dreamed of them. these creatures were hardly to be recognized as human
 beings; they were some new grotesque race of apes. they could not walk,
 they could only shamble; they could not laugh, they could only leer. i saw
 a hand-organ playing, and turned away—the things they did in their
 efforts to dance were not to be watched. and then i went out into the
 beautiful english country; cultured and charming ladies took me in swift,
 smooth motor-cars, and i saw the pitiful hovels and the drink-sodden,
 starch-poisoned inhabitants—slum-populations everywhere, even on the
 land! when the newspaper reporters came to me, i said that i had just come
 from germany, and that if ever england found herself at war with that
 country, she would regret that she had let the bodies and the minds of her
 people rot; for which expression i was severely taken to task by more than
 one british divine.
 the bodies—and the minds; the rot of the latter being the cause of
 the former. all over england in that year of , in thousands of
 schools, rich and poor, and in the greatest centres of learning, men like
 dean goode were teaching boys dead languages and dead sciences and dead
 arts; sending them out to life with no more conception of the modern world
 than a monk of the middle ages; sending them out with minds, made hard and
 inflexible, ignorant of science, indifferent to progress, contemptuous of
 ideas. and then suddenly, almost overnight, this terrified people finds
 itself at war with a nation ruled and disciplined by modern experts,
 scientists and technicians. the awful muddle that was in england during
 the first two years of the war has not yet been told in print; but
 thousands know it, and some day it will be written, and it will finish
 forever the prestige of the british ruling caste. they rushed off an
 expedition to gallipoli, and somebody forgot the water-supply, and at one
 time they had ninety-five thousand cases of dysentery!
 they always "muddle through", they tell you; that is the motto of their
 ruling caste. but this time they did not "muddle through"—they had
 to come to america for help. as i write, our congress is voting billions
 and tens of billions of dollars, and a million of the best of our young
 manhood are being taken from their homes—because in  the mind of
 england was occupied with dean goode "on eucharist", and the ten volumes
 of gibson's "preservative".
 the elders
 what the church means in human affairs is the rule of the aged. it means
 old men in the seats of authority, not merely in the church, but in the
 law-courts and in parliament, even in the army and navy. for a test i look
 up the list of bishops of the church of england in whitaker's almanac; it
 appears that there are  of these functionaries, including the
 archbishops, but not the suffragans; and that the total salary paid to
 them amounts to more than nine hundred thousand dollars a year. this, it
 should be understood, does not include the pay of their assistants, nor
 the cost of maintaining their religious establishments; it does not
 include any private incomes which they or their wives may possess, as
 members of the privileged classes of the empire. i look up their ages in
 who's who, and i find that there is only one below fifty-three; the oldest
 of them is ninety-one, while the average age of the goodly company is
 seventy. there have been men in history who have retained their
 flexibility of mind, their ability to adjust themselves to new
 circumstances at the age of seventy, but it will always be found that
 these men were trained in science and practical affairs, never in dead
 languages and theology. one of the oldest of the english prelates, the
 archbishop of canterbury, recently stated to a newspaper reporter that he
 worked seventeen hours a day, and had no time to form an opinion on the
 labor question.
 and now—here is the crux of the argument—do these aged
 gentlemen rule of their own power? they do not! they do literally nothing
 of their own power; they could not make their own episcopal robes, they
 could not even cook their own episcopal dinners. they have to be
 maintained in all their comings and goings. who supports them, and to what
 end?
 the roots of the english church are in the english land system, which is
 one of the infamies of the modern world. it dates from the days of william
 the norman, who took possession of britain with his sword, and in order to
 keep possession for himself and his heirs, distributed the land among his
 nobles and prelates. in those days, you understand, a high ecclesiastic
 was a man of war, who did not stoop to veil his predatory nature under
 pretense of philanthropy; the abbots and archbishops, of william wore
 armor and had their troops of knights like the barons and the dukes.
 william gave them vast tracts, and at the same time he gave them orders
 which they obeyed. says the english chronicler, "stark he was. bishops he
 stripped of their bishopricks, abbots of their abbacies". green tells us
 that "the dependencie of the church on the royal power was strictly
 enforced. homage was exacted from bishop as from baron." and what was this
 homage? the bishop knelt before william, bareheaded and without arms, and
 swore: "hear my lord, i become liege man of yours for life and limb and
 earthly regard, and i will keep faith and loyalty to you for life and
 death, god help me."
 the lands which the church got from william the norman, she has held, and
 always on the same condition—that she shall be "liege man for life
 and limb and earthly regard". in this you have the whole story of the
 church of england, in the twentieth century as in the eleventh. the
 balance of power has shifted from time to time; old families have lost the
 land and new families have gotten it; but the loyalty and homage of the
 church have been held by the land, as the needle of the compass is held by
 a mass of metal. some two hundred and fifty years ago a popular song gave
 the general impression—
 for this is law that i'll maintain
 until my dying day, sir:
 that whatsoever king shall reign
 i'll still be vicar of bray, sir!
 so, wherever you take the anglican clergy, they are tories and royalists,
 conservatives and reactionaries, friends of every injustice that profits
 the owning class. and always among themselves you find them intriguing and
 squabbling over the dividing of the spoils; always you find them enjoying
 leisure and ease, while the people suffer and the rebels complain. one can
 pass down the corridor of english history and prove this statement by the
 words of englishmen from every single generation. take the fourteenth
 century; the "good parliament" declares that,
 unworthy and unlearned caitiffs are appointed to benefices of a thousand
 marks, while the poor and learned hardly obtain one of twenty. god gave
 the sheep to be pastured, not to be shaven and shorn.
 and a little later comes the poet of the people, piers plowman—
 but now is religion a rider, a roamer through the streets, a leader at the
 love-day, a buyer of the land, pricking on a palfrey from manor to manor,
 a heap of hounds at his back, as tho he were a lord; and if his servant
 kneel not when he brings his cup, he loureth on him asking who taught him
 courtesy. badly have lords done to give their heirs' lands away to the
 orders that have no pity; money rains upon their altars. there where such
 parsons be living at ease they have no pity on the poor; that is their
 "charity". ye hold you as lords; your lands are too broad, but there shall
 come a king and he shall shrive you all and beat you as the bible saith
 for breaking of your rule.
 another step through history, and in the early part of the sixteenth
 century here is simon fish, addressing king henry the eighth, in the
 "supplicacyon for the beggars", complaining of the "strong, puissant and
 counterfeit holy and ydell" which "are now increased under your sight, not
 only into a great nombre, but ynto a kingdome."
 they have begged so importunatly that they have gotten ynto their hondes
 more than a therd part of all youre realme. the goodliest lordshippes,
 maners, londes, and territories, are theyres. besides this, they have the
 tenth part of all the come, medowe, pasture, grasse, wolle, coltes,
 calves, lambes, pigges, gese and chikens. ye, and they looke so narowly
 uppon theyre proufittes, that the poore wyves must be countable to thym of
 every tenth eg, or elles she gettith not her rytes at ester, shal be taken
 as an heretike.... is it any merveille that youre people so compleine of
 povertie? the turke nowe, in your tyme, shulde never be abill to get so
 moche grounde of christendome... and whate do al these gredy sort of
 sturdy, idell, holy theves? these be they that have made an hundredth
 thousand idell hores in your realme. these be they that catche the pokkes
 of one woman, and here them to an other.
 the petitioner goes on to tell how they steal wives and all their goods
 with them, and if any man protest they make him a heretic, "so that it
 maketh him wisshe that he had not done it". also they take fortunes for
 masses and then don't say them. "if the abbot of westminster shulde sing
 every day as many masses for his founders as he is bounde to do by his
 foundacion,  monkes were too few." the petitioner suggests that the
 king shall "tie these holy idell theves to the cartes, to be whipped naked
 about every market towne till they will fall to laboure!"
 church history
 king henry did not follow this suggestion precisely, but he took away the
 property of the religious orders for the expenses of his many wives and
 mistresses, and forced the clergy in england to forswear obedience to the
 pope and make his royal self their spiritual head. this was the beginning
 of the anglican church, as distinguished from the catholic; a beginning of
 which the anglican clergy are not so proud as they would like to be. when
 i was a boy, they taught me what they called "church history", and when
 they came to henry the eighth they used him as an illustration of the fact
 that the lord is sometimes wont to choose evil men to carry out his
 righteous purposes. they did not explain why the lord should do this
 confusing thing, nor just how you were to know, when you saw something
 being done by a murderous adulterer, whether it was the will of the lord
 or of satan; nor did they go into details as to the motives which the lord
 had been at pains to provide, so as to induce his royal agent to found the
 anglican church. for such details you have to consult another set of
 authorities—the victims of the plundering.
 when i was in college my professor of latin was a gentleman with bushy
 brown whiskers and a thundering voice of which i was often the object—for
 even in those early days i had the habit of persisting in embarrassing
 questions. this professor was a devout catholic, and not even in dealing
 with ancient romans could he restrain his propaganda impulses. later on in
 life he became editor of the "catholic encyclopedia", and now when i turn
 its pages, i imagine that i see the bushy brown whiskers, and hear the
 thundering voice: "mr. sinclair, it is so because i tell you it is so!"
 i investigate, and find that my ex-professor knows all about king henry
 the eighth, and his motives in founding the church of england; he is ready
 with an "economic interpretation", as complete as the most rabid muckraker
 could desire! it appears that the king wanted a new wife, and demanded
 that the pope should grant the necessary permission; in his efforts to
 browbeat the pope into such betrayal of duty, king henry threatened the
 withdrawal of the "annates" and the "peter's pence". later on he forced
 the clergy to declare that the pope was "only a foreign bishop", and in
 order to "stamp out overt expression of disaffection, he embarked upon a
 veritable reign of terror".
 in anglican histories, you are assured that all this was a work of
 religious reform, and that after it the church was the pure vehicle of
 god's grace. there were no more "holy idell theves", holding the land of
 england and plundering the poor. but get to know the clergy, and see
 things from the inside, and you will meet some one like the archbishop of
 cashell, who wrote to one of his intimates:
 i conclude that a good bishop has nothing more to do than to eat, drink
 and grow fat, rich and die; which laudable example i propose for the
 remainder of my days to follow.
 if you say that might be a casual jest, hear what thackeray reports of
 that period, the eighteenth century, which he knew with peculiar intimacy:
 i read that lady yarmouth (my most religious and gracious king's favorite)
 sold a bishopric to a clergyman for  pounds. (she betted him the 
 pounds that he would not be made a bishop, and he lost, and paid her.) was
 he the only prelate of his time led up by such hands for consecration? as
 i peep into george ii's st. james, i see crowds of cassocks pushing up the
 back-stairs of the ladies of the court; stealthy clergy slipping purses
 into their laps; that godless old king yawning under his canopy in his
 chapel royal, as the chaplain before him is discoursing. discoursing about
 what?—about righteousness and judgment? whilst the chaplain is
 preaching, the king is chattering in german and almost as loud as the
 preacher; so loud that the clergyman actually burst out crying in his
 pulpit, because the defender of the faith and the dispenser of bishoprics
 would not listen to him!
 land and livings
 and how is it in the twentieth century? have conditions been much
 improved? there are great englishmen who do not think so. i quote robert
 buchanan, a poet who spoke for the people, and who therefore has still to
 be recognized by english critics. he writes of the "new rome", by which he
 means present-day england:
 the gods are dead, but in their name
 humanity is sold to shame,
 while (then as now!) the tinsel'd priest
 sitteth with robbers at the feast,
 blesses the laden, blood-stained board,
 weaves garlands round the butcher's sword,
 and poureth freely (now as then)
 the sacramental blood of men!
 you see, the land system of england remains—the changes having been
 for the worse. william the conqueror wanted to keep the saxon peasantry
 contented, so he left them their "commons"; but in the eighteenth century
 these were nearly all filched away. we saw the same thing done within the
 last generation in mexico, and from the same motive—because
 developing capitalism needs cheap labor, whereas people who have access to
 the land will not slave in mills and mines. in england, from the time of
 queen anne to that of william and mary, the parliaments of the landlords
 passed some four thousand separate acts, whereby more than seven million
 acres of the common land were stolen from the people. it has been
 calculated that these acres might have supported a million families; and
 ever since then england has had to feed a million paupers all the time.
 as an old song puts the matter:
 why prosecute the man or woman
 who steals a goose from off the common,
 and let the greater felon loose
 who steals the common from the goose?
 in our day the land aristocracy is rooted like the native oak in british
 soil: some of them direct descendants of the normans, others children of
 the court favorites and panders who grew rich in the days of the tudors
 and the unspeakable stuarts. seven men own practically all the land of the
 city and county of london, and collect tribute from seven millions of
 people. the estates are entailed—that is, handed down from father to
 oldest son automatically; you cannot buy any land, but if you want to
 build, the landlord gives you a lease, and when the lease is up, he takes
 possession of your buildings. the tribute which london pays is more than a
 hundred million dollars a year. so absolute is the right of the land-owner
 that he can sue for trespass the driver on an aeroplane which flies over
 him; he imposes on fishermen a tax upon catches made many hundred of yards
 from the shore.
 and in this graft, of course, the church has its share. each church owns
 land—not merely that upon which it stands, but farms and city lots
 from which it derives income. each cathedral owns large tracts; so do the
 schools and universities in which the clergy are educated. the income from
 the holdings of a church constitutes what is called a "living"; these
 livings, which vary in size, are the prerogatives of the younger sons of
 the ruling families, and are intrigued and scrambled for in exactly the
 fashion which thackeray describes in the eighteenth century.
 about six thousand of these "livings" are in the gift of great land
 owners; one noble lord alone disposes of fifty-six such plums; and
 needless to say, he does not present them to clergymen who favor radical
 land-taxes. he gives them to men like himself—autocratic to the
 poor, easy-going to members of his own class, and cynical concerning the
 grafts of grace.
 in one english village which i visited the living was worth seven hundred
 pounds, with the use of a fine mansion; as the incumbent had a large
 family, he lived there. in another place the living was worth a thousand
 pounds, and the incumbent hired a curate, himself appearing twice a year,
 on christmas day and on the king's birthday, to preach a sermon; the rest
 of the time he spent in paris. it is worth noting that in  a law was
 proposed compelling absentee pluralists—that is, clergymen holding
 more than one "living"—to furnish curates to do their work; it might
 be interesting to note that this law met with strenuous clerical
 opposition, the house of bishops voting against it without a division.
 thus we may understand the sharp saying of karl marx, that the english
 clergy would rather part with thirty-eight of their thirty-nine articles
 than with one thirty-ninth of their income.
 there is always a plentiful supply of curates in england. they are the
 sons of the less influential ruling families, and of the clergy; they have
 been trained at oxford or cambridge, and possess the one essential
 qualification, that they are gentlemen. their average price is two hundred
 and fifty pounds a year; their function was made clear to me when i
 attended my first english tea-party. there was a wicker table, perhaps a
 foot and a half square, having three shelves, one below the other the top
 layer the plates and napkins, on the next the muffins, and on the lowest
 the cake. said the hostess, "will you pass the curate, please?" i looked
 puzzled, and she pointed. "we call that the curate, because it does the
 work of a curate."
 graft in tail
 as one of america's head muck-rakers, i found that i was popular with the
 british ruling classes; they found my books useful in their campaigns
 against democracy, and they were surprised and disconcerted when they
 found i did not agree with their interpretation of my writings. i had told
 of corruption in american politics; surely i must know that in england
 they had no such evils! i explained that they did not have to; their
 graft, to use their own legal phrase, was "in tail"; the grafters had, as
 a matter of divine right, the things which in america they had to buy. in
 america, for instance, we had a senate, a "millionaire's club", for
 admission to which the members paid in cash; but in england the same men
 came to the same position as their birth-right. political corruption is
 not an end in itself, it is merely a means to exploitation; and of
 exploitation england has even more than america. when i explained this, my
 popularity with the british ruling classes vanished quickly.
 as a matter of fact, england is more like america than she realizes; her
 british reticence has kept her ignorant about herself. i could not carry
 on my business in england, because of the libel laws, which have as their
 first principle "the greater the truth, the greater the libel". englishmen
 read with satisfaction what i write about america; but if i should turn my
 attention to their own country, they would send me to jail as they sent
 frank harris. the fact is that the new men in england, the lords of coal
 and iron and shipping and beer, have bought their way into the landed
 aristocracy for cash, just as our american senators have done; they have
 bought the political parties with campaign gifts, precisely as in america;
 they have taken over the press, whether by outright purchase like
 northcliffe, or by advertising subsidy—both of which methods we
 americans know. within the last decade or two another group has been
 coming into control; and not merely is this the same class of men as in
 america, it frequently consists of the same individuals. these are the big
 money-lenders, the international financiers who are the fine and final
 flower of the capitalist system. these gentlemen make the world their home—or,
 as shakespeare puts it, their oyster. they know how to fit themselves to
 all environments; they are catholics in rome and vienna, country gentlemen
 in london, bons vivants in paris, democrats in chicago, socialists in
 petrograd, and hebrews wherever they are.
 and of course, in buying the english government, these new classes have
 bought the english church. skeptics and men of the world as they are, they
 know that they must have a religion. they have read the story of the
 french revolution, and the shadow of the guillotine is always over their
 thoughts; they see the giant of labor, restless in his torment, groping as
 in a nightmare for the throat of his enemy. who can blind the eyes of this
 giant, who can chain him to his couch of slumber? there is but one agent,
 without rival—the keeper of the holy secrets, the deputy of the
 almighty awfulness, the giver and withholder of eternal life. tremble,
 slave! fall down and bow your forehead in the dust! i can see in my memory
 the sight that thrilled my childhood—my grim old bishop, clad in his
 gorgeous ceremonial robes, stretching out his hands over the head of the
 new priest, and pronouncing that most deadly of all the christian curses:
 "whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou dost
 retain, they are retained!"
 bishops and beer
 for example, the international shylocks wanted the diamond mines of south
 africa—wanted them more firmly governed and less firmly taxed than
 could be arranged with the old man of the boers. so the armies of england
 were sent to subjugate the country. you might think they would have had
 the good taste to leave the lowly jesus out of this affair—but if
 so, you have missed the essential point about established religion. the
 bishops, priests, and deacons are set up for the populace to revere, and
 when the robber-classes need a blessing upon some enterprise, then is the
 opportunity for the bishops, priests and deacons to earn their "living."
 during the boer war the blood-lust of the english clergy was so extreme
 that writers in the dignified monthly reviews felt moved to protest
 against it. when the pastors of switzerland issued a collective protest
 against cruelties to women and children in the south african
 concentration-camps, it was the right reverend bishop of winchester who
 was brought forward to make reply. nowadays all england is reading
 bernhardi, and shuddering at prussian glorification of war; but no one
 mentions bishop welldon of calcutta, who advocated the boer war as a means
 of keeping the nation "virile"; nor archbishop alexander, who said that it
 was god's way of making "noble natures".
 the british god had other ways of improving nations—for example, the
 opium traffic. the british traders had been raising the poppy in india and
 selling its juice to the chinese. they had made perhaps a hundred million
 "noble natures" by this method; and also they were making a hundred
 million dollars a year. the chinese, moved by their new "virility,"
 undertook to destroy some opium, and to stop the traffic; whereupon it was
 necessary to use british battle-ships to punish and subdue them. was there
 any difficulty in persuading the established church of jesus to bless this
 holy war? there was not! lord shaftesbury, himself the most devout of
 anglicans, commented with horror upon the attitude of the clergy, and
 wrote in his diary:
 i rejoice that this cruel and debasing opium war is terminated. we have
 triumphed in one of the most lawless, unnecessary, and unfair struggles in
 the records of history; and christians have shed more heathen blood in two
 years, than the heathens have shed of christian blood in two centuries.
 that was in ; for seventy years thereafter pious england continued to
 force the opium traffic upon protesting china, and only in the last two or
 three years has the infamy been brought to an end. throughout the long
 controversy the attitude of the church was such that li hung chang was
 moved to assert in a letter to the anti-opium society:
 opium is a subject in the discussion of which england and china can never
 meet on a common ground. china views the whole question from a moral
 standpoint, england from a fiscal.
 and just as the chinese people were poisoned with opium, so the english
 people are being poisoned with alcohol. both in town and country, labor is
 sodden with it. scientists and reformers are clamoring for restriction—and
 what prevents? head and front of the opposition for a century, standing
 like a rock, has been the established church. the rev. dawson burns,
 historian of the early temperance movement, declares that "among its
 supporters i cannot recall one church of england minister of influence."
 when asquith brought in his bill for the restriction of the traffic in
 beer, he was confronted with petitions signed by members of the clergy,
 protesting against the act. and what was the basis of their protest? that
 beer is a food and not a poison? yes, of course; but also that there was
 property invested in brewing it, three hundred and thirty-two clergy of
 the diocese of peterborough declared:
 we do strongly protest against the main provisions of the present bill as
 creating amongst our people a sense of grave injustice as amounting to a
 confiscation of private property, spelling ruin for thousands of quite
 innocent people, and provoking deep and widespread resentment, which must
 do harm to our cause and hinder our aims.
 i have come upon references to another and even more plainspoken petition,
 signed by , clergymen; but war-time facilities for research have not
 enabled me to find the text. in prof. henry c. vedder's "jesus christ and
 the social question," we read:
 it was authoritatively stated a short time ago that mr. asquith's
 temperance bill was defeated in parliament through the opposition of
 clergymen who had invested their savings in brewery stock, the profits of
 which might have been lessened by the bill.
 also the power of the clergy, combined with the brewer, was sufficient to
 put through parliament a provision that no prohibition legislation should
 ever be passed without providing for compensation to the owners of the
 industry. today, all over america, appeals are being made to the people to
 eat less grain; the grain is being shipped to england, some of it to be
 made into beer; and a high anglican prelate, his grace the archbishop of
 york, comes to america to urge us to increased sacrifices, and in his
 first newspaper interview takes occasion to declare that his church is not
 in favor of prohibition as a measure of war-time economy!
 anglicanism and alcohol
 this partnership of bishops and beer is painfully familiar to british
 radicals; they see it at work in every election—the publican
 confusing the voters with spirits, while the parson confuses them with
 spirituality. there are two powerful societies in england employing this
 deadly combination—the "anti-socialist union" and the "liberty and
 property defense league." if you scan the lists of the organizers,
 directors and subsidizers of these satanic institutions, you find tory
 politicians and landlords, prominent members of the higher clergy, and
 large-scale dealers in drunkenness. i attended in london a meeting called
 by the "liberty and property defense league," to listen to a denunciation
 of socialism by w. h. mallock, a master sophist of roman catholicism; upon
 the platform were a bishop and half a dozen members of the anglican
 clergy, together with the secretary of the federated brewers' association,
 the secretary of the wine, spirit, and beer trade association, and three
 or four other alcoholic magnates.
 in every public library in england and many in america you will find an
 assortment of pamphlets published by these organizations, and scholarly
 volumes endorsed by them, in which the stock misrepresentations of
 socialism are perpetuated. some of these writings are brutal—setting
 forth the ethics of exploitation in the manner of the rev. thomas malthus,
 the english clergyman who supplied for capitalist depredation a basis in
 pretended natural science. said this shepherd of jesus:
 a man who is born into a world already possessed, if he cannot get
 subsistence from his parents, and if society does not want his labor, has
 no claim of right to the smallest portion of food, and in fact has no
 business to be where he is. at nature's mighty feast there is no cover for
 him. she tells him to be gone, and will quickly execute her own orders.
 such was the tone of the ruling classes in the nineteenth century; but it
 was found that for some reason this failed to stop the growth of
 socialism, and so in our time the clerical defenders of privilege have
 grown subtle and insinuating. they inform us now that they have a deep
 sympathy with our fundamental purposes; they burn with pity for the poor,
 and they would really and truly wish happiness to everyone, not merely in
 heaven, but right here and now. however, there are so many complications—and
 so they proceed to set out all the anti-socialist bug-a-boos. here for
 example, is the rev. james stalker, d. d., expounding "the ethics of
 jesus," and admonishing us extremists:
 efforts to transfer money and property from one set of hands to another
 may be inspired by the same passions as have blinded the present holders
 to their own highest good, and may be accompanied with injustice as
 extreme as has ever been manifested by the rich and powerful.
 and again, the rev. w. sanday, d. d., an especially popular clerical
 author, gives us this sublime utterance of religion on wage-slavery:
 the world is full of mysteries, but some clear lines run through them, of
 which this is one. where god has been so patient, it is not for us to be
 impatient.
 and again, professor robert flint, of edinburgh university, a clergyman,
 author of a big book attacking socialism, and bringing us back to the
 faith of our fathers:
 the great bulk of human misery is due, not to social arrangements, but to
 personal vices.
 i study professor flint's volume in the effort to find just what, if
 anything, he would have the church do about the evils of our time. i find
 him praising the sermons of dr. westcott, bishop of durham, as being the
 proper sort for clergymen to preach. bishop westcott, whether he is
 talking to a high society congregation, or to one of workingmen, shows "an
 exquisite sense of knowing always where to stop." so i consulted the
 bishop's volume, "the social aspects of christianity" and i see at once
 why he is popular with the anti-socialist propagandists—neither i or
 any other man can possibly discover what he really means, or what he
 really wants done.
 i was fascinated by this westcott problem; i thought maybe if i kept on
 the good bishop's trail, i might in the end find something a plain man
 could understand; so i got the beautiful two-volume "life of brooke
 westcott, by his son"—and there i found an exposition of the social
 purposes of bishops! in the year  there was a strike in durham, which
 is in the coal country; the employers tried to make a cut in wages, and
 some ten thousand men walked out, and there was a long and bitter
 struggle, which wrung the episcopal heart. there was much consultation and
 correspondence on episcopal stationery, and at last the masters and men
 were got together, with the bishop as arbitrator, and the dispute was
 triumphantly settled—how do you suppose? on the basis of a ten per
 cent reduction in wages!
 i know nothing quainter in the history of english graft than the naivete
 with which the bishop's biographer and son tells the story of this
 episcopal venture into reality. the prelate came out from the conference
 "all smiles, and well satisfied with the result of his day's work." as for
 his followers, they were in ecstacies; they "seized and waltzed one
 another around on the carriage drive as madly as ever we danced at a
 flower show ball. hats and caps are thrown into the air, and we cheer
 ourselves hoarse." the bishop proceeds to his palace, and sends one more
 communication on episcopal stationery—an order to all his clergy to
 "offer their humble and hearty thanks to god for our happy deliverance
 from the strife by which the diocese has been long afflicted." strange to
 say, there were a few varlets in durham who did not appreciate the
 services of the bold bishop, and one of them wrote and circulated some
 abusive verses, in which he made reference to the bishop's comfortable way
 of life. the biographer then explains that the bishop was so
 tender-hearted that he suffered for the horses who drew his episcopal
 coach, and so ascetic that he would have lived on tea and toast if he had
 been permitted to. a curious condition in english society, where the
 bishop would have lived on tea and toast, but was not permitted to; while
 the working people, who didn't want to live on tea and toast, were
 compelled to!
 dead cats
 for more than a hundred years the anglican clergy have been fighting with
 every resource at their command the liberal and enlightened men of england
 who wished to educate the masses of the people. in  the first measure
 for a national school-system was denounced by the archbishop of canterbury
 as "derogatory to the authority of the church." as a counte-measure, his
 supporters established the "national society for promoting the education
 of the poor in the doctrines of the established church"; and the founder
 of the organization, a clergyman, advocated a barn as a good structure for
 a school, and insisted that the children of the workers "should not be
 taught beyond their station." in  a committee of the privy council of
 education was appointed, but bowed to the will of the archbishops, setting
 forth the decree of "their lordships" that "the first purpose of all
 instruction must be the regulation of the thoughts and habits of the
 children by the doctrine and precepts of revealed religion." in  a
 bill for secular education was denounced as presenting to the country "a
 choice between heaven or hell, god or the devil." in , forster, author
 of the still unpassed bill, wrote that while the parsons were disputing,
 the children of the poor were "growing into savages."
 as with education, so with social reform. during the struggle to abolish
 slavery in the british colonies, some enthusiasts endeavored to establish
 the doctrine that christian baptism conferred emancipation upon negroes
 who accepted it; whereupon the bishop of london laid down the formula of
 exploitation: "christianity and the embracing of the gospel do not make
 the least alteration of civil property."
 gladstone, who was a democrat when he was not religious, spoke of the
 cultured classes of england:
 in almost every one, if not every one, of the greatest political
 controversies of the last fifty years, whether they affected the
 franchise, whether they affected commerce, whether they affected religion,
 whether they affected the bad and abominable institution of slavery, or
 what subject they touched, these leisured classes, these educated classes,
 these titled classes have been in the wrong.
 the "great commoner" did not add "these religious classes," for he
 belonged to the religious classes himself; but a study of the record will
 supply the gap. the church opposed all the reform measures which gladstone
 himself put through. it opposed the reform bill of . it opposed all
 the social reforms of lord shaftesbury. this noble-hearted englishman
 complained that at first only a single minister of religion supported him,
 and to the end only a few. he expressed himself as distressed and puzzled
 "to find support from infidels and non-professors; opposition or coldness
 from religionists or declaimers."
 and to our own day it has been the same. in  the house of bishops
 voted solidly against the employers' liability law. the house of bishops
 opposed home rule, and beat it; the house of bishops opposed womans'
 suffrage, and voted against it to the end. concerning this establishment
 lord shaftesbury, himself the most devout of englishmen, used the vivid
 phrase: "this vast aquarium full of cold-blooded life." he told the
 bishops that he would give up preaching to them about ecclesiastical
 reform, because he knew that they would never begin. another member of the
 british aristocracy, the hon. geo. russell, has written of their record
 and adventures:
 they were defenders of absolutism, slavery, and the bloody penal code;
 they were the resolute opponents of every political or social reform; and
 they had their reward from the nation outside parliament. the bishop of
 bristol had his palace sacked and burnt; the bishop of london could not
 keep an engagement to preach lest the congregation should stone him. the
 bishop of litchfield barely escaped with his life after preaching at st.
 bride's, fleet street. archbishop howley, entering canterbury for his
 primary visitation, was insulted, spat upon, and only brought by a
 circuitous route to the deanery, amid the execrations of the mob. on the
 th of november the bishops of exeter and winchester were burnt in effigy
 close to their own palace gates. archbishop howley's chaplain complained
 that a dead cat had been thrown at him, when the archbishop—a man of
 apostolic meekness—replied: "you should be thankful that it was not
 a live one."
 the people had reason for this conduct—as you will always find they
 have, if you take the trouble to inquire. let me quote another member of
 the english ruling classes, mr. conrad noel, who gives "an instance of the
 procedure of church and state about this period":
 in  six agricultural labourers in south dorsetshire, led by one of
 their class, george loveless, in receipt of s. a week each, demanded the
 s. rate of wages usual in the neighbourhood. the result was a reduction
 to s. an appeal was made to the chairman of the local bench, who decided
 that they must work for whatever their masters chose to pay them. the
 parson, who had at first promised his help, now turned against them, and
 the masters promptly reduced the wage to s., with a threat of further
 reduction. loveless then formed an agricultural union, for which all seven
 were arrested, treated as convicts, and committed to the assizes. the
 prison chaplain tried to bully them into submission. the judge determined
 to convict them, and directed that they should be tried for mutiny under
 an act of george iii, specially passed to deal with the naval mutiny at
 the nore. the grand jury were landowners, and the petty jury were farmers;
 both judge and jury were churchmen of the prevailing type. the judge
 summed up as follows: "not for anything that you have done, or that i can
 prove that you intend to do, but for an example to others i consider it my
 duty to pass the sentence of seven years' penal transportation across his
 majesty's high seas upon each and every one of you."
 suffer little children
 the founder of christianity was a man who specialized in children. he was
 not afraid of having his discourses disturbed by them, he did not consider
 them superfluous. "of such is the kingdom of heaven", he said; and his
 church is the inheritor of this tradition—"feed my lambs". there
 were children in great britain in the early part of the nineteenth
 century, and we may see what was done with them by turning to gibbon's
 "industrial history of england":
 sometimes regular traffickers would take the place of the manufacturer,
 and transfer a number of children to a factory district, and there keep
 them, generally in some dark cellar, till they could hand them over to a
 mill owner in want of hands, who would come and examine their height,
 strength, and bodily capacities, exactly as did the slave owners in the
 american markets. after that the children were simply at the mercy of
 their owners, nominally as apprentices, but in reality as mere slaves, who
 got no wages, and whom it was not worth while even to feed and clothe
 properly, because they were so cheap and their places could be so easily
 supplied. it was often arranged by the parish authorities, in order to get
 rid of imbeciles, that one idiot should be taken by the mill owner with
 every twenty sane children. the fate of these unhappy idiots was even
 worse than that of the others. the secret of their final end has never
 been disclosed, but we can form some idea of their awful sufferings from
 the hardships of the other victims to capitalist greed and cruelty. the
 hours of their labor were only limited by exhaustion, after many modes of
 torture had been unavailingly applied to force continued work. children
 were often worked sixteen hours a day, by day and by night.
 in the year  an act of parliament was proposed limiting the labor of
 children nine years of age to four-teen hours a day. this would seem to
 have been a reasonable provision, likely to have won the approval of
 christ; yet the bill was violently opposed by christian employers, backed
 by christian clergymen. it was interfering with freedom of contract, and
 therefore with the will of providence; it was anathema to an established
 church, whose function was in , as it is in , and was in  b.
 c., to teach the divine origin and sanction of the prevailing economic
 order. "anu and baal called me, hammurabi, the exalted prince, worshipper
 of the gods".... so begins the oldest legal code which has come down to
 us, from  b. c.; and the coronation service of the english church is
 made whole out of the same thesis. the duty of submission, not merely to
 divinely chosen king, but to divinely chosen landlord and divinely chosen
 manufacturer, is implicit in the church's every ceremony, and explicit in
 many of its creeds. in the litany the people petition for increase of
 grace to hear meekly "thy word"; and here is this "word," as little
 children are made to learn it by heart. if there exists in the world a
 more perfect summary of slave ethics, i do not know where to find it.
 my duty towards my neighbour is..... to honour and obey the king, and all
 that are put in authority under him; to submit myself to all my
 governours, teachers, spiritual pastors, and masters: to order myself
 lowly and reverently to all my betters.... not to covet nor desire other
 men's goods; but to learn and labour truly to get mine own living, and to
 do my duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please god to call
 me.
 a hundred years ago one of the most popular of british writers was hannah
 more. she and her sister martha went to live in the coal-country, to teach
 this "catechism" to the children of the starving miners. the "mendip
 annals" is the title of a book in which they tell of their ten years'
 labors in a village popularly known as "little hell." in this place two
 hundred people were crowded into nineteen houses. "there is not one
 creature in it that can give a cup of broth if it would save a life." in
 one winter eighteen perished of "a putrid fever", and the clergyman "could
 not raise a sixpence to save a life."
 and what did the pious sisters make of all this? from cover to cover you
 find in the "mendip annals" no single word of social protest, not even of
 social suspicion. that wages of a shilling a day might have anything to do
 with moral degeneration was a proposition beyond the mental powers of
 england's most popular woman writer. she was perfectly content that a
 woman should be sentenced to death for stealing butter from a dealer who
 had asked what the woman thought too high a price. when there came a
 famine, and the children of these mine-slaves were dying like flies,
 hannah more bade them be happy because god had sent them her pious self.
 "in suffering by the scarcity, you have but shared in the common lot, with
 the pleasure of knowing the advantage you have had over many villages in
 your having suffered no scarcity of religious instruction." and in another
 place she explained that the famine was caused by god to teach the poor to
 be grateful to the rich!
 let me remind you that probably that very scarcity has been permitted by
 an all-wise and gracious providence to unite all ranks of people together,
 to show the poor how immediately they are dependent upon the rich, and to
 show both rich and poor that they are all dependent upon himself. it has
 also enabled you to see more clearly the advantages you derive from the
 government and constitution of this country—to observe the benefits
 flowing from the distinction of rank and fortune, which has enabled the
 high to so liberally assist the low.
 it appears that the villagers were entirely convinced by this pious
 reasoning; for they assembled one saturday night and burned an effigy of
 tom paine! this proceeding led to a tragic consequence, for one of the
 "common people," known as robert, "was overtaken by liquor," and was
 unable to appear at sunday school next day. this fall from grace
 occasioned intense remorse in robert. "it preyed dreadfully upon his mind
 for many months," records martha more, "and despair seemed at length to
 take possession of him." hannah had some conversation with him, and read
 him some suitable passages from "the rise and progress". "at length the
 almighty was pleased to shine into his heart and give him comfort."
 nor should you imagine that this saintly stupidity was in any way unique
 in the anglican establishment. we read in the letters of shelley how his
 father tormented him with archdeacon paley's "evidences" as a cure for
 atheism. this eminent churchman wrote a book, which he himself ranked
 first among his writings, called "reasons for contentment, addressed to
 the labouring classes of the british public." in this book he not merely
 proved that religion "smooths all inequalities, because it unfolds a
 prospect which makes all earthly distinctions nothing"; he went so far as
 to prove that, quite apart from religion, the british exploiters were less
 fortunate than those to whom they paid a shilling a day.
 some of the conditions which poverty (if the condition of the labouring
 part of mankind must be so called) imposes, are not hardships, but
 pleasures. frugality itself is a pleasure. it is an exercise of attention
 and contrivance, which, whenever it is successful, produces
 satisfaction..... this is lost among abundance.
 and there was william wilberforce, as sincere a philanthropist as
 anglicanism ever produced, an ardent supporter of bible societies and
 foreign missions, a champion of the anti-slavery movement, and also of the
 ruthless "combination laws," which denied to british wage-slaves all
 chance of bettering their lot. wilberforce published a "practical view of
 the system of christianity", in which he told unblushingly what the
 anglican establishment is for. in a chapter which he described as "the
 basis of all politics," he explained that the purpose of religion is to
 remind the poor:
 that their more lowly path has been allotted to them by the hand of god;
 that it is their part faithfully to discharge its duties, and contentedly
 to bear its inconveniences; that the objects about which worldly men
 conflict so eagerly are not worth the contest; that the peace of mind,
 which religion offers indiscriminately to all ranks, affords more true
 satisfaction than all the expensive pleasures which are beyond the poor
 man's reach; that in this view the poor have the advantage; that if their
 superiors enjoy more abundant comforts, they are also exposed to many
 temptations from which the inferior classes are happily exempted; that,
 "having food and raiment, they should be therewith content," since their
 situation in life, with all its evils, is better than they have deserved
 at the hand of god; and finally, that all human distinctions will soon be
 done away, and the true followers of christ will all, as children of the
 same father, be alike admitted to the possession of the same heavenly
 inheritance. such are the blessed effects of christianity on the temporal
 well-being of political communities.
 the court circular
 the anglican system of submission has been transplanted intact to the soil
 of america. when king george the third lost the sovereignty of the
 colonies, the bishops of his divinely inspired church lost the control of
 the clergy across the seas; but this revolution was purely one of church
 politics—in doctrine and ritual the "protestant episcopal church of
 america" remained in every way anglican. the little children of our free
 republic are taught the same slave-catechism, "to order myself lowly and
 reverently to all my betters." the only difference is that instead of
 being told "to honour and obey the king," they are told "to honour and
 obey the civil authority."
it is the church of good society in england, and it is the same in
boston, new york, philadelphia, baltimore, washington, charleston. just
as our ruling classes have provided themselves with imitation english
schools and imitation english manners and imitation english clothes—so
in their heaven they have provided an imitation english monarch. i
wonder how many americans realize the treason to democracy they are
committing when they allow their children to be taught a symbolism and
liturgy based upon absolutist ideas. i take up the hymn-book—not the
english, but the sturdy, independent, democratic american hymn-book.
i have not opened it for twenty years, yet the greater part of its
contents is as familiar to me as the syllables of my own name. i read:
 holy, holy, holy! all the saints adore thee, casting down their
golden crowns around the glassy sea; cherubim and seraphim bowing down
before thee, which wert, and art, and ever more shall be!
 one might quote a hundred other hymns made thus out of royal imagery. i
 turn at random to the part headed "general," and find that there is hardly
 one hymn in which there is not "king..... throne," or some image of homage
 and flattery. the first hymn begins—
 ancient of days, who sittest, throned in glory;
 to thee all knees are bent, all voices pray.
 and the second—
 christ, whose glory fills the skies—-
 and the third—
 lord of all being, throned afar,
 thy glory flames from sun and star.
 there is a court in heaven above, to which all good britons look up, and
 about which they read with exactly the same thrills as they read the court
 circular. the two courts have the same ethical code and the same manners;
 their sovereigns are jealous, greedy of attention, self-conscious and
 profoundly serious, punctilious and precise; their existence consisting of
 an endless round of ceremonies, and they being incapable of boredom. no
 member of the royal family can escape this regime even if he wishes; and
 no more can any member of the holy family—not even the meek and
 lowly jesus, who chose a carpenter's wife for his mother, and showed all
 his earthly days a preference for low society.
 this unconventional son lived obscurely; he never carried weapons, he
 could not bear to have so much as a human ear cut off in his presence. but
 see how he figures in the court circular:
 the son of god goes forth to war,
 a kingly crown to gain:
 his blood-red banner streams afar:
 who follows in his train?
 this carpenter's son was one of the most unpretentious men on earth;
 utterly simple and honest—he would not even let anyone praise him.
 when some one called him "good master," he answered, quickly, "why callest
 thou me good? there is none good save one, that is, god." but this
 simplicity has been taken with deprecation by his church, which persists
 in heaping compliments upon him in conventional, courtly style:
 the company of angels
 are praising thee on high;
 and mortal men, and all things
 created, make reply: all glory, laud and honour,
 to thee, redeemer, king.....
 the impression a modern man gets from all this is the unutterable boredom
 that heaven must be. can one imagine a more painful occupation than that
 of the saints—casting down their golden crowns around the glassy sea—unless
 it be that of the triumvirate itself, compelled to sit through eternity
 watching these saints, and listening to their mawkish and superfluous
 compliments!
 but one can understand that such things are necessary in a monarchy; they
 are necessary if you are going to have good society, and a good society
 church. for good society is precisely the same thing as heaven; that is, a
 place to which only a few can get admission, and those few are bored. they
 spend their time going through costly formalities—not because they
 enjoy it, but because of its effect upon the populace, which reads about
 them and sees their pictures in the papers, and now and then is allowed to
 catch a glimpse of their physical presences, as at the horse-show, or the
 opera, or the coaching-parade.
 horn-blowing
 i know the church of good society in america, having studied it from the
 inside. i was an extraordinarily devout little boy; one of my earliest
 recollections—i cannot have been more than four years of age—is
 of carrying a dust-brush about the house as the choir-boy carried the
 golden cross every sunday morning. i remember asking if i might say the
 "lord's prayer" in this fascinating play; and my mother's reply: "if you
 say it reverently." when i was thirteen, i attended service, of my own
 volition and out of my own enthusiasm, every single day during the forty
 days of lent; at the age of fifteen i was teaching sunday-school. it was
 the church of the holy communion, at sixth avenue and twentieth street,
 new york; and those who know the city will understand that this is a
 peculiar location—precisely half way between the homes of some of
 the oldest and most august of the city's aristocracy, and some of the
 vilest and most filthy of the city's slums. the aristocracy were paying
 for the church, and occupied the best pews; they came, perfectly clad, aus
 dem ei gegossen, as the germans say, with the manner they so carefully
 cultivate, gracious, yet infinitely aloof. the service was made for them—as
 all the rest of the world is made for them; the populace was permitted to
 occupy a fringe of vacant seats.
 the assistant clergyman was an englishman, and a gentleman; orthodox, yet
 the warmest man's heart i have ever known. he could not bear to have the
 church remain entirely the church of the rich; he would go persistently
 into the homes of the poor, visiting the old slum women in their pitifully
 neat little kitchens, and luring their children with entertainments and
 christmas candy. they were corralled into the sunday-school, where it was
 my duty to give them what they needed for the health of their souls.
 i taught them out of a book of lessons; and one sunday it would be moses
 in the bulrushes, and next sunday it would be jonah and the whale, and
 next sunday it would be joshua blowing down the walls of jericho. these
 stories were reasonably entertaining, but they seemed to me futile, not to
 the point. there were little morals tagged to them, but these lacked
 relationship to the lives of little slum-boys. be good and you will be
 happy, love the lord and all will be well with you; which was about as
 true and as practical as the procedure of the fijians, blowing horns to
 drive away a pestilence.
 i had a mind, you see, and i was using it. i was reading the papers, and
 watching politics and business. i, followed the fates of my little
 slum-boys—and what i saw was that tammany hall was getting them. the
 liquor-dealers and the brothel-keepers, the panders and the pimps, the
 crap-shooters and the petty thieves—all these were paying the
 policeman and the politician for a chance to prey upon my boys; and when
 the boys got into trouble, as they were continually doing, it was the
 clergyman who consoled them in prison—but it was the tammany leader
 who saw the judge and got them out. so these boys got their lesson even
 earlier in life than i got mine—that the church was a kind of
 amiable fake, a pious horn-blowing; while the real thing was tammany.
 i talked about this with the vestrymen and the ladies of good society;
 they were deeply pained, but i noticed that they did nothing practical
 about it; and gradually, as i went on to investigate, i discovered the
 reason—that their incomes came from real estate, traction, gas and
 other interests, which were contributing the main part of the campaign
 expenses of the corrupt tammany machine, and of its equally corrupt rival.
 so it appeared that these immaculate ladies and gentlemen, aus dem ei
 gegossen, were themselves engaged, unconsciously, perhaps, but none the
 less effectively, in spreading the pestilence against which they were
 blowing their religious horns!
 so little by little i saw my beautiful church for what it was and is: a
 great capitalist interest, an integral and essential part of a gigantic
 predatory system. i saw that its ethical and cultural and artistic
 features, however sincerely they might be meant by individual clergymen,
 were nothing but a bait, a device to lure the poor into the trap of
 submission to their exploiters. and as i went on probing into the secret
 life of the great metropolis of mammon, and laying bare its infamies to
 the world, i saw the attitude of the church to such work; i met, not
 sympathy and understanding, but sneers and denunciation—until the
 venerable institution which had once seemed dignified and noble became to
 me as a sepulchre of corruption.
 trinity corporation
 there stands on the corner of broadway and wall street a towering
 brown-stone edifice, one of the most beautiful and most famous churches in
 america. as a child i have walked through its church yard and read the
 quaint and touching inscriptions on its gravestones; when i was a little
 older, and knew wall street, it seemed to me a sublime thing that here in
 the very heart of the world's infamy there should be raised, like a finger
 of warning, this symbol of eternity and judgment. its great bell rang at
 noon-time, and all the traders and their wage-slaves had to listen,
 whether they would or no! such was old trinity to my young soul; and what
 is it in reality?
 the story was told some ten years ago by charles edward russell. trinity
 corporation is the name of the concern, and it is one of the great
 landlords of new york. in the early days it bought a number of farms, and
 these it has held, as the city has grown up around them, until in 
 their value was estimated at anywhere from forty to a hundred million
 dollars. the true amount has never been made public; to quote russell's
 words:
 the real owners of the property are the communicants of the church. for 
 years none of the owners has known the extent of the property, nor the
 amount of the revenue therefrom, nor what is done with the money. every
 attempt to learn even the simplest fact about these matters has been
 baffled. the management is a self perpetuating body, without
 responsibility and without supervision.
 and the writer goes on to describe the business policy of this great
 corporation, which is simply the english land system complete. it refuses
 to sell the land, but rents it for long periods, and the tenant builds the
 house, and then when the lease expires, the corporation takes over the
 house for a nominal sum. thus it has purchased houses for as low as $,
 and made them into tenements, and rented them to the swarming poor for a
 total of fifty dollars a month. the houses were not built for tenements,
 they have no conveniences, they are not fit for the habitation of animals.
 the article, in everybody's magazine for july, , gives pictures of
 them, which are horrible beyond belief. to quote the writer again:
 decay, neglect and squalor seem to brood wherever trinity is an owner.
 gladly would i give to such a charitable and benevolent institution all
 possible credit for a spirit of improvement manifested anywhere, but i can
 find no such manifestation. i have tramped the eighth ward day after day
 with a list of trinity properties in my hand, and of all the tenement
 houses that stand there on trinity land, i have not found one that is not
 a disgrace to civilization and to the city of new york.
 it happens that i once knew the stately prelate who presided over this
 corporation of corruption. i imagine how he would have shivered and turned
 pale had some angel whispered to him what devilish utterances were some
 day to proceed from the lips of the little cherub with shining face and
 shining robes who acted as the bishop's attendant in the stately
 ceremonials of the church! truly, even into the goodly company of the
 elect, even to the most holy places of the temple, satan makes his
 treacherous way! even under the consecrated hands of the bishop! for while
 the bishop was blessing me and taking me into the company of the
 sanctified, i was thinking about what the papers had reported, that the
 bishop's wife had been robbed of fifty thousand dollars worth of jewels!
 it did not seem quite in accordance with the doctrine of jesus that a
 bishop's wife should possess fifty thousand dollars worth of jewels, or
 that she should be setting the blood-hounds of the police on the train of
 a human being. i asked my clergyman friend about it, and remember his
 patient explanation—that the bishop had to know all classes and
 conditions of men: his wife had to go among the rich as well as the poor,
 and must be able to dress so that she would not be embarrassed. the bishop
 at this time was making it his life-work to raise a million dollars for
 the beginning of a great episcopal cathedral; and this of course compelled
 him to spend much time among the rich!
 the explanation satisfied me; for of course i thought there had to be
 cathedrals—despite the fact that both st. stephen and st. paul had
 declared that "the lord dwelleth not in temples made with hands." in the
 twenty-five years which have passed since that time the good bishop has
 passed to his eternal reward, but the mighty structure which is a monument
 to his visitations among the rich towers over the city from its
 vantage-point on morningside heights. it is called the cathedral of st.
 john the divine; and knowing what i know about the men who contributed its
 funds, and about the general functions of the churches of the metropolis
 of mammon, it would not seem to me less holy if it were built, like the
 monuments of ancient ravagers, out of the skulls of human beings.
 spiritual interpretation
 there remains to say a few words as to the intellectual functions of the
 fifth avenue clergy. let us realize at the outset that they do their
 preaching in the name of a proletarian rebel, who was crucified as a
 common criminal because, as they said, "he stirreth up the people." an
 embarrassing "savior" for the church of good society, you might imagine;
 but they manage to fix him up and make him respectable.
 i remember something analogous in my own boyhood. all day saturday i ran
 about with the little street rowdies, i stole potatoes and roasted them in
 vacant lots, i threw mud from the roofs of apartment-houses; but on
 saturday night i went into a tub and was lathered and scrubbed, and on
 sunday i came forth in a newly brushed suit, a clean white collar and a
 shining tie and a slick derby hat and a pair of tight gloves which made me
 impotent for mischief. thus i was taken and paraded up fifth avenue, doing
 my part of the duties of good society. and all church-members go through
 this same performance; the oldest and most venerable of them steal
 potatoes and throw mud all week—and then take a hot bath of
 repentance and put on the clean clothing of piety. in this same way their
 ministers of religion are occupied to scrub and clean and dress up their
 disreputable founder—to turn him from a proletarian rebel into a
 stained-glass-window divinity.
 the man who really lived, the carpenter's son, they take out and crucify
 all over again. as a young poet has phrased it, they nail him to a jeweled
 cross with cruel nails of gold. come with me to the new golgotha and
 witness this crucifixion; take the nails of gold in your hands, try the
 weight of the jeweled sledges! here is a sledge, in the form of a
 dignified and scholarly volume, published by the exclusive house of
 scribner, and written by the bishop of my boyhood, the bishop whose train
 i carried in the stately ceremonials: "the citizen in his relation to the
 industrial situation," by the right reverend henry codman potter, d. d.,
 l. l. d., d. c. l.—a course of lectures delivered before the sons of
 our predatory classes at yale university, under the endowment of a
 millionaire mining king, founder of the phelps-dodge corporation, which
 the other day carried out the deportation from their homes of a thousand
 striking miners at bisbee, arizona. says my bishop:
 christ did not denounce wealth any more than he denounced pauperism. he
 did not abhor money; he used it. he did not abhor the company of rich men;
 he sought it. he did not invariably scorn or even resent a certain
 profuseness of expenditure.
 and do you think that the late bishop of j. p. morgan and company stands
 alone as an utterer of scholarly blasphemy, a driver of golden nails? in
 the course of this book there will march before us a long line of the
 clerical retainers of privilege, on their way to the new golgotha to
 crucify the carpenter's son: the rector of the money trust, the preacher
 of the coal trust, the priest of the traction trust, the archbishop of
 tammany, the chaplain of the millionaires' club, the pastor of the
 pennsylvania railroad, the religious editor of the new haven, the
 sunday-school superintendent of standard oil. we shall try the weight of
 their jewelled sledges—books, sermons, newspaper-interviews,
 after-dinner speeches—wherewith they pound their golden nails of
 sophistry into the bleeding hands and feet of the proletarian christ.
 here, for example, is rev. f. g. peabody, professor of christian morals at
 harvard university. prof. peabody has written several books on the social
 teachings of jesus; he quotes the most rabid of the carpenter's
 denunciations of the rich, and says:
 is it possible that so obvious and so limited a message as this, a
 teaching so slightly distinguished from the curbstone rhetoric of a modern
 agitator, can be an adequate reproduction of the scope and power of the
 teaching of jesus?
 the question answers itself: of course not! for jesus was a gentleman; he
 is the head of a church attended by gentlemen, of universities where
 gentlemen are educated. so the professor of christian morals proceeds to
 make a subtle analysis of jesus' actions; demonstrating therefrom that
 there are three proper uses to be made of great wealth: first, for
 almsgiving—"the poor ye have always with you!"; second, for beauty
 and culture—buying wine for wedding-feasts, and ointment-boxes and
 other objets de vertu; and third, "stewardship," "trusteeship"—which
 in plain english is "big business."
 i have used the illustration of soap and hot water; one can imagine he is
 actually watching the scrubbing process, seeing the proletarian founder
 emerging all new and respectable under the brush of this capitalist
 professor. the professor has a rule all his own for reading the
 scriptures; he tells us that when there are two conflicting sayings, the
 rule of interpretation is that "the more spiritual is to be preferred."
 thus, one gospel makes jesus say: "blessed are ye poor." another puts it:
 "blessed are the poor in spirit." the first one is crude and literal;
 obviously the second must be what jesus meant! in other words, the
 professor and his church have made for their economic masters a
 treacherous imitation virtue to be taught to wage-slaves, a quality of
 submissiveness, impotence and futility, which they call by the name of
 "spirituality". this virtue they exalt above all others, and in its name
 they cut from the record of jesus everything which has relation to the
 realities of life!
 so here is our professor peabody, sitting in the plummer chair at harvard,
 writing on "jesus christ and the social question," and explaining:
 the fallacy of the socialist program is not in its radicalism, but in its
 externalism. it proposes to accomplish by economic change what can be
 attained by nothing less than spiritual regeneration.
 and here is "the churchman," organ of the episcopalians of new york,
 warning us:
 it is necessary to remember that something more than material and temporal
 considerations are involved. there are things of more importance to the
 purposes of god and to the welfare of humanity than economic readjustments
 and social amelioration.
 and again:
 without doubt there is a strong temptation today, bearing upon clergy and
 laity alike, to address their religious energies too exclusively to those
 tasks whereby human life may be made more abundant and wholesome
 materially..... we need constantly to be reminded that spiritual things
 come first.
 there come before my mental eye the elegant ladies and gentlemen for whom
 these comfortable sayings are prepared: the vestrymen and pillars of the
 church, with black frock coats and black kid gloves and shiny top-hats;
 the ladies of good society with their easter costumes in pastel shades,
 their gracious smiles and their sweet intoxicating odors. i picture them
 as i have seen them at st. george's, where that aged wild boar, pierpont
 morgan, the elder, used to pass the collection plate; at holy trinity,
 where they drove downtown in old-fashioned carriages with grooms and
 footmen sitting like twin statues of insolence; at st. thomas', where you
 might see all the "four hundred" on exhibition at once; at st. mary the
 virgin's, where the choir paraded through the aisles, swinging costly
 incense into my childish nostrils, the stout clergyman walking alone with
 nose upturned, carrying on his back a jewelled robe for which some adoring
 female had paid sixty thousand dollars. "spiritual things come first?" ah,
 yes! "seek first the kingdom of god, and the jewelled robes shall be added
 unto you!" and it is so dreadful about the french and german socialists,
 who, as the "churchman" reports, "make a creed out of materialism." but
 then, what is this i find in one issue of the organ of the "church of good
 society"?
 business men contribute to the y. m. c. a. because they realize that if
 their employees are well cared for and religiously influenced, they can be
 of greater service in business!
 who let that material cat out of the spiritual bag?
 book three — the church of the servant-girls
 was it for this—that prayers like these
 should spend themselves about thy feet,
 and with hard, over-labored knees
 kneeling, these slaves of men should beat
 bosoms too lean to suckle sons
 and fruitless as their orisons?
 was it for this—that men should make
 thy name a fetter on men's necks,
 poor men made poorer for thy sake,
 and women withered out of sex?
 was it for this—that slaves should be—
thy word was passed to set men free? swinburne.
 charity
 as everyone knows, the "society lady" is not an independent and
 self-sustaining phenomenon. for every one of these exquisite,
 sweet-smelling creatures that you meet on fifth avenue, there must be at
 home a large number of other women who live sterile and empty lives, and
 devote themselves to cleaning up after their luckier sisters. but these
 "domestics" also are human beings; they have emotions—or, in
 religious parlance, "souls;" it is necessary to provide a discipline to
 keep them from appropriating the property of their mistresses, also to
 keep them from becoming enceinte. so it comes about that there are two
 cathedrals in new york: one, st. john the divine, for the society ladies,
 and the other, st. patrick's, for the servant-girls. the latter is located
 on fifth avenue, where its towering white spires divide with the homes of
 the vanderbilts the interest of the crowds of sight-seers. now, early
 every sunday morning, before "good society" has opened its eyes, you may
 see the devotees of the irish snake-charmer hurrying to their orisons,
 each with a little black prayer-book in her hand. what is it they do
 inside? what are they taught about life? this is the question to which we
 have next to give attention.
 some years ago mr. thomas f. ryan, traction and insurance magnate of new
 york, favored me with his justification of his own career and activities.
 he mentioned his charities, and, speaking as one man of the world to
 another, he said: "the reason i put them into the hands of catholics is
 not religious, but because i find they are efficient in such matters. they
 don't ask questions, they do what you want them to do, and do it
 economically."
 i made no comment; i was absorbed in the implications of the remark—like
 agassiz when some one gave him a fossil bone, and his mind set to work to
 reconstruct the creature.
 when a man is drunk, the catholics do not ask if it was long hours and
 improper working-conditions which drove him to desperation; they do not
 ask if police and politicians are getting a rake-off from the saloon, or
 if traction magnates are using it as an agency for the controlling of
 votes; they do not plunge into prohibition movements or good government
 campaigns—they simply take the man in, at a standard price, and the
 patient slave-sisters and attendants get him sober, and then turn him out
 for society to make him drunk again. that is "charity," and it is the
 special industry of roman catholicism. they have been at it for a thousand
 years, cleaning up loathsome and unsightly messes—"plague,
 pestilence and famine, battle and murder and sudden death." yet—puzzling
 as it would seem to anyone not religious—there were never so many
 messes, never so many different kinds of messes, as now at the end of the
 thousand years of charitable activity!
 but the catholics go on and on; like the patient spider, building and
 rebuilding his web across a doorway; like soldiers under the command of a
 ruling class with a "muddling through" tradition—
 theirs not to reason why,
 theirs but to do and die.
 and so of course all magnates and managers of industry who have messes to
 be cleaned up, human garbage-heaps to be carted away quickly and without
 fuss, turn to the catholic church for this service, no matter what their
 personal religious beliefs or lack of beliefs may be. somewhere in the
 neighborhood of every steel-mill, every coal-mine or other place of
 industrial danger, you will find a catholic hospital, with its
 slave-sisters and attendants. once when i was "muck-raking" near
 pittsburgh, i went to one of these places to ask information as to the
 frequency of industrial accidents and the fate of the victims. the "mother
 superior" received me with a look of polite dismay. "these concerns pay
 us!" she said. "you must see that as a matter of business it would not do
 for us to talk about them."
 obey and keep silence: that is the catholic law. and precisely as it is
 with the work of nursing and almsgiving, so it is with the work of
 vote-getting, the elaborate system of policemen and saloon-keepers and
 ward-heelers which the catholic machine controls. this industry of
 vote-getting is a comparatively new one; but the church has been handling
 the masses for so many centuries that she quickly learned this new way of
 "democracy," and has established her supremacy over all rivals. she has
 the schools for training the children, the confessional for controlling
 the women; she has the intellectual machinery, the purgatory and the code
 of slave-ethics. she has the supreme advantage that the rank and file of
 her mighty host really believe what she teaches; they do not have to
 listen to table-rappings and flounder through swamps of automatic writings
 in order to bolster their hope of the survival of personality after death!
 so it comes about that our captains of industry and finance have been
 driven to a more or less reluctant alliance with the papacy. the church is
 here, and her followers are here, before the war several hundred thousand
 of them pouring into the country every year. it is no longer possible to
 do without catholics in america; not merely do ditches have to be dug,
 roads graded, coal mined, and dishes washed, but franchises have to be
 granted, tariff-schedules adjusted, juries and courts manipulated, police
 trained and strikes crushed. under our native political system, for these
 purposes millions of votes are needed; and these votes belong to people of
 a score of nationalities—irish and german and italian and
 french-canadian and bohemian and mexican and portuguese and polish and
 hungarian. who but the catholic church can handle these polyglot hordes?
 who can furnish teachers and editors and politicians familiar with all
 these languages?
 considering how complex is the service, the price is extremely moderate—the
 mere actual expenses of the campaign, the cost of red fire and
 torch-lights, of liquor and newspaper advertisements. the rest may come
 out of the public till, in the form of exemption from taxation of church
 buildings and lands, a share of the public funds for charities and
 schools, the control of the police for saloon-keepers and district
 leaders, the control of police-courts and magistrates, of municipal
 administrations and boards of education, of legislatures and governors;
 with a few higher offices now and then, to flatter our sacred self-esteem,
 a senator or a justice on the supreme court bench; and on state occasions,
 to keep up our necessary prestige, some cabinet-members and legislators
 and justices to attend high mass, and be blessed in public by catholic
 prelates and dignitaries.
 you think this is empty rhetoric—you comfortable, easy-going,
 ultra-cultured americans? you professors in your classic shades, absorbed
 in "the passionless pursuit of passionless intelligence"—while the
 world about you slides down into the pit! you ladies of good society,
 practicing your "sweet little charities," pursuing your "dear little
 ideals," raising your families of one or two lovely children—while
 irish and french-canadians and italians and portuguese and hungarians are
 breeding their dozens and scores, and preparing to turn you out of your
 country!
 god's armor
 you remember "bishop blougram's apology," browning's study of the
 psychology of a modern catholic ecclesiastic. he is not unaware of modern
 thought, this bishop; he is a man of culture, who wants to have beauty
 about him, to be a "cabin passenger":
 there's power in me and will to dominate
 which i must exercise, they hurt me else;
 in many ways i need mankind's respect,
 obedience, and the love that's born of fear.
 he wishes that he had faith—faith in anything; he understands that
 faith is all-important—
 enthusiasm's the best thing, i repeat.
 but you cannot get faith just by wishing for it—
 but paint a fire, it will not therefore burn!
 he tries to imagine himself going on a crusade for truth, but he asks what
 there would be in it for him—
 state the facts,
 read the text right, emancipate the world—
the emancipated world enjoys itself with scarce a thank-you.
 blougram told it first
 it could not owe a farthing,—not to him
 more than st. paul!
 so the bishop goes on with his role, but uneasily conscious of the
 contempt of intellectual people.
 i pine among my million imbeciles
 (you think) aware some dozen men of sense
 eye me and know me, whether i believe
 in the last winking virgin as i vow,
 and am a fool, or disbelieve in her,
 and am a knave.
 but, as he says, you have to keep a tight hold upon the chain of faith,
 that is what
 gives all the advantage, makes the difference,
 with the rough, purblind mass we seek to rule.
 we are their lords, or they are free of us,
 just as we tighten or relax that hold.
 so he continues, but not with entire satisfaction, in his role of shepherd
 to those whom he calls "king bomba's lazzaroni," and "ragamuffin saints."
 i wander into a catholic bookstore and look to see what bishop blougram is
 doing with his lazzaroni and his ragamuffin saints here in this new
 country of the far west. it is easy to acquire the information, for the
 saleswoman is polite and the prices fit my purse. america is going to war,
 and catholic boys are being drafted to be trained for battle; so for ten
 cents i obtain a firmly bound little pamphlet called "god's armor, a
 prayer book for soldiers." it is marked "copyright by the g. r. c.
 central-verein," and bears the "nihil obstat" of the "censor theolog." and
 the "imprimatur" of "johannes josephus, archiepiscopus sti. ludovici"—which
 last you may at first fail to recognize as a well-known city on the
 mississippi river. do you not feel the spell of ancient things, the magic
 of the past creeping over you, as you read those latin trade-marks? such
 is the dead hand, and its cunning, which can make even st. louis sound
 mysterious!
 in this booklet i get no information as to the commercial causes of war,
 nor about the part which the clerical vote may have played throughout
 europe in supporting military systems. i do not even find anything about
 the sacred cause of democracy, the resolve of a self-governing people to
 put an end to feudal rule. instead i discover a soldier-boy who obeys and
 keeps silent, and who, in his inmost heart, is in the grip of terrors both
 of body and soul. poor, pitiful soldier-boy, marking yourself with
 crosses, performing genuflections, mumbling magic formulas in the trenches—how
 many billions of you have been led out to slaughter by the greeds and
 ambitions of your religious masters, since first this accursed antichrist
 got its grip upon the hearts of men!
 i quote from this little book:
 start this day well by lifting up your heart to god. offer yourself to
 him, and beg grace to spend the day without sin. make the sign of the
 cross. most holy trinity, father, son, and holy ghost, behold me in thy
 divine presence. i adore thee and give thee thanks. grant that all i do
 this day be for thy glory, and for the salvation of my immortal soul.
 during the day lift your heart frequently to god. your prayers need not be
 long nor read from a book. learn a few of these short ejaculations by
 heart and frequently repeat them. they will serve to recall god to your
 heart and will strengthen you and comfort you.
 you remember a while back about the prayer-wheels of the thibetans. the
 catholic religion was founded before the thibetan, and is less
 progressive; it does not welcome mechanical devices for saving labor. you
 have to use your own vocal apparatus to keep yourself from hell; but the
 process has been made as economical as possible by kindly dispensations of
 the pope. thus, each time that you say "my god and my all," you get fifty
 days indulgence; the same for "my jesus, mercy," and the same for "jesus,
 my god, i love thee above all things." for "jesus, mary, joseph," you get
 three hundred days—which would seem by all odds the best investment
 of your spare breath.
 and then come prayers for all occasions: "prayer before battle"; "prayer
 for a happy death"; "prayer in temptation"; "prayer before and after
 meals"; "prayer when on guard"; "prayer before a long march"; "prayer of
 resignation to death"; "prayer for those in their agony"—i cannot
 bear to read them, hardly to list them. i remember standing in a cathedral
 "somewhere in france" during the celebration of some special big magic.
 there was brilliant white light, and a suffocating strange odor, and the
 thunder of a huge organ, and a clamor of voices, high, clear voices of
 young boys mounting to heaven, like the hands of men in a pit reaching up,
 trying to climb over the top of one another. it sent a shudder into the
 depths of my soul. there is nothing left in the modern world which can
 carry the mind so far back into the ancient nightmare of anguish and
 terror which was once the mental life of mankind, as these roman catholic
 incantations with their frantic and ceaseless importunity. they have even
 brought in the sex-spell; and the poor, frightened soldier-boy, who has
 perhaps spent the night with a prostitute, now prostrates himself before a
 holy woman-being who is lifted high above the shames of the flesh, and who
 stirs the thrills of awe and affection which his mother brought to him in
 early childhood. read over the phrases of this "litany of the blessed
 virgin":
 holy mary, pray for us. holy mother of god. holy virgin of virgins. mother
 of christ. mother of divine grace. mother most pure. mother most chaste.
 mother inviolate. mother undefiled. mother most amiable. mother most
 admirable. mother of good counsel. mother of our creator. mother of our
 savior. virgin most prudent. virgin most venerable. virgin most renowned.
 virgin most powerful. virgin most merciful. virgin most faithful. mirror
 of justice. seat of wisdom. cause of our joy. spiritual vessel. vessel of
 honor. singular vessel of devotion. mystical rose. tower of david. tower
 of ivory. house of gold. ark of the covenant. gate of heaven. morning
 star. health of the sick. refuge of sinners. comforter of the afflicted.
 help of christians. queen of angels. queen of patriarchs. queen of
 prophets. queen of apostles. queen of martyrs. queen of confessors. queen
 of virgins. queen of all saints. queen conceived without original sin.
 queen of the most holy rosary. queen of peace, pray for us.
 thanksgivings
 for another five cents—how cheaply a man of insight can obtain
 thrills in this fantastic world!—i purchase a copy of the "messenger
 of the sacred heart", a magazine published in new york, the issue for
 october, . there are pages of advertisements of schools and colleges
 with strange titles: "immaculata seminary", "holy cross academy", "holy
 ghost institute", "ladycliff", "academy of holy child jesus". the leading
 article is by a jesuit, on "the spread of the apostleship of prayer among
 the young"; and then "sister clarissa" writes a poem telling us "what are
 sorrows"; and then we are given a story called "prayer for daddy"; and
 then another jesuit father tells us about "the hills that jesus loved". a
 third father tells us about the "eucharistic propaganda"; and we learn
 that in july, , it distributed , beads, and caused the
 expenditure of , hours of adoration; and then the faithful are given
 a form of letter which they are to write to the honorable baker, secretary
 of war, imploring him to intimate to the french government that france
 should withdraw from one of her advances in civilization, and join with
 mediaeval america in exempting priests from being drafted to fight for
 their country. and then there is a "question box"—just like the
 hearst newspapers, only instead of asking whether she should allow him to
 kiss her before he has told her that he loves her, the reader asks what is
 the pauline privilege, and what is the heroic act, and is robert a saint's
 name, and if food remains in the teeth from the night before, would it
 break the fast to swallow it before holy communion. (no, i am not
 inventing this.)
 i quoted the episcopal book of common prayer, and pointed out how deftly
 the church has managed to slip in a prayer for worldly prosperity. but the
 catholic church does not show any squeamishness in dealing with its
 "million imbeciles", its "rough, purblind mass". there is a department of
 the little magazine entitled "thanksgiving", and a statement at the top
 that "the total number of thanksgivings for the month is ,,." i am
 suspicious of that, as of german reports of prisoners taken; but i give
 the statement as it stands, not going through the list and picking out the
 crudest, but taking them as they come, classified by states:
 general favors: for many of these favors mass and publication were
 promised, for others the badge of promoter's cross was used, for others
 the prayers of the associates had been asked.
 alabama—jewelry found, relief from pain, protection during storm.
 alaska—safe return, goods found.
 arizona—two recoveries, suitable boarding place, illness averted,
 safe delivery.
 british honduras—successful operation.
 california—seventeen recoveries, six situations, two successful
 examinations, house rented, stocks sold, raise in salary, return to
 religious duties, sight regained, medal won, baptism, preservation from
 disease, contract obtained, success in business, hearing restored, easter
 duty made, happy death, automobile sold, mind restored, house found, house
 rented, successful journey, business sold, quarrel averted, return of
 friends, two successful operations.
 and for all these miraculous performances the catholic machine is
 harvesting the price day by day—harvesting with that ancient fervor
 which the latin poet described as "auri sacra fames". as christopher
 columbus wrote from jamaica in : "gold is a wonderful thing. by means
 of gold we can even get souls into paradise."
 the holy roman empire
 the system thus self-revealed you admit is appalling in its squalor; but
 you say that at least it is milder and less perilous than the church which
 burned giordano bruno and john huss. but the very essence of the catholic
 church is that it does not change; semper eadem is its motto: the same
 yesterday, today and forever—the same in washington as in rome or
 madrid—the same in a modern democracy as in the middle ages. the
 catholic church is not primarily a religious organization; it is a
 political organization, and proclaims the fact, and defies those who would
 shut it up in the religious field, the rev. s. b. smith, a catholic doctor
 of divinity, explains in his "elements of ecclesiastical law":
 protestants contend that the entire power of the church consists in the
 right to teach and exhort, but not in the right to command, rule, or
 govern; whence they infer that she is not a perfect society or sovereign
 state. this theory is false; for the church, as was seen, is vested jure
 divino with power, () to make laws; () to define and apply them
 (potestas judicialis); () to punish those who violate her laws (potestas
 coercitiva).
 and this is not one scholar's theory, but the formal and repeated
 proclamation of infallible popes. here is the "syllabus of errors", issued
 by pope pius ix, dec. th, , declaring in precise language that,
 the state has not the right to leave every man free to profess and embrace
 whatever religion he shall deem true.
 it has not the right to enact that the ecclesiastical power shall require
 the permission of the civil power in order to the exercise of its
 authority.
 then in the same syllabus the rights and powers of the church are affirmed
 thus:
 she has the right to require the state not to leave every man free to
 profess his own religion.
 she has the right to exercise her power without the permission or consent
 of the state.
 she has the right of perpetuating the union of church and state.
 she has the right to require that the catholic religion shall be the only
 religion of the state, to the exclusion of all others.
 she has the right to prevent the state from granting the public exercise
 of their own worship to persons immigrating from it.
 she has the power of requiring the state not to permit free expression of
 opinion.
 you see, the holy office is unrepentant and unchastened. you, who think
 that liberty of conscience is the basis of civilization, ought at least to
 know what the catholic church has to say about the matter. here is mgr.
 segur, in his "plain talk about protestantism of today", a book published
 in boston and extensively circulated by american catholics:
 freedom of thought is the soul of protestantism; it is likewise the soul
 of modern rationalism and philosophy. it is one of those impossibilities
 which only the levity of a superficial reason can regard as admissible.
 but a sound mind, that does not feed on empty words, looks upon this
 freedom of thought only as simply absurd, and, what is more, as sinful.
 you take the liberty of thinking, nevertheless; you feel safe because the
 law will protect you. but do you imagine that this "law" applies to your
 catholic neighbors? do you imagine that they are bound by the restraints
 that bind you? here is pope leo xiii, in his encyclical of —and
 please remember that leo xiii was the beau ideal of our capitalist
 statesmen and editors, as wise and kind and gentle-souled a pope as ever
 roasted a heretic. he says:
 if the laws of the state are openly at variance with the laws of god—if
 they inflict injury upon the church—or set at naught the authority
 of jesus christ which is vested in the supreme pontiff, then indeed it
 becomes a duty to resist them, a sin to render obedience.
 and consider how many fields there are in which the laws of a democratic
 state do and forever must contravene the "laws of god" as interpreted by
 the catholic church. consider for example, that the pope, in his decree ne
 temere, has declared that all persons who have been married by civil
 authorities or by protestant clergymen are living in "filthy concubinage"!
 consider, in the same way, the problems of education, burial, prison
 discipline, blasphemy, poor relief, incorporation, mortmain, religious
 endowments, vows of celibacy. to the above list, as given by gladstone,
 one might add many issues, such as birth control, which have arisen since
 his time.
 what the church means is to rule. her literature is full of expressions of
 that intention, set forth in the boldest and haughtiest and most
 uncompromising manner. for example, cardinal manning, in the pro-cathedral
 at kensington, speaking in the name of the pope:
 i acknowledge no civil power; i am the subject of no prince; i claim more
 than this—i claim to be the supreme judge and director of the
 consciences of men—-of the peasant that tills the field, and of the
 prince that sits upon the throne; of the household of privacy, and the
 legislator that makes laws for kingdoms; i am the sole, last supreme judge
 of what is right and wrong.
 temporal power
 what this means is, that here in our american democracy the catholic
 church is a rebel; a prisoner of war who bides his time, watching for the
 moment to rise in revolt, and meantime making no secret of his intentions.
 the pious leo xiii, addressing all true believers in america, instructed
 them as to their attitude in captivity:
 the church amongst you, unopposed by the constitution and government of
 your nation, fettered by no hostile legislation, protected against
 violence by the common laws and the impartiality of the tribunals, is free
 to live and act without hindrance. yet, though all this is true, it would
 be very erroneous to draw the conclusion that in america is to be sought
 the type of the most desirable status of the church, or that it would be
 universally lawful or expedient for state and church to be, as in america,
 dissevered and divorced. the fact that catholicity with you is in good
 condition, nay, is even enjoying a prosperous growth, is by all means to
 be attributed to the fecundity with which god has endowed his church....
 but she would bring forth more abundant fruits if, in addition to liberty,
 she enjoyed the favor of the laws and patronage of the public authority.
 accordingly, here is father phelan of st. louis, addressing his flock in
 the "western watchman", june , :
 tell us we are catholics first and americans or englishmen afterwards; of
 course we are. tell us, in the conflict between the church and the civil
 government we take the side of the church; of course we do. why, if the
 government of the united states were at war with the church, we would say
 tomorrow, to hell with the government of the united states; and if the
 church and all the governments of the world were at war, we would say, to
 hell with all the governments of the world.... why is it that in this
 country, where we have only seven per cent of the population, the catholic
 church is so much feared? she is loved by all her children and feared by
 everybody. why is it that the pope has such tremendous power? why, the
 pope is the ruler of the world. all the emperors, all the kings, all the
 princes, all the presidents of the world, are as these altar boys of mine.
 the pope is the ruler of the world.
 you recall what i said at the outset about power; the ability to control
 the lives of other men, to give laws and moral codes, to shape fashions
 and tastes, to be revered and regarded. here is a man swollen to bursting
 with this power. dressed in his holy robes, with his holy incense in his
 nostrils, and the faces of the faithful gazing up at him awe-stricken,
 hear him proclaim:
 the church gives no bonds for her good behavior. she is the judge of her
 own rights and duties, and of the rights and duties of the state.
 and lest you think that an extreme example of ultramontanist arrogance,
 listen to the boston "pilot", april , , speaking for cardinal
 o'connell, whose official organ it is:
 it must be borne in mind that even though cardinals farley, o'connell and
 gibbons are at heart patriotic americans and members of an american
 hierarchy, yet they are as cardinals foreign princes of the blood, to whom
 the united states, as one of the great powers of the world, is under an
 obligation to concede the same honors that they receive abroad.
 thus, were cardinal farley to visit an american man-of-war, he would be
 entitled to the salutes and to naval honors reserved for a foreign royal
 personage, and at any official entertainment at washington the cardinal
 will outrank not merely every cabinet officer, the speaker of the house
 and the vice-president, but also the foreign ambassadors, coming
 immediately next to the chief magistrate himself.
 incidentally, it may be mentioned that when a royal personage not of
 sovereign rank visits new york it is his duty to make the first call on
 cardinal farley.
 knights of slavery
 such is the worldly station of these apostles of the lowly jesus. and what
 is their attitude towards their brothers in god, the rank and file of the
 membership, whose pennies grease the wheels of the ecclesiastical machine?
 his holiness, the pope, sent over a delegate to represent him in america,
 and at a convention of the federation of catholic societies held in new
 orleans in november, , this gentleman, diomede falconio, delivered
 himself on the subject of capital and labor. we have heard the slave-code
 of the anglican disciples of jesus, the revolutionary carpenter; now let
 us hear the slave-code of his roman disciples:
 human society has its origin from god and is constituted of two classes of
 people, the rich and the poor, which respectively represent capital and
 labor.
 hence it follows that according to the ordinance of god, human society is
 composed of superiors and subjects, masters and servants, learned and
 unlettered, rich and poor, nobles and plebeians.
 and lest this should not be clear enough, the pope sent a second
 representative, mgr. john bonzano, who, speaking at a general meeting of
 the german catholic central-verein, st. louis, , declared:
 one of the worst evils that may grow out of the european war is the
 spreading of the doctrine of socialism, and the catholic church must be
 ready to counteract such doctrines. we must be ready to prevent the spread
 of socialism and to work against it. as i understand, you have a society
 of wealthy people in st. louis ready for such a campaign. you have
 experienced leaders who are masters in their kind of work. they are always
 insistent to show that this wealth was and is in close touch with the
 church, and therefore it will not fail.
 this, you perceive, is the complete thesis of the present book, which
 therefore no doubt will be entitled to the "nihil obstat" of the "censor
 theolog.", and the "imprimatur" of "johannes josephus, archiepiscopus sti.
 ludovici." no wonder that the "experienced leaders" of america, our
 captains of industry and exploiters of labor, are forced, whatever their
 own faith may be, to make use of this system of subjection. a few years
 ago we read in our papers how a jewish millionaire of baltimore was
 presenting a fortune to the catholic church, to be used in its war upon
 socialism. the late mark hanna, the shrewdest and most far-seeing man that
 big business ever brought into power, said that in twenty years there
 would be two parties in america, a capitalist and a socialist; and that it
 would be the catholic church that would save the country from socialism.
 that prophecy was widely quoted, and sank into the souls of our steel and
 railway and money magnates; from which time you might see, if you watched
 political events, a new tone of deference to the roman hierarchy on the
 part of our ruling classes. today you cannot get an expression of opinion
 hostile to catholicism into any newspaper of importance. the associated
 press does not handle news unfavorable to the church, and from top to
 bottom, the politician takes off his hat when the sacred host goes by.
 said archbishop quigley, speaking before the children of the mary
 sodality:
 i'd like to see the politician who would try to rule against the church in
 chicago. his reign would be short indeed.
 priests and police
 and how is it in our national capital, the palladium of our liberties? as
 a means of demonstrating the power of the church and the subservience of
 our politicians, the catholics have invented what they call the
 "cardinal's day mass": an elaborate procession of high ecclesiastics,
 dressed in gorgeous robes and jewels, through the streets of washington,
 accompanied by a small army of policemen, paid by non-catholic taxpayers.
 the cardinal seats himself upon a throne, and our political rulers make
 obeisance before him. on sunday, january , , there were present at
 this political mass the following personages: four cabinet members and
 their wives; the speaker of the house; a large group of senators and
 representatives; a general of the army and his wife; an admiral of the
 navy and his wife; the chief justice of the supreme court and his wife,
 and another justice of the supreme court and his wife.
 and understand that the church makes no secret of its purpose in
 conducting such public exhibitions. here is the pious pope leo xiii again,
 in his encyclical of nov. , :
 all catholics must make themselves felt as active elements in daily
 political life in the countries where they live. they must penetrate,
 wherever possible, in the administration of civil affairs; must constantly
 exert the utmost vigilance and energy to prevent the usages of liberty
 from going beyond the limits fixed by god's law. all catholics should do
 all in their power to cause the constitutions of states and legislation to
 be modeled on the principles of the true church.
 and following these instructions, the catholics are organized for
 political work. there are the various catholic societies, such as the
 knights of columbus, secret, oath-bound organizations, the military arm of
 the papal power. these societies boast some three million members, and
 control not less than that many votes. the one thing that you can be
 certain about these votes is that on every public question, of whatever
 nature, they will be cast on the side of ignorance and reaction. thus, it
 was the influence of the catholic societies which put upon our national
 statute books the infamous law providing five years imprisonment and five
 thousand dollars fine for the sending through the mail of information
 about the prevention of conception. it is their influence which keeps upon
 the statute-books of new york state the infamous law which permits divorce
 only for infidelity, and makes it "collusion" if both parties desire the
 divorce. it is these societies which, in every city and town in america,
 are pushing and plotting to get catholics upon library boards, so that the
 public may not have a chance to read scientific books; to get catholics
 into the public schools and on school-boards, so that children may not
 hear about galileo, bruno, and ferrer; to have catholics in control of
 police and on magistrates benches, so that priests who are caught in
 brothels may not be exposed or punished.
 you are shocked at this, you think it a vulgar jest, perhaps; but during a
 period of "vice raids" in new york i was told by a captain of police,
 himself a catholic, that it was a common thing for them to get priests in
 their net. "of course," the official added, good-naturedly, "we let them
 slip out." i understood that he had to do that; for the pope, in his "motu
 proprio" decree, has forbidden catholics to bring a priest into court for
 any civil crime whatsoever; he has forbidden catholic policemen to arrest,
 catholic judges to try, and catholic law-makers to make laws affecting any
 priest of the church of rome. and of course we know, upon the authority of
 a cardinal, that the pope is "the sole, last, supreme judge of what is
 right and wrong." he has held that position for a thousand years and more;
 and wherever you consult the police records throughout the thousand years,
 you find the same entries concerning catholic ecclesiastics. i turn to
 riley's "illustrations of london life from original documents," and i find
 in the year  a certain chaplain, whose name is considerately
 suppressed, had a breviary stolen from him by a loose woman, because he
 has not given her any money, either on that night or the one previous. in
  john de sloghtre, a priest, is put in the tower "for being found
 wandering about the city against the peace", and richard heyring, a
 priest, is indicted in the ward of farringdon and in the ward of
 crepelgate "as being a bruiser and nightwalker." that this has been going
 on for six hundred years is due, not to any special corruption of the
 catholic heart, but to the practice of clerical celibacy, which is
 contrary to nature, a transgression of fundamental instinct. it should be
 noted that the purpose of this transgression, which pretends to be
 spiritual, is really economic; it was the means whereby the church machine
 built up its power through the middle ages. the priests had children then,
 as they have them today; but these children not being recognized, the
 church machine remained the sole heir of the property of its clergy.
 the church militant
 knowing what we know today, we marvel that it was possible for germany to
 prepare through so many years for her assault on civilization, and for
 england to have slept through it all. in exactly the same way, the
 historian of a generation from now will marvel that america should have
 slept, while the new inquisition was planning to strangle her. for we are
 told with the utmost explicitness precisely what is to be done. we are to
 see wiped out these gains of civilization for which our race has bled and
 agonized for many centuries; the very gains are to serve as the means of
 their own destruction! have we not heard pope leo tell his faithful how to
 take advantage of what they find in america—our easy-going trust,
 our quiet certainty of liberty, our open-handed and open-homed and
 hail-fellow-well-met democracy?
 we see the army being organized and drilled under our eyes; and we can
 read upon its banners its purpose proclaimed. just as the prussian
 military caste had its slogan "deutschland ueber alles!" so the knights of
 slavery have their slogan: "make america catholic!"
 their attitude to democratic institutions is attested by the fact that
 none of their conventions ever fails in its resolutions to "deeply deplore
 the loss of the temporal power of our father, the pope." their subjection
 to priestly domination is indicated by such resolutions as this, bearing
 date of may th, :
 the knights of columbus of texas in annual convention assembled, prostrate
 at the feet of your holiness, present filial regards with assurances of
 loyalty and obedience to the holy see and request the papal blessing.
 on june th, , one t. j. carey of palestine, texas, wrote to
 archbishop bonzano, the apostolic delegate: "must i, as a catholic,
 surrender my political freedom to the church? and by this i mean the right
 to vote for the democratic, socialist, or republican parties when and
 where i please?" the answer was: "you should submit to the decisions of
 the church, even at the cost of sacrificing political principles." and to
 the same effect mgr. preston, in new york city, jan. , : "the man who
 says, 'i will take my faith from peter, but i will not take my politics
 from peter,' is not a true catholic."
 such is the papal machine; and not a day passes that it does not discover
 some new scheme to advance the papal glory; a "catholic battle-ship" in
 the united states navy; catholic chaplains on all ships of the navy;
 catholic holidays—-such as columbus day—to be celebrated by
 all protestants in america; thirty million dollars worth of church
 property exempted from taxation in new york city; mission bells to be set
 up at the expense of the state of california; state support for parish
 schools—or, if this cannot be had, exemption of catholics from
 taxation for school purposes. so on through the list which might continue
 for pages.
 more than anything else, of course, the papal machine is concerned with
 education, or rather, with the preventing of education. it was in its
 childish days that the race fell under the spell of the priestly lie; it
 is in his childish days that the individual can be most safely snared.
 suffer little children to come unto the catholic priest, and he will make
 upon their sensitive minds an impression which nothing in after life can
 eradicate. so the mainstay of the new inquisition is the parish-school,
 and its deadliest enemy is the american school system. listen to the rev.
 james conway, of the society of jesus, in his book, "the rights of our
 little ones":
 catholic parents cannot, in conscience send their children to american
 public schools, except for very grave reasons approved by the
 ecclesiastical authorities.
 while state education removes illiteracy and puts a limited amount of
 knowledge within the reach of all, it cannot be said to have a beneficial
 influence on civilization in general.
 the state cannot justly enforce compulsory education, even in case of
 utter illiteracy, so long as the essential physical and moral education
 are sufficiently provided for.
 and so, at all times and in all places, the catholic church is fighting
 the public school. eternal vigilance is necessary; as "america", the organ
 of the jesuits, explains:
 sometimes it is a new building code, or an attempt at taxing the school
 buildings, which creates hardships to the parochial and other private
 schools. now it is the free text book law that puts a double burden on the
 catholics. then again it is the unwise extension of the compulsory school
 age that forces children to be in school until they are  to  years
 old.
 and if you wish to know the purpose of the catholic schools, hear
 archbishop quigley of chicago, speaking before the children of the mary
 sodality in the holy name parish-school:
 within twenty years this country is going to rule the world. kings and
 emperors will pass away, and the democracy of the united states will take
 their place. the west will dominate the country, and what i have seen of
 the western parochial schools has proved that the generation which follows
 us will be exclusively catholic. when the united states rules the world
 the catholic church will rule the world.
 the church triumphant
 the question may be asked, what of it? what if the church were to rule?
 there are not a few americans who believe that there have to be rich and
 poor, and that rule by roman catholics might be preferable to rule by
 socialists. before you decide, at least do not fail to consider what
 history has to tell about priestly government. we do not have to use our
 imaginations in the matter, for there was once a golden age such as
 archbishop quigley dreams of, when the power of the church was complete,
 when emperors and princes paid homage to her, and the civil authority made
 haste to carry out her commands. what was the condition of the people in
 those times? we are told by lea, in his "history of the inquisition" that:
 the moral condition of the laity was unutterably depraved. uniformity of
 faith had been enforced by the inquisition and its methods, and so long as
 faith was preserved, crime and sin was comparatively unimportant except as
 a source of revenue to those who sold absolution. as theodoric vrie
 tersely puts it, hell and purgatory would be emptied if enough money could
 be found. the artificial standard thus created is seen in a revelation of
 the virgin to st. birgitta, that a pope who was free from heresy, no
 matter how polluted by sin and vice, is not so wicked but that he has the
 absolute power to bind and loose souls. there are many wicked popes
 plunged in hell, but all their lawful acts on earth are accepted and
 confirmed by god, and all priests who are not heretics administer true
 sacraments, no matter how depraved they may be. correctness of belief was
 thus the sole essential; virtue was a wholly subordinate consideration.
 how completely under such a system religion and morals came to be
 dissociated is seen in the remarks of pius ii, that the franciscans were
 excellent theologians, but cared nothing about virtue.
 this, in fact, was the direct result of the system of persecution embodied
 in the inquisition. heretics who were admitted to be patterns of virtue
 were ruthlessly exterminated in the name of christ, while in the same holy
 name the orthodox could purchase absolution for the vilest of crimes for a
 few coins. when the only unpardonable offence was persistence in some
 trifling error of belief, such as the poverty of christ; when men had
 before them the example of their spiritual guides as leaders in vice and
 debauchery and contempt of sacred things, all the sanctions of morality
 were destroyed and the confusion between right and wrong became hopeless.
 the world has probably never seen a society more vile than that of europe
 in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. the brilliant pages of
 froissart fascinate us with their pictures of the artificial courtesies of
 chivalry; the mystic reveries of rysbroek and of tauler show us that
 spiritual life survived in some rare souls, but the mass of the population
 was plunged into the depths of sensuality and the most brutal oblivion of
 the moral law. for this alvaro pelayo tells us that the priesthood were
 accountable, and that, in comparison with them, the laity were holy. what
 was that state of comparative holiness he proceeds to describe, blushing
 as he writes, for the benefit of confessors, giving a terrible sketch of
 universal immorality which nothing could purify but fire and brimstone
 from heaven. the chroniclers do not often pause in their narrations to
 dwell on the moral aspects of the times, but meyer, in his annals of
 flanders, under date of , tells us that it would be impossible to
 describe the prevalence everywhere of perjuries, blasphemies, adulteries,
 hatreds, quarrels, brawls, murder, rapine, thievery, robbery, gambling,
 whoredom, debauchery, avarice, oppression of the poor, rape, drunkenness:
 and similar vices, and he illustrates his statement with the fact that in
 the territory of ghent, within the space of ten months, there occurred no
 less than fourteen hundred murders committed in the bagnios, brothels,
 gambling-houses, taverns, and other similar places. when, in , jean
 sans peur led his crusaders to destruction at micopolis, their crimes and
 cynical debauchery scandalized even the turks, and led to the stern rebuke
 of bajazet himself, who as the monk of st. denis admits was much better
 than his christian foes. the same writer, moralizing over the disaster at
 agincourt, attributes it to the general corruption of the nation. sexual
 relations, he says, were an alternation of disorderly lust and of incest;
 commerce was nought but fraud and treachery; avarice withheld from the
 church her tithes, and ordinary conversation was a succession of
 blasphemies. the church, set up by god as a model and protector of the
 people, was false to all its obligations. the bishops, through the basest
 and most criminal of motives, were habitual accepters of persons; they
 anointed themselves with the last essence extracted from their flocks, and
 there was in them nothing of holy, of pure, of wise, or even of decent.
 god in the schools
 but that, you may say, was a long time ago. if so, let us take a modern
 country in which the catholic church has worked its will. until recently,
 spain was such a country. now the people are turning against the clerical
 machine; and if you ask why, turn to rafael shaw's "spain from within":
 on every side the people see the baleful hand of the church, interfering
 or trying to interfere in their domestic life, ordering the conditions of
 employment, draining them of their hard-won livelihood by trusts and
 monopolies established and maintained in the interest of the religious
 orders, placing obstacles in the way of their children's education,
 hindering them in the exercise of their constitutional rights, and
 deliberately ruining those of them who are bold enough to run counter to
 priestly dictation. riots suddenly break out in barcelona; they are
 instigated by the jesuits. the country goes to war in morocco; it is
 dragged into it solely in defense of the mines owned, actually, if not
 ostensibly, by the jesuits. the consumos cannot be abolished because the
 jesuits are financially interested in their continuance.
 we have read the statement of a jesuit father, that "the state cannot
 justly enforce compulsory education, even in case of utter illiteracy."
 how has that doctrine worked out in spain? there was an official
 investigation of school conditions, the report appearing in the "heraldo
 de madrid" for november, . in  there had been passed a law
 requiring a certain number of schools in each of the  provinces: this
 requirement being below the very low standards prevailing at that time in
 other european countries. yet in  it was found that only four
 provinces had the required number of elementary schools, and at the rate
 of increase then prevailing it would have taken  years to catch up.
 seventy-five per cent of the population were wholly illiterate, and ,
 towns and villages had no government schools at all. the government owed
 nearly a million and a half dollars in unpaid salaries to the teachers.
 the private schools were nearly all "nuns' schools", which taught only
 needle-work and catechism; the punishments prevailing in them were "cruel
 and disgusting."
 as to the location of the schools, a report of the minister of education
 to the cortes, the parliament of spain, sets forth as follows:
 more than , schools are on hired premises, and many of these are
 absolutely destitute of hygienic conditions. there are schools mixed up
 with hospitals, with cemeteries, with slaughter houses, with stables. one
 school forms the entrance to a cemetery, and the corpses are placed on the
 master's table while the last responses are being said. there is a school
 into which the children cannot enter until the animals have been sent out
 to pasture. some are so small that as soon as the warm weather begins the
 boys faint for want of air and ventilation. one school is a manure-heap in
 process of fermentation, and one of the local authorities has said that in
 this way the children are warmer in winter. one school in cataluna adjoins
 the prison. another, in andalusia, is turned into an enclosure for the
 bulls when there is a bull-fight in the town.
 these conditions excited the indignation of a spanish educator by the name
 of francesco ferrer. he founded what he called a "modern school", in which
 the pupils should be taught science and common sense. he drew, of course,
 the bitter hatred of the catholic hierarchy, which saw in the spread of
 his principles the end of their mastery of the people. when the barcelona
 insurrection took place, they had ferrer seized upon a charge of having
 been its instigator; they had him tried in secret before a military
 tribunal, convicted upon forged documents, and shot beneath the walls of
 the fortress of montjuich. the case was thoroughly investigated by william
 archer, one of england's leading critics, a man of scrupulous rectitude of
 mind. his conclusion is that ferrer was absolutely innocent of the charges
 against him, and that his execution was the result of a clerical plot. of
 ferrer's character archer writes:
 fragmentary though they be, the utterances which i have quoted form a
 pretty complete revelation. from first to last we see in him an ardent,
 uncompromising, incorruptible idealist. his ideals are narrow, and his
 devotion to them fanatical; but it is devoid, if not of egoism, at any
 rate of self-interest and self-seeking. as he shrank from applying the
 money entrusted him to ends of personal luxury, so also he shrank from
 making his ideas and convictions subserve any personal ambition or vanity.
 the menace
 there are, of course, many people in america who will not rest idle while
 their country falls into the condition of spain. there are anti-catholic
 propaganda societies, which send out lecturers to discuss the church and
 its records; and this is exasperating to devout believers, who regard the
 church as holy, and any criticism of it as blasphemy. so we have
 opportunity to observe the working out of the doctrine that the church is
 superior to the civil law.
 on june th, , there came to the little town of oelwein, iowa, a
 former priest of the catholic church, named jeremiah j. crowley, to
 deliver a lecture exposing the papal propaganda. the catholics of the town
 made efforts to intimidate the owner of the place in which the lecture was
 to be given; the priest of the town, father o'connor, preached a sermon
 furiously denouncing the lecturer; and after the lecture the unfortunate
 crowley was surrounded by a mob of men, women and boys, and although he
 was six feet three in size, he was beaten almost to death. at the trial
 which followed it developed that father o'connor and also his brother, a
 judge on the superior bench, were accessories before the fact.
 nor is this a solitary instance. the catholic military societies, with
 their uniforms and their armories, are not maintained for nothing. as
 archbishop quigley declared before the german catholic central verein:
 we have well ordered and efficient organizations, all at the beck and nod
 of the hierarchy and ready to do what the church authorities tell them to
 do. with these bodies of loyal catholics ready to step into the breach at
 any time and present an unbroken front to the enemy we may feel secure.
 and so, on the evening of april th, , a group of catholics entered
 the pierce hotel in denver, colorado, overpowered a police guard and
 seized the rev. otis l. spurgeon, an anti-catholic lecturer. they bound
 and gagged him, took him to a lonely woods, and beat him to insensibility.
 the same thing happened to the rev. augustus barnett, at buffalo; the rev.
 william black was killed at marshall, texas. in each case the assailants
 avowed themselves knights of columbus, and efforts to punish them failed,
 because no jury can be got to convict a catholic, fighting for his pope
 against a godless state. the most pious leo xiii has laid down:
 it is an impious deed to break the laws of jesus christ for the purpose of
 obeying the magistrates, or to transgress the law of the church under the
 pretext of observing the civil law.
 there are papers published to warn americans against the plotting of this
 political church. one of them, "the menace," has a circulation of more
 than a million; and naturally the knights of slavery do not enjoy reading
 it. year after year they have marshalled their power to have this paper
 barred from the mails—so far, in vain. they caused an obscenity
 prosecution, which failed; so finally the press rooms of the paper were
 blown up with dynamite. at the present time there is a "catholic truth
 society" with a publication called "truth", to oppose the anti-catholic
 campaign; and that is all right, of course—except when the agents
 who collect the two-dollar subscriptions to this publication make use of
 untruth in their labors—promising absolution and salvation to the
 families, dead and living, of those who "come across" with subscriptions.
 in the "bulletin of the american federation of catholic societies" for
 september, , i find a record of the ceaseless plotting to bar
 criticism of the catholic church from the mails. fitzgerald, a tammany
 catholic congressman, proposes a bill in washington; and judge st. paul,
 of new orleans, a member of the federation's "law committee", points out
 the difficulties in the way of such legislation. you cannot pass a law
 against ridiculing religion, because the catholics want to ridicule
 christian science, mormonism, and the "holy ghost and us" society! the
 judge thinks the purpose of the papal plotters will be accomplished if
 they can slip into the present law the words "scurrilous and slanderous";
 he hopes that this much can be done without the american people catching
 on!
 you read these things for the first time, perhaps, and you want to start
 an american "kultur-kampf." i make haste, therefore, to restate the main
 thesis of this book. it is not the new inquisition which is our enemy
 today; it is hereditary privilege. it is not superstition, but big
 business which makes use of superstition as a wolf makes use of sheep's
 clothing.
 you remember how, when americans first awakened to the universal
 corruption of our politics, we used to attribute it to the "ignorant
 foreign vote." turn to lecky's "democracy and liberty" and you will see
 how reformers twenty years ago explained our political depravity. but we
 probed deeper, and discovered that the purely american communities, such
 as rhode island, were the most corrupt of all. it dawned upon us that
 wherever there was a political boss paying bribes on election day, there
 was a captain of industry furnishing the money for the bribes, and taking
 some public privilege in return. so we came to realize that political
 corruption is merely a by-product of big business.
 and when we come to probe this problem of the spread of superstition in
 america, this amazing renascence of romanism in a democracy, we find
 precisely the same phenomenon. it is not the poor foreigner who troubles
 us. our human magic would win him—our easy-going trust, our quiet
 certainty of liberty, our open-handed and open-homed and
 hail-fellow-well-met democracy. we should break down the catholic machine,
 and not all the priests in the hierarchy could stop us—were it not
 for the steel trust and the coal trust and the beef trust, the liquor
 trust and the traction trust and the money trust—those masters of
 america who do not want citizens, free and intelligent and self-governing,
 but who want the slave-hordes as they come, ignorant, inert, physically,
 mentally and morally helpless!
 no, do not let yourself be lured into a kultur-kampf. it is not the
 pennies of the servant-girls which build the towering cathedrals; it is
 not the two-dollar contributions for the salvation of souls which support
 the catholic truth society and the knights of columbus and the holy name
 society and the mary sodality and the national shrine of the immaculate
 conception and all the rest of the machinery of the papal propaganda.
 these help, of course; but the main sources of growth are, first, the
 subsidies of industrial exploiters, the majority of whom are non-catholic,
 and second, the privilege of public plunder granted as payment for votes
 by politicians who are creatures and puppets of big business.
 king coal
 the proof of these statements is written all over the industrial life of
 america. i will stop long enough to present an account of one industry,
 asking the reader to accept my statement that if space permitted i could
 present the same sort of proof for a dozen other industries which i have
 studied—the steel-mills of western pennsylvania, the meat-factories
 of chicago, the glass-works of southern jersey, the silk-mills of
 paterson, the cotton-mills of north carolina, the woolen-mills of
 massachusetts, the lumber-camps of louisiana, the copper-mines of
 michigan, the sweat-shops of new york.
 in a lonely part of the rocky mountains lies a group of enormously
 valuable coal-mines owned by the rockefellers and other protestant
 exploiters. the men who work these mines, some twelve or fifteen thousand
 in number, come from all the nations of europe and asia, and their fate is
 that of the average wage-slave. i do not ask anyone to take my word, but
 present sworn testimony, taken by the united states commission on
 industrial relations in . here is the way the italian miners live, as
 described in a doctor's report:
 houses up the canyon, so-called, of which eight are habitable, and
 forty-six simply awful; they are disreputably disgraceful. i have had to
 remove a mother in labor from one part of the shack to another to keep
 dry.
 and here is the testimony of the rev. eugene s. gaddis, former
 superintendent of the sociological department of the colorado fuel and
 iron company:
 the c. f. & i. company now own and rent hovels, shacks and dug-outs
 that are unfit for the habitation of human beings and are little removed
 from the pig-sty make of dwellings. and the people in them live on the
 very level of a pig-sty. frequently the population is so congested that
 whole families are crowded into one room; eight persons in one small room
 was reported during the year.
 and here is what this same clergyman has to say about the bosses whom the
 rockefellers employ:
 the camp superintendents as a whole impressed me as most uncouth,
 ignorant, immoral, and in many instances, the most brutal set of men that
 i have ever met. blasphemous bullies.
 sometimes the miner grows tired of being robbed of his weights, and
 applies for the protection which the law of the state allows him. what
 happens then?
 "when a man asked for a checkweighman, in the language of the super he was
 getting too smart."
 "and he got what?"
 "he got it in the neck, generally."
 and when these wage-slaves, goaded beyond endurance, went on strike, in
 the words of the commission's report:
 five strikers, one boy, and thirteen women and children in the strikers'
 tent colony were shot to death by militiamen and guards employed by the
 coal companies, or suffocated and burned to death when these militiamen
 and guards set fire to the tents in which they made their homes.
 and now, what is the position of education in such camps? the rev. james
 mcdonald, a methodist preacher, testified that the school building was
 dilapidated and unfit. one year there were four teachers, the next three,
 and the next only two. the teacher of the primary grade had a hundred and
 twenty children enrolled, ninety per cent of whom could not speak a word
 of english.
 every little bench was seated with two or three. it was over-crowded
 entirely, and she could hardly get walking room around there.
 and as to the political use made of this deliberately cultivated
 ignorance, former united states senator patterson testified that the
 companies controlled all elections and all nominations:
 election returns from the two or three counties in which the large
 companies operate show that in the precincts in which the mining camps are
 located the returns are nearly unanimous in favor of the men or measures
 approved by the companies, regardless of party.
 and now comes the all-important question. what of the catholic church and
 these evils? the majority of these mine-slaves are catholics, it is this
 church which is charged with their protection. there are priests in every
 town, and in nearly every camp. and do we find them lifting their voices
 in behalf of the miners, protesting against the starving and torturing of
 thirty or forty thousand human beings? do we find catholic papers printing
 accounts of the ludlow massacre? do we find catholic journalists on the
 scene reporting it, catholic lawyers defending the strikers, catholic
 novelists writing books about their troubles? we do not!
 through the long agony of the fourteen months strike, i know of just one
 catholic priest, father le fevre, who had a word to say for the strikers.
 one of the first stories i heard when i reached the strike-field was of a
 priest who had preached on the text that "idleness is the root of all
 evil," and had been reported as a "scab" and made to shut up. "who made
 him?" i asked, naively, thinking of his church superiors. my informant, a
 union miner, laughed. "we made him!" he said.
 i talked with another priest who was prudently saving souls and could not
 be interested in questions of worldly greed. max eastman, reporting the
 strike in the "masses", tells of an interview with a catholic sister.
 "has the church done anything to try to help these people, or to bring
 about peace?" we asked. "i consider it the most useless thing in the world
 to attempt it," she replied.
 the investigating committee of congress came to the scene, and several
 clergymen of the protestant church appeared and bore testimony to the
 outrages which were being committed against the strikers; but of all the
 catholic priests in the district not one appeared—not one! several
 protestant clergymen testified that they had been driven from the
 coal-camps—not because they favored the unions, but because the
 companies objected to having their workers educated at all; but no one
 ever heard of the catholic church having trouble with the operators. to
 make sure on this point i wrote to a former clergyman of trinidad who
 watched the whole strike, and is now a first lieutenant in the first new
 mexico infantry. he answered:
 the catholic church seemed to get along with the companies very cordially.
 the church was permitted in all the camps. the impression was abroad that
 this was due to favoritism. i honor what good the church does, but i know
 of no instance, during the colorado coal-strike or at any other time or
 place, when the catholic church has taken any special interest in the
 cause of the laboring men. many catholics, especially the men, quit the
 church during the coal-strike.
 the unholy alliance
 everywhere throughout america today the ultimate source of all power,
 political, social, and religious, is economic exploitation. to all other
 powers and all other organizations it speaks in these words: "help us, and
 you will thrive; oppose us, and you will be destroyed." it has spoken to
 the catholic church, for sixteen hundred years the friend and servant of
 every ruling class; and the church has hastened to fit itself into the
 situation, continuing its pastoral role as shepherd to the wage-slave
 vote.
 in new york and boston and chicago the church is "democratic"; so in the
 blaine campaign it was possible for a republican clergyman to describe the
 issue as "rum, romanism and rebellion." but the holy office was shrewd and
 socially ambitious, and the grand old party was desperately in need of
 votes, so under the regime of mark hanna, the president-maker, there began
 a rapprochement between big business and the new inquisition. under hanna
 the catholic church got representation in the cabinet; under him the
 cardinal's mass became a government institution, a catholic college came
 to the fore in washington, and catholic prelates were introduced in the
 role of eminent publicists, their reactionary opinions on important
 questions being quoted with grave solemnity by a prostitute press. it was
 mark hanna himself who founded the national civic federation, upon whose
 executive committee catholic cardinals and archbishops might work hand in
 glove with catholic labor-leaders for the chloroforming of the american
 working-class. hanna's biographer naively calls attention to the
 president-maker's popularity among catholics, high and low, and the
 support they gave him. "archbishop ireland was in frequent correspondence
 with him, and used his influence in mr. hanna's behalf."
 and this tradition, begun under hanna, was continued under roosevelt, and
 reached its finest flower in the days of taft, the most pliant tool of the
 forces of evil who has occupied the white house since the days of the
 slave power. president taft was himself a unitarian; yet it was under his
 administration that the catholic church achieved one of its dearest
 ambitions, and broke into the supreme court. why not? we can imagine the
 powers of the time in conference. it is desired to pack the court against
 the possibility of progress; it is desired to find men who will stand like
 a rock against change—and who better than those who have been
 trained from childhood in the idea of a divine sanction for doctrine and
 morals? after all, what is it that hereditary privilege wants in america?
 a roman catholic code of property rights, with a supreme tribunal to play
 the part of an infallible pope!
 under this taft administration the country was governed by the strangest
 legislative alliance our history ever saw; a combination of the old guard
 of the republican party with the leaders of the tammany democracy of new
 york. "bloody shirt" foraker, senator from ohio, voting with the sons of
 those irish catholic mob-leaders whom the federal troops shot down in the
 draft-riots! by this unholy combination a pledge to reduce the tariff was
 carried out by a bill which greatly increased its burdens; by this
 combination the public lands and resources of the country were fed to a
 gang of vultures by a thievish secretary of the interior. and of course
 under such an administration the cause of "religion" made tremendous
 strides. catholic officials were appointed to public office, catholic
 ecclesiastics were accorded public honors, and catholic favor became a
 means to political advancement. you might see a hard-swearing old
 political pirate like "uncle joe" cannon, taking his cigar out of the
 corner of his blasphemous mouth and betaking himself to the "cardinal's
 day mass", to bend his stiff knees and bow his hoary unrepentant head
 before a jeweled prelate on a throne. you might see an emissary of the
 united states government proceeding to rome, prostrating himself before
 the pope, and paying over seven million dollars of our taxes for lands
 which the filthy and sensual friars of the philippine islands had filched
 from the wretched serfs of that country and which the wretched serfs had
 won back by their blood in a revolution.
 secret service
 this taft administration, urged on by the catholic intrigue, made the most
 determined efforts to prevent the spread of radical thought. because the
 popular magazines were opposing the plundering of the country, a bill was
 introduced into congress to put them out of business by a prohibitive
 postal tax; the president himself devoted all his power to forcing the
 passage of this bill. at the same time the socialist press was handicapped
 by every sort of persecution. i was at that time in intimate touch with
 the "appeal to reason", and i know that scarcely a month passed that the
 post office department did not invent some new "regulation" especially
 designed to limit its circulation. i recall one occasion when i met the
 editor on his way to washington with a trunkful of letters from
 subscribers who complained that their postmasters refused to deliver the
 paper to them; and later on this same editor was prosecuted by a catholic
 attorney general and sentenced to prison for seeking to awaken the people
 concerning the moyer-haywood case.
 from my personal knowledge i can say that under the administration of
 president taft the roman catholic church and the secret service of the
 federal government worked hand in hand for the undermining of the radical
 movement in america. catholic lecturers toured the country, pouring into
 the ears of the public vile slanders about the private morality of
 socialists; while at the same time government detectives, paid out of
 public funds, spent their time seeking evidence for these catholic
 lecturers to use. i know one man, a radical labor-leader, whose morals
 happened to approach those of the average capitalist politician, and who
 was prevented by threats of exposure and scandal from accepting the
 socialist nomination for president. i know a dozen others who were
 shadowed and spied upon; i know one case—myself—a man who was
 asking a divorce from his wife, and whose mail was opened for months.
 this subject is one on which i naturally speak with extreme reluctance. i
 will only say that my opponent in the suit made no charge of misconduct
 against me; but those in control of our political police evidently thought
 it likely that a man who was not living with his wife might have something
 to hide; so for months my every move was watched and all my mail
 intercepted. in such a case one might at first suspect one's private
 opponent; but it soon became evident that this net was cast too wide for
 any private agency. not merely was my own mail opened, but the mail of all
 my relatives and friends—people residing in places as far apart as
 california and florida. i recall the bland smile of a government official
 to whom i complained about this matter: "if you have nothing to hide you
 have nothing to fear." my answer was that a study of many labor cases had
 taught me the methods of the agent provocateur. he is quite willing to
 take real evidence if he can find it; but if not, he has familiarized
 himself with the affairs of his victim, and can make evidence which will
 be convincing when exploited by the yellow press. in my own case, the
 matter was not brought to a test, for i went abroad to live; when i made
 my next attack on big business, the taft administration had been
 repudiated at the polls, and the secret service of the government was no
 longer at the disposal of the catholic machine.
 tax exemption
 today the catholic church is firmly established and everywhere recognized
 as one of the main pillars of american capitalism. it has some fifteen
 thousand churches, fourteen million communicants, and property valued at
 half a billion dollars. upon this property it pays no taxes, municipal,
 state or national; which means, quite obviously, that you and i, who do
 not go to church, but who do pay taxes, furnish the public costs of
 catholicism. we pay to have streets paved and lighted and cleaned in front
 of catholic churches; we pay to have thieves kept away from them, fires
 put out in them, records preserved for them—all the services of
 civilization given to them gratis, and this in a land whose constitution
 provides that congress (which includes all state and municipal legislative
 bodies) "shall make no law respecting a religious establishment." when war
 is declared, and our sons are drafted to defend the country, all catholic
 monks and friars, priests and dignitaries are exempted. they are
 "ministers of religion"; whereas we socialists may not even have the
 status of "conscientious objectors." we do not teach "religion"; we only
 teach justice and humanity, decency and truth.
 in defense of this tax-exemption graft, the stock answer is that the
 property is being used for purposes of "education" or "charity". it is a
 school, in which children are being taught that "liberty of conscience is
 a most pestiferous error, from which arises revolution, corruption,
 contempt of sacred things, holy institutions, and laws." (pius ix). it is
 a "house of refuge", to which wayward girls are committed by catholic
 magistrates, and in which they are worked twelve hours a day in a laundry
 or a clothing sweat-shop. or it is a "parish-house", in which a celibate
 priest lives under the care of an attractive young "house-keeper". or it
 is a nunnery, in which young girls are held against their will and fed
 upon the scraps from their sisters' plates to teach them humility, and
 taught to lie before the altar, prostrate in the form of a cross, while
 their "superiors" walk upon their bodies to impress the religious virtues.
 "i was a teacher in the catholic schools up to a very recent period,"
 writes the woman friend who tells me of these customs, "and i know about
 the whole awful system which endeavors to throttle every genuine impulse
 of the human will."
 concerning a large part of this church property, the claim of "religious"
 use has not even the shadow of justification. in every large city of
 america you will find acres of land owned by the catholic machine, and
 supposed to be the future site of some institution; but as time goes on
 and property values increase, the church decides to build on a cheaper
 site, and proceeds to cash in the profits of its investment, precisely as
 does any other real estate speculator. everywhere you turn in the history
 of romanism you find it at this same game, doing business under the cloak
 of philanthropy and in the holy name of christ. read the letter which the
 catholic bishop of mexico sent to the pope in , complaining of the
 jesuit fathers and their boundless graft. in mccabe's "candid history of
 the jesuits" appears a summary:
 a remarkable account is given of the worldly property of the fathers. they
 hold, it seems, the greater part of the wealth of mexico. two of their
 colleges own , sheep, besides cattle and other property. they own
 six large sugar refineries, worth from half a million to a million crowns
 each, and making an annual profit of , crowns each, while all the
 other monks and clergy of mexico together own only three small refineries.
 they have immense farms, rich silver mines, large shops and butcheries,
 and do a vast trade. yet they continually intrigue for legacies—a
 woman has recently left them , crowns—and they refuse to pay
 the appointed tithe on them. it is piquant to add to this authoritative
 description that the jesuit congregation at rome were still periodically
 forbidding the fathers to engage in commerce, and jesuit writers still
 gravely maintain that the society never engaged in commerce. it should be
 added that the missionaries were still heavily subsidized by the king of
 spain, that there were (the bishop says) only five or six jesuits to each
 of their establishments, and that they conducted only ten colleges.
 "holy history"
 and if you think this tax-exemption privilege should be taken away from
 the church grafters, let me suggest a course of procedure. write a letter
 about it to your daily newspaper; and if the letter is not published, go
 and see the editor and ask why; so you will learn something about the
 partnership between superstition and big business!
 it is not too much to say that today no daily newspaper in any large
 american city dares to attack the emoluments of the catholic church, or to
 advocate restrictions upon the ecclesiastical machine. as i write, they
 are making a new catholic bishop in los angeles, and all the newspapers of
 that graft-ridden city herald it as an important social event. each paper
 has the picture of the new prelate, with his shepherd's crook upraised,
 his empty face crowned with a rhomboidal fool's cap, and enough upholstery
 on him to outfit a grand opera company. the los angeles "examiner", the
 only paper in the city with a pretense to radicalism, turns loose its
 star-writer—one of those journalist virtuosos who will describe you
 a wild west "rodeo" one day, and a society elopement the next, and a g. o.
 p. convention the next; and always with his picture, one inch square, at
 the head of his effusion. he takes in the catholic festivity; and does it
 phaze him? it does not! he is a newspaper man, and if his city editor sent
 him to hell, he would take the assignment and write like the devil. to
 read him now you might think he had been reared in a convent; his soul is
 uplifted, and he bursts forth in pure spontaneous ecstacy:
 solemnly magnificent, every brilliant detail symbolically picturing the
 holy history of the roman catholic church in the inexorable progress of
 its immense structure, which rises from the rock of peter, with its
 beacons of faith and devotion piercing the fog of doubt and fear which
 surround the world and the worldly, was the ceremony yesterday at the
 cathedral of st. vibiana, whereby bishop john j. cantwell was installed in
 his diocese of monterey and los angeles.
 and then, a month later, comes another occasion of state—the
 twenty-third annual-banquet of the merchants' and manufacturers'
 association of los angeles. i should have to write a little essay to make
 clear the sociological significance of that function; explaining first, a
 nation-wide organization which has been proven by congressional
 investigation and by the publication of its secret documents to be a
 machine for the corruption of our political life; and then exhibiting our
 "city of the angels", from which all angels have long since fled; a city
 in the first crude stage of land speculation, without order, dignity or
 charm; a city of real estate agents, who exist by selling climate to new
 arrivals from the east; a city whose intellectual life is "boosting",
 whose standards of truth are those of the horse-trade. its newspapers
 publish a table of temperatures, showing the daily contrast between
 southern california and the east. this device is effective in the
 winter-time; but last june, when for five days and nights the temperature
 was over , and several times —the los angeles space was left
 empty!
 in the same way, there is a rule that our earthquake shocks are never
 mentioned, unless they destroy whole towns. on the afternoon of jan. th,
 , a cyclone hit pasadena, of violence sufficient to lift a barn over a
 church-steeple and deposit it in the pastor's front yard. that evening a
 friend of mine in los angeles called up the office of the "times" to make
 inquiry; and although they are only thirteen miles away, and have a branch
 office and a special correspondent in pasadena, the answer was that they
 had heard nothing about the cyclone! and next morning i made a careful
 search of their columns. on the front page i read: "fourth blizzard of
 season raging in east"; also: "another earthquake in guatemala". but not a
 line about the pasadena cyclone that there was plenty of space in that
 issue, you may judge from the fact that there were twenty headlines like
 the following—many of them representing full page and half page
 illustrated "write-ups":
 where spring is january; wealth waits in california; the bright side of
 sunshine land; come to california: southland's arms outstretched in
 cordial invitation to the east; flower stands make gay city streets;
 southland climate big manufacturing factor; joy of life demonstrated in
 los angeles' beautiful homes; nymphs knit and bathe at ocean's sunny
 beach; etc.
 now we are in the war and our business is booming, we are making money
 hand over fist. it is all the more delightful, because we are putting our
 souls into it, we are lending our money to the government and saving the
 world for democracy! our labor unionists have been driven to other cities,
 and our mexican agitators and i. w. w.'s are in jail; so, in the gilt
 ball-room of our palatial six-dollar-a-day hotel the four hundred masters
 of our prosperity meet to pat themselves on the back, and they invite the
 new catholic bishop to come and confer the grace of god upon their eating.
 the bishop comes; and i take up the "times"—the labor-hating,
 labor-baiting, fire-and-slaughter-breathing "times"—and here is the
 episcopal picture on the front page, the arms stretched four columns wide
 in oratorical beneficence. how the shepherd of jesus does love the
 merchants and manufacturers! how his eloquence is poured out upon them!
 "you represent, gentlemen, the largest and the most civilizing secular
 body in the country. you are the pioneers of american civilization..... i
 am glad to be among you; glad that my lines have fallen in this glorious
 land by the sunset sea, and honored to meet in intimate acquaintance the
 big men who have raised here in a few years a city of metropolitan
 proportions."
 and then, bearing in mind his responsibilities as guardian of
 exploitation, the bishop goes on to tell them about the coming class-war.
 "on the one side a statesman preaching patience and respect for vested
 rights, strict observance of public faith; on the other a demagog speaking
 about the tyranny of capitalists and usurers." and then, of course, the
 inevitable religious tag: "how will men obey you, if they believe not in
 god, who is the author of all authority?" at which, according to the
 "times", "prolonged applause and cheers" from the merchants and
 manufacturers! the editor of the "times" goes back to his office, and
 inspired by this episcopal eloquence writes a "leader" with the statement
 that: "we have no proletariat in america!"
 das centrum
 in order to see clearly the ultimate purpose of this unholy alliance, this
 union of superstition and the merchants' and manufacturers' association,
 we have to go to europe, where the arrangement has been working for a
 thousand years. in europe to-day we see the whole world in conflict with a
 band of criminals who have been able to master the minds and lives of a
 hundred million highly civilized people. as i write, the junker
 aristocracy is at bay, and soon to have its throat cut; but there comes a
 holy father to its rescue, with the cross of jesus uplifted, and a series
 of pleas for mercy, written in vienna, edited in berlin, and sent out from
 rome. the holy father loves all mankind with a tender and touching love;
 his heart bleeds at the sight of bloodshed and suffering, and he pleads
 the sacred cause of peace on earth and good-will toward men.
 but what was the holy father doing through the forty-three years that the
 potsdam gang were preparing for their assault on the world? how was the
 holy father manifesting his love of peace and good will? he is, you
 understand, the "sole, last, supreme judge of what is right and wrong,"
 and his followers obey him with the utmost promptness and devotion—they
 express themselves as "prostrate at his feet." and when the masters of
 prussia came to him and said: "give us the power to turn this nation into
 the world's greatest military empire"—what did the roman church
 answer? did it speak boldly for the gentle jesus, and the cause of peace
 on earth and good-will towards men? no, it did not. to bismarck in germany
 it said, precisely as it said to mark hanna in america: "give us honors
 and prestige; give us power over the minds of the young, so that we may
 plunder the poor and build our cathedrals and feed fat our greed; and in
 return we will furnish you with votes, so that you may rule the state and
 do what you will."
 you think there is exaggeration in that statement? why, we know the very
 names of the prelates with whom the master-cynic of the junkerthum made
 his "deal." he had tried the method of the kultur-kampf, and had failed;
 but before he repealed the anti-catholic laws, he made sure that the
 church had learned its lesson, and would nevermore oppose the prussian
 ruling caste. we know how this bargain was carried out; we have the record
 of the centrum, the catholic party of germany, whose hundred deputies were
 the solid rock upon which the military regime of prussia was erected. not
 a battle-ship nor a zeppelin was built for which the black terror did not
 vote the funds; not a school-child was beaten in posen or alsace that the
 new inquisition did not shout its "hoch!" the writer sat in the visitors'
 gallery of the reichstag when the socialists were protesting against the
 torturing of miserable herreros in africa, and he heard the deputies of
 the holy father's political party screaming their rage like jaguars in a
 jungle night. all over europe the catholic church organized fake labor
 unions, the "yellows," as they were called, to scab upon the workers and
 undermine the revolutionary movement. the holy father himself issued
 precise instructions for the management of these agencies of betrayal.
 hear the most pious and benevolent leo xiii:
 "they must pay special and principal attention to piety and morality, and
 their internal discipline must be directed precisely by these
 considerations; otherwise they entirely lose their special character, and
 come to be very little better than those societies which take no account
 of religion at all."
 it is so hard, you see, to keep a man thinking about piety and morality
 while he is starving! i am quoting from the encyclical letter on "the
 condition of labor," issued in , and addressed "to our venerable
 brethren, all patriarchs, primates, archbishops and bishops of the
 catholic world in grace and communion with the apostolic see." the purpose
 of the letter is "to refute false teaching," and the substance of its
 message is:
 this great labor question cannot be solved except by assuming as a
 principle that private property must be held sacred and inviolable.
 and again, the purpose of churches proclaimed in language as frank as any
 used in the present book:
 the chief thing to be secured is the safe-guarding, by legal enactment and
 policy, of private property. most of all it is essential in these times of
 covetous greed, to keep the multitude within the line of duty; for if all
 may justly strive to benefit their condition, yet neither justice nor the
 common good allows any one to seize that which belongs to another, or,
 under the pretext of futile and ridiculous equality, to lay hands on other
 peoples' fortunes.
 and this, you understand, in lands where rapine and conquest,
 class-tyranny and priestly domination have been the custom since the dawn
 of history; in which no property-right can possibly trace back to any
 other basis than force. in austria, for example—austria, the leader
 and guardian of the holy alliance—austria, which had no reformation,
 no revolution, no kultur-kampf—austria, in which the income of the
 catholic primate is $, a year! in other words, austria is still to a
 large extent a "priestly empire;" and it was austria which began the war—began
 it in a religious quarrel, with a slav people which does not acknowledge
 the holy father as the ruler of the world, but persists in adhering to the
 eastern church. so of course to-day, when austria is learning the bitter
 lesson that they who draw the sword shall perish by the sword, the heart
 of the holy father is wrung with grief, and he sends out these eloquent
 peace-notes, written in vienna and edited in berlin. and at the same time
 his private chaplain is convicted and sentenced to prison for life as
 austria's master-spy in rome!
 it is a curious thing to observe—the natural instinct which, all
 over the world, draws superstition and exploitation together. this war,
 which is hailed as a war against autocracy, might almost as accurately be
 described as a war against the clerical system. wherever in the world you
 find the papal power strong, there you find sympathy with the prussian
 infamy and there you find german intrigue. in spain, for example; in
 ireland and quebec, and in the argentine. the treatment of belgium was a
 little too raw—too many priests were shot at the outset, and so
 cardinal mercier denounces the germans; but you notice that he pleads in
 vain with the vatican, which stands firm by its beloved austria, and
 against the godless kingdom of italy. the kaiser allows the hope of
 restoration of the temporal power at the peace settlement; and meantime
 the law forbidding the presence of the jesuits in germany has been
 repealed, and all over the world the propagandists of this order are
 working for the kaiser. sir roger casement was raised a catholic, and so
 also "jim" larkin, the irish labor-leader who is touring america
 denouncing the allies. the catholic bishop of melbourne opposed and beat
 conscription in australia, and it was catholic propaganda of treachery
 among the ignorant peasant-soldiers from sicily which caused the breaking
 of the italian line at tolmino. so deeply has this instinct worked that,
 in the fall of  while the socialist party in new york was campaigning
 for immediate peace, the catholic irish suddenly forgot their ancient
 horrors. the catholic "freeman's journal" published nine articles favoring
 socialism in a single issue; while even "the tablet," the diocesan paper,
 began to discover that the socialists were not such bad fellows after all.
 the same "tablet" which a few years ago allowed father belford to declare
 that socialists were mad dogs who should be "stopped with a bullet"!
 note to second edition: since the above was written, the war fervor has
 swept america, including even the rank and file of the catholics, and what
 has here been said might seem unfair to persons who have forgotten the
 attitude of the church during the early part of the conflict, and the
 struggle it cost to bring the hierarchy into line. it is one of the
 ironies of history that the most reactionary organization in the world
 should be lending its aid to the destruction of the second most
 reactionary. when the catholic church marches forth to war for democracy,
 it is not drawing america down into the pit, but is letting america pull
 it out of the pit—at least for a time, and the spectacle is one in
 which all lovers of progress will rejoice.
 book four — the church of the slavers
 see, underneath the crown of thorn,
 the eye-balls fierce, the features grim!
 and merrily from night to morn
 we chaunt his praise and worship him—
great christus-jingo, at whose feet christian and jew and atheist meet!
 a wondrous god! most fit for those
 who cheat on 'change, then creep to prayer;
 blood on his heavenly altar flows,
 hell's burning incense fills the air,
 and death attests in street and lane
 the hideous glory of his reign.
 face of caesar
 the thesis of this book is the effect of fixed dogma in producing mental
 paralysis, and the use of this mental paralysis by economic exploitation.
 from that standpoint the various protestant sects are better than the
 catholic, but not much better. the catholics stand upon tradition, the
 protestants upon an inspired word; but since this word is the entire
 literary product, history and biography, science and legislation, poetry,
 drama and fiction of a whole people for something like a thousand years,
 it is possible by judicious selection of texts to prove anything you wish
 to prove and to justify anything you wish to do. the "holy book" being
 full of polygamy, slavery, rape and wholesale murder, committed by priests
 and rulers under the direct orders of god, it was a very simple matter for
 the protestant slavers to construct a bible defense of their system.
 they get poor jesus because he was given to irony, that most dangerous
 form of utterance. if he could come back to life, and see what men have
 done with his little joke about the face of caesar on the roman coin, i
 think he would drop dead. as for paul, he was a roman bureaucrat, with no
 nonsense in his make-up; when he ordered, "servants obey your masters," he
 meant exactly what he said. the roman official stamp which he put upon the
 gospel of jesus has been the salvation of the slavers from the reformation
 on.
 in the time of martin luther, the peasants of germany were suffering the
 most atrocious and awful misery; luther himself knew about it, he had
 denounced the princely robbers and the priestly land-exploiters with that
 picturesque violence of which he was a master. but nothing had been done
 about it, nothing ever is done about it—until at last the miserable
 peasants attempted to organize and win their own rights. their demands do
 not seem to us so very criminal as we read them today; the privilege of
 electing their own pastors, the abolition of villeinage, the right to hunt
 and fish and cut wood in the forest, the reduction of exorbitant rents,
 extra payment for extra labor, and—that universal cry of peasant
 communes whether in russia, england, mexico or sixteenth century germany—the
 restoration to the village of lands taken by fraud. but luther would hear
 nothing of slaves asserting their own rights, and took refuge in the
 pauline sociology: if they really wished to follow christ, they would drop
 the sword and resort to prayer; the gospel has to do with spiritual, not
 temporal, affairs; earthly society cannot exist without inequalities, etc.
 and when the peasants went on in spite of this, he turned upon them and
 denounced them to the princes; he issued proclamations which might have
 been the instructions of mr. john wanamaker to the police-force of his
 "city of brotherly love": "one cannot answer a rebel with reason, but the
 best answer is to hit him with the fist until blood flows from the nose."
 he issued a letter: "against the murderous and thieving mob of peasants,"
 which might have come from the reverend woelfkin, fifth avenue pastor of
 standard oil: "the ass needs to be beaten, and the populace needs to be
 controlled with a strong hand. god knew this well, and therefore he gave
 the rulers, not a fox's tail, but a sword." he implored these rulers,
 after the fashion of methodist chancellor day of the university of
 syracuse: "do not be troubled about the severity of their repression, for
 it will save many souls." with such pious exhortations in their ears the
 princes set to work, and slaughtered a hundred thousand of the miserable
 wretches; they completely aborted the social hopes of the reformation, and
 cast humanity into the pit of wage-slavery and militarism for four
 centuries. as a church scholar, prof. rauschenbusch, puts it:
 the glorious years of the lutheran reformation were from  to ,
 when the whole nation was in commotion, and a great revolutionary tidal
 wave seemed to be sweeping every class and every higher interest one step
 nearer to its ideal of life.... the lutheran reformation had been most
 truly religious and creative when it embraced the whole of human life and
 enlisted the enthusiasm of all ideal men and movements. when it became
 "religious" in the narrow sense, it grew scholastic and spiny,
 quarrelsome, and impotent to awaken high enthusiasm and noble life.
 deutschland ueber alles
 as a result of luther's treason to humanity, his church became the state
 church of prussia, and bible-worship and devil-terror played their part,
 along with the mass and the confessional, in building up the junker dream.
 a court official—the oberhofprediger—was set up, and from that
 time on the hohenzollerns were the most pious criminals in europe.
 frederick the great, the ancestral genius, was an atheist and a scoffer,
 but he believed devoutly in religion for his subjects. he said: "if my
 soldiers were to begin to think, not one would remain in the ranks." and
 carlyle, instinctive friend of autocrats, tells with jocular approval how
 he kept them from thinking:
 he recognizes the uses of religion; takes a good deal of pains with his
 preaching clergy; will suggest texts to them; and for the rest expects to
 be obeyed by them, as by his sergeants and corporals. indeed, the reverend
 men feel themselves to be a body of spiritual sergeants, corporals, and
 captains, to whom obedience is the rule, and discontent a thing not to be
 indulged in by any means.
 so the soldiers stayed in the ranks, and frederick raided silesia and
 poland. his successors ordered all the protestant sects into one, so that
 they might be more easily controlled; from which time the lutheran church
 has been a department of the prussian state, in some cases a branch of the
 municipal authority.
 in , when the people of various german states demanded their liberty,
 it was an ultra-pious king of prussia who sent his troops and shot them
 down—precisely as luther had advised to shoot down the peasants. at
 this time the future maker of the german empire rose in the landtag and
 made his bow before the world; a young prussian land-magnate, otto von
 bismarck by name, he shook his fist in the face of the new german
 liberalism, and incidentally of the new german infidelity:
 christianity is the solid basis of prussia; and no state erected upon any
 other foundation can permanently exist.
 the present hohenzollern has diligently maintained this tradition of his
 line. it was his custom to tour the empire in a train of blue and white
 cars, carrying as many costumes as any stage favorite, most of them
 military; with him on the train went the prussian god, and there was
 scarcely a performance at which this god did not appear, also in military
 costume. after the failure of the "kultur-kampf," the official lutheran
 religion was ordered to make friends with its ancient enemy, the catholic
 church. said the kaiser:
 i make no difference between the adherents of the catholic and protestant
 creeds. let them both stand upon the foundation of christianity, and they
 are both bound to be true citizens and obedient subjects. then the german
 people will be the rock of granite upon which our lord god can build and
 complete his work of kultur in the world.
 and here is the oath required of the catholic clergy, upon their admission
 to equality of trustworthiness with their protestant confreres:
 i will be submissive, faithful and obedient to his royal majesty,—and
 his lawful successors in the government,—as my most gracious king
 and sovereign; promote his welfare according to my ability; prevent injury
 and detriment to him; and particularly endeavor carefully to cultivate in
 the minds of the people under my care a sense of reverence and fidelity
 towards the king, love for the fatherland, obedience to the laws, and all
 those virtues which in a christian denote a good citizen; and i will not
 suffer any man to teach or act in a contrary spirit. in particular i vow
 that i will not support any society or association, either at home or
 abroad, which might endanger the public security, and will inform his
 majesty of any proposal made, either in my diocese or elsewhere, which
 might prove injurious to the state.
 and later on this heaven-guided ruler conceived the scheme of a
 berlin-bagdad railway, for which he needed one religion more; he paid a
 visit to constantinople, and made another debut and produced another god—with
 the result that millions of turks are fighting under the belief that the
 kaiser is a convert to the faith of mohammed!
 der tag.
 all this was, of course, in preparation for the great event to which all
 good germans looked forward—to which all german officers drank their
 toasts at banquets—the day.
 this glorious day came, and the field-gray armies marched forth, and the
 pauline-lutheran god marched with them. the kaiser, as usual, acted as
 spokesman:
 remember that the german people are the chosen of god. on me, the german
 emperor, the spirit of god has descended. i am his sword, his weapon and
 his viceregent. woe to the disobedient and death to cowards and
 unbelievers.
 as to the prussian state religion, its attitude to the war is set forth in
 a little book written by a high clerical personage, the herr
 consistorialrat dietrich vorwerk, containing prayers and hymns for the
 soldiers, and for the congregations at home. here is an appeal to the lord
 god of battles:
 though the warrior's bread be scanty, do thou work daily death and tenfold
 woe unto the enemy. forgive in merciful long-suffering each bullet and
 each blow which misses its mark. lead us not into the temptation of
 letting our wrath be too tame in carrying out thy divine judgment. deliver
 us and our ally from the infernal enemy and his servants on earth. thine
 is the kingdom, the german land; may we, by the aid of thy steel-clad
 hand, achieve the fame and the glory.
 it is this herr consistorialrat who has perpetrated the great masterpiece
 of humor of the war—the hymn in which he appeals to that god who
 keeps guard over cherubim, seraphim, and zeppelins. you have to say over
 the german form of these words in order to get the effect of their
 delicious melody—"cherubinen, seraphinen, zeppelinen!" and lest you
 think that this too-musical clergyman is a rara avis, turn to the little
 book which has been published in english under the same title as herr
 vorwerk's "hurrah and hallelujah." here is the reverend s. lehmann:
 germany is the center of god's plans for the world. germany's fight
 against the whole world is in reality the battle of the spirit against the
 whole world's infamy, falsehood and devilish cunning.
 and here is pastor k. koenig:
 it was god's will that we should win the war.
 and pastor j. rump:
 our defeat would mean the defeat of his son in humanity. we fight for the
 cause of jesus within mankind.
 and here is an eminent theological professor:
 the deepest and most thought-inspiring result of the war is the german
 god. not the national god such as the lower nations worship, but "our
 god," who is not ashamed of belonging to us, the peculiar acquirement of
 our heart.
 king cotton
 it is a cheap way to gain applause in these days, to denounce the prussian
 system; my only purpose is to show that bible-worship, precisely as
 saint-worship or totem-worship, delivers the worshipper up to the slavers.
 this truth has held in america, precisely as in prussia. during the middle
 of the last century there was fought out a mighty issue in our free
 republic; and what was the part played in this struggle by the
 bible-cults? hear the testimony of william lloyd garrison: "american
 christianity is the main pillar of american slavery." hear parker
 pillsbury: "we had almost to abolish the church before we could reach the
 dreadful institution at all."
 in the year  the presbyterian general assembly, which represented the
 churches of the south as well as of the north, passed by a unanimous vote
 a resolution to the effect that "slavery is utterly inconsistent with the
 law of god, which requires us to love our neighbor as ourselves." but in a
 generation the views of the entire south, including the presbyterian
 church, had changed entirely. what was the reason? had the "law of god"
 been altered? had some new "revelation" been handed down? nothing of the
 kind; it was merely that a yankee by the name of eli whitney had perfected
 a machine to take the seeds out of short staple cotton. the cotton crop of
 the south increased from four thousand bales in  to four hundred and
 fifty thousand in  and five million, four hundred thousand in .
 there was a new monarch, king cotton, and his empire depended upon slaves.
 according to the custom of monarchs since the dawn of history, he hired
 the ministers of god to teach that what he wanted was right and holy. from
 one end of the south to the other the pulpits rang with the text: "cursed
 be canaan; a servant to servants shall he be to his brethren." the learned
 bishop hopkins, in his "bible view of slavery", gave the standard
 interpretation of this text:
 the almighty, forseeing the total degradation of the negro race, ordained
 them to servitude or slavery under the descendants of shem and japheth,
 doubtless because he judged it to be their fittest condition.
 i might fill the balance of this volume with citations from defenses of
 the "peculiar institution" in the name of jesus christ—and not only
 from the south, but from the north. for it must be understood that leading
 families of massachusetts and new york owed their power to slavery; their
 fathers had brought molasses from new orleans and made it into rum, and
 taken it to the coast of africa to be exchanged for slaves for the
 southern planters. and after this trade was outlawed, the slave-grown
 cotton had still to be shipped to the north and spun; so the traders of
 the north must have divine sanction for the fugitive slave law. here is
 the bishop of vermont declaring: "the slavery of the negro race appears to
 me to be fully authorized both in the old and new testaments." here in the
 "true presbyterian", of new york, giving the decision of a clerical man of
 the world: "there is no debasement in it. it might have existed in
 paradise, and it may continue through the millenium."
 and when the slave-holding oligarchy of the south rose in arms against
 those who presumed to interfere with this divine institution, the men of
 god of the south called down blessings upon their armies in words which,
 with the proper change of names, might have been spoken in berlin in
 august, . thus dr. thornwell, one of the leading presbyterian divines
 of the south: "the triumph of lincoln's principles is the death-knell of
 slavery...... let us crush the serpent in the egg." and the reverend dr.
 smythe of charleston: "the war is a war against slavery, and is therefore
 treasonable rebellion against the word, providence and government of god."
 i read in the papers, as i am writing, how the clergy of germany are
 thundering against president wilson's declaration that that country must
 become democratic. here is a manifesto of the german evangelical league,
 made public on the four hundredth anniversary of the reformation:
 we especially warn against the heresy, promulgated from america, that
 christianity enjoins democratic institutions, and that they are an
 essential condition of the kingdom of god on earth.
 in exactly the same way the religious bodies of the entire south united in
 an address to christians throughout the world, early in the year :
 the recent proclamation of the president of the united states, seeking the
 emancipation of the slaves of the south, is in our judgment occasion of
 solemn protest on the part of the people of god.
 witches and women
 to whatever part of the world you travel, to whatever page of history you
 turn, you find the endowed and established clergy using the word of god in
 defense of whatever form of slave-driving may then be popular and
 profitable. two or three hundred years ago it was the custom of protestant
 divines in england and america to burn poor old women as witches; only a
 hundred and fifty years ago we find john wesley, founder of methodism,
 declaring that "the giving up of witchcraft is in effect the giving up of
 the bible." and if you investigate this witch-burning, you will find that
 it is only one aspect of a blot upon civilization, the christian mysogyny.
 you see, there were two hebrew legends—one that woman was made out
 of a man's rib, and the other that she ate an apple; therefore in modern
 england a wife must be content with a legal status lower than a domestic
 servant.
 perhaps the most comical of the clerical claims is this—that
 christianity has promoted chivalry and respect for womanhood. in ancient
 greece and rome the woman was the equal and helpmate of man; we read in
 tacitus about the splendid women of the germans, who took part in public
 councils, and even fought in battles. two thousand years before the
 christian era we are told by maspero that the egyptian woman was the
 mistress of her house; she could inherit equally with her brothers, and
 had full control of her property. we are told by paturet that she was
 "juridically the equal of man, having the same rights and being treated in
 the same fashion." but in present-day england, under the common law, woman
 can hold no office of trust or power, and her husband has the sole custody
 of her person, and of her children while minors. he can steal her
 children, rob her of her clothing, and beat her with a stick provided it
 is no thicker than his thumb. while i was in london the highest court
 handed down a decision on the law which does not permit a woman to divorce
 her husband for infidelity, unless it has been accompanied by cruelty; a
 man had brought his mistress into his home and—compelled his wife to
 work for and wait upon her, and the decision was that this was not cruelty
 in the meaning of the law!
 and if you say that this enslavement of woman has nothing to do with
 religion—that ancient hebrew fables do not control modern english
 customs—then listen to the vicar of crantock, preaching at st.
 crantock's, london, aug. th, , and explaining why women must cover
 their heads in church:
 () man's priority of creation. adam was first formed, then eve.
 () the manner of creation. the man is not of the woman, but the woman of
 the man.
 () the purport of creation. the man was not created for the woman, but
 the woman for the man.
 () results in creation. the man is the image of the glory of god, but
 woman is the glory of man.
 () woman's priority in the fall. adam was not deceived; but the woman,
 being deceived, was in the transgression.
 () the marriage relation. as the church is subject to christ, so let the
 wives be to their husbands.
 () the headship of man and woman. the head of every man is christ, but
 the head of the woman is man.
 i say there is no modern evil which cannot be justified by these ancient
 texts; and there is nowhere in christendom a clergy which cannot be
 persuaded to cite them at the demand of ruling classes. in the city where
 i write, three clergymen are being sent to jail for six months for
 protesting against the use of the name of jesus in the wholesale slaughter
 of men. now, i am backing this war. i know that it has to be fought, and i
 want to see it fought as hard as possible; but i want to leave jesus out
 of it, for i know that jesus did not believe in war, and never could have
 been brought to support a war. i object to clerical cant on the subject;
 and i note that an eminent theological authority, "billy" sunday, appears
 to agree with me; for i find him on the front page of my morning paper,
 assailing the three pacifist clergymen, and making his appeal not to
 jesus, but to the blood-thirsty tribal diety of the ancient hebrews:
 i suppose they think they know more than god almighty, who commanded the
 sun to stand still while joshua won the battle for the lord; more than the
 god who made samson strong so he could slay thousands of his nation's
 enemies in a righteous cause.
 right you are, billy! and if the capitalist system continues to develop
 unchecked, we shall some day see it dawn upon the masters of the world how
 wasteful it is to permit the superannuated workers to perish by slow
 starvation. so much more sensible to make use of them! so we shall have a
 bible defense of cannibalism; we shall hear our evangelists quoting
 leviticus: "they shall eat the flesh of their own sons and daughters." or
 perhaps some of our leisure-class ladies might make the discovery that the
 flesh of working-class babies is relished by pomeranians and poodles. if
 so, the billy sundays of the twenty-first century may discover the text:
 "happy shall be he that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the
 stones."
 moth and rust
 it is especially interesting to notice what happens when the bible texts
 work against the interests of the slavers and their clerical retainers.
 then they are null and void—and no matter how precise and explicit
 and unmistakable they may be! take for example the sabbath injunction:
 "six days shalt thou labor and do all that thou hast to do." karl marx
 records of the pious england of his time that,
 occasionally in rural districts a day-labourer is condemned to
 imprisonment for desecrating the sabbath by working in his front garden.
 the same labourer is punished for breach of contract if he remains away
 from his metal, paper or glass works on the sunday, even if it be from a
 religious whim. the orthodox parliament will hear nothing of
 sabbath-breaking if it occurs in the process of expanding capital.
 or consider the attitude of the church in the matter of usury. throughout
 ancient hebrew history the money-lender was an outcast; both the law and
 the prophets denounced him without mercy, and it was made perfectly clear
 that what was meant was, not the taking of high interest, but the taking
 of any interest whatsoever. the early church fathers were explicit, and
 the catholic church for a thousand years consigned money-lenders
 unhesitatingly to hell. but then came the modern commercial system, and
 the money-lenders became the masters of the world! there is no more
 amusing illustration of the perversion of human thought than the efforts
 of the jesuit casuists to escape from the dilemma into which their
 heavenly guides had trapped them.
 here, for example is alphonso ligouri, a spanish jesuit of the eighteenth
 century, a doctor of the church, now worshipped as st. alphonsus,
 presenting a long and elaborate theory of "mental usury"; concluding that,
 if the borrower pay interest of his own free will, the lender may keep it.
 in answer to the question whether the lender may keep what the borrower
 pays, not out of gratitude, but out of fear that otherwise loans will be
 refused to him in future, ligouri says that "to be usury, it must be paid
 by reason of a contract, or as justly due; payment by reason of such a
 fear does not cause interest to be paid as an actual price," again the
 great saint and doctor tells us that "it is not usury to exact something
 in return for the danger and expense of regaining the principal!" could
 the house of j. p. morgan and company ask more of their ecclesiastical
 department?
 the reader may think that such sophistications are now out of date; but he
 will find precisely the same knavery in the efforts of present-day slavers
 to fit jesus christ into the system of competitive commercialism. jesus,
 as we have pointed out, was a carpenter's son, a thoroughly
 class-conscious proletarian. he denounced the exploiters of his own time
 with ferocious bitterness, he drove the money-changers out of the temple
 with whips, and he finally died the death of a common criminal. if he had
 forseen the whole modern cycle of capitalism and wage-slavery, he could
 hardly have been more precise in his exortations to his followers to stand
 apart from it. but did all this avail him? not in the least!
 i place upon the witness-stand an exponent of bible-christianity whom all
 readers of our newspapers know well: a scholar of learning, a publicist of
 renown; once pastor of the most famous church in brooklyn; now editor of
 our most influential religious weekly; a liberal both in theology and
 politics; a modernist, an advocate of what he calls industrial democracy.
 his name is lyman abbott, and he is writing under his own signature in his
 own magazine, his subject being "the ethical teachings of jesus". several
 times i have tried to persuade people that the words i am about to quote
 were actually written and published by this eminent doctor of divinity,
 and people have almost refused to believe me. therefore i specify that the
 article may be found in the "outlook", the bound volumes of which are in
 all large libraries: volume , page . the words are as follows, the
 bold face being dr. abbott's, not mine:
 my radical friend declares that the teachings of jesus are not
 practicable, that we cannot carry them out in life, and that we do not
 pretend to do so. jesus, he reminds us, said, 'lay not up for yourself
 treasures upon earth;' and christians do universally lay up for themselves
 treasures upon earth; every man that owns a house and lot, or a share of
 stock in a corporation, or a life insurance policy, or money in a savings
 bank, has laid up for himself treasure upon earth. but jesus did not say,
 "lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth." he said, "lay not up for
 yourselves treasures upon earth where moth and rust doth corrupt and where
 thieves break through and steal." and no sensible american does. moth and
 rust do not get at mr. rockefeller's oil wells, nor at the sugar trust's
 sugar, and thieves do not often break through and steal a railway or an
 insurance company or a savings bank. what jesus condemned was hoarding
 wealth.
 strange as it may sound to some of the readers of this book, i count
 myself among the followers of jesus of nazareth. his example has meant
 more to me than that of any other man, and all the experiences of my
 revolutionary life have brought me nearer to him. living in the great
 metropolis of mammon, i have felt the power of privilege, its scourge upon
 my back, its crown of thorns upon my head. when i read that article in the
 "outlook", i felt just as jesus himself would have felt; and i sat down
 and wrote a letter—
 to lyman abbott
 this discovery of a new method of interpreting the bible is one of such
 very great interest and importance that i cannot forbear to ask space to
 comment upon it. may i suggest that dr. abbott elaborate this exceedingly
 fruitful idea, and write us another article upon the extent to which the
 teachings of the inspired word are modified by modern conditions, by the
 progress of invention and the scientific arts? the point of view which dr.
 abbott takes is one which had never occurred to me before, and i had
 therefore been completely mistaken as to the attitude of jesus on the
 question. also i have, like dr. abbott, many radical friends who are still
 laboring under error.
 jesus goes on to bid his hearers: "consider the lilies of the field, how
 they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin." what an apt simile is
 this for the "great mass of american wealth," in dr. abbott's portrayal of
 it! "it is serving the community," he tells us; "it is building a railway
 to open a new country to settlement by the homeless; it is operating a
 railway to carry grain from the harvests of the west to the unfed millions
 of the east," etc. incidentally, it is piling up dividends for its pious
 owners; and so everybody is happy—and jesus, if he should come back
 to earth, could never know that he had left the abodes of bliss above.
 truly, there should be a new school of bible interpretation founded upon
 this brilliant idea. jesus says, "therefore when thou doest thine alms, do
 not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues
 and in the streets, that they may have glory of men." verily not; for of
 what avail are trumpets, compared with the millions of copies of
 newspapers which daily go forth to tell of mr. rockefeller's benefactions?
 how transitory are they, compared with the graven marble or granite which
 mr. carnegie sets upon the front of each of his libraries!
 there is the paragraph, "neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because
 thou canst not make one hair white or black." i have several among my
 friends who are quakers; presumably dr. abbott has also; and he should not
 fail to point out to them the changes which scientific discovery has
 wrought in the significance of this command against swearing. we can now
 make our hair either white or black, or a combination of both. we can make
 it a brilliant peroxide golden; we could, if pushed to an extreme, make it
 purple or green. so we are clearly entitled to swear all we please by our
 head.
 nor should we forget to examine other portions of the bible according to
 this method. "look not upon the wine when it is red," we are told. thanks
 to the activities of that capitalism which dr. abbott praises so
 eloquently, we now make our beverages in the chemical laboratory, and
 their color is a matter of choice. also, it should be pointed out that we
 have a number of pleasant drinks which are not wine at all—"high-balls"
 and "gin rickeys" and "peppered punches"; also vermouthe and creme de
 menthe and absinthe, which i believe, are green in hue, and therefore
 entirely safe.
 then there are the ten commandments. "thou shalt not make unto thee any
 graven image." see how completely our understanding of this command is
 changed, so soon as we realize that we are free to make images of molten
 metal! and that we may with impunity bow down to them and worship them and
 serve them—even, for instance, a golden calf!
 "the seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy god; in it thou shalt not
 do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
 maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates."
 this, again, it will be noted, is open to new interpretations. it
 specifies maidservants, but does not prevent one's employing as many
 married women as he pleases. it also says nothing about the various kinds
 of labor-saving machinery which we have now taught to work for us—sail-boats,
 naptha launches, yachts, automobiles, and private cars—all of which
 may be busily occupied during the seventh day of the week. the men who run
 these machines—the guides, boatmen, stokers, pilots, chauffeurs, and
 engineers—would all indignantly resent being regarded as "servants",
 and so they do not come under the prohibition any more than the machines.
 "thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy
 neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
 his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbor's." i read this paragraph over
 for the first time in quite a while, and i came with a jolt to its last
 words. i had been intending to point out that it said nothing about a
 neighbor's automobile, nor a neighbor's oil wells, sugar trusts, insurance
 companies and savings banks. the last words, however, stop one off
 abruptly. one is almost tempted to imagine that the divine intelligence
 must have foreseen dr. abbott's ingenious method of interpretation, and
 taken this precaution against him. and this was a great surprise to me—for,
 truly, i had not supposed it possible that such an interpretation could
 have been foreseen, even by omniscience itself. i will conclude this
 communication by venturing the assertion that it could not have been
 foreseen by any other person or thing, in the heavens above, on the earth
 beneath, or the waters under the earth. dr. abbott may accept my
 congratulations upon having achieved the most ingenious and masterful
 exhibition of casuistical legerdemain that it has ever been my fortune to
 encounter in my readings in the literatures of some thirty centuries and
 seven different languages.
 and i will also add that i respectfully challenge dr. abbott to publish
 this letter. and i announce to him in advance that if he refuses to
 publish it, i will cause it to be published upon the first page of the
 "appeal to reason", where it will be read by some five hundred thousand
 socialists, and by them set before several million followers of jesus
 christ, the world's first and greatest revolutionist, whom dr. lyman
 abbott has traduced and betrayed by the most amazing piece of theological
 knavery that it has ever been my fortune to encounter.
 the octopus
 dr. lyman abbott published this letter! in his editorial comment thereon
 he said that he did not know which of two biblical injunctions to follow:
 "answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be thought like unto
 him"; or "answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
 conceit". i replied by pointing out a third text which the reverend doctor
 had possibly overlooked: "he that calleth his neighbor a fool shall be in
 danger of hell-fire." but the reverend doctor took refuge in his dignity,
 and i bided my time and waited for that revenge which comes sooner or
 later to us muck-rakers. in this case it came speedily. the story is such
 a perfect illustration of the functions of religion as oil to the
 machinery of graft that i ask the reader's permission to recite it at
 length.
 for a couple of decades the political and financial life of new england
 has been dominated by a gigantic aggregation of capital, the new york, new
 haven and hartford railroad. it is a "morgan" concern; its popular name,
 "the new haven", stands for all the railroads of six states, nearly all
 the trolley-lines and steamship-lines, and a group of the most powerful
 banks of boston and new york. it is controlled by a little group of
 insiders, who followed the custom of rail-road-wrecking familiar to
 students of american industrial life: buying up new lines, capitalizing
 them at fabulous sums, and unloading them on the investing public; paying
 dividends out of capital, "passing" dividends as a means of stock
 manipulation, accumulating surpluses and cutting "melons" for the
 insiders, while at the same time crushing labor unions, squeezing wages,
 and permitting rolling-stock and equipment to go to wreck.
 all these facts were perfectly well known in wall street, and could not
 have escaped the knowledge of any magazine editor dealing with current
 events. in eight years the "new haven" had increased its capitalization
  per cent; and what that meant, any office boy in "the street" could
 have told. what attitude should a magazine editor take to the matter?
 at that time there were still two or three free magazines in america. one
 of them was hampton's, and the story of its wrecking by the new haven
 criminals will some day serve in school text-books as the classic
 illustration of that financial piracy which brought on the american social
 revolution. ben hampton had bought the old derelict "broadway magazine",
 with twelve thousand subscribers, and in four years, by the simple process
 of straight truth-telling, had built up for it a circulation of ,.
 in two years more he would have had a million; but in may, , he
 announced a series of articles dealing with the new haven management.
 the articles, written by charles edward russell, were so exact that they
 read today like the reports of the interstate commerce commission, dated
 three years later. a representative of the new haven called upon the
 editor of hampton's with a proof of the first article—obtained from
 the printer by bribery—and was invited to specify the statements to
 which he took exception; in the presence of witnesses he went over the
 article line by line, and specified two minor errors, which were at once
 corrected. at the end of the conference he announced that if the articles
 were published, hampton's magazine would be "on the rocks in ninety days."
 which threat was carried out to the letter. first came a campaign among
 the advertisers of the magazine, which lost an income of thousands of
 dollars a month, almost over night. and then came a campaign among the
 banks—the magazine could not get credit. anyone familiar with the
 publishing business will understand that a magazine which is growing
 rapidly has to have advances to meet each month's business. hampton
 undertook to raise the money by selling stock; whereupon a spy was
 introduced into his office as bookkeeper, his list of subscribers was
 stolen, and a campaign was begun to destroy their confidence.
 it happened that i was in hampton's office in the summer of , when the
 crisis came. money had to be had to pay for a huge new edition; and upon a
 property worth two millions of dollars, with endorsements worth as much
 again, it was impossible to borrow thirty thousand dollars in the city of
 new york. bankers, personal friends of the publisher, stated quite openly
 that word had gone out that any one who loaned money to him would be
 "broken". i myself sent telegrams to everyone i knew who might by any
 chance be able to help; but there was no help, and hampton retired without
 a dollar to his name, and the magazine was sold under the hammer to a
 concern which immediately wrecked it and discontinued publication.
 the industrial shelley
 such was the fate of an editor who opposed the "new haven". and now, what
 of those editors who supported it? turn to "the outlook, a weekly journal
 of current events," edited by lyman abbott—the issue of dec. th,
 nineteen hundred and nine years after christ came down to bring peace on
 earth and good-will toward wall street. you will there find an article by
 sylvester baxter entitled "the upbuilding of a great railroad." it is the
 familiar "slush" article which we professional writers learn to know at a
 glance. "prodigious", mr. baxter tells us, has been the progress of the
 new haven; this was "a masterstroke", that was "characteristically
 sagacious". the road had made "prodigious expenditures", and to a noble
 end: "transportation efficiency epitomizes the broad aim that animated
 these expenditures and other constructive activities." there are
 photographs of bridges and stations—"vast terminal improvements", "a
 masterpiece of modern engineering", "the highest, greatest and most
 architectural of bridges". of the official under whom these miracles were
 being wrought—president mellen—we read: "nervously organized,
 of delicate sensibility, impulsive in utterance, yet with an
 extraordinarily convincing power for vividly logical presentation." an
 industrial shelley, or a milton, you perceive; and all this prodigious
 genius poured out for the general welfare! "to study out the sort of
 transportation service best adapted to these ends, and then to provide it
 in the most efficient form possible, that is the life-task that president
 mellen has set himself."
 there was no less than sixteen pages of these raptures—quite a
 section of a small magazine like the "outlook". "the new haven ramifies to
 every spot where industry flourishes, where business thrives." "as a
 purveyor of transportation it supplies the public with just the sort
 desired." "here we have the new efficiency in a nutshell." in short, here
 we have what dr. lyman abbott means when he glorifies "the great mass of
 american wealth". "it is serving the community; it is building a railway
 to open a new country to settlement by the homeless; it is operating a
 railway to carry grain from the harvests of the west to the unfed millions
 of the east," etc. the unfed millions—my typewriter started to write
 "underfed millions"—are humbly grateful for these services, and
 hasten to buy copies of the pious weekly which tells about them.
 the "outlook" runs a column of "current events" in which it tells what is
 happening in the world; and sometimes it is compelled to tell of
 happenings against the interests of "the great mass of american wealth".
 the cynical reader will find amusement in following its narrative of the
 affairs of the new haven during the five years subsequent to the
 publication of the baxter article.
 first came the collapse of the road's service; a series of accidents so
 frightful that they roused even clergymen and chambers of commerce to
 protest. a number of the "outlook's" subscribers are new haven
 "commuters", and the magazine could not fail to refer to their troubles.
 in the issue of jan. th, , three years and ten days after the baxter
 rhapsody, we read:
 the most numerous accidents on a single road since the last fiscal year
 have been, we believe, those on the new haven. in the opinion of the
 connecticut commission, the westport wreck would not have occurred if the
 railway company had followed the recommendation of the chief inspector of
 safety appliances of the interstate commerce commission in its report on a
 similar accident at bridgeport a year ago.
 and by june th, matters had gone farther yet; we find the "outlook"
 reporting:
 within a few hours of the collision at stamford, the wrecked pullman car
 was taken away and burned. is this criminal destruction of evidence?
 this collapse of the railroad service started a clamor for investigation
 by the interstate commerce commission, which of course brought terror to
 the bosoms of the plunderers. on dec. , , we find the "outlook"
 "putting the soft pedal" on the public indignation. "it must not be
 forgotten that such a road as the new haven is, in fact if not in terms, a
 national possession, and as it goes down or up, public interests go down
 or up with it," but in spite of all pious admonitions, the interstate
 commerce commission yielded to the public clamor, and an investigation was
 made—revealing such conditions of rottenness as to shock even the
 clerical retainers of privilege. "securities were inflated, debt was
 heaped upon debt", reports the horrified "outlook"; and when its hero, mr.
 mellen—its industrial shelley, "nervously organized, of delicate
 sensibility"—admitted that he had no authority as to the finances of
 the road and no understanding of them, but had taken all his orders from
 morgan, the "outlook" remarks, deeply wounded: "a pitiable position for
 the president of a great railway to assume." a little later, when things
 got hotter yet, we read:
 in the search for truth the commissioners had to overcome many obstacles,
 such as the burning of books, letters and documents, and the obstinacy of
 witnesses, who declined to testify until criminal proceedings were begun.
 the new haven system has more than three hundred subsidiary corporations
 in a web of entangling alliances, many of which were seemingly planned,
 created and manipulated by lawyers expressly retained for the purpose of
 concealment or deception.
 but do you imagine even that would sicken the pious jackals of their
 offal? if so, you do not know the sturdiness of the pious stomach. a
 compromise was patched up between the government and the thieves who were
 too big to be prosecuted; this bargain was not kept by the thieves, and
 president wilson declared in a public statement that the new haven
 administration had "broken an agreement deliberately and solemnly entered
 into," in a manner to the president "inexplicable and entirely without
 justification." which, of course, seemed to the "outlook" dreadfully
 impolite language to be used concerning a "national possession"; it
 hastened to rebuke president wilson, whose statement was "too severe and
 drastic."
 a new compromise was made between the government and the thieves who were
 too big to be prosecuted, and the stealing went on. now, as i work over
 this book, the president takes the railroads for war use, and reads to
 congress a message proposing that the securities based upon the new haven
 swindles, together with all the mass of other railroad swindles, shall be
 sanctified and secured by dividends paid out of the public purse. new
 haven securities take a big jump; and the "outlook", needless to say, is
 enthusiastic for the president's policy. here is a chance for the big
 thieves to baptize themselves—or shall we say to have the water in
 their stocks made "holy"? says our pious editor, for the government to
 take property without full compensation "would be contrary to the whole
 spirit of america."
 the outlook for graft
 anyone familiar with the magazine world will understand that such crooked
 work as this, continued over a long period, is not done for nothing. any
 magazine writer would know, the instant he saw the baxter article, that
 baxter was paid by the new haven, and that the "outlook" also was paid by
 the new haven. generally he has no way of proving such facts, and has to
 sit in silence; but when his board bill falls due and his landlady is
 persistent, he experiences a direct and earnest hatred of the crooks of
 journalism who thrive at his expense. if he is a socialist, he looks
 forward to the day when he may sit on a publications' graft commission,
 with access to all magazine books which have not yet been burned!
 in the case of the new haven, we know a part of the price—thanks to
 the labors of the interstate commerce commission. needless to say, you
 will not find the facts recorded in the columns of the outlook; you might
 have read it line by line from the palmy days of mellen to our own, and
 you would have got no hint of what the commission revealed about magazine
 and newspaper graft. nor would you have got much more from the great
 metropolitan dailies, which systematically "played down" the expose,
 omitting all the really damaging details. you would have to go to the
 reports of the commission—or to the files of "pearson's magazine",
 which is out of print and not found in libraries!
 according to the new haven's books, and by the admission of its own
 officials, the road was spending more than four hundred thousand dollars a
 year to influence newspapers and magazines in favor of its policies.
 (president mellen stated that this was relatively less than any other
 railroad in the country was spending). there was a professor of the
 harvard law school, going about lecturing to boards of trade, urging in
 the name of economic science the repeal of laws against railroad
 monopolies—and being paid for his speeches out of railroad funds!
 there was a swarm of newspaper reporters, writing on railroad affairs for
 the leading papers of new england, and getting twenty-five dollars weekly,
 or two or three hundred on special occasions. sums had been paid directly
 to more than a thousand newspapers—$, to the boston "republic",
 and when the question was asked "why?" the answer was, "that is mayor
 fitzgerald's paper." even the ultra-respectable "evening transcript",
 organ of the brahmins of culture, was down for $ for typing,
 mimeographing and sending out "dope" to the country press. there was an
 item of $ for , "prayers"; and when asked about that president
 mellen explained that it referred to a pamphlet called "prayers from the
 hills", embodying the yearnings of the back-country people for
 trolley-franchises to be issued to the new haven. asked why the pamphlet
 was called "prayers", mr. mellen explained that "there was lots of
 biblical language in it."
 and now we come to the "outlook"; after five years of waiting, we catch
 our pious editors with the goods on them! there appears on the pay-roll of
 the new haven, as one of its regular press-agents, getting sums like $
 now and then—would you think it possible?—sylvester baxter!
 and worse yet, there appears an item of $. to the "outlook", for a
 total of , copies of its issue of dec. th, nineteen hundred and nine
 years after christ came to bring peace on earth and good will towards wall
 street!
 the writer makes a specialty of fair play, even when dealing with those
 who have never practiced it towards him. he wrote a letter to the editor
 of the "outlook", asking what the magazine might have to say upon this
 matter. the reply, signed by lawrence f. abbott, president of the
 "outlook" company, was that the "outlook" did not know that mr. baxter had
 any salaried connection with the new haven, and that they had paid him for
 the article at the usual rates. against this statement must be set one
 made under oath by the official of the new haven who had the disbursing of
 the corruption fund—that the various papers which used the railroad
 material paid nothing for it, and "they all knew where it came from." mr.
 lawrence abbott states that "the new haven railroad bought copies of the
 'outlook' without any previous understanding or arrangement as anybody is
 entitled to buy copies of the 'outlook'." i might point out that this does
 not really say as much as it seems to; for the president of every magazine
 company in america knows without any previous understanding or arrangement
 that any time he cares to print an article such as mr. baxter's, dealing
 with the affairs of a great corporation, he can sell ten thousand copies
 to that corporation. the late unlamented elbert hubbard wrote a defense of
 the rockefeller slaughter of coal-miners, published it in "the fra," and
 came down to new york and unloaded several tons at  broadway; he did the
 same thing in the case of the copper strike in michigan, and again in the
 case of "the jungle"—and all this without the slightest claim to
 divine inspiration or authority!
 mr. abbott answers another question: "we certainly did not return the
 amount to the railroad company." well, a sturdy conscience must be a
 comfort to its possessor. the president of the "outlook" is in the
 position of a pawnbroker caught with stolen goods in his establishment. he
 had no idea they were stolen; and we might believe it, if the thief were
 obscure. but when the thief is the most notorious in the city—when
 his picture has been in the paper a thousand times? and when the thief
 swears that the broker knew him? and when the broker's shop is full of
 other suspicious goods? why did the "outlook" practically take back mr.
 spahr's revelations concerning the powder barony of delaware? why did it
 support so vigorously the standard oil ticket for the control of the
 mutual life insurance company—and with james stillman, one of the
 heads of standard oil, president of standard oil's big bank in new york,
 secretly one of its biggest stockholders!
 also, why does the magazine refuse to give its readers a chance to judge
 its conduct? why is it that a search of its columns reveals no mention of
 the revelations concerning mr. baxter—not even any mention of the
 $, slush fund of its paragon, of transportation virtues? i asked
 that question in my letter, and the president of the "outlook" company for
 some reason failed to notice it. i wrote a second time, courteously
 reminding him of the omission; and also of another, equally significant—he
 had not informed me whether any of the editors of the "outlook", or the
 officers or directors of the company, were stockholders in the new haven.
 his final reply was that the questions seem to him "wholly unimportant";
 he does not know whether the "outlook" published anything about the baxter
 revelations, nor does he know whether any of the editors or officers or
 directors of the "outlook" company are or ever have been stockholders of
 the new york, new haven and hartford railroad company. the fact "would not
 in the slightest degree affect either favorably or unfavorably our
 editorial treatment of that corporation." caesar's wife, it appears is
 above suspicion—even when she is caught in a brothel!
 clerical camouflage
 i have seen a photograph from "somewhere in france", showing a wayside
 shrine with a statue of the virgin mary, innocent and loving, with her
 babe in her arms. if you were a hostile aviator, you might sail over and
 take pictures to your heart's content, and you would see nothing but a
 saintly image; you would have to be on the enemy's side, and behind the
 lines, to make the discovery that under the image had been dug a hole for
 a machine-gun. when i saw that picture, i thought to myself—there is
 capitalist religion!
 you see, if cannon and machine-guns are out in the open, they are almost
 instantly spotted and put out of action; and so with magazines like
 "leslie's weekly", or "munsey's", or the "north american review", which
 are frankly and wholly in the interest of big business. if an editor
 wishes really to be effective in holding back progress, he must protect
 himself with a camouflage of piety and philanthropy, he must have at his
 tongue's end the phrases of brotherhood and justice, he must be liberal
 and progressive, going a certain cautious distance with the reformers,
 indulging in carefully measured fair play—giving a dime with one
 hand, while taking back a dollar with the other!
 let us have an illustration of this clerical camouflage. here are the
 wives and children of the colorado coal-miners being shot and burned in
 their beds by rockefeller gun-men, and the press of the entire country in
 a conspiracy of silence concerning the matter. in the effort to break down
 this conspiracy, bouck white, congregational clergyman, author of "the
 call of the carpenter", goes to the fifth avenue church of standard oil
 and makes a protest in the name of jesus. i do not wish to make extreme
 statements, but i have read history pretty thoroughly, and i really do not
 know where in nineteen hundred years you can find an action more
 completely in the spirit and manner of jesus than that of bouck white. the
 only difference was that whereas jesus took a real whip and lashed the
 money-changers, white politely asked the pastor to discuss with him the
 question whether or not jesus condemned the holding of wealth. he even
 took the precaution to write a letter to the clergyman announcing in
 advance what he intended to do! and how did the clergyman prepare for him?
 with the sword of truth and the armor of the spirit? no—but with two
 or three dozen strong-arm men, who flung themselves upon the socialist
 author and hurled him out of the church. so violent were they that several
 of white's friends, also one or two casual spectators, were moved to
 protest; what happened then, let us read in the new york "sun", the most
 bitterly hostile to radicalism of all the metropolitan newspapers. says
 the "sun's" report:
 a police billy came crunching against the bones of lopez's legs. it struck
 him as hard as a man could swing it eight times. a fist planted on lopez's
 jaw knocked out two teeth. his lip was torn open. a blow in the eye made
 it swell and blacken instantly. a minute later lopez was leaning against
 the church with blood running to the doorsill.
 and now, what has the clerical camouflage to say on this proceeding? does
 it approve it? oh no! it was "a mistake", the "outlook" protests; it
 intensifies the hatred which these extremists feel for the church. the
 proper course would have been to turn the disturber aside with a soft
 answer; to give him some place, say in a park, where he could talk his
 head off to people of his own sort, while good and decent christians
 continued to worship by themselves in peace, and to have the children of
 their mine-slaves shot and burned in their beds. says our pious editor:
 the true way to repress cranks is not to suppress them; it is to give them
 an opportunity to air their theories before any who wish to learn, while
 forbidding them to compel those to listen who do not wish to do so.
 or take another case. twelve years ago the writer made an effort to
 interest the american people in the conditions of labor in their
 packing-plants. it happened that incidentally i gave some facts about the
 bedevilment of the public's meat-supply, and the public really did care
 about that. as i phrased it at the time, i aimed at the public's heart,
 and by accident i hit it in the stomach. there was a terrible clamor, and
 congress was forced to pass a bill to remedy the evils. as a matter of
 fact this bill was a farce, but the public was satisfied, and soon forgot
 the matter entirely. the point to be noted here is that so far as
 concerned the atrocious miseries of the working-people, it was not
 necessary even to pretend to do anything. the slaves of packingtown went
 on living and working as they were described as doing in "the jungle", and
 nobody gave a further thought to them. only the other day i read in my
 paper—while we are all making sacrifices in a "war for democracy"—that
 armour and company had paid a dividend of twenty-one per cent, and swift
 and company a dividend of thirty-five per cent.
 this prosperity they owe in good part to their clerical camouflage. listen
 to our pious "outlook", engaged in countermining "the jungle". the
 "outlook" has no doubt that there are genuine evils in the packing-plants;
 the conditions of the workers ought of course to be improved; but—
 to disgust the reader by dragging him through every conceivable horror,
 physical and moral, to depict with lurid excitement and with offensive
 minuteness the life in jail and brothel—all this is to overreach the
 object.... even things actually terrible may become distorted when a
 writer screams them out in a sensational way and in a high pitched
 key...... more convincing if it were less hysterical.
 don't you see what these clerical crooks are for?
 the jungle
 a four years' war was fought in america, a million men were killed and
 half a continent was devastated, in order to abolish chattel slavery and
 put wage slavery in its place. i have made a thorough study of both these
 industrial systems, and i freely admit that there is one respect in which
 the lot of the wage slave is better than that of the chattel slave. the
 wage slave is free to think; and by squeezing a few drops of blood from
 his starving body, he may possess himself of machinery for the
 distribution of his ideas. taking his chances of the policeman's club and
 the jail, he may found revolutionary organizations, and so he has the
 candle of hope to light him to his death-bed. but excepting this
 consideration, and taking the circumstances of the wage slave from the
 material point of view alone, i hold it beyond question that the average
 lot of the chattel slave of  was preferable to that of the modern
 slave of the beef trust, the steel trust, or the coal trust. it was the
 southern master's real concern, his business interest, that the chattel
 slave should be kept physically sound; but it is nobody's business to care
 anything about the wage slave. the children of the chattel slave were
 valuable property, and so they got plenty to eat, and a happy outdoor
 life, and medical attention if they fell ill. but the children of the
 sweat-shop or the cotton-mill or the canning-factory are raised in a city
 slum, and never know what it is to have enough to eat, never know a
 feeling of security or rest—
 we are weary in our cradles
 from our mother's toil untold;
 we are born to hoarded weariness
 as some to hoarded gold.
 the system of competitive commercialism, of large-scale capitalist
 industry in its final flowering! i quote from "the jungle":
 here in this city tonight, ten thousand women are shut up in foul pens,
 and driven by hunger to sell their bodies to live. tonight in chicago
 there are ten thousand men, homeless and wretched, willing to work and
 begging for a chance, yet starving, and fronting with terror the awful
 winter cold! tonight in chicago there are a hundred thousand children
 wearing out their strength and blasting their lives in the effort to earn
 their bread! there are a hundred thousand mothers who are living in misery
 and squalor, struggling to earn enough to feed their little ones! there
 are a hundred thousand old people, cast off and helpless, waiting for
 death to take them from their torments! there are a million people, men
 and women and children, who share the curse of the wage-slave; who toil
 every hour they can stand and see, for just enough to keep them alive; who
 are condemned till the end of their days to monotony and weariness, to
 hunger and misery, to heat and cold, to dirt and disease, to ignorance and
 drunkenness and vice! and then turn over the page with me, and gaze upon
 the other side of the picture. there are a thousand—ten thousand,
 maybe—who are the masters of these slaves, who own their toil. they
 do nothing to earn what they receive, they do not even have to ask for it—-it
 comes to them of itself, their only care is to dispose of it. they live in
 palaces, they riot in luxury and extravagance—such as no words can
 describe, as makes the imagination reel and stagger, makes the soul grow
 sick and faint. they spend hundreds of dollars for a pair of shoes, a
 handkerchief, a garter; they spend millions for horses and automobiles and
 yachts, for palaces and banquets, for little shiny stones with which to
 deck their bodies. their life is a contest among themselves for supremacy
 in ostentation and recklessness, in the destroying of useful and necessary
 things, in the wasting of the labor and the lives of their
 fellow-creatures, the toil and anguish of the nations, the sweat and tears
 and blood of the human race! it is all theirs—it comes to them; just
 as all the springs pour into streamlets, and the streamlets into rivers,
 and the rivers into the ocean—so, automatically and inevitably, all
 the wealth of society comes to them. the farmer tills the soil, the miner
 digs in the earth, the weaver tends the loom, the mason carves the stone,
 the clever man invents, the shrewd man directs, the wise man studies, the
 inspired man sings—and all the results, the products of the labor of
 brain and muscle, are gathered into one stupendous stream and poured into
 their laps!
 this is the system. it is the crown and culmination of all the wrongs of
 the ages; and in proportion to the magnitude of its exploitation, is the
 hypocrisy and knavery of the clerical camouflage which has been organized
 in its behalf. beyond all question, the supreme irony of history is the
 use which has been made of jesus of nazareth as the head god of this
 blood-thirsty system; it is a cruelty beyond all language, a blasphemy
 beyond the power of art to express. read the man's words, furious as those
 of any modern agitator that i have heard in twenty years of revolutionary
 experience: "lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth!—sell that
 ye have and give alms!—blessed are ye poor, for yours is the kingdom
 of heaven!—woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your
 consolation!—verily, i say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly
 enter into the kingdom of heaven!—woe unto you also, you lawyers!—ye
 serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of
 hell?"
 "and this man"—i quote from "the jungle" again—"they have made
 into the high-priest of property and smug respectability, a divine
 sanction of all the horrors and abominations of modern commercial
 civilization! jewelled images are made of him, sensual priests burn
 incense to him, and modern pirates of industry bring their dollars, wrung
 from the toil of helpless women and children, and build temples to him,
 and sit in cushioned seats and listen to his teachings expounded by
 doctors of dusty divinity!"
 book five — the church of the merchants
 mammon led them on—
 mammon, the least erected spirit that fell
 from heaven; for even in heaven his looks and
 thoughts
 were always downward bent, admiring more
 the riches of heaven's pavement, trodden gold,
 than aught divine or holy else enjoyed
 in vision beatific.....
 let none admire
 that riches grow in hell; that soil may best
 deserve the precious bane.
 milton.
 the head merchant
 ours is the era of commerce, as its propagandists never weary of telling
 us. business is the basis of our material lives, and consequently of our
 culture. business men control our politics and dictate our laws; business
 men own our newspapers and direct their policy; business men sit on our
 school boards, and endow and manage our universities. the reformation was
 a revolt of the newly-developing merchant classes against the tyrannies
 and abuses of feudal clericalism: so in all protestant christianity one
 finds the spirit, ideals, and language of trade. we have shown how the
 symbolism of the anglican church is of the palace and the throne; in the
 same way that of the non-conformist sects may be shown to be of the
 counting-house. in the view of the middle-class britisher, the nexus
 between man and man is cent per cent; and so in their sunday services the
 worshippers sing such hymns as this:
 whatever, lord, we lend to thee,
 repaid a thousand fold shall be;
 then gladly will we give to thee,
 who givest all.
 the first duty of every man under the competitive system is to secure the
 survival of his own business; so on the sabbath, when he comes to deal
 with eternity, he is practical and explicit:
 nothing is worth a thought beneath
 but how i may escape the death
 that never, never dies;
 how make mine own election sure,
 and when i fail on earth secure
 a mansion in the skies.
 just as the priest of the aristocratic caste figures god as a mighty
 conqueror—
 marching as to war
 with the cross of jesus
 going on before
 so the preacher to the trader figures the divinity as a glorified merchant
 keeping books. this head merchant has a monopoly in his line; he knows all
 his rivals' secrets, so there is no getting ahead of him, and nothing to
 do but obey his word, as revealed through his clerical staff. the system
 is oily with protestations of divine love; but when you read the comments
 of luther upon calvin and of calvin upon luther, you understand that this
 love is confined to the inside of each denomination. and even so
 restricted, there is not always enough to go around. recently i met a
 presbyterian clergyman, to whom i remarked, "i see by the papers that you
 have just finished a church building." "yes," he answered; "and i have had
 three offers of a new church." i did not see the connection, and asked,
 "because you were so successful with this one?" the reply was, "they
 always take it for granted that you want to change when you've finished a
 new building, because you make so many enemies!"
 the business man puts up the money to build the church, he puts up the
 money to keep it going; and the first rule of a business man is that when
 he puts up the money for a thing he "runs" that thing. of course he sees
 that it spreads his own views of life, it helps to maintain his tradition.
 in the days of anu and baal we heard the proclamation of the divine right
 of kings; in these days of mammon we hear the proclamation of the divine
 right of merchants. some fifteen years ago the head of our coal trust
 announced during a great strike that the question would be settled "by the
 christian men to whom god in his infinite wisdom has given control of the
 property interests of this country". and on that declaration all pious
 merchants stand; whatever their denominations, catholic, episcopalian,
 baptist, methodist, presbyterian or hebrew, their sabbath doctrines are
 alike, as their week-day practices are alike; whether it is rockefeller
 shooting his bayonne oil-workers and burning alive the little children of
 his miners; or smooth john wanamaker, paying starvation wages to
 department-store girls and driving them to the streets; or that clergyman
 who, at a gathering of society ladies, members of the "law and order
 league" of denver, declared in my hearing that if he could have his way he
 would blow up the home of every coal-striker with dynamite; or the rev. r.
 a. torrey, dean of the bible institute of los angeles, who refused to
 employ union labor on the million dollar building of the institute,
 declaring that "the church cannot afford to have any dealings with a band
 of fire-bugs and murderers!"
 "herr beeble"
 the business of the clerical department of the merchants' and
 manufacturers' association is to justify the processes of trade, and to
 preach to clerks and employees the slave-virtues of frugality, humility,
 and loyalty to the profit system. the depths of sociological depravity to
 which some of the agents of this association have sunk is difficult of
 belief. twelve years ago i was invited to address the book-sellers of new
 york, in company with a well-known clergyman of the city, the reverend
 madison c. peters. this gentleman's address made such an impression upon
 me that i recall it even at this distance: a string of jokes spoken with
 an effect of rapid-fire smartness, and simply reeking with commercialism.
 i could not describe it better than to say that it was on the ethical
 level of the "letters of a self-made merchant to his son". again, i
 attended a debate on socialism, in which the capitalist end was taken by
 another famous clergyman, pastor of the metropolitan temple, the rev. j.
 wesley hill. he was so ignorant that when he wished to prove that
 socialism means free love, he quoted a writer by the name of "herr
 beeble"; he was so dishonest that he garbled the writings of this "herr
 beeble", making him say something quite different from what he had meant
 to say. i could name several clergymen of various denominations who have
 stooped to that device against the socialists; including the catholic
 father belford, who says that we are mad dogs and should be stopped with
 bullets.
 or consider the reverend thomas dixon. this gentleman's pulpit-slang used
 to be the talk of new york when i was a boy; and when i grew up, and came
 into the socialist movement—behold, here he was, chief inquisitor of
 the capitalist holy office. i had a friend, a man who saved my life at a
 time when i was practically starving, and to whom therefore i owe my
 survival as a writer; this friend had been a clergyman in a middle western
 state, and had preached jesus as he really was, and so was hated and
 feared like jesus. it happened that he was unhappily married, and
 permitted his wife to divorce him so that he might marry the woman he
 loved; for which unheard of crime the organized hypocrisy of america fell
 upon him like a thousand devils with poisoned whips. the reverend dixon's
 holy rage was fired; he applied his imagination to my friend's story,
 producing a novel under the title of "the one woman"; and it is as if you
 were reading the story of jesus and the magdalen transmitted through the
 personality of a he-goat. of late years this clerical author has turned
 his energies to negrophobia, and militarism, making millions out of
 motion-picture incitements to hatred and terror. the pictures were made
 here in southern california, and friends in the business have described to
 me the pious propagandist in the position of st. anthony surrounded by
 swarms of cute and playful little movie-girls.
 or take the rev. james roscoe day, d. d., s. t. d., l. l. d., d. c. l., l.
 h. d., a leading light of the methodist episcopal church, who offers
 himself as comic relief in our clerical vaudeville. dr. day is chancellor
 of syracuse university, a branch of the mental munitions department of the
 standard oil company; his function being to manufacture intellectual
 weapons and explosives to be used in defense of the rockefeller fortune.
 it is generally not expected that the makers of ruling-class munitions
 should face the dirty and perilous work of the trenches; but ten years
 ago, during a raid by an active squad of muckrake-men, chancellor day
 astonished the world by rushing to the front with both arms full of
 star-shells and bombs. he afterwards put the history of this gallant
 action into a volume, "the raid on prosperity"; and if you want the real
 thrill of the class-war, here is where to get it!
 the chancellor is a quaint and touching figure; an enthusiast and dreamer,
 idealist and martyr, in whom the ordinary human virtues have been fused,
 absorbed, transformed and sublimated into a new supreme virtue of loyalty
 to exploitation, patriotism for profiteering. he began life as a
 working-man, he tells us, in the good old american fashion of hustle for
 yourself; but he differed from other americans in that he had an instant,
 intuitive recognition of the intellectual and moral excellence of
 plutocracy. the first time he met a rich man, he quivered with rapture, he
 burst into a hymn of appreciation. so very quickly he was recognized as a
 proper person to have charge of a mental munition works; and the ruling
 classes proceeded to pin medals upon the bosom of his academic robes—d.
 the chancellor knows the masters of our profit system, those "consummate
 geniuses of manufacture and trade by which the earth has yielded up her
 infinite treasures." and having been at the same time in intimate daily
 communion with the almighty, he can tell us the almighty's attitude
 towards these prodigies. "god has made the rich of this world to serve
 him.... he has shown them a way to have this world's goods and to be rich
 towards god.... god wants the rich men....christ's doctrines have made the
 world rich, and provide adequate uses for its riches." also the chancellor
 knows our great corporations, and gives us the almighty's views about
 them; they mean that "the forces with which god built the universe have
 been put into the hands of man." likewise by divine authority we learn
 that "the sympathy given to socialism is appalling. it is insanity." we
 learn that the income tax is "a doctrine suited to the dark ages, only no
 age ever has been dark enough." somebody raises the issue of "tainted
 money", and the chancellor disposes of this matter also. as a deputy of
 divinity, he settles it by holy writ: "paul permitted meat offered to
 idols to be eaten in the fear of god." and then, to make assurance doubly
 sure, he settles it with plain human logic; and you are astonished to see
 how simple, under his handling, the complex problem becomes—how
 clear and clean-cut is the distinction he draws for you:
 every boy knows that one cannot take stolen goods without being a partaker
 with the thief. but the proceeds of recognized business are quite a
 different thing.
 holy oil
 and here is billy sunday, most conspicuous phenomenon of protestant
 christianity at the beginning of the twentieth century. for the benefit of
 posterity i explain that "billy" is a baseball player turned evangelist,
 who has brought to the cause of god the crowds and uproar of the diamond;
 also the commercial spirit of america's most popular institution. he
 travels like a circus, with all the press-agent work and newspaper hurrah;
 he conducts what are called "revivals", in an enormous "tabernacle" built
 especially for him in each city. i cannot better describe the billy sunday
 circus than in the words of a certain sidney c. tapp, who brought suit
 against the evangelist for $, damages for the theft of the ideas of
 a book. says mr. tapp in his complaint:
 the so-called religious awakening or "trail-hitting" is produced by an
 appeal to the emotions and in stirring up the senses by a combination of
 carrying the united states flag in one hand and the bible in the other,
 singing, trumpeting, organ playing, garrulous and acrobatic feats of
 defendant, by defendant in his talk leaping from the rostrum to the top of
 the pulpit, lying prone on the floor of the rostrum on his stomach in the
 presence of the vast audience and from thence into a pit to shake hands
 with the so-called "trail-hitters" and the vulgar use of plaintiff's
 thoughts contained in said books. said harangues and vulgarisms of said
 defendant and horns, drums, organs and singing by said choir and vast
 audience which are assembled by means of said newspaper advertisements for
 the purpose of inducing a habit of free and copious flow of money through
 religious and patriotic excitement produced by and through the vulgarisms,
 scurrility, buffoonery, obscenity and profanity of defendant pretending to
 be in the interest of the cause of religion through what he denominates
 "hitting the trail", the real object being to induce a religious frenzy
 and enthusiasm which he announces in advance is to result in large
 audiences composed of thousands of people generously contributing vast
 sums of money on the last day and night of the so-called revival which is
 invariably appropriated by the defendant and through which scheme and
 device defendant has become enormously wealthy.
 as i write, the evangelist is in los angeles, and twice each day he holds
 forth to a crowd of ten or fifteen thousand; in addition the newspapers
 print literally pages of his utterances. the entire protestant clergy for
 a score of miles around has been hitched to his triumphal chariot, and
 driven captive through the streets. here in this dignified city of
 pasadena, home of millionaire brewers and chewing-gum kings, all the
 churches have been plastered for weeks with cloth signs: "this church is
 cooperating in the sunday campaign." to give a sample of the intellectual
 level of the performance, here is what billy has to say about modern
 thought:
 all this blasphemy against god and jesus christ, all this sneering,
 highbrow, rotten, loathesome, higher criticism, wriggling its dirty,
 filthy, stinking carcass out of a beer-mug in leipzig or heidelberg!
 whether willingly or reluctantly, the preachers sit upon the platform and
 smile while billy thus slangs the devil; and being themselves, poor
 fellows, at their wits end to draw the crowd, they watch and see how he
 does it, and then return to their own churches and try the same stunt; so
 the manners of the baseball diamond spread like a contagion. i open my
 morning paper, and find a picture of an intense-looking clerical
 gentleman, the rev. j. whitcomb brougher, pastor of the baptist temple. he
 is discussing certain slanderous rumors which he has heard about billy
 sunday, and he offers ten thousand dollars reward to anyone who can prove
 these things; though, as he says,
 the dirty, low-down, contemptible, weazen-brained, impure-hearted,
 shrivelled-souled, gossipping devils do not deserve to be noticed.....
 scandal-mongers, gossip-lovers, reputation-destroyers, hypocritical,
 black-hearted, green-eyed slanderers..... corrupt, devil-possessed, vile
 debauches..... immoral, sin-loving, vice-practicing, underhanded
 sneaks..... carrion-loving buzzards and foul-smelling skunks.
 you will be prepared after this to hear that when the socialists were near
 to carrying los angeles, this clergyman preached a sermon in support of
 the candidate of "booze, gas and railroads".
 in so far as billy sunday is trying to keep the neglected youth of our
 streets from drinking, gambling and whoring, no one could wish him
 anything but success; but his besotted ignorance, his childish crudity of
 mind, make it impossible that he could have any success except of a
 delusive nature. he is utterly devoid of a social sense; utterly unaware
 of the existence of the forces of capitalism which are causing depravity
 ten times as fast as all the evangelists in creation can remedy it. so he
 is precisely like the catholics with their "charity", cleaning up
 loathsome and unsightly messes for a thousand years, and never stopping to
 ask why such messes continue to come into existence.
 more than that, i question whether the spirit of commercialism which he
 fosters does not help the development of evil more than his preaching
 hinders it. the newspapers always report the cost of the tabernacle, of
 the "free-will offering", which amounts to hundreds of thousands of
 dollars in each "campaign", in each city the expenses are guaranteed by
 men who are generally the most sinister exploiting forces of the
 community; they welcome and fete him, and he visits their homes, and is in
 every way one of the crowd. after the big strike in paterson, n. j., the
 employers, jews and catholics included, all subscribed a fund to bring
 billy sunday to that city; and it was freely proclaimed that the purpose
 was to undermine the radical union movement. this was never denied by
 sunday himself, and his whole campaign was conducted on that basis.
 later billy came to new york, where he met a certain rich young man,
 perhaps a thousand times as rich as any that lived in palestine. this
 young man came to billy and said: "what shall i do to inherit eternal
 life?" and billy told him to keep the commandments—"do not commit
 adultery, do not kill, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honor thy
 father and thy mother." the young man answered; "all these have i kept
 from my youth up." and billy said: "yet lackest thou one thing; sell all
 that thou hast and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure
 in heaven; and come follow me." and when he heard this he was very
 sorrowful, for he was very rich.
 —no, i have got the story mixed up. that is what happened in
 palestine. what happened in new york is that billy said, "i am delighted
 to meet you, mr. rockefeller." and mr. rockefeller said, "come be my guest
 at my palace in the pocantico hills; and then we will go together and you
 may preach submission to my wage-slaves in the oil-factories at bayonne
 and elsewhere." and billy went to the palace, and went and preached to the
 wage-slaves, telling them to beware the "stinking socialists", and to
 concentrate their attention on the saving of their souls; so the rich
 young man was delighted, and he sent for all the newspaper reporters to
 come to his office at  broadway, and told them what a great and useful
 man billy sunday is. as the new york "times" tells about it:
 mr. rockefeller seldom gives interviews and certainly he has never been
 charged with having an excess of verbally expressed enthusiasm on any
 subject. but he talked for an hour and a half about the evangelist. he was
 full of the subject of billy sunday. "billy did new york a lot of good,"
 he said. he went on to tell of  meetings held in  different
 factories, attended by , men. "that's good work." and he expressed
 his satisfaction with sunday's theology: "he believes the bible from cover
 to cover and that is good enough for me." the sunday campaign had cost
 $,, and "if it had stopped here, if it was not kept up, it would be
 poor business; a poor dividend on the $, and the work invested. but
 we expect to get dividends in the next year."
 again you note the symbolism of the counting-house!
 rhetorical black-hanging
 it is the duty of the clergy, not merely to defend large-scale merchants
 while they live, but to bury them when they die, and to place the seal of
 sanctity upon their careers. concerning this aspect of bootstrap-lifting i
 quote the opinion of an earnest hater of shams, william makepeace
 thackeray:
 i think the part which pulpits play in the death of kings is the most
 ghastly of all the ceremonial: the lying eulogies, the blinking of
 disagreeable truths, the sickening flatteries, the simulated grief, the
 falsehood and sycophancies—all uttered in the name of heaven in our
 state churches: these monstrous threnodies which have been sung from time
 immemorial over kings and queens, good, bad, wicked, licentious. the state
 parson must bring out his commonplaces; his apparatus of rhetorical
 black-hanging......
 and this, of course, applies not merely to kings of england, but to kings
 of steel, kings of coal, kings of oil, kings of wall street. when a
 certain king of western railroads died, a methodist clergyman, afterwards
 bishop, likened his heir to the boy christ; a statement which requires for
 its appreciation a mention of the fact that this heir died of syphilis. in
 the year  there passed from his earthly reward in pennsylvania a
 united states senator who had been throughout his lifetime a notorious and
 unblushing corruptionist. matthew stanley quay was his name, and the new
 york "nation", having no clerical connections, was free to state the facts
 about him:
 he bought the organization, bribed or intimidated the press, got his grip
 on the public service, including even the courts; imposed his will on
 congress and cabinet, and upon the last three presidents—making the
 latter provide for the offal of his political machine, which even
 pennsylvania could no longer stomach—and all without identifying his
 name with a single measure of public good, without making a speech or
 uttering a party watchword, without even pretending to be honest, but
 solely because, like judas, he carried the bag and could buy whom he
 would.
 such was the lay opinion; and now for the clerical. it was expressed by a
 presbyterian divine, the reverend dr. j. s. ramsey, who stood over the
 coffin of "matt", and without cracking a smile declared that he had been
 "a statesman who was always on the right side of every moral question!"
 in that same year of  died the high priest of our political
 corruption, mark hanna. he had belonged to no church, but had backed them
 all, understanding the main thesis of this book as clearly as the writer
 of it. in his home city of cleveland the eulogy upon him was pronounced by
 bishop leonard, in st. paul's episcopal church; while in the united states
 senate the service was performed by the chaplain, the rev. edward everett
 hale. this is a name well-known in american letters, as in american
 religious life; it was borne by a benevolent old gentleman, a unitarian
 and a liberal, who organized "lend-a-hand clubs" and such like
 amiabilities. "do you love this old man?" the signs in the street-cars
 used to ask when i was a boy; and i promptly answered "yes"—for my
 mother took the "ladies' home journal", and i swallowed the sentimental
 dish-water set out for me. but when i read the rev. edward's funeral
 oration over the irrev. mark, i loved neither of them any longer. "this
 whole-souled child of god," cried the rev. edward, "who believed in
 success, and knew how to succeed by using the infinite powers!" you
 perceive that the chaplain of the millionaires' club agrees with this
 book, that the "infinite powers" in america are the powers that prey!
 the great american fraud
 among the most loathesome products of our native commercial greed is the
 patent medicine industry, "the great american fraud," as its historian has
 called it. in  this historian wrote:
 gullible america will spend this year some seventy-five millions of
 dollars in the purchase of patent medicines. in consideration of this sum
 it will swallow huge quantities of alcohol, an appalling amount of opiates
 and narcotics, a wide assortment of varied drugs ranging from powerful and
 dangerous heart depressants to insidious liver stimulants; and, far in
 excess of all other ingredients, undiluted fraud. for fraud, exploited by
 the skillfullest of advertising bunco men, is the basis of the trade.
 one by one mr. adams tells about these medical fakes: habit-forming
 laxatives, head-ache powders full of acetanilid, soothing-syrups and
 catarrh-cures full of opium and cocaine, cock-tails subtly disguised as
 "bitters", "sarsaparillas", and "tonics". he shows how the fake
 testimonials are made up and exploited; how the confidential letters,
 telling the secret troubles of men and women, are collected by tens and
 hundreds of thousands and advertised and sold—so that the victim, as
 he begins to lose faith in one fake, finds another at hand, fully informed
 as to his weakness. he quotes the amazing "red clause" in the contracts
 which the patent-medicine makers have with thousands of daily and weekly
 papers, whereby the makers are able to control the press of the country
 and prevent legislation against the "great american fraud."
 there are a thousand religious papers in america, weekly and monthly; and
 what is their attitude on this question? mr. adams tells us:
 whether because church-going people are more trusting, and therefore more
 easily befooled than others, or from some more obscure reason, many of the
 religious papers fairly reek with patent medicine fakes.
 he gives us many pages of specific instances:
 dr. smith belongs to the brood of cancer vampires. he is a patron and prop
 of religious journalism. it is his theory that the easiest prey is to be
 found among readers of church papers. moreover he has learned from his
 father-in-law (who built a small church out of blood-money) to capitalize
 his own sectarian associations, and when confronted recently with a formal
 accusation he replied, with an air of injured innocence, that he was a
 regular attendant at church, and could produce an endorsement from his
 minister.
 and here is the "church advocate", of harrisburg, pa., which publishes
 quack advertisements disguised as editorials. one of them mr. adams
 paraphrases:
 as dr. smith is, on the face of his own statements, a self-branded
 swindler and rascal, you run no risk in assuming that the rev. c. h.
 forney, d. d., l. l. d., in acting as his journalistic supporter for pay,
 is just such another as himself!
 and again:
 will the editor of the "baptist watchman" of boston explain by what
 phenomenon of logic or elasticity of ethics he accepts the lucubrations of
 dr. bye, of oren oneal, of liquozone, of actina, that marvelous two-ended
 mechanical appliance which "cures" deafness at one terminus and blindness
 at the other, and all with a little oil of mustard?
 and again:
 the "christian observer" of louisville replied to a protesting subscriber,
 suggesting that the "collier" articles were written in a spirit of
 revenge, because "collier's" could not get patent medicine advertising.
 when i asked the rev. f. bartlett converse for his foundation for the
 charge, he said that one of the typewriters must have written the letter!
 doubtless also the same highly responsible typewriter imitated the
 signature with startling fidelity to dr. converse's handwriting!
 and here is—would you think it possible?—our "church of good
 society"! it has an organ in chicago called the "living church", most
 dignified and decorous. you have to study quite a while to ascertain what
 denomination it belongs to; it will not tell you directly, for the
 anglician pose is that it is the church
 elect from every nation,
 yet one oer all the earth,
 her charter of salvation,
 one lord, one faith, one birth;
 one holy name she blesses,
 partakes one holy food,
 and toward one hope she presses,
 with every grace endued.
 and this one holy institution was found setting at its peak the black flag
 of the trader, the "jolly roger" of the modern commercial pirate—"caveat
 emptor!" to quote the precise words:
 the editors and publishers of the "living church" assume no responsibility
 for the assertions of advertisers.
 and so it threw open its columns to the claims of america's champion
 labor-baiter, the late c. w. post, that his "grapenuts" would prevent
 appendicitis, and obviate the need of operations in such cases!
 and here is the "christian endeavor world", organ of one of the most
 powerful non-sectarian religious bodies in the country. some one wrote
 complaining of its medical advertising, and the answer was:
 to the best of our knowledge and belief, we are not publishing any
 fraudulent or unworthy medical advertising...... trusting that you will be
 able to understand that we are acting according to our best and sincerest
 judgment, i remain, yours very truly, the golden rule company, george w.
 coleman, business manager.
 whereupon the historian of "the great american fraud" remarks:
 assuming that the business management of the "christian endeavor world"
 represents normal intelligence, i would like to ask whether it accepts the
 statement that a pair of "magic foot drafts" applied to the soles of the
 feet will cure any and every kind of rheumatism in any part of the body?
 further, if the advertising department is genuinely interested in
 declining "fraudulent and unworthy" copy, i would call their attention to
 the ridiculous claims of dr. shoop's medicines, which "cure" almost every
 disease; to two hair removers, one an "indian secret", the other an
 "accidental discovery", both either fakes or dangerous; to the lying
 claims of hall's catarrh cure, that it is "a positive cure for catarrh",
 in all its stages; to "syrup of figs", which is not a fig syrup, but a
 preparation of senna; to dr. kilmer's swamp root, of which the principal
 medical constituent is alcohol; and, finally, to dr. bye's oil cure for
 cancer, a particularly cruel swindle on unfortunates suffering from an
 incurable malady. all of these, with other matter, which for the sake of
 decency i do not care to detail in these columns, appear in recent issues
 of the "christian endeavor world".
 riches in glory
 there came recently to los angeles a "world-famous evangelist", known as
 "gipsy" smith. there was a shirt-waist strike at the time, and the girls
 were starving, and they sent a delegation to this evangelist to ask for
 help. they told him how they were mistreated, exposed to insults, driven
 to sell their virtue because their wage would not support life; and to
 their plea he made answer: "get jesus in your hearts, and these questions
 will take care of themselves!"
 so we see the most important of the many services which the churches
 perform for the merchants—taking the revolutionary hope of jesus,
 for a kingdom of heaven upon earth, and perverting it into a dream of a
 golden harp in an uncertain future. to appreciate the fullness of this
 betrayal, take the prayer which jesus dictated—so simple, direct and
 practical: "give us this day our daily bread", and put it beside the hymns
 which the slave-congregations are trained to sing. in my neighborhood is a
 one-roomed building with a plate glass front, upon which i observe a
 painter inscribing in red, white and blue letters the sign "glory
 mission". i approach him, and he drops his work and welcomes me with eager
 cordiality. am i "living in grace"? i answer that i am. i have to shout
 the good tidings into his ear, as he is very deaf. he presents me with his
 card, which shows that he bears the title of "reverend", also the
 sobriquet of "mountain missionary". i ask him to permit me to examine the
 hymn-book which he uses in his work, and with touching eagerness he
 presses upon me a well-worn volume bearing the title "waves of glory". i
 seat myself and note down a few of the baits it sets out for hungry
 wage-slaves:
 o, there's a plenty, o, there's a plenty,
 there's a plenty in my father's bank above!
 riches in glory, riches in glory,
 royal supply our wants exceed!
 feasting, i'm feasting,
 i'm feasting with my lord!
 beautiful robes, beautiful robes,
 beautiful robes we then shall wear!
 jerusalem the golden,
 with milk and honey blest!
 yes, i'll meet you in the city of the new jerusalem,
 i'll be there, i'll be there!
 blest canaan land, bright canaan land,
 i love to be in canaan land!
 oh, beulah land, sweet beulah land,
 as on the highest mount i stand,
 i look away across the sea,
 where mansions are prepared for me!
 in the sweet bye and bye
 we shall meet on that beautiful shore—
 i stopped there, being reminded of joe hill, poet of the i. w. w. who was
 hanged three or four years ago in utah, and who used this tune in his
 little red book of revolutionary chants:
 you will eat, bye and bye,
 in the glorious land above the sky;
 work and pray, live on hay,
 you'll get pie in the sky when you die!
 captivating ideals
 in one of the writer's earlier novels, "prince hagen", the hero is a
 nibelung out of wagner's "rheingold", who leaves his diggings in the
 bowels of the earth, and comes up to look into our superior civilization.
 the thing that impresses him most is what he calls "the immortality idea".
 the person who got that up was a world-genius, he exclaims. "if you can
 once get a man to believing in immortality, there is no more left for you
 to desire; you can take everything he owns—you can skin him alive if
 it pleases you—and he will bear it all with perfect good humor."
 and is that merely the spiritual deficiency of a nibelung—or the
 effort of a young author to be smart? would you like to hear that view of
 the most vital of christian doctrines set forth in the language of
 scholarship and culture? would you like to know how an ecclesiastical
 authority, equipped with every tool of modern learning, would set about
 voicing the idea that the function of the teaching of heaven is to
 chloroform the poor, so that the rich may continue to rob them in
 security?
 here under my hand is a volume in the newest dress of scholarship, dated
 , and written by professor georges chatterton-hill, of the university
 of geneva. its title is "the sociological value of christianity", and from
 cover to cover it is a warning to the rich of the danger they run in
 giving up their religion and ceasing to support its priests. it explains
 how "the genius of christianity has succeeded in making the individual
 suffering, the individual sacrifices, which are indispensible for the
 welfare of the collectivity, appear as indispensible for the individual
 welfare." the learned professor makes plain just what he means by
 "individual suffering, individual sacrifices"; he means all the horrors of
 capitalism; and the advantage of christianity is that it makes you think
 that by submitting to these horrors, you are profiting your own soul. "by
 making individual salvation depend on the acceptance of suffering, on the
 voluntary sacrifice of egotistical interests, christianity adapts the
 individual to society". and this, as the professor explains, is not an
 easy thing to do, in a world in which so many people are thinking for
 themselves. "the only means of causing the rationalized individual to
 consent to the sacrifice...... is to captivate him with a sufficiently
 powerful idea!" and the professor shows how beautifully jesus can be used
 for this purpose. "jesus, the so-called humanitarian, never ceased to
 insist on the necessity of suffering, the desirableness of suffering—of
 that suffering which a weak and sickly humanitarianism would fain suppress
 if it could."
 you get this, you "blanket-stiff", you "husky", or "wop", or whatever you
 are—you disinherited of the earth, you proletarians who have only
 your labor-power to sell, you weak and sickly ones who are condemned to
 elimination? there has come, let us say, a period of "overproduction"; you
 have raised too much food, and therefore you are starving, you have woven
 too much cloth, and therefore you are naked, you have finished the world
 for your masters, and it is time for you to move out of the way. as the
 sociologist from geneva phrases it, "your suppression imposes itself as an
 imperious necessity." and the function of the christian religion is to
 make you enjoy the process, by "captivating you with a sufficiently
 powerful ideal"! the priest will fill your nostrils with incense, your
 eyes with candle-lights and images, your ears with sweet music and
 soothing words; and so you will perish without raising a finger! "here,"
 reflects the professor, "we see how magnificently the teaching of jesus
 applies to all classes of society!"
 somebody has evidently put up to our christian sociologist the
 embarrassing fact that so many of those who survive under the capitalist
 system are godless scoundrels. but do you think that troubles him? not for
 long. like all religious thinkers, he carries with his scholar's equipment
 a pair of metaphysical wings, wherewith at any moment he may soar into the
 empyrean, out of reach of vulgar materialists, like you and me.
 "inequality signifies inequality of capacity," he explains; but the
 standard whereby we judge this capacity "cannot be the standard of the
 moral law."
 the laws which govern the biological evolution of man are known, but those
 which govern his moral nature cannot be known; the moral nature appertains
 to the absolute, and hence is not subject to the law of inequality!
 as an exhibition of metaphysical wing-power, that is almost as wonderful
 as the flight of cardinal newman when confronted with the fact that his
 divinely guided church had burned men for teaching the copernican view of
 the universe; that infallible popes had again and again condemned this
 heresy ex cathedra. said the eloquent cardinal:
 scripture says that the sun moves and the earth is stationary, and science
 that the earth moves and the sun is comparatively at rest. how can we
 determine which of these opposite statements is the very truth till we
 know what motion is?
 spook hunting
 do not imagine that it is only in geneva that christian professors realize
 this peril from the loss of faith. it is never far from the thoughts of
 any of them—for, of course, no man can look at the present system
 and not wonder how the poor stand it, and more especially why they stand
 it. there have been many thinking men who have given up the
 miracle-business quite cheerfully, but have stood appalled at the idea of
 letting the lower classes find out the truth. you note that idea
 continually in the writings of professor goldwin smith, who was a
 free-thinker, but also a bourgeois publicist, with a deep sense of
 responsibility to the money-masters of the world. he was about as honest a
 man as the capitalist system can produce; he was the beau ideal of the new
 york "evening post", which indicates his point of view. he wrote:
 it can hardly be doubted that hope of compensation in a future state, for
 a short measure of happiness here, has materially helped to reconcile the
 less favored members of the community to the inequalities of the existing
 order of things.
 when i was a student in columbia university, i took a course called
 "practical ethics", under a professor by the name of hyslop. the course
 differed from most of the forty that i tried, in that it gave evidence
 that the professor was accustomed to read the morning paper. he had
 learned that american politics were rotten; his idea of "practical ethics"
 was to outline in elaborate detail a complete scheme of constitutional
 changes which would make it impossible for the "boss" to control the
 government. i think i must have been born with a charm against bourgeois
 thought, for the good professor never fooled me an instant; i remember i
 used to smile at the idea of how quickly the "boss" would brush through
 his constitutional cobwebs. the reforms required an elaborate campaign of
 publicity—and of course long before they could be put into practice,
 the politicians would be ready with devices to make them of no effect.
 soon after this, my ethical professor resigned and went to hunting spooks.
 i don't want to be unfair to him; i know that he is a determined and
 courageous man, and it seems possible that he may really have bagged some
 spooks. all i wish to point out here is the method he uses in seeking to
 persuade the heedless rich to support the spook-hunting industry. the very
 same argument as we got from the university of geneva and the university
 of toronto! says our head spook-hunter:
 there has been no belief that exercised so much power upon the poor as
 that in a future life. the politicians, men of the world, have known this
 so well as to postpone the day of political judgment by it for many years.
 and again:
 the church, having lost all its battles with science, and having abandoned
 a strenuous intellectual defense of its fundamental beliefs, has lost its
 power over the poor and the laboring classes..... the spiritual ideal of
 life has gone out of the masses as well as the classes, and nothing is
 left but a venture on a struggle with wealth.
 and again, more menacingly yet:
 the rich will learn in the dangers of a social revolution that the poor
 will not sacrifice both wealth and immortality.
 what is to be done about this? the question answers itself: step up,
 ladies and gentlemen, and empty your purses into the psychical research
 hat! so that we may accumulate statistics as to the cost of milk and honey
 in jerusalem the golden!
 you read what i had to say about bootstrap-lifters, and the wholesale
 pickpockets' association making use of their incantations. you admired my
 ability to sling language, but not my taste; and you certainly did not
 think that i would back my rhetoric with facts. but what do these
 quotations mean, unless they mean what i have said? are not these three
 professors men of culture? are they not as "spiritual" as any men of
 learning you can find in our present-day society?
 and now stop for a moment and put yourself in the position of the young
 student of the working-class, who goes to these books and discovers that
 truth is not truth, but only a bait for a snare. who discovers that
 professors of ethics, practical or impractical, are not interested in
 justice among men, but only in collecting funds for their specialty; that
 in order to get funds, they are willing to teach the rich how to paralyze
 the minds of the poor! do you wonder that such young students conclude
 that bourgeois thinkers do not know what honesty is, but are prostitutes,
 retainers and lackeys, to be kicked out of the temple of truth?
 running the rapids
 and now, can you form to yourselves a clear concept of what it means to
 society that practically all its moral teaching should be in the hands of
 men who are incapable of clean, straight thinking? that all the
 intellectual prestige of the church should be lent to the support of
 vagueness, futility, and deliberate evasion? here we are, all of us,
 caught in the most terrific social crisis of history; i search for a
 metaphor to picture our position, and i recall a canoe-trip in the wilds
 of ontario, hundreds of miles down a long swift river. you sit in the bow
 of the canoe, your partner in the stern, watching ahead; and there comes a
 slide of smooth green water, and you go over it, and into a torrent of
 foaming white, which seizes you and rushes you along with the speed of a
 race-horse. with every sense alert, you watch for the rocks, and when you
 see one, you dip your paddle on one side or the other and with a quick
 motion draw the canoe clear of the danger. if by any chance you fail to do
 it, over you go, and your partner with you, and all your belongings go
 down-stream, and maybe you are sucked into a whirlpool, and not seen for
 several hours afterwards. precisely like this is the voyage of life, for
 the whole of society and for every individual. the paddle which would save
 us from the rocks is experimental science; but in most of our canoes we
 put a man who has no paddle, but a holy book; and he casts up his eyes and
 murmurs words in ancient greek and hebrew, and now and then, when he sees
 an especially formidable obstruction—a war, or the gonococcus, or
 the i. w. w.—he casts a holy wafer upon the foaming torrent.
 and mind you, it isn't as if i could save myself and you could save
 yourself; we are all in the same canoe, and we all go overboard together.
 you, perhaps, have a son who is drafted into the trenches in winter-time,
 and drowned in blood and mud, because in europe the catholic party
 supported militarism, and kept aristocratic criminals in control of
 states. or you find yourself involved in a marital tragedy, and in order
 to free yourself from unendurable misery, you are obliged to go to
 law-courts dominated by the tradition of paul, the roman bureaucrat, who
 despised women, and regarded marriage as a means of gratifying an unclean
 animal desire. "it is better to marry than to burn," he said, with
 unmatchable brutality; and so of course those who think him a voice of god
 can form no conception of the dignity and grace of love, and if you want
 sound and wholesome sex-conventions, you will be as apt to find them among
 the ashantees or the kamchadals as among the followers of the apostle to
 the gentiles.
 you go to a so-called "divorce-court," which is dominated by this
 christian taboo, and exists for the purpose of barring you from a second
 chance at the gratification of your unclean animal desire. you are not
 permitted to tell your own story, for that would be "collusion;" you
 listen while your intimate friends recite the pitiful and shameful details
 of your domestic misfortune, under the cross-questioning of lawyers who
 have suppressed for the time whatever decent instincts they may possess,
 and follow blindly the details of a prescribed procedure, at the cost of
 all sincerity, humanity and truth. the next morning you find that the
 privacy guaranteed you by law has been taken from you by corrupt court
 officials, who have sold copies of the testimony to the newspapers, so
 that all the intimate details of where you slept and where your wife slept
 and what you saw your wife doing have been thrown out to journalistic
 jackals, who scream with glee as they rend the carcass of your dead love.
 and in the end, perhaps, you find that you have gone through this horror
 for nothing—the august court with its roman catholic judge throws
 out your petition, its suspicions having been excited by the fact that
 when you discovered your domestic tragedy, you sought to behave like a
 civilized person, with pity and self-restraint, instead of like a sultan
 in turkey, or a basso in an italian grand opera.
 birth control
 i assert that the control of our thinking on ethical questions by minds
 enslaved to tradition and priestcraft is an unmitigated curse to the race.
 the armory of science is full of weapons which might be used to slay the
 monsters of disease and vice—but these weapons are not allowed to be
 employed, sometimes not even to be mentioned. consider the misery which is
 piling itself up in the slams of our great cities—-the degenerate,
 the defective, the insane, who are multiplying as never before in history.
 there exists a perfectly harmless and painless method of sterilizing the
 hopelessly unfit, so that they can not reproduce their hopeless unfitness;
 but religion objects to this operation, and so the law does not make use
 of this knowledge. there exists a simple, entirely harmless, and
 practically costless method of preventing conception, which would enable
 us to check the blind and futile fecundity of nature, and to multiply as
 gods instead of as animals. consider the festering mass of misery in the
 slums of our great cities; consider the millions of terrified,
 poverty-hounded women, bearing one half-nurtured infant after another,
 struggling desperately to feed and care for them, and seeing them drop
 into the grave as fast as they are born-until finally the mother, worn out
 with the sisyphean labor, gives up and follows her misbegotten offspring.
 consider how many women, in their agony and despair, make use of the
 methods of the primitive savage, to escape from nature's curse of
 fecundity. dr. wm. j. robinson has estimated that in the united states
 alone there are a million abortions every year; and consider that all this
 hideous mass of suffering—a bloody european war going on
 continually, unheeded by any newspaper correspondent—might be
 avoided by the use of a simple sterilizing formula, which we are not
 permitted to give! the federation of catholic societies have placed a law
 upon the statute-books of the nation, and of all the states as well; the
 whole power of police and courts and jails is at the service of religious
 bigots, and a young girl is sent to prison and forcibly fed with a tube
 through the nose for telling poverty-ridden, slum-women how to keep from
 becoming pregnant!
 and go among the sleek, cynical men of the world, the judges and district
 attorneys, the commissioners of correction and doctors who perpetrated
 this infamy under a so-called "reform" administration in new york city—and
 what do you find? the first thing you find is that they themselves, one
 and all, practice birth-control with their wives or their mistresses. the
 second thing you find is that the statute-books are crowded with other
 laws which they make no pretense of enforcing; for example, the law which
 forbids the saloons to be open on sunday—which law they take the
 liberty of understanding to mean that the saloons shall not have their
 front doors open on sunday. you will find that they are not at all afraid
 of the religious taboos; they are afraid of the religious vote—and
 even more they are afraid of the campaign contributions of sweat-shop
 manufacturers and landlords, who cannot see what would become of
 prosperity if the women of the slums were to cease to breed. so once more
 we discover the wolf in sheep's clothing, the trader, making use of
 tradition-worship; hiding behind the skirts of devout old maiden aunts and
 grandmothers, who repeat the instructions which god gave to adam and eve,
 "be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth." as if god were as
 blind as a fifth avenue preacher, and could see no difference between the
 garden of eden, full of all fruits that grow and all creatures that run
 and fly and swim, and a modern east side tenement-room, with an oil stove
 and no windows and no water-closet, and the price of cabbage seven cents a
 pound!
 sheep
 there are more than a hundred thousand protestant churches in america.
 they own more than a billion dollars' worth of property, and in the west
 and south they dominate the intellectual life of the country. i do not
 wish to be unfair in what i say of them. they are far more democratic than
 the catholic church; they fight valiantly against the liquor traffic and
 those forms of graft which are obvious, or directly derived from vice.
 there are among their clergy many men who are honestly seeking light, and
 trying to make their institutions a factor for progress. but they are
 caught in the spirit of lutheran scholasticism, narrow and ignorant,
 dogmatic and jealous; and they cannot help it, because they are pledged by
 their creeds and foundations to tradition-worship; they have to believe
 certain things because their ancestors believed them, they have to act in
 certain ways, because of certain facts which existed in the world three
 thousand years ago, but which now are known only to historians.
 you are familiar with the habit of a herd of sheep to follow the example
 of their leader; if this leader leaps over a stick, all the rest will leap
 when they come to that spot, even though the stick may have been taken
 away in the meantime. the scientist explains this seeming-foolishness by
 the fact that sheep once lived in high mountains, and fled from their
 enemies in swiftly rushing herds; when the leader leaped across an abyss,
 the others had to leap, without waiting to see in the dust and confusion.
 now there are no mountains and no enemies, but the sheep still jump. and
 in exactly the same way the tailor still sews buttons at the back of your
 dress-coat, because a couple of hundred years ago all gentlemen wore
 swords; in the same way our railroad builders make cars narrow and
 uncomfortable and liable to overturn, because a hundred years ago all cars
 were hauled by mules. in the same way the orthodox hebrew will eat no
 pork, in spite of the fact that the microscope affords him complete
 protection against disease; the orthodox catholic will not eat meat on
 friday, because he thinks jesus was crucified on that day; the orthodox
 anglican will not marry his deceased wife's sister, because of something
 he reads in leviticus; the orthodox baptist requires total immersion in a
 climate quite different from that of palestine; the orthodox methodist
 refuses to enjoy fresh air and exercise on the sabbath.
 in ancient judea, you see, the people lived an open-air life, tending
 sheep and working the fields; so it was an excellent thing for them to
 rest from labor one day of the week, and to gather in temples to hear the
 reading of the best literature of their time. but nowadays the city slave
 spends his week-days shut up in an office, poring over a ledger, or in a
 sweat-shop, chained to a sewing-machine. obviously, therefore, the thing
 to do on the seventh day is to lure him into the open air, and persuade
 him to run and play. but do we do that, we human sheep? we write ancient
 hebrew laws upon our modern statute-books, and if the city slave goes into
 a vacant lot and tries to play base-ball, we send a policeman and take him
 to jail, and next morning he is fined five dollars, and probably loses his
 job.
 in the city where i live, a city supposed to be free and enlightened, but
 in reality heavily burdened with churches, there are tennis courts built
 and paid for out of public funds, my own included; yet i cannot use these
 tennis courts on sunday, because of the ancient hebrew taboo. my mail is
 not delivered to me, the swimming pool in the park is closed to me, the
 library is closed nearly all day. if i enquire about it, i am told that it
 is desirable that city employees should have one day's rest a week; but
 when i ask why it might not be possible to relay the employees, so that
 they might all have one, or even two days' rest a week, and still give the
 public their rights on sunday, there is no answer. but i know the answer,
 having probed our politics of hypocrisy. there is a "church vote" at which
 all politicians tremble; there are clergymen, humanly jealous when their
 peculiar graft is threatened, and hoping that if the law enforces a
 general boredom, the public may be more disposed to endure the boredom of
 sermons.
 in new york city the theaters are closed on sunday; but moving pictures
 having come into being since the days of puritan rule, the picture-shows
 are free to keep open. the law permits "sacred concerts"—which,
 under the benevolent sway of tammany, has come to mean any sort of
 vaudeville; so what we have is a free rein to the imbecilities of "mutt
 & jeff" and the obscenities of anna held and gaby deslys—while
 we bar the greatest moralists of our times, such as ibsen and brieux.
 i speak with some crossness of this sabbath taboo, because of an
 experience which once befell me. in the second decade of this century of
 enlightenment and progress, in our free american democracy, whose
 constitution proclaims religious toleration, and forbids the establishment
 by the state of any form of worship, i was made to serve a sentence of
 eighteen hours in the state prison of delaware for playing a game of
 tennis on the sabbath. i was duly arrested upon a warrant, duly sentenced
 by a magistrate, duly clad in a prison costume, duly set to work upon a
 stone-pile, duly locked up over night in a steel-barred cell full of
 vermin—in a building housing some five hundred wretches, black and
 white, thirty of them serving life-terms under circumstances which never
 permitted them a breath of fresh air nor a glimpse of the sunshine or the
 sky. they had no exercise court to their prison, and the inmates were not
 permitted to speak to one another, but ate their meals in dead silence,
 and walked back to their cells with folded arms, and had their only
 occupation working for a sweat-shop contractor; this on the outskirts of
 the capital city of wilmington, with no less than ninety-one churches! the
 writer was informed that he would return to this institution regularly
 every week unless he abandoned his godless habit of playing tennis on a
 private club court on sunday; he only escaped the painful punishment by
 making the discovery that at the wilmington country club it was the custom
 of the leading officials of the city and state to play golf every sunday,
 and by threatening to employ detectives and have these mighty ones
 arrested and sent to their own prison. which shows again the importance of
 understanding the relationship of superstition and big business!
 book six — the church of the quacks
 they may talk as they please about what they call pelf,
 and how one ought never to think of one's self,
 and how pleasures of thought surpass eating and drinking—
 my pleasure of thought is the pleasure of thinking
 how pleasant it is to have money, heigh ho!
 how pleasant it is to have money.
 clough.
 tabula rasa
 nature has given us a virgin continent, a clean slate upon which to write
 what we will. and what are we writing? what is our intellectual life? i
 came to the far west, which i had been taught by novelists and poets to
 think of as a place of freedom. i came, because i like freedom; i am
 staying because i like the climate. i find that what freedom means in the
 west is the ability of ignorant and fanatical persons to start some new,
 fantastical quirk of scriptural interpretation, to build a new cult around
 it, and earn a living out of it.
 my first contact with that sort of thing was when i went to the battle
 creek sanitarium to investigate hydrotherapy, and found myself in a nest
 of seventh-day adventists. three generations or so ago some odd character
 hit upon the discovery that the christian churches had let the devil snare
 them into resting on the first day of the week, whereas the bible states
 distinctly that the lord "rested on the seventh day". so here is a million
 dollar establishment, with a thousand or two patients and employees, and
 on friday at sundown the silence of death settles upon the place, and
 stays settled until sundown of saturday, when everything comes suddenly to
 life again, and there is a little celebration, like easter or new year's,
 with what i used to call "sterilized dancing"—the men pairing with
 men and the women with women.
 they are decent and kindly people, and you learn to put up with their
 eccentricities; it is really convenient in some ways, because, as not all
 the city shares their delusions, there are some stores open every day of
 the week. but then you discover that the sanitarium is training "medical
 missionaries" to send to africa, and is teaching these
 supposed-to-be-scientists that evolution is a doctrine of the devil, and
 not proven anyhow!
 you get the shrewd little doctor who is running this establishment alone
 in his office, and he will smile and admit that of course it is not
 necessary to take all bible phrases literally; but you know how it is—there
 are different levels of intelligence, and so on. yes, i know how it is.
 you have an institution founded upon a certain dogma, and run by means of
 that dogma, and it is hard to change without smashing things. it is
 especially convenient when servants and nurses have a religious
 upbringing, and do not steal the pocket-books of the patients. people will
 come from all over the country, and pay high prices to stay in such a
 sanitarium; you can make vegetarians of them, which you think more
 important than teaching abstract notions about their being descended from
 monkeys. also you can manufacture vegetarian foods for them, and build up
 an enormous business—so obtaining that power which is the thing
 desired of men.
 this is but one illustration of a sort of thing of which i could cite a
 hundred. the city in which i live is headquarters of another sect, the
 "pentecostal church of the nazarene"; primitive methodists,
 bible-worshippers not content with the king james version, but going back
 to the sinaitic ms. they have a "university", located in one of the most
 beautiful spots that nature ever made; an institution with seventy-five
 students. a couple of years ago i happened to meet the "president," who
 was a preacher with grease on the ample expanse of his black broadcloth
 waistcoat, and a speech full of the commonest grammatical errors, such as
 "you was" and "i seen". the past year witnessed a split, and the founding
 of a brand new church and "university"—because one of the preachers
 insisted upon preaching so much that the students got no chance to study;
 also because he sent home a rich man's daughter whose shirt-waists
 revealed too much of her fleshly nature.
 and there is an even stranger phenomenon in the locality, taking you back
 to the libyan desert and the time of thais. a lady friend of mine,
 generously blessed with this world's goods, asks me have i seen the
 hermit. "hermit?" i say, and she replies, "didn't you know there was a
 hermit? he lives on a mountain, in a cave, and never has anything to do
 with the world. he has no books; he contemplates spiritually." i picture
 my friend with her large limousine, a rolling palace full of ladies,
 drawing up at the door of this hermit's cave. "he received you?" i ask.
 "yes, he was quite polite." "and what was your impression of him?" "oh,
 how he stank!" i answer that this is the odor of sanctity, and my friend
 thinks that i am enormously witty; i have to explain to her that i am not
 jesting, but that there are definite physiological phenomena incidental to
 the ecstatic life.
 the book of mormon
 or let us take a trip to salt lake city, the headquarters of a still
 stranger cult.
 on the morning of the nd of september, , the angel of the lord
 delivered unto joseph smith, jr., an ignorant farmer-youth in a
 "backwoods" part of new york state, some plates which had "the appearance
 of gold". as we know from the scriptures, it is the habit of the angel of
 the lord to appear in unexpected places and to make miraculous revelations
 to men in humble walks of life; so, as devout believers, we hold ourselves
 in readiness. in this case the plates were written in "reformed egyptian";
 but the angel thoughtfully provided joseph smith, jr., with urim and
 thummim, two magic stones with which to read the records. they proved to
 deal with a mystery which has haunted the minds of bible students for
 centuries—the fate of the "lost ten tribes of israel", who were now
 revealed to have been the ancestors of the american indians. the angel
 told smith to found a new religion, and gave him prophecies concerning
 things in general; so, on the th of april, , in the town of
 manchester, n. y., there was formally launched the "church of the latter
 day saints." smith turned over to his followers his translation of the
 miraculous plates, called "the book of mormon"; obviously genuine, for it
 read precisely like the books which we already know are the revealed word
 of god. but, on chance that this might not be sufficient, we were offered
 in the preface two documents, the "testimony of three witnesses", and the
 "further testimony of eight witnesses". the latter being the shorter, may
 be quoted:
 be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, unto whom this
 work shall come: that joseph smith jr., the translator of this work, has
 shewn unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the
 appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said smith hath
 translated, we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings
 there-on, all of which has the appearance of ancient work and of curious
 workmanship. and this we bear record with words of soberness, that the
 said smith has shewn unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a
 surety that the said smith hath got the plates of which we have spoken.
 and we give our names unto the world, to witness that which we have seen,
 and we lie not, god bearing witness of it.
 christian whitmer
 jacob whitmer
 peter whitmer, jr.
 john whitmer
 hiram page
 joseph smith, sr.
 hyrum smith
 saml. h. smith
 the subsequent career of the church of the latter day saints bore out the
 angel's prophesies and proved conclusively its divine origin; it was
 persecuted as the saints of old were persecuted, and its followers
 proceeded to massacre the nearby unbelieving populations, just as the
 divinely guided hebrews had done. driven from place to place, they built
 at nauvoo, ill., a beautiful temple, according to plans revealed in a
 vision, exactly like solomon. finally they settled in utah, where they
 have a magnificent marble tabernacle, and some , followers. the
 united states government, not being entirely biblical, objected to their
 practice of allowing the patriarchs of the tribe to have as many wives as
 they could support; the government confiscated the church's property, and
 forced it to conceal the practice of polygamy, as is done by elderly
 church members in other parts of the country. recently the head of the
 church, who bears the title of "prophet, seer and revelator", was
 persuaded to permit an examination of one of its secret plates, the "book
 of abraham", by egyptologists, who found that it was ordinary egyptian
 hieroglyphics, not "reformed", but containing prayers to the sun-god. but
 this will of course make no difference to the devout followers of joseph—any
 more than it has made to devout catholics and episcopalians that german
 scholars have proven that the bible legends and ritual have come from the
 babylonians, and that the four gospels date from the second and third
 centuries after christ.
 holy rolling
 all over america you will find these weird bible-cults, some of them
 pathetic, some of them dangerous, some of them merely grotesque. thus, for
 example, there was john alexander dowie, who founded the "christian
 catholic church in zion" and dressed himself up in scarlet and purple
 robes with stars on. through his zion city bank and zion city realty
 company he became enormously wealthy; he finally announced himself as
 "elijah the restorer." i remember as a boy how he brought his gospel to
 new york, and p. t. barnum with tom thumb and the white elephant never
 made such a sensation. the ridicule of the metropolis overwhelmed the old
 prophet, and he died and passed on his robes and his tabernacle and his
 bank to his son; straightway, according to the rule of all religions, the
 followers fell to quarrelling and splitting up, and suing one another in
 the law-courts.
 also there are the "holy rollers" and "holy jumpers", ghastly sects which
 cultivate the religious hysterias, and have spread like a plague among the
 women of our lonely prairie farms and desert ranches. the "holy rollers",
 who call themselves the "apostolic church", have a meeting place here in
 pasadena, and any sunday evening at nine o'clock you may see the spirit of
 the lord taking possession of the worshippers, causing moans and shrieks
 and convulsions; you may see a woman holding her hands aloft for seventeen
 minutes by the watch, making chattering sounds like an ape. this is called
 "talking in tongues" and is a sign of the presence of the holy spirit. if
 you come back at eleven in the evening, you will find the entire
 congregation, men and women, prostrate on the floor, or hanging over the
 benches; and maybe a child moaning in terror, having a devil cast out.
 you may be interested, perhaps, to know how to throw yourself into these
 convulsions. here is a paper called "trust", which is "published monthly
 (d. v.) in the interests of elim faith work and bible training school."
 elizabeth sisson writes on "the pentecostal baptism", and tells the story
 of her experiences. she "camped on the word of god," she declares.
 i went up to calgary in canada, and the leader of the mission told me,
 "you can go down to the mission and stay there all day. there is plenty of
 wood, and you can stay there all night." i went down, and there was plenty
 of "let go" in me. i cried, and prayed all i knew, and got wonderfully
 loosed.....
 then the lord said to me, "now, no more praying!" god told me it was mine.
 what was there left for me to pray about. he spoiled my praying and i took
 up praising. i praised god that he who worked in the upper room was
 working the same in me. i praised, and i praised, and i praised. the devil
 said to me, "that's mechanical." i said, "i'll praise you lord, and if you
 want real praise, you'll have to put the wind in the sails."
 that's the way i came through. one morning i was just getting out of bed,
 "this gibberish, this jargon" as the enemy likes to call it, began to
 come. the lord said, "let it babble!" i let. the babble increased, and by
 night i was up to my neck. i let. i still let. that's all. someone else
 does the work, and it does not tire you.
 and here is another paper. "meat in due season: published monthly, or as
 often as the lord leads." the editor quotes the bible, "call upon the name
 of the lord," and explains that "call means call." the word appears to
 have a special meaning to these pentecostal persons—it means working
 yourself into a frenzy of agitation; as the editor puts it, "you must lay
 hold of the horns of the altar." he goes on to exhort—the bold face
 being his:
 pray as if your very life depended upon it! the first few minutes
 seemingly all the powers of hell will contend every word, the next few,
 relief in a measure will come, more liberty in calling. in a very little
 while you will be dead to the room, dead to the chair, dead to everyone
 around you, dead to all and tremendously alive to your desperate need and
 emptyness; this conviction will grow as you increase calling upon him. it
 maybe you'll weep, it maybe you'll perspire, it maybe your clothing will
 be deranged, it, maybe your throat will get sore. never for a moment let
 your mind rest on the condition of your person. open your mouth and god
 has promised to fill it. ask persistently until the very floor seems to
 sink beneath you and the fountains of the deep, of your heart let loose.
 like david, "pour out your soul" like one would pour water out of a
 bucket. i have seen hundreds get through right at this point. when
 self-thought, reticence, decorum, reserve, propriety and dignity had all
 been thrown to the four winds of heaven. self was then obliterated and
 consciousness of person gone. draw near to god and he will draw near to
 you saith the scripture, but you must draw near to him first.
 these enthusiasts derive their practices from the shakers, a sect which
 originated in england, but was driven by persecution to the new world. the
 shakers call themselves the "united society of true believers in christ's
 second coming," and were founded by ann lee, who, variously termed herself
 the "female christ", the "holy comforter", and the "god-anointed woman".
 they might be termed the suffragettes of religion, for they pray always to
 "our father and mother, which are in heaven." they were taught the
 convenient doctrine that their founder had "spiritual illumination", so
 that any evidence of the senses used against her might deceive. she
 governed through terror, holding that by her mental powers she could
 inflict torment upon any of her followers. fortunately she taught absolute
 celibacy, and so there are now only about a thousand of her disciples.
 bible prophecy
 this far western country swarms with those fanatics who await the return
 of christ, and find in bible chronology positive evidence that he is
 coming on a specified day. seldom do i give a lecture on socialism that
 some eager old lady does not come up to me and point out how futile are my
 hopes, because the millenium will come before the revolution. several
 times i have come on an item in the newspapers, telling of a group of
 people, sometimes whole villages, selling their goods and going out into
 the fields to shout and sing and pray, expecting the vision of the lord
 and his angels in the skies. i have in my hand a pamphlet entitled
 "shekineh: the glory of god in israel, facts mathematically foretold, of
 the soon coming of our blessed lord." it is earnestly, yearningly written,
 in that spirit of feeble-minded affectionateness which the bible-sects
 seem to encourage:
 now dear reader you see that these problems tell a wonderful story which i
 know are the eternal truths of god. jesus is soon coming. i believe that
 from now on we can say, next week perhaps our blessed lord will return.
 yet the time may not end till the close of the a. m. year, which will be
 march th, . but let us take up the sickle of god, etc. oh, my
 christian friends, live near the blessed christ, and gain eternal life
 through jesus our lord!
 in the public library i find another pamphlet, entitled "the our race,"
 which proves that the "lost ten tribes of israel" are not the american
 indians, but the irish! and here is a publication of the "watch tower
 bible and tract society," declaring:
 the great pyramid in egypt is a witness to all the events of the ages and
 of our day. the pyramid's downward passage under "a draconis" symbolizes
 the course of sin. its first ascending passage symbolizes the jewish age.
 its grand gallery symbolizes the gospel age. its upper step symbolizes the
 approaching period of tribulation and anarchy, "judgment" upon
 christendom.
 it is a sunday morning, and i sit in the california sunshine revising this
 manuscript, when a decorous-looking young man approaches, having a sack
 over his shoulder. "from the bible-students," he says politely, and hands
 me a little paper, "the bible students' monthly: an independent,
 unsectarian religious newspaper, specially devoted to the forwarding of
 the laymen's home missionary movement for the glory of god and good of
 humanity." the leading article is headed "the fall of babylon: ancient
 babylon a type—mystic babylon the antitype: why christendom must
 suffer—the final outcome." a note explains:
 the following article is extracted from pastor russell's posthumous volume
 entitled "the finished mystery," the th in the series of his studies in
 the scriptures and published subsequent to his death. pastor russell held
 the distinction of being the most fearless and powerful writer of modern
 times on ecclesiastical subjects. in this posthumous volume, which is
 called "his last legacy to the christians on earth," is found a thorough
 exposition of every verse in the entire book of revelation and also an
 elucidation of the obscure prophecy of ezekiel. the book contains 
 pages, handsomely bound in embossed cloth.
 pastor russell used to publish a two-column sermon in some hundreds of
 sunday newspapers, together with a presentment of his features—solemn,
 stiff, white-whiskered, set off with a "choker" and a black broadcloth
 coat. there are five million such faces in america, but if you have an
 impulse to despair for your country, remember that it produced mark twain
 and artemus ward, as well as pastor russell and the moody and sankey
 hymn-book. i quote one passage from "the finished mystery", in order that
 the reader may know what it means to "hold the distinction of being the
 most fearless and powerful writer of modern times on ecclesiastical
 subjects." pastor russell does not approve of the methodists, and he
 quotes twelve verses of revelation, line by line and phrase by phrase,
 showing how the evil course and downfall of the wesleyan system were
 divinely foretold. thus:
 "but that they should be tormented five months."—in symbolic time,
  years— x  = . (ezek. :.) wesley became the first
 methodist in . (rev. :.) when the methodist denomination, with all
 the others, was cast off from favor in  (rev. :) its powers to
 torment men by preaching what presbyterians describe as "conscious misery,
 eternal in duration" came to an end legally, and to a large extent
 actually—rev. :.
 p. s. a few months pass, and while this book is going to press, "the
 finished mystery" is suppressed by the government and several score "bible
 students" are landed in jail for sedition.
 koreshanity
 such are the beliefs built on the bible. but there are other ancient
 writings with strange nomenclature and ritual and symbolism, calculated to
 impress the unlettered; also our prophets have imaginations of their own,
 and can invent nomenclature and ritual and symbolism never seen in heaven
 nor on earth before. thus there is dr. newo newi new, who called himself
 "archbishop of the newthot church," and gathered about him a harem of
 devoted females in san francisco, and was landed in jail for using the
 mails to defraud. or there is "oahspe, the cosmic bible," a work of
 brand-new revelation with a brand-new view of the universe and all things
 therein:
 the reader soon discovers that he must radically revise not only his ideas
 of celestial cosmogony, but the order and significance of names and titles
 commonly applied to the transcendental brethren. the great provinces of
 etheria are presided over by chiefs, chosen for their superior development
 in wisdom and love. for our solar system to cross one of these provinces
 requires about , years, and between them are belts of high etherian
 light which take several years to pass over. the passage of each province
 is a cycle of earthly history, and the crossings are called dawns of dan.
 and here is koreshanity, a revelation vouchsafed by the lord to dr. c. r.
 teed of chicago in the year . this new seer took the name of koresh,
 which is hebrew for cyrus, "the shepherd from joseph, the stone of israel,
 the sun-man; the illuminating center of the son of man", and went out on
 the streets of the city to preach that the earth is a hollow sphere with
 the stars inside. the street urchins of the pork-packing metropolis threw
 stones at him, and the irreverent newspapers took up his adventures, with
 the result that followers gathered, and now there is a flourishing colony
 in florida, with a dignified magazine called "the flaming sword", and a
 collection of propaganda volumes: "the cellular cosmogony, an exposition
 of koreshan universology and the new geodesy"; "the immortal manhood, the
 laws and processes of its attainment in the flesh"; "the great red dragon,
 by lord chester"; "the coming of the shepherd from joseph, the standing of
 the great ensign, by koresh." the "religio-science" of this chicago
 revelator is based, first upon some precise measurements of the earth
 which prove that its surface is concave; and second upon some philological
 discoveries very much resembling puns. thus the "cross of christ" is
 explained in a sense of the word more common among horse-breeders than
 among theologians:
 the highest characteristic of the alchemical law is the cross of christ
 with sensual man. the cross means that the lord god, in order to
 perpetuate his own being, descends into the race of sensuality.
 and again, when someone asks about meteors:
 "the word heaven means things heaved up, that is, heaved up from their
 material basis, the earth; thus, the meteors which fall to the earth are
 composed of metallic, mineral, and geological substances, being
 materialized or actually created in the atmosphere by an alchemico-organic
 process from zones or belts periodically open, which precipitate their
 contents in the form or shape of meteors."
 and perhaps i ought also to quote the "indicia of human progress", by
 "berthaldine, matrona". i don't know what a "matrona" is—unless it
 is a female matron. this female matron tells me that now is the "time of
 restitution", and explains that "the prolification of the human race has
 reached a fruition of the adultery of the truth and good of the lord with
 the fallacies and evils of the mortal hells"..... we have come, it seems,
 to the "age of pisces", which is "one of the greatest radical
 prolification"; and what we now need is the "power of polarization", so
 that we may join the "white horse army of the most high", which is the
 organization of the "aquarian age", proclaimed by koresh on january th,
 mazdaznan
 and here is another and even more startling revelation from chicago, given
 to a seer by the name of dr. otoman prince of adusht ha'nish, prophet of
 the sun god, prince of peace, manthra magi of temple el katman, kalantar
 of zoroastrian breathing and envoy of mazdaznan living, viceroy-elect and
 international head of master-thot. if you had happened to live near the
 town of mendota, illinois, and had known the german grocer-boy named otto
 hanisch, you might at first have trouble in recognizing him through this
 transmogrification. i have traced his career in the files of the chicago
 newspapers, and find him herding sheep, setting type, preaching
 prestidigitation, mesmerism, and fake spiritualism, joining the mormon
 church, then the "christian catholic church in zion", and then the cult of
 brighouse, who claimed to be christ returned. finally he sets himself up
 in chicago as a persian magi, teaching yogi breathing exercises and occult
 sex-lore to the elegant society ladies of the pork-packing metropolis. the
 sun god, worshipped for two score centuries in india, egypt, greece and
 rome, has a new shrine on lake park avenue, and the prophet gives
 tea-parties at which his disciples are fed on lilac-blossoms—"the
 white and pinkish for males, the blue-tinted for females". he wears a long
 flowing robe of pale grey cashmere, faced with white, and flexible white
 kid shoes, and he sells his lady adorers a book called "inner studies",
 price five dollars per volume, with information on such subjects as:
 the immaculate conception and its repetition; the secrets of lovers
 unveiled; our ideals and soul mates; magnetic attraction and electric
 mating.
 a grand jury intervenes, and the prophet goes to jail for six months; but
 that does not harm his cult, which now has a temple in chicago, presided
 over by a lady called kalantress and evangelist; also a "northern
 stronghold" in montreal, an "embassy" in london, an "international aryana"
 in switzerland, and "centers" all over america. at the moment of going to
 press, the prophet himself is in flight, pursued by a warrant charging him
 with improper conduct with a number of young boys in a los angeles hotel.
 i have dipped into ha'nish's revelations, which are a farrago of every
 kind of ancient mysticism—paper and binding from the bible,
 illustrations from the egyptian, names from the zoroastrian, health rules
 from the hindoos, laws from the confucians—price ten dollars per
 volume. would you like to discover your seventeen senses, to develop them
 according to the gallama principle, and to share the "expansion of the
 magnetic circles"? here is the way to do it:
 inhale through nostrils for four seconds, and upon one exhalation, speak
 slowly:
 open, o thou world-sustaining sun, the entrance unto truth hidden by the
 vase of dazzling light.
 again inhale for four seconds, and breathe out the following sentence upon
 one exhalation as before:
 soften the radiation of thy illuminating splendor, that i may behold thy
 true being.
 i have a clipping from a los angeles newspaper telling of the prophet's
 arriving there. he takes the front page with the captivating headline:
 "women didn't think till they put on corsets". the interview tells about
 his mysteriousness, his aloofness, his bird-like-diet, and his personal
 beauty. "despite his seventy-three years, ha'nish evidences no sign of
 age. his keen blue eyes showed no sign of wavering. there were no wrinkles
 on his face, and his walk was that of a man of forty." the humor of this
 becomes apparent when we mention that at ha'nish's trial, three or four
 years ago, he was proven to be thirty-five years old!
 being thus warned as to the accuracy of american journalism, we shall not
 be taken in by the repeated statements that the mazdaznan prophet is a
 millionaire. but there is no doubt that he is wealthy; and as all
 americans wish to be wealthy, i will quote his formula of prosperity, his
 method of accomplishing what might be called the individual revolution:
 when hungry and you do not know where to get your next piece of bread, do
 not despair. thy father, all-loving, has provided you with everything that
 will meet all cases of emergency. place your teeth tightly together, with
 tongue pressing against the lower teeth and lips parted. breathe in, close
 lips immediately, exhaling through the nostrils. breathe again; if saliva
 forms in your mouth, hold your breath so you can swallow it first before
 you exhale. you thus take out of the air the metal-substance contained
 therein; you can even taste the iron which you convert into substance
 required for making the blood. should you feel that, although you have
 sufficient iron in the blood, there is a lack of copper and zinc and
 silver, place upper teeth over lower, keep lower lip tightly to lower
 teeth, now breathe and you can even taste the metals named. then should
 you feel you need more gold element for your brain functions, place your
 back teeth together just as if you were to grind the back teeth, taking
 short breaths only. you will then learn to know that there is gold and
 silver all around us. that our bodies are filled with quite a quantity of
 gold.
 black magic
 what all this means is that we have a continent, with a hundred million
 half-educated people, materially prosperous, but spiritually starving; so
 any man who possesses personality, who looks in any way strange and
 impressive, or has hunted up old books in a library, and can pronounce
 mysterious words in a thrilling voice—such a man can find followers.
 anybody can do it with any doctrine, from anywhere, persia or patagonia,
 pekin or pompei. i would be willing to wager that if i cared to come out
 and announce that i had had a visit from god last night, and to devote
 such literary and emotional power as i possess to communicating a new
 revelation, i could have a temple, a university, and a million dollars
 within five years at the outside. and if at the end of five years i were
 to announce that i had played a joke on the world, some one of my
 followers would convince the faithful that i had been an agent of god
 without knowing it, and that the leadership had now been turned over to
 him.
 i would not be understood as believing that all our cults are undiluted
 fakery, for that would be doing injustice to some earnest people. there
 are, in this country, many followers of the persian reformer, abbas
 effendi, who call themselves babists, and who have what i am inclined to
 think is the purest and most dignified religion in existence. there was a
 man named jacob beilhardt, who founded a cult in illinois with the painful
 name of "spirit fruit colony", who nevertheless was a man of spiritual
 insight, a true mystic; he was honest, and so he failed, and died of a
 broken heart. also there are the christian scientists and the
 theosophists, so exasperating that one would like to throw them onto the
 rubbish-heap, who yet compel us to sift over their mountains of chaff for
 the grains of truth which will bear fruit in future.
 while we western races have been exploring the natural world and
 perfecting the mechanical arts, the hindoo students have been exploring
 the subconscious and its strange powers. what myers and lodge and janet
 and charcot and freud and jung are telling us today they had hints of a
 long time ago; and doubtless they have hints of other things, upon which
 our scientists have not yet come. i have friends, perfectly sane and
 competent people, who tell me that they can see auras, and use this
 ability as a means of judging character. shall i say that there are no
 auras, simply because i do not happen to have this gift of seeing them? in
 the same way, having read gurney's "phantasms of the living," i am not
 ready to ridicule the claim of the yogi adepts, that they are able to
 project some kind of astral body, and to communicate with one another from
 distant places. but granting such occult powers in a world of economic
 strife, what follows? simply new floods of charlatanism, elaborate and
 complicated systems of ritual and metaphysic for the deluding and
 plundering of the credulous.
 i have seen the thing working itself out in one case known to me. a young
 man had a gift of mental healing; i know, because i saw it work; but it
 did not always work, and that was annoying. he was penniless and had a
 taste for power, and to eke out his erratic endowment he got himself books
 of eastern lore, and day by day as i watched him i could see him becoming
 more and more impressive, mysterious and forbidding. today he is a
 full-fledged wonder-worker, with the language of a dozen mystic cults at
 his tongue's end, and the reverent regard of many wealthy ladies. i have
 never tried to break through his guard, but i feel certain that he is a
 deliberate charlatan.
 this is an economic process, automatic and irresistible. just as the
 manufacturer of honest foods is driven out by the adulterator, so the
 worker of miracles drives out the sincere investigator. as a result we
 have here in america a plague of eastern cults, with "swamis" using soft
 yellow robes and soft brown eyes to win the souls of idle society ladies.
 these teachers of ancient hindoo lore despise us as a race of barbarians;
 but they stay—whether because of love of man or woman, i do not
 pretend to say.
 there are the theosophists of many brands, with schools and institutes and
 temples and colonies, and a doctrine as complex and detailed and fantastic
 as that of the roman catholics. i have already referred to the writings of
 madame blavatsky, a runaway russian army officer's daughter, whose career
 reads like a tale out of the arabian nights. and there is annie besant,
 who was once an ardent worker in the social-democratic federation; h. m.
 hyndman tells of his dismay when she went to india and walked in a
 procession between two white bulls! here in california is madame tingley,
 with a colony and a host of followers in a miniature paradise. men work at
 money-lending or manufacturing sporting-goods, and when they get old and
 tired they make the thrilling discovery that they have souls; the
 theosophists cultivate these souls and they leave their money to the
 soul-cause, and there are lawsuits and exposes in the newspapers. for, you
 see, there is ferocious rivalry in the game of cultivating millionaire
 souls; there are slanders and feuds, just as in soulless affairs. "don't
 have anything to do with madame tingley," whispers a theosophist lady to
 my wife; and when my wife in all innocence inquires, "why not?" the
 awe-stricken answer comes, "she practices black magic!"
let me add that i do not say that she practices black magic. i do not
believe that she could practice it, even if she wanted to—i do not
believe in black magic. my purpose is merely to show how theosophists
quarrel: going back to the days of anu and baal and the bronze image of
the babylonian fire-god:
 let them die, but let me live! let them be put under a ban, but
let me prosper! let them perish, but let me increase! let them become
weak, but let me wax strong!
 mental malpractice
 this is the other side of the fair shield of religious faith. why, if
 there be a power which loves and can be persuaded to aid us, may there not
 also be a power which hates, and can be persuaded to destroy? no religion
 has ever been able to answer this, and therefore none has ever been able
 to escape from devil-terrors. even jesus was pursued by satan, and the
 holy catholic church has its ceremonies for the exorcising of demons, and
 a most frightful formula for cursing. and here are our friends the
 christian scientists, proclaiming the unreality of all evil, their ability
 to banish disease by convincing themselves that they are perfect in god—yet
 tormented by a squalid phobia called "mental malpractice", or "malicious
 animal magnetism".
 christian science is the most characteristic of american religious
 contributions. just as billy sunday is the price we pay for failing to
 educate our base-ball players, so mary baker glover patterson eddy is the
 price we pay for failing to educate our farmer's daughters.
 that she had a power to cure disease i do not doubt, because i have a
 little of it myself. at first my opinion was that her "science" made its
 way by curing the imaginary ailments of the idle rich. if a person has
 nothing to do but think that he is sick, you can work easy miracles by
 persuading him to think that he is well; and if he has nothing to do but
 think that he is well, he will help you to build marble churches and
 maintain propaganda societies. but recently i have experimented with
 mental healing—enough to satisfy myself that the subconscious mind
 which controls our physical functions can be powerfully influenced by the
 will.
 i told the story of some of these experiments in hearst's magazine for
 april, . suffice it here to say that if you will lay your hands upon a
 sick person, forming a vivid mental picture of the bodily changes you
 desire, and concentrating the power of your will upon them, you may be
 surprised by the results, especially if you possess anything in the way of
 psychic gifts. you do not have to adopt any theories, you do not have to
 do it in the name of any divinity, ancient or modern; the only bearing of
 such ideas is that they serve to persuade people to make the experiment,
 and to make it with persistence and intensity. so it has come about that
 "miracles" of healing are associated with "faith"; and so it comes about
 that scientists are apt to flout the subject. but read of the work of
 janet and charcot and their followers at the salpetriere; they have proven
 that all kinds of seeming-organic ailments may be entirely hysterical in
 nature, and may be cured by the simplest form of suggestion. understanding
 this, you may find it more easy to credit the fact that cripples do
 sometimes throw away their crutches in the grotto of lourdes. for my part,
 i can believe that jesus performed all the miracles of healing attributed
 to him—including the raising up of people pronounced to be dead by
 the ignorance of that time. i am convinced that in the new science of
 psycho-analysis we have a universe as vast as the universe of the atom or
 of the stars.
 the christian scientists have got hold of this power; they have mixed it
 up with metaphysic and divinity, and built some four or five hundred
 churches, and printed the mother church alone knows how many million
 pamphlets and books. i once invested three of my hard-earned dollars for a
 copy of the eddy bible, and let myself be stunned and blinded by the
 flapping of metaphysical wings. it is unadulterated moonshine—as the
 platonist and berkeleyan and hegelian and other orthodox collegiate
 metaphysical magi can prove to you in one minute. what interests me about
 the phenomenon is not the slinging of tremendous words, but the strictly
 yankee use which is made of them. there is no nonsense about saving your
 soul in christian science; what it is for is to remove your wen, to nail
 down your floating kidney, and to enable you to hustle and make money. we
 saw in our politics the growth of a party of the full dinner-pail;
 contemporaneous therewith, and corresponding thereto, we see in our
 religious life the development of a church of the full pocket-book.
 it is a strict religion—strictly cash. the heads of the cult do not
 issue cheap editions of "science and health, with key to the scriptures",
 to relieve the suffering of the proletariat; no—the work is
 copyrighted, in all its varying and contradictory editions, and the price
 is from three to seven-fifty, according to binding. treatments cost from
 three dollars to ten, whether you come and get them or take them over the
 telephone. and we have no nonsense about charity, we don't worry about the
 poor who fester in our city slums; because poverty is a product of mortal
 mind, and we offer to all men a way to get rich right off the bat. you may
 come to our marble churches and hear people testify how through the power
 of divine mind they were enabled to anticipate a rise in the stock-market.
 if you don't avail yourself of the opportunity, the fault is yours, and
 yours also the punishment.
 as to the management of the church, the roman catholic hierarchy is a
 bolshevik democracy in comparison. the church is controlled by an
 absolutely irresponsible self-perpetuating body of five men, who alone
 dictate its policy. i have in my hand a letter from a christian science
 healer who was listed as an "authorized practitioner", and who withdrew
 from the church because of its attitude on public questions. he sends me a
 copy of his correspondence with the editors of the "christian science
 monitor", containing a detailed analysis of the position of that paper on
 such issues as the ballinger land-frauds. he writes:
 i am thoroughly convinced now that the policy of the church is consciously
 plutocratic. the only recommendation i have heard of the latest appointee
 to the board of directors is that he is one of the richest men in the
 movement.
 after the titanic disaster, senator la follette brought in a carefully
 drawn bill to compel steamship companies to provide life-boats and trained
 crews. the "christian science monitor" opposed this bill; and when my
 correspondent cited the fact, he brought out a quaint bit of metaphysical
 logic, as follows:
 one would prefer to travel on a vessel without a single boat, rather than
 on some other vessels which were loaded down with life-boats, where the
 government of mind was not understood!
 science and wealth
 the truth is that the brand of mammon was on our yankee religion from the
 day of its birth. in the first edition of her new bible "mother" eddy
 dropped the hint to her readers: "men of business have said this science
 was of great advantage from a secular point of view." and in her
 advertisements she threw aside all pretense, declaring that her work
 "affords an opportunity to acquire a profession by which one can
 accumulate a fortune." when her pupils did accumulate, she boasted of
 their success; nor did she neglect her own accumulating.
 it has been a dozen years since i looked into this cult; in order to be
 sure that it has not been purified in the interim, i proceed to a street
 corner in my home city, where is a stand with a sign: "christian science
 literature." i take four sample copies of a magazine, the "christian
 science sentinel", published by the mother church in boston, and turn to
 the "testimonials of healing". in the issue of august , , mary c.
 richards of st. margarets-on-thames, england, testifies: "through a number
 of circumstances unnecessary to relate, but proving conclusively that the
 result came not from man but from god, employment was found." in the issue
 of december , , frances tuttle of jersey city, n. j., testifies how
 her sister was successfully treated for unemployment by a scientist
 practitioner. "every condition was beautifully met." in the same issue
 fred d. miller of los angeles, cal., testifies: "soon after this wonderful
 truth came to me, divine love led me to a new position with a responsible
 firm. the work was new to me, but i have given entire satisfaction, and my
 salary has been advanced twice in less than a year." in the issue of
 january , , eliza fryant of agricola, miss., testifies how she cured
 her little dog of snake-bite and removed two painful corns from her own
 foot. in the issue of august , , marcia e. gaier, of everett, wash.,
 testifies how it suddenly occurred to her that because god is all, she
 would drop her planning and outlining in regard to real estate properties,
 "upon which for nine months all available material methods were tried to
 no effect." the result was a triumph of "principle".
 while working in the yard one morning and gratefully communing with god,
 the only power, i suddenly felt that i should stop working and prepare for
 visitors on their way to look at the property. i obeyed this very distinct
 command, and in about an hour i greeted two people who had searched almost
 the entire city for just what we had to offer. they had been directed to
 our place by what to material sense would seem an accident, but we know it
 was the divine law of harmony in its universal operation.
 after this no one will wonder that john m. tutt, in a christian science
 lecture at kansas city, mo., should proclaim:
 my friends, do you know that since the world began christian science is
 the only system which has intelligently related religion to business?
 christian science shows that since all ideas belong to mind, god,
 therefore all real business belongs to him.
 as i said, these people have the new-old power of mental healing, they
 blunder along with it blindly, absurdly, sometimes with tragic
 consequences; but meantime the rank and file of the pill-doctors know
 nothing about this power, and regard it with contempt mingled with fear;
 so of course the hosts of sufferers whom the pill-doctors cannot help
 flock to the healers of the "church of christ, scientist". according to
 the custom of those who are healed by "faith", they swallow line, hook,
 and sinker, creed, ritual, metaphysic and divinity. so we see in
 twentieth-century america precisely what we saw in b. c. twentieth-century
 assyria—a host of worshippers, giving their worldly goods without
 stint, and a priesthood, made partly of fanatics and partly of charlatans,
 conducting a vast enterprise of graft, and harvesting that thing desired
 of all men, power over the lives and destinies of others.
 and of course among themselves they quarrel; they murder one another's
 mortal minds, they drive one another out, they snarl over the spoils like
 a pack of hungry animals. listen to the mother, denouncing one of her
 students—a perfectly amiable and harmless youth whose only offense
 was that he had gone his own way and was healing the sick for the benefit
 of his own pocket-book:
 behold! thou criminal mental marauder, that would blot out the sunshine of
 earth, that would sever friends, destroy virtue, put out truth, and murder
 in secret the innocent, befouling thy track with the trophies of thy guilt—i
 say, behold the "cloud" no bigger than a man's hand already rising on the
 horizon of truth, to pour down upon thy guilty head the hailstones of
 doom.
 and again:
 the nero of today, regaling himself through a mental method with the
 torture of individuals, is repeating history, and will fall upon his own
 sword, and it shall pierce him through. let him remember this when, in the
 dark recesses of thought, he is robbing, committing adultery and killing.
 when he is attempting to turn friend away from friend, ruthlessly stabbing
 the quivering heart; when he is clipping the thread of life and giving to
 the grave youth and its rainbow hues; when he is turning back the reviving
 sufferer to his bed of pain, clouding his first morning after years of
 night; and the nemesis of that hour shall point to the tyrant's fate, who
 falls at length upon the sword of justice.
 new nonsense
 in a certain city of america is a large building given up entirely to the
 whims of pretty ladies. its floors are not floors but "promenades", and
 have walls of glass, behind which, as you stroll, you see bonnets from
 paris and opera cloaks from london, furs from alaska and blankets from
 arizona, diamonds from south africa and beads from the philippines, grapes
 from spain and cherries from japan, fortune-tellers from arabia and
 dancing-masters from petrograd and "naturopaths" from vienna. there are
 seventy-three shops, by actual count, containing everything that could be
 imagined or desired by a pretty lady, whether for her body, or for that
 vague stream of emotion she calls her "soul". one of the seventy-three
 shops is a "metaphysical library", having broad windows, and walls in
 pastel tints, and pretty vases with pink flowers, and pretty gray wicker
 chairs in which the reader will please to be seated, while we probe the
 mysteries of an activity widely spread throughout america, called "new
 thought."
 we begin with a shelf of magazines having mystical titles: azoth; master
 mind; aletheian; words of power; qabalah; comforter; adept; nautilus; true
 word; astrological bulletin; unity; uplift; now. and then come shelves of
 pretty pamphlets, alluring to the eye and the purse; also shelves of
 imposing-looking volumes containing the lore and magic of a score of races
 and two score of centuries—together with the very newest
 manifestations of yankee hustle and graft.
 as in the case of christian science, these new thoughters have a
 fundamental truth, which i would by no means wish to depreciate. it is a
 fact that the mysterious source of our being is infinite, and that we are
 only at the beginning of our thinking about it. it is a fact that by
 appeal to it we can perform seeming miracles of mental and moral
 regeneration; we can stimulate the flow of nervous energy and of the
 blood, thus furthering the processes of bodily healing. but the fact that
 god is infinite and omnipotent does not bar the fact that he has certain
 ways of working, which he does not vary; and that it is our business to
 explore and understand these ways, instead of setting our fancies to work
 imagining other ways more agreeable to our sentimentality.
 thus, for example, if we want bread, it is god's decree that we shall
 plant wheat and harvest it, and grind and bake and distribute it. under
 conditions prevailing at the moment, it appears to be his decree that we
 shall store the wheat in elevators, and ship it in freight cars, and buy
 it through a grain exchange, with capital borrowed from a national bank;
 in other words, that our daily bread shall be the plaything of exploiters
 and speculators, until such a time as we have the intelligence to form an
 effective political party and establish industrial democracy. but when you
 come to study the ways of god in the literature of the new thought, do you
 find anything about the millers' trust and the bakers' trust and how to
 expropriate these agencies of starvation? you do not!
 what you find is bootstrap-lifting; you find gentlemen and lady
 practitioners shutting their eyes and lifting their hands and pronouncing
 incantations in awe-inspiring voices—or in capital letters and large
 type: "god is infinite, god is all-loving, god will provide. bread is
 coming to you! bread is coming to you!! bread is coming to you!!!"
 you think this is exaggeration? if so, it is because you have never
 entered the building of the pretty ladies, and sat in the gray wicker
 chairs of the metaphysical library. one of the highest high-priestesses of
 the cults of new nonsense is a lady named elizabeth towne, editor of "the
 nautilus"; and priestess elizabeth tells you:
 i believe the idea that money wants you will help you to the right mental
 condition. be a pot of honey and let it come.
 i look over this priestess' magazine, and find it full of testimonials and
 advertisements for the conjuring of prosperity. "are you in the success
 sphere?" asks one exhorter; the next tells you "how to enter the silence.
 how to manifest what you desire. the secret of advancement." another
 tells: "how a failure at sixty won sudden success; from poverty to $,
 a year—a lesson for old and young alike." the lesson, it appears, is
 to pay $. for a book called "power of will." and here is another book:
 master key: which can unlock the secret chamber of success, can throw wide
 the doors which seem to bar men from the treasure house of nature, and
 bids those enter and partake who are wise enough to understand and broad
 enough to weigh the evidence, firm enough to follow their own judgment and
 strong enough to make the sacrifice exacted.
 "dollars want me"
 i turn to the shelves of pamphlets. here is a pretty one called "all
 sufficiency in all things," published by the "unity school of
 christianity", in kansas city; it explains that god is god, not merely of
 the soul, but also of the kansas city stockyards.
 this divine substance is ever abiding within us, and stands ready to
 manifest itself in whatever form you and i need or wish, just as it did in
 elisha's time. it is the same yesterday, today and forever. abundant
 supply by the manifestation of the father within us, from within outward,
 is as much a legitimate outcome of the christ life or spiritual
 understanding as is bodily healing..... "know that i am god—all of
 god, good, all of good. i am life. i am health. i am supply. i am the
 substance."
 and here is w. w. atkinson of chicago, author of a work called "mind
 power". would you like to be an impressive personality? mr. atkinson will
 tell you exactly how to do it; he will give you the secret of the magnetic
 handclasp, of the intense, straight-in-the-eye look; he will tell you what
 to say, he will write out for you incantations which you may pronounce to
 yourself, to convince yourself that you have power, that the indwelling
 presence with all its might is yours. mr. atkinson rebukes mildly the
 tendency of some of his fellow bootstrap-lifters to employ these arts for
 money-making; but you notice that his magazine, "advanced thought", does
 not decline the advertisements of such too-practical practitioners.
 next comes a gentleman with the musical name of wallace wattles, who tells
 in one pamphlet "how to be a genius", and in another pamphlet "how to get
 what you want". the thing for you to do is—
 saturate your mentality through and through with the knowledge that you
 can do what you want to do..... look upon the peanut-stand merely as the
 beginning of the department store, and make it grow; you can.
 and mr. wattles wattles on, in an ecstasy of acquisitiveness:
 hold this consciousness and say with deep, earnest feeling: i can succeed!
 all that is possible to any one is possible to me. i am success. i do
 succeed, for i am full of the power of success.
 imagine, if you please, a poor devil chained in the treadmill of the
 capitalist system—a "soda-jerker", a "counter-jumper", a book-keeper
 for the steel trust. his chances of rising in life are one in ten
 thousand; but he comes to the metaphysical library, and pays the price of
 his dinner for a pamphlet by henry harrison brown, who was first a
 unitarian clergyman, and then an extra-high bootstrap-lifter in san
 francisco, an honorary vice-president of the international new nonsense
 alliance. mr. brown will tell our soda-jerker or counter-jumper exactly
 how to elevate himself by mental machinery. all calculations of
 probabilities are delusions of the senses; if you have faith, you can
 move, not merely mountains, but riker-hegeman's, macy's, or the steel
 trust. "how to promote yourself" is the title of one of mr. brown's
 pamphlets, in which he explains that—
 your wants are impressed on the divine mind only by your faith. a doubt
 cuts the connection.
 a second pamphlet, which we are told is now in its thirtieth edition,
 bears the thrilling title of "dollars want me!" in it mr. brown lays claim
 to being a pioneer:
 i believe that this little monograph is the first utterance of the thought
 that each individual has the ability so to radiate his mental forces that
 he can cause the dollars to feel him, love him, seek him, and thus draw at
 will all things needed for his unfoldment from the universal supply.
 "what are dollars?" asks our author; and answers:
 dollars are manifestations of the one infinite substance as you are, but,
 unlike you, they are not self-conscious. they have no power till you give
 them power. make them feel this through your thought-vibrations as you
 feel the importance of your work. they will then come to you to be used.
 "what is poverty?" mr. brown asks, and answers himself:
 poverty is a mental condition. it can be cured only by the affirmation of
 power to cure: i am a part of the one, and, in the one, i possess all!
 affirm this and patiently wait for the manifestation. you have sown the
 thought seed.
and our author goes on to hand out packages of these
thought-seeds—"affirmations" as they are called, in the jargon of the
new conjuring:
 i desire a deep consciousness of financial freedom. i desire
that the flow of prosperity become equalized. i desire a greater
consciousness of my power to attract the dollar. the indwelling power
cares for my purse. i own whatever i desire. i can afford to use dollars
for my happiness. i always have a good bank account. i actually see it.
my one idea of the law is to use, use, use.
 spiritual financiering
 if the symbolism of the episcopal church is of the palace, and that of the
 non-conformist sects of the counting-house, that of the international new
 nonsense alliance is of wall street and the "ticker". "what is your rating
 in the spiritual bradstreet?" asks william morris nichols in the
 publication of the "'now' folk", san francisco:
 is it low or high? is your credit with the bank of the universe good or
 poor? if you draw a spiritual draft are you sure of its being honored?
 if you can answer that last question affirmatively, you are on the road to
 become a master in spiritual financiering.
 have you an account with the first (and only) bank of spirit? if not, then
 you should at once open one therewith. for no one can afford to keep less
 than a large deposit of spiritual funds with that bank.
 and how do you proceed to open your account? it is very simple:
 intend the mind in the direction indicated by your desire. seek for the
 light and guidance by which you may open up the way for your spiritual
 substance, which governs material supply, to reach you and make you as
 rich as you ought to be, in freedom and happiness. all this you can, and
 when in earnest, will do.
 i turn over the advertisements of this publication of the "'now' folk".
 one offers "the business side of new thought." another offers "the books
 without an if", with your money back if you are not satisfied! another
 offers land in bolivia for two dollars an acre. another quotes
 shakespeare: "'tis the mind that makes the body rich." another offers two
 copies of the "phrenological era" for ten cents.
 there is apparently no delusion of any age or clime which cannot find
 dupes among the readers of this new nonsense. one notice commands:
 stop! a revelation! a book has been written entitled "strands of gold" or
 "from darkness into light!"
 another announces:
 the most wonderful book of the ages: the acquarian gospel of jesus the
 christ, transcribed from the book of god's remembrance, the akashic
 records.
 and here is an advertisement published in mr. atkinson's paper:
 numerology: the universal adjuster! do you know: what you appear to be to
 others? what you really are? what you want to be? what would overcome your
 present and future difficulties? write to x, philosopher. you will receive
 full particulars of his personal work which is dedicated to your service.
 no problem is too big or too small for numerology. understanding awaits
 you.
 and looking in the body of the magazine, you find this philosopher
 imparting some of this understanding. would you like, for example, to
 understand why america entered the war? nothing easier. the vowels of the
 words united states of america are uieaeoaeia, which are numbered
 , which added make , or  plus  equals . you might not at
 first see what that has to do with the war—until the philosopher
 points out that " in the number of completion, indicating the end of a
 cosmic cycle." that, of course, explains everything.
 and here is a work on what you perhaps thought to be a dead science,
 astrology. it is called "lucky hours for everybody: a true system of
 planetary hours by prof. john b. early. price one dollar." it teaches you
 things like this:
 saturn's negative hours are especially good for all matters relating to
 gold-mining..... the sun negative rules the emerald, the musical note d
 sharp, and the number four. the lunar hours are a good time to deal in
 public commodities, and to hire servants of both sexes.....
 a recent lady visitor informed me that she had made several vain attempts
 to transact important business in the hours ruled by jupiter, usually held
 to be fortunate, while she was nearly always fortunate in what she began
 in the hours ruled by saturn. upon investigation i found her name was
 ruled by the sun negative, and that she had capricorn with saturn therein
 as her ascendant at birth, which explains.
 and finally, here is a london "scientist", reported in the "weekly unity"
 of kansas city, who proves his mental power over two-horse power oil
 engines which fail to act. "going a little apart, he came back in a few
 minutes and said: 'the engine is all right now and will work
 satisfactorily.' and without any further difficulty it did." we are told
 how dr. rawson gave a demonstration of his method to a newspaper reporter
 the other day. fixing his gaze as though looking into space, he apparently
 became absorbed in deep contemplation and said aloud: "there is no danger;
 man is surrounded by divine love; there is no matter; all is spirit and
 manifestation of spirit."
 you might at first find difficulty in believing what can be accomplished
 by "demonstrations" such as this; not merely are two-horse power oil
 engines made to work, but the whole gigantic machine of prussian
 militarism is prevented from working. you may recall how arthur machen's
 magazine story of the angels of mons was taken up and made into a catholic
 legend over-night; now here is a new-nonsense legend, complete and
 perfect, going the rounds of our nonsense magazines:
 london, dec. .—shell-proof and bullet-proof soldiers have been
 discovered on the european battle-fronts. heroes with "charmed lives" are
 being made every day, according to frederick l. rawson, a london
 scientist, who insists he has found the miraculous way by which they are
 developed. he calls it "audible treatment". "practical utilization of the
 powers of god by right thinking," is the agency through which dr. rawson
 declares he can so treat a man that he will not be harmed when hundreds of
 men are being shot dead beside him. this amazing treatment includes a new
 type of prayer. it is being administered to hundreds of men audibly, and
 to hundreds more by letter. nothing since the war began has aroused so
 much talk of modern miracles as have many of the statements of dr.
 rawson.......
 at the taking of a wood there were five hundred yards of "no man's land"
 to be crossed. our troops could not get across. then capt. ————,
 who practices this method of prayer, treated them for an hour before they
 started, and not a man was knocked out. he was the only officer left out
 of eighty in his brigade. he simply held onto the fact that man is
 spiritual and perfect and could not be touched. a bullet fired from a
 revolver only five yards away hit him over the chest, tore his shirt and
 went out at the shoulder. but it never penetrated his chest. he was
 frequently in a hail of shells and bullets which did not touch him.
 the graft of grace
 all this is grotesque; but it is what happens to religions in a world of
 commercial competition. it happens not merely to christian science and new
 thought religions, mazdaznan and zionist, holy roller and mormon
 religions, but to catholic and episcopalian, presbyterian and methodist
 and baptist religions. for you see, when you are with the wolves you must
 howl with them; when you are competing with fakirs you must fake. the
 ordinary christian will read the claims of the new thought fakers with
 contempt; but have i not shown the catholic church publishing long lists
 of money-miracles? have i not shown the church of good society, our
 exclusive and aristocratic protestant episcopal communion, pretending to
 call rain and to banish pestilence, to protect crops and win wars and heal
 those who are "sick in estate"—that is, who are in business trouble?
 the reader will say that i am a cynic, despising my fellows; but that is
 not so. i am an economic scientist, analyzing the forces which operate in
 human societies. i blame the prophets and priests and healers for their
 fall from idealism; but i blame still more the competitive wage-system,
 which presents them with the alternative to swindle or to starve.
 for, you see, the prophet has to have food. he has frequently got along
 with almost none, and with only a rag for clothing; in palestine and
 india, where the climate is warm, a sincere faith has been possible for
 short periods. but the modern prophet who expects to influence the minds
 of men has to have books and newspapers; he will find a telephone and a
 typewriter and postage-stamps hardly to be dispensed with, also in europe
 and america some sort of a roof over his meeting place. so the prophet is
 caught, like all the rest of us, in the net of the speculator and the
 landlord. he has to get money, and in order to get it he has to impress
 those who already have it—people whose minds and souls have been
 deformed by the system of parasitism and exploitation.
 so the prophet becomes a charlatan; or, if he refuses, he becomes a
 martyr, and founds a church which becomes a church of charlatans. i care
 not how sincere, how passionately proletarian a religious prophet may be,
 that is the fate which sooner or later befalls him in a competitive
 society—to be the founder of an organization of fools, conducted by
 knaves, for the benefit of wolves. that fate befell buddha and jesus, it
 befell ignatius loyola and francis of assisi, john fox and john calvin and
 john wesley.
 a friend of mine who has made a study of "spiritualism" describes to me
 the conditions in that field. the mediums are people, mostly women, with a
 peculiar gift; whether we believe in the survival of personality, or
 whether we call it telepathy, does not alter the fact that they have a
 rare and special sensitiveness, a new faculty which science must
 investigate. they come, poor people mostly—for the well-to-do will
 seldom give their time to exacting and wearisome experiments. they come,
 wearing frayed and thin clothing, shivering with cold, obviously
 undernourished; and their survival depends upon their producing
 "phenomena"—which phenomena are capricious, and will not come at
 call. so, what more natural than that mediums should resort to faking?
 that the whole field should be reeking with fraud, and science should be
 held back from understanding an extraordinary power of the subconscious
 mind?
 ever since we came to pasadena, various ladies have been telling us about
 the wondrous powers of a mulatto-woman, a manicurist at the city's most
 fashionable hotel. the other day, out of curiosity, my wife and i went;
 the moment the "medium" opened her mouth my wife recognized her as the
 person who has been trying for several months to get me on the telephone
 to tell me how the spirit of jack london is seeking to communicate with
 me! the seance was a public one, a gathering composed, half of wealthy and
 cultured society-women, and half of confederates, people with the dialect
 and manners of a vaudeville troupe. a megaphone was set in the middle of
 the floor, the room was made dark, a couple of hymns were sung, and then
 the spirit of dr. oliver wendell holmes spoke through the megaphone with a
 bowery accent, and gave communications from relatives and friends of the
 various confederates. "jesus is with us", said dr. holmes. "the spirit of
 jesus bids you to study spiritualism." and then came the voice of a child:
 "mamma! mamma!" "it is little georgie!" cried dr. holmes; and one of the
 society ladies started, and answered, and presently burst into tears. a
 marvelous piece of evidence—especially when you recall that the
 story of this mother's bereavement had been published in all the papers a
 couple of months before!
 and this kind of swindling is going on every night in every city of
 america. it goes on wholesale for months every summer at lily dale, in new
 york state, where the spiritualists hold their combination of chautauqua
 and coney island. and the same thing is going on in the field of mental
 healing, and of all other "occult" forces and powers, whether real or
 imaginary. it is going on with new spiritual fervors, new moral idealisms,
 new poetry, new music, new painting, new sculpture. the faker, the
 charlatan is everywhere—using the mental and moral and artistic
 forces of life as a means of delivering himself from economic servitude.
 everywhere i turn i see it—credulity being exploited, and men of
 practical judgment, watching the game and seeing through it, made hard in
 their attitude of materialism. how many men i know who sit by in sullen
 protest while their wives drift from one new quackery to another, wasting
 their income seeking health and happiness in futile emotionalism! how many
 kind and sensitive spirits i know—both men and women—who pour
 their treasures of faith and admiration into the laps of hierophants who
 began by fooling all mankind and ended by fooling themselves!
 in each one of the cults of what i have called the "church of the quacks",
 there are thousands, perhaps millions of entirely sincere,
 self-sacrificing people. they will read this book—if anyone can
 persuade them to read it—with pain and anger; thinking that i am
 mocking at their faith, and have no appreciation of their devotion. all
 that i can say is that i am trying to show them how they are being
 trapped, how their fine and generous qualities are being used by
 exploiters of one sort or another; and how this must continue, world
 without end, until there is order in the material affairs of the race,
 until justice has been established as the law of man's dealing with his
 fellows.
 book seven — the church of the social revolution
 they have taken the tomb of our comrade christ—
 infidel hordes that believe not in man;
 stable and stall for his birth sufficed,
 but his tomb is built on a kingly plan.
 they have hedged him round with pomp and parade,
 they have buried him deep under steel and stone—
 but we come leading the great crusade
 to give our comrade back to his own.
 waddell.
 christ and caesar
 in the most deeply significant of the legends concerning jesus, we are
 told how the devil took him up into a high mountain and showed him all the
 kingdoms of the world in a moment of time; and the devil said unto him:
 "all this power will i give unto thee, and the glory of them, for that is
 delivered unto me, and to whomsoever i will, i give it. if thou,
 therefore, wilt worship me, all shall be thine." jesus, as we know,
 answered and said "get thee behind me, satan!" and he really meant it; he
 would have nothing to do with worldly glory, with "temporal power;" he
 chose the career of a revolutionary agitator, and died the death of a
 disturber of the peace. and for two or three centuries his church followed
 in his footsteps, cherishing his proletarian gospel. the early christians
 had "all things in common, except women;" they lived as social outcasts,
 hiding in deserted catacombs, and being thrown to lions and boiled in oil.
 but the devil is a subtle worm; he does not give up at one defeat, for he
 knows human nature, and the strength of the forces which battle for him.
 he failed to get jesus, but he came again, to get jesus' church. he came
 when, through the power of the new revolutionary idea, the church had won
 a position of tremendous power in the decaying roman empire; and the
 subtle worm assumed the guise of no less a person than the emperor
 himself, suggesting that he should become a convert to the new faith, so
 that the church and he might work together for the greater glory of god.
 the bishops and fathers of the church, ambitious for their organization,
 fell for this scheme, and satan went off laughing to himself. he had got
 everything he had asked from jesus three hundred years before; he had got
 the world's greatest religion. how complete and swift was his success you
 may judge from the fact that fifty years later we find the emperor
 valentinian compelled to pass an edict limiting the donations of emotional
 females to the church in rome!
 from that time on christianity has been what i have shown in this book,
 the chief of the enemies of social progress. from the days of constantine
 to the days of bismarck and mark hanna, christ and caesar have been one,
 and the church has been the shield and armor of predatory economic might.
 with only one qualification to be noted: that the church has never been
 able to suppress entirely the memory of her proletarian founder. she has
 done her best, of course; we have seen how her scholars twist his words
 out of their sense, and the catholic church even goes so far as to keep to
 the use of a dead language, so that her victims may not hear the words of
 jesus in a form they can understand.
 'tis well that such seditious songs are sung
 only by priests, and in the latin tongue!
 but in spite of this, the history of the church has been one incessant
 struggle with upstarts and rebels who have filled themselves with the
 spirit of the magnificat and the sermon on the mount, and of that bitterly
 class-conscious proletarian, james, the brother of jesus.
 and here is the thing to be noted, that the factor which has given life to
 christianity, which enables it to keep its hold on the hearts of men
 today, is precisely this new wine of faith and fervor which has been
 poured into it by generation after generation of poor men who live like
 jesus as outcasts, and die like jesus as criminals, and are revered like
 jesus as founders and saints. the greatest of the early church fathers
 were bitterly fought by the church authorities of their own time. st.
 chrysostom, bishop of constantinople, was turned out of office, exiled and
 practically martyred; st. basil was persecuted by the emperor valens; st.
 ambrose excommunicated the tyrannical emperor theodosius; st. cyprian gave
 all his wealth to the poor, and was exiled and finally martyred. in the
 same way, most of the heretics whom the holy inquisition tortured and
 burned were proletarian rebels; the saints whom the church reveres, the
 founders of the orders which gave it life for century after century, were
 men who sought to return to the example of the carpenter's son. let us
 hear a christian scholar on this point, prof. rauschenbusch:
 the movement of francis of assisi, of the waldenses, of the humiliati and
 bons hommes, were all inspired by democratic and communistic ideals.
 wiclif was by far the greatest doctrinal reformer before the reformation;
 but his eyes, too, were first opened to the doctrinal errors of the roman
 church by joining in a great national and patriotic movement against the
 alien domination and extortion of the church. the bohemian revolt made
 famous by the name of john huss, was quite as much political and social as
 religious. savonarola was a great democrat as well as a religious prophet.
 in his famous interview with the dying lorenzo de medici he made three
 demands as a condition for granting absolution. of the man he demanded a
 living faith in god's mercy. of the millionaire he demanded restitution of
 his ill-gotten wealth. of the political usurper he demanded the
 restoration of the liberties of the people of florence. it is significant
 that the dying sinner found it easy to assent to the first, hard to assent
 to the second, and impossible to concede the last.
 locusts and wild honey
 this proletarian strain in christianity goes back to a time long before
 jesus; it seems to have been inherent in the religious character of the
 jews—that stubborn independence, that stiff-necked insistence on the
 right of a man to interview god for himself and to find out what god wants
 him to do; also the inclination to find that god wants him to oppose
 earthly rulers and their plundering of the poor. what is it that gives to
 the bible the vitality it has today? its literary style? to say that is to
 display the ignorance of the cultured; for elevation of style is a
 by-product of passionate conviction; it is what the jewish writers had to
 say, and not the way they said it, that has given them their hold upon
 mankind. was it their insistence upon conscience, their fear of god as the
 beginning of wisdom? but that same element appears in the babylonian
 psalms, which are as eloquent and as sincere as those of the hebrews, yet
 are read only by scholars. was it their sense of the awful presence of
 divinity, of the soul immortal in its keeping? the egyptians had that far
 more than the hebrews, and yet we do not cherish their religious books. or
 was it the love of man for all things living, the lesson of charity upon
 which the catholics lay such stress? the gentle buddha had that, and had
 it long before christ; also his priests had metaphysical subtlety, greater
 than that of john the apostle or thomas aquinas.
 no, there is one thing and one only which distinguishes the hebrew sacred
 writings from all others, and that is their insistent note of proletarian
 revolt, their furious denunciations of exploiters, and of luxury and
 wantonness, the vices of the rich. of that note the assyrian and chaldean
 and babylonian writing contain not a trace, and the egyptian hardly enough
 to mention. the hindoos had a trace of it; but the true, natural-born
 rebels of all time were the hebrews. they were rebels against oppression
 in ancient judea, as they are today in petrograd and new york; the spirit
 of equality and brotherhood which spoke through ezekiel and amos and
 isaiah, through john the baptist and jesus and james, spoke in the last
 century through marx and lassalle and jaures, and speaks today through
 liebknecht and rosa luxemburg and karl kautsky and israel zangwill and
 morris hillquit and abraham cahan and emma goldman and the joseph fels
 endowment.
 the legal rate of interest throughout the babylonian empire was %; the
 laws of manu permitted %, while the laws of the egyptians only stepped
 in to prevent more than %. but listen to this hebrew law:
 if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou
 shalt relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger or a sojourner, that he
 may live with thee: take thou no interest of him, or increase; but fear
 thy god that thy brother may live with thee. thou shalt not give him any
 money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.
 and so on, forbidding that hebrews be sold as bond servants, and
 commanding that at the end of fifty years all debtors shall have their
 debts forgiven and their lands returned to them. and note that this is not
 the raving of agitators, the demand of a minority party; it is the law of
 the hebrew land.
 there has been of late a great deal of new discovery concerning the early
 jews. conrad noel summarizes the results as follows:
 the land-mark law, which sternly forbids encroachment upon peasant rights;
 consideration for the foreigner; additional sanitary and food laws; tithe
 regulations on behalf of widows, orphans, foreigners, etc.; that those who
 have no economic independence should eat and be satisfied; that loans
 should be given cheerfully, not only without any interest, but even at the
 risk of losing the principal. to withhold a loan because the year of
 release is at hand in which the principal is no longer recoverable, is
 described as a grave sin. when you are compelled to free your slaves, you
 must give them sufficient capital to embark upon some industry which shall
 prevent their falling back into slavery. a number of holidays are insisted
 upon. there must be no more crushing of the poor out of existence, for god
 cares for these people who have been driven to poverty, and they shall
 never cease out of the land. howbeit there shall be no poor with you, for
 the lord will bless you, if you will obey these laws.
 but then prosperity came, and culture, which meant contact with the
 capitalist ideas of the heathen empires. the jews fell from the stern
 justice of their fathers; and so came the prophets, wild-eyed men of the
 people, clad in camel's hair and living upon locusts and wild honey,
 breaking in upon priests and kings and capitalists with their furious
 denunciations. and always they incited to class war and social
 disturbance. i quote conrad noel again:
 nathan and gad bad been david's political advisers, abijah had stirred
 jeroboam to revolt, elijah had resisted ahab, elisha had fanned the
 rebellion of jehu, amos thunders against the misrule of the king of
 israel, isaiah denounces the landlords and the usurers, micah charges them
 with blood-guiltiness; jeremiah and the latter prophets, though they
 strike a more intimate note of personal repentance, strike it as the
 prelude to that national restoration for which they hunger as exiles.
 the first chapters of isaiah are typical of the old testament point of
 view. just as the prophets of the nineteenth century thundered against the
 "christian" employers of lancashire, and told them their houses were
 cemented with the blood of little children, so isaiah cries against his
 generation: "your governing classes companion with thieves; behold you
 build up sion with blood." their ceremonial and their sabbath keeping are
 an abomination to god. "when ye spread forth your hands, i will hide mine
 eyes from you. your hands are full of blood." the poor man is robbed. the
 rich exact usury. "woe unto you that lay house to house and field to
 field, that ye may dwell alone in the midst of the land." "wash you, make
 you clean, put away the evil of your doing from before mine eyes; cease to
 do evil; learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
 fatherless, plead for the widow. come now, let us reason together, saith
 the lord. though your sins be blood-colored, they shall be as white as
 snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. if ye be
 willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land. but if ye refuse
 and rebel, ye shall be devoured by the sword."
 mother earth
 and nowadays we have the socialist and anarchist agitators, following the
 same tradition, possessed by the same dream as the ancient hebrew
 prophets. i have mentioned emma goldman; it may be that the reader is not
 familiar with her writings, and does not realize how very biblical she is,
 both in point of view and style. let me quote a few sentences from a
 recent issue of her paper, "mother earth", on the subject of our ruling
 classes and their social responsibility:
 yes, you idle rich, you may howl about what we mean to do to you! your
 riches are rotten and your fine clothes are falling from your backs. your
 stocks and bonds are so tainted that the ink on them should turn to acid
 and eat holes in your pockets and your skins. you have piled up your dirty
 millions, but what wages have you paid to the poor devils of farm hands
 you have robbed? and do you imagine they won't remember it when the
 revolution comes? you loll on soft couches and amuse yourselves with your
 mistresses; you think you are "it" and the world is yours. you send
 militiamen and shoot down our organizers, and we are helpless. but wait,
 comrades, our time is coming.
 doubtless the reader is well satisfied that the author of this tirade is
 now in jail, where she can no longer defy the laws of good taste. they
 always put the ancient prophets in jail; that is the way to know a prophet
 when you meet him. let me quote another prophet who is now behind bars—alexander
 berkman, in his "prison memoirs of an anarchist", discussing the same
 subject of plutocratic pretension:
 tell me, you four hundred, where did you get it? who gave it to you? your
 grandfather, you say? your father? can you go all the way back and show
 there is no flaw anywhere in your title? i tell you that the beginning and
 the root of your wealth is necessarily in injustice. and why? because
 nature did not make this man rich and that man poor from the start. nature
 does not intend for one man to have capital and another to be a
 wage-slave. nature made the earth to be cultivated by all. the idea we
 anarchists have of the rich is of highwaymen, standing in the street and
 robbing every one that passes.
 or take "big bill" haywood, chief of the i. w. w. hear what he has to say
 in a pamphlet addressed to the harvest-hands he is seeking to organize:
 how much farther do you piutes expect to go with your grabbing? do you
 want to be the only people left on earth? why else do you drive out the
 workers from all share in nature, and claim everything for yourselves? the
 earth was made for all, rich and poor alike; where do you get your title
 deeds to it? nature gave everything for all men to use alike; it is only
 your robbery which makes your so-called "ownership". capital has no
 rights. the land belongs to nature, and we are all nature's sons.
 or take eugene v. debs, three times candidate of the socialist party for
 president. i quote from one of his pamphlets:
 the propertied classes are like people who go into a public theatre and
 refuse to let anyone else come in, treating as private property what is
 meant for social use. if each man would take only what he needs, and leave
 the balance to those who have nothing, there would be no rich and no poor.
 the rich man is a thief.
 i might go on citing such quotations for many pages; but i know that emma
 goldman and alexander berkman and bill haywood and gene debs may read this
 book, and i don't want them to close it in the middle and throw it at me.
 therefore let me hasten to explain my poor joke; the sentiments i have
 been quoting are not those of our modern agitators, but of another group
 of ancient ones. the first is not from emma goldman, nor did i find it in
 "mother earth". i found it in the epistle of james, believed by orthodox
 authorities to have been james, the brother of jesus. it is exactly what
 he wrote—save that i have put it into modern phrases, and changed
 the swing of the sentences, in order that those familiar with the bible
 might read it without suspicion. the second passage is not in the writings
 of alexander berkman, but in those of st. john chrysostom, most famous of
 the early fathers, who lived -. the third is not from the pen of
 "big bill" but from that of st. ambrose, a father of the latin church,
 -, and the fourth is not by comrade debs, but by st. basil of the
 greek church, -. and if the reader objects to my having fooled him
 for a minute or two, what will he say to the christian church, which has
 been fooling him for sixteen hundred years?
 the soap box
 this book will be denounced from one end of christendom to the other as
 the work of a blasphemous infidel. yet it stands in the direct line of the
 christian tradition: written by a man who was brought up in the church,
 and loved it with all his heart and soul, and was driven out by the
 formalists and hypocrites in high places; a man who thinks of jesus more
 frequently and with more devotion than he thinks of any other man that
 lives or has ever lived on earth; and who has but one purpose in all that
 he says and does, to bring into reality the dream that jesus dreamed of
 peace on earth and good will toward men.
 i will go farther yet and say that not merely is this book written for the
 cause of jesus, but it is written in the manner of jesus. we read his
 bitter railings at the pharisees, and miss the point entirely, because the
 word pharisee has become to us a word of reproach. but this is due solely
 to jesus; in his time the word was a holy word, it meant the most orthodox
 and respectable, the ultra high-church devotees of jerusalem. the way to
 get the spirit of the tirades of jesus is to do with him what we did with
 the early church fathers—translate him into american. this time,
 since the reader shares the secret, it will not be necessary to disguise
 the bible style, and we may follow the text exactly. let me try the
 twenty-third chapter of matthew, omitting seven verses which refer to
 subtleties of hebrew casuistry, for which we should have to go to lyman
 abbott or st. alphonsus to find a parallel:
 then jesus mounted upon a soap-box, and began a speech, saying, the
 doctors of divinity and episcopalians fill the fifth avenue churches; and
 it would be all right if you were to listen to what they preach, and do
 that; but don't follow their actions, for they never practice what they
 preach. they load the backs of the working-classes with crushing burdens,
 but they themselves never move a finger to carry a burden, and everything
 they do is for show. they wear frock-coats and silk hats on sundays, and
 they sit at the speakers' table at the banquets of the civic federation,
 and they occupy the best pews in the churches, and their doings are
 reported in all the papers; they are called leading citizens and pillars
 of the church. but don't you be called leading citizens, for the only
 useful man is the man who produces. (applause). and whoever exalts himself
 shall be abased, and whoever humbles himself shall be exalted.
 woe unto you, doctors of divinity and catholics, hypocrites! for you shut
 up the kingdom of heaven against men; you don't go in yourself and you
 don't let others go in. woe unto you, doctors of divinity and
 presbyterians, hypocrites! for you foreclose mortgages on widows' houses,
 and for a pretense you make long prayers. for this you will receive the
 greater damnation! woe unto you, doctors of divinity and methodists,
 hypocrites! for you send missionaries to africa to make one convert, and
 when you have made him, he is twice as much a child of hell as yourselves.
 (applause). woe unto you, blind guides, with your subtleties of doctrine,
 your transubstantiation and consubstantiation and all the rest of it; you
 fools and blind! woe unto you, doctors of divinity and episcopalians,
 hypocrites! for you drop your checks into the collection-plate and you pay
 no heed to the really important things in the bible, which are justice and
 mercy and faith in goodness. you blind guides, who strain at a gnat and
 swallow a camel! (laughter). woe unto you, doctors of divinity and
 anglicans, hypocrites! for you bathe yourselves and dress in immaculate
 clothing but within you are full of extortion and excess. you blind high
 churchmen, clean first your hearts, so that the clothes you wear may
 represent you. woe unto you, doctors of divinity and baptists, hypocrites!
 for you are like marble tombs which appear beautiful on the outside, but
 inside are full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness. even so you
 appear righteous to men, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and
 iniquity. (applause). woe unto you, doctors of divinity and unitarians,
 hypocrites! because you erect statues to dead reformers, and put wreathes
 upon the tombs of old-time martyrs. you say, if we had been alive in those
 days, we would not have helped to kill those good men. that ought to show
 you how to treat us at present. (laughter). but you are the children of
 those who killed the good men; so go ahead and kill us too! you serpents,
 you generation of vipers, how can you escape the damnation of hell?
 at this point, according to the report published in the jerusalem "times",
 a police sergeant stepped up to the orator and notified him that he was
 under arrest; he submitted quietly, but one of his followers attempted to
 use a knife, and was severely clubbed. jesus was taken to the
 station-house followed by a riotous throng, and held upon a charge of
 disorderly conduct. next morning the rev. dr. caiaphas of old trinity
 appeared against him, and magistrate pilate sentenced him to six months on
 blackwell's island, remarking that from this time on he proposed to make
 an example of those soap-box orators who persist in using threatening and
 abusive language. just as the prisoner was being led away, a detective
 appeared with a requisition from the governor, ordering that jesus be
 taken to san francisco, where he is under indictment for murder in the
 first degree, it being charged that his teachings helped to incite the
 preparedness day explosion.
 the church machine
 the catholics of his time came to jesus and said, "master, we would have a
 sign of thee"—meaning that they wanted him to do some magic, to
 prove to their vulgar minds that his power came from god. he answered by
 calling them an evil and adulterous generation—which is exactly what
 i have said about the papal machine. the baptists and methodists and
 presbyterians and other book-worshippers of his time accused him of
 violating the sacred commands so definitely set down in their ancient
 texts, and to them he answered that the sabbath was made for man and not
 man for the sabbath; he called them hypocrites, and quoted karl marx at
 them—"this people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is
 far from me." because he despised the company of the respectables, and
 went among the humble and human folk of his own class in the places where
 they gathered—the public houses—the churchly scandal-mongers
 called him "a man gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and
 sinners"—precisely as in the old days they used to sneer at the
 socialists for having their meetings in the back-rooms of saloons, and
 precisely as they still denounce us as free-lovers and atheists.
 but the longing for justice between man and man, which is the kingdom of
 heaven on earth, is the deepest instinct of the human heart, and the voice
 of the carpenter cannot be confined within the thickest church-walls, nor
 drowned by all the pealing organs in christendom. even in these days, when
 the power of mammon is more widespread, more concentrated and more
 systematized than ever before in history—even in these days of
 morgan and rockefeller, there are christian clergymen who dare to preach
 as jesus preached. one by one they are cast out of the church—father
 mcglynn, george d. herron, alexander irvine, j. stitt wilson, austin
 adams, algernon crapsey, bouck white; but their voices are not silenced
 they are like the leaven, to which jesus compared the kingdom of god—a
 woman took it and hid it in three measures of meal till the whole was
 leavened. the young theological students read, and some of them
 understand; i know three brothers in one family who have just gone into
 the church, and are preaching straight social revolution—and the
 scribes and the pharisees have not yet dared to cast them out.
 in this book i have portrayed the christian church as the servant and
 henchman of big business, a part of the system of mammon. every church is
 necessarily a money machine, holding and administering property. and it is
 not alone the catholic church which is in politics, seeking favors from
 the state—the exemption of church property from taxation, exemption
 of ministers from military service, free transportation for them and their
 families on the railroads, the control of charity and education, laws to
 deprive people of amusements on sunday—so on through a long list. as
 the churches have to be built with money, you find that in them the rich
 possess the control and demand the deference, while the poor are humble,
 and in their secret hearts jealous and bitter; in other words, the class
 struggle is in the churches, as everywhere else in the world, and the
 social revolution is coming in the churches, just as it is coming in
 industry.
 it is a fact of deep significance that the majority of ministers are
 proletarians, eking out their existence upon a miserable salary, and
 beholden in all their comings and goings to the wealthy holders of
 privilege. even in the roman catholic church that is true. the ordinary
 priest is a man of the working class, and knows what working people suffer
 and feel. so in the catholic church there are proletarian rebellions;
 there is many a priest who does not carry out the political orders of his
 superiors, but goes to the polls and votes for his class instead of for
 his pope. in ireland, as i write, the young priests are defying their
 bishops and joining the sinn fein, a non-religious movement for an irish
 republic.
 what is it that keeps the average workingman in subjection to the
 exploiter? simply terror, the terror of losing his job. and if you could
 get into the inmost soul of christian ministers, you would find that
 precisely the same force is keeping many of them slaves to tradition. they
 are educated men, and thousands of them must resent the dilemma which
 compels them to be either fools or hypocrites. they have caught enough of
 the spirit of their time not to enjoy having to pose as miracle-mongers,
 rain-makers and witch-doctors; they would like to say frankly that they do
 not believe that jonah ever swallowed the whale, and even that they are
 dubious about hercules and achilles and other demigods. but they are part
 of a machine, and the old men and the rich men who run the machine have
