of countries from devastation.
to return to our fundamental theorem. everything
which is produced is consumed—both what is saved and
what is said to be spent—and the former quite as rapidly as
the latter. all the ordinary forms of language tend to disguise
this. when people talk of the ancient wealth of a
country, of riches inherited from ancestors, and similar expressions,
the idea suggested is, that the riches so transmitted
were produced long ago, at the time when they are said to
have been first acquired, and that no portion of the capital
of the country was produced this year, except as much as
may have been this year added to the total amount. the
fact is far otherwise. the greater part, in value, of the
[pg ]
wealth now existing [in the united states] has been produced
by human hands within the last twelve months.
“in the state of massachusetts it is estimated that the capital,
on the average, belonging to each individual does not exceed
$, and that the average annual product per capita is
about $; so that the total capital is the product of only two
or three years' labor.”
the land subsists, and the land is almost the only thing
that subsists. everything which is produced perishes, and
most things very quickly. most kinds of capital are not
fitted by their nature to be long preserved. westminster
abbey has lasted many centuries, with occasional repairs;
some grecian sculptures have existed above two thousand
years; the pyramids perhaps double or treble that time.
but these were objects devoted to unproductive use. capital
is kept in existence from age to age not by preservation,
but by perpetual reproduction; every part of it is used and
destroyed, generally very soon after it is produced, but those
who consume it are employed meanwhile in producing more.
the growth of capital is similar to the growth of population.
every individual who is born, dies, but in each year the
number born exceeds the number who die; the population,
therefore, always increases, though not one person of those
composing it was alive until a very recent date.
this perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital
afford the explanation of what has so often excited wonder,
the great rapidity with which countries recover from a state
of devastation. the possibility of a rapid repair of their
disasters mainly depends on whether the country has been
depopulated. if its effective population have not been extirpated
at the time, and are not starved afterward, then,
with the same skill and knowledge which they had before,
with their land and its permanent improvements undestroyed,
and the more durable buildings probably unimpaired, or only
partially injured, they have nearly all the requisites for their
[pg ]
former amount of production. if there is as much of food
left to them, or of valuables to buy food, as enables them by
any amount of privation to remain alive and in working condition,
they will, in a short time, have raised as great a produce,
and acquired collectively as great wealth and as great a
capital, as before, by the mere continuance of that ordinary
amount of exertion which they are accustomed to employ in
their occupations. nor does this evince any strength in the
principle of saving, in the popular sense of the term, since
what takes place is not intentional abstinence, but involuntary
privation.
the world has at any given period the power, under existing
conditions of production and skill, to create a certain
amount of wealth, as represented by the inner rectangle, w.
each increased power of production arising from conquests
over nature's forces, as the use of steam and labor-saving machinery,
permits the total wealth
to be enlarged, as, in the figure, to
rectangle w'. for the production
of wealth are required labor,
capital, and land; therefore, if
the labor and land are not destroyed
by war, there need not
necessarily be in existence all the
previous capital. if there are
the necessaries for all, and only sufficient tools to accomplish
the work, they will, in a few years, again recreate all the
wealth that formerly existed, regain the same position as before,
and go on slowly increasing the total wealth just as fast
as improvements in the arts of production render it possible.
§ . effects of defraying government expenditure by loans.
[an application of this truth has been made to the
question of raising government supplies for war purposes.]
loans, being drawn from capital (in lieu of taxes, which
would generally have been paid from income, and made
up in part or altogether by increased economy), must, according
to the principles we have laid down, tend to impoverish
the country: yet the years in which expenditure of
this sort has been on the greatest scale have often been years
of great apparent prosperity: the wealth and resources of the
country, instead of diminishing, have given every sign of
[pg ]
rapid increase during the process, and of greatly expanded
dimensions after its close.
during our civil war, at the same time that wealth was
being destroyed on an enormous scale, there was a very general
feeling that trade was good, and large fortunes were
made. at the close of the war a period of speculation and
overtrading continued until it was brought to a disastrous
close by the panic of . much of this speculation, however,
was due to an inflated paper currency.
we will suppose the most unfavorable case possible: that
the whole amount borrowed and destroyed by the government
was abstracted by the lender from a productive employment
in which it had actually been invested. the capital,
therefore, of the country, is this year diminished by so
much. but, unless the amount abstracted is something enormous,
there is no reason in the nature of the case why next
year the national capital should not be as great as ever. the
loan can not have been taken from that portion of the capital
of the country which consists of tools, machinery, and
buildings. it must have been wholly drawn from the portion
employed in paying laborers: and the laborers will suffer
accordingly. but if none of them are starved, if their
wages can bear such an amount of reduction, or if charity
interposes between them and absolute destitution, there is no
reason that their labor should produce less in the next year
than in the year before. if they produce as much as usual,
having been paid less by so many millions sterling, these
millions are gained by their employers. the breach made
in the capital of the country is thus instantly repaired, but
repaired by the privations and often the real misery of the
laboring-class.
as mr. mill points out, during the napoleonic wars, in
france the withdrawal of laborers from industry into the army
was so large that it caused a rise of wages, and a fall in the
profits of capital; while in england, inasmuch as capital,
rather than men, was sent to the continent in the war, the very
reverse took place: the diversion of “hundreds of millions of
capital from productive employment” caused a fall of wages,
[pg ]
and the prosperity of the capitalist class, while the permanent
productive resources did not fall off.
this leads to the vexed question to which dr. chalmers
has very particularly adverted: whether the funds required
by a government for extraordinary unproductive expenditure
are best raised by loans, the interest only being provided
by taxes, or whether taxes should be at once laid on
to the whole amount; which is called, in the financial vocabulary,
raising the whole of the supplies within the year.
dr. chalmers is strongly for the latter method. he says
the common notion is that, in calling for the whole amount
in one year, you require what is either impossible, or very
inconvenient; that the people can not, without great hardship,
pay the whole at once out of their yearly income; and
that it is much better to require of them a small payment
every year in the shape of interest, than so great a sacrifice
once for all. to which his answer is, that the sacrifice is
made equally in either case. whatever is spent can not but
be drawn from yearly income. the whole and every part
of the wealth produced in the country forms, or helps to
form, the yearly income of somebody. the privation which
it is supposed must result from taking the amount in the
shape of taxes is not avoided by taking it in a loan. the
suffering is not averted, but only thrown upon the laboring-classes,
the least able, and who least ought, to bear it: while
all the inconveniences, physical, moral, and political, produced
by maintaining taxes for the perpetual payment of
the interest, are incurred in pure loss. whenever capital is
withdrawn from production, or from the fund destined for
production, to be lent to the state and expended unproductively,
that whole sum is withheld from the laboring-classes:
the loan, therefore, is in truth paid off the same year; the
whole of the sacrifice necessary for paying it off is actually
made: only it is paid to the wrong persons, and therefore
does not extinguish the claim; and paid by the very worst
of taxes, a tax exclusively on the laboring-class. and, after
having, in this most painful and unjust of ways, gone through
[pg ]
the whole effort necessary for extinguishing the debt, the
country remains charged with it, and with the payment of its
interest in perpetuity.
the united states, for example, borrows capital from a, with
which it buys stores from b. if the loan all comes from within
the country, a's capital is borrowed, when the united states
should have taken that amount outright by taxation. when the
money is borrowed of a, the laborers undergo the sacrifice, the
title to the whole sum remains in a's hands, and the claim against
the government by a still exists; while, if the amount were
taken by taxation, the title to the sum raised is in the state,
and it is paid to the right person.
the experience of the united states during the civil war
is an illustration of this principle. it is asserted that, as a
matter of fact, the total expenses of the war were defrayed by
the northern states, during the four years of its continuance,
out of surplus earnings; and yet at the close of the conflict a
debt of $,,, was saddled on the country.
the united states borrowed$,,,revenue during that time,,,total cost of the war$,,,
in reality we borrowed only about $,,, instead
of $,,,, since () the government issued paper which
depreciated, and yet received it at par in subscriptions for loans.
moreover, the total cost would have been much reduced had
we issued no paper and () thereby not increased the prices of
goods to the state, and () if no interest account had been created
by borrowing. but could the country have raised the whole
sum each year by taxation? in the first fiscal year after the
war the united states paid in war taxes $,,. at the
beginning of the struggle, to june , , the expenditure
was $,,, and by june , , it had amounted to
$,,,; so that $,, of taxes a year would
have paid the war expenses, and left us free of debt at the close.
a confirmatory experience is that of england during the
continental wars, -:
total war expenditures£,,,interest charge on the existing debt,,total amount required£,,,revenue for that period,,,deficit£,,
to provide for this deficit, the government actually increased
[pg ]
its debt by £,,. a slight additional exertion
would have provided £,, more of revenue, and saved
£,, to the taxpayers.
the practical state of the case, however, seldom exactly
corresponds with this supposition. the loans of the less
wealthy countries are made chiefly with foreign capital,
which would not, perhaps, have been brought in to be invested
on any less security than that of the government:
while those of rich and prosperous countries are generally
made, not with funds withdrawn from productive employment,
but with the new accumulations constantly making
from income, and often with a part of them which, if not
so taken, would have migrated to colonies, or sought other
investments abroad.
§ . demand for commodities is not demand for labor.
mr. mill's statement of the theorem respecting capital,
discussed in the argument that “demand for commodities is
not demand for labor,” needs some simplification. for this
purpose represent by the letters of the alphabet, a, b, c, ...
x, y, z, the different kinds of commodities produced in the
world which are exchanged against each other in the process of
reaching the consumers. this exchange of commodities for
each other, it need hardly be said, does not increase the number
or quantity of commodities already in existence; since
their production, as we have seen, requires labor and capital in
connection with natural agents. mere exchange does not alter
the quantity of commodities produced.
to produce a plow, for example, the maker must have capital
(in the form of subsistence, tools, and materials) of which
some one has foregone the use by a process of saving in order
that something else, in this case a plow, may be produced.
this saving must be accomplished first to an amount sufficient
to keep production going on from day to day. this capital is
all consumed, but in a longer or shorter term (depending on the
particular industrial operation) it is reproduced in new forms
adapted to the existing wants of man. moreover, without any
new exertion of abstinence, this amount of capital may be again
consumed and reproduced, and so go on forever, after once
being saved (if never destroyed in the mean while, thereby
passing out of the category not only of capital, but also of
wealth). the total capital of the country, then, is not the sum
[pg ]
of one year's capital added to that of another; but that of last
year reproduced in a new form this year, plus a fractional increase
arising from new savings. but, once saved, capital can
go on constantly aiding in production forever. this plow when
made is exchanged (if a plow is wanted, and the production is
properly adjusted to meet desires) for such other products,
food, means for repairing tools, etc., as give back to the plow-maker
all the commodities consumed in its manufacture (with
an increase, called profit).
returning to our illustration of the alphabet, it is evident
that a certain amount of capital united with labor (constituting
what may be called a productive engine) lies behind the production
of a (such as the plow, for example), and to which its
existence is due. the same is true of z. suppose that ,
of z is produced, of which , is enough to reimburse the
capital used up by labor in the operation, and that the owner
of commodity z spends the remaining , z in exchange for
, of commodity a. it is evident (no money being used as
yet) that this exchange of goods is regulated entirely by the
desires of the two parties to the transaction. no more goods
are created simply by the exchange; the simple process of exchange
does not keep the laborers engaged on a occupied. and
yet the owner of z had a demand for commodity a; his demand
was worthless, except through the fact of his production,
which gave him actual wealth, or purchasing power, in the form
of z. his demand for commodity a was not the thing which
employed the laborers engaged in producing a, although the
demand (if known beforehand) would cause them to produce a
rather than some other article—that is, the demand of one
quantity of wealth for a certain thing determines the direction
taken by the owner of capital a. but, since the exchange is
merely the form in which the demand manifests itself, it is clear
that the demand does not add to production, and so of itself
does not employ labor. of course, if there were no desires,
there would be no demand, and so no production and employment
of labor. but we may conclude by formulating the proposition,
that wealth (z) offered for commodities (a) necessitates
the use of other wealth (than z) as capital to support the operation
by which those commodities (a) are produced. it
makes no difference to the existing employment of labor what
want is supplied by the producers of a, whether it is velvet
(intended for unproductive consumption) or plows (intended
for productive consumption). even if z is no longer offered
in exchange for a, and if then a is no longer to be made, the
laborers formerly occupied in producing a—if warning is
given of the coming change; if not, loss results—having the
plant, can produce something else wanted by the owner of z.
[pg ]
now into a community, as here pictured, all laborers supposed
to be occupied, and all capital employed in producing
a, b, c, ... x, y, z, imagine the coming of a shipwrecked
crew. instead of exchanging z for a, as before, the owner of
z may offer his wealth to the crew to dance for him. the
essential question is, is more employment offered to labor by
this action than the former exchange for a? that is, it is a
question merely of distribution of wealth among the members
of a community. the labor engaged on a is not thrown out
of employment (if they have warning). there is no more
wealth in existence, but it is differently distributed than before:
the crew, instead of the former owner, now have ,
of z. so far as the question of employment is concerned, it
makes no difference on what terms the crew got it: they
might have been hired to stand in a row and admire the owner
of z when he goes out. but yet it may naturally be assumed
that the crew were employed productively. in this case, after
they have consumed the wealth z, they have brought into
existence articles in the place of those they consumed. but,
although this last operation is economically more desirable for
the future growth of wealth, yet no more laborers for the time
were employed than if the crew had merely danced. the advantages
or disadvantages of productive consumption are not
to be discussed here. it is intended, however, to establish the
proposition that wealth paid out in wages, or advanced to producers,
itself supports labor; that wealth offered directly to
laborers in this way employs more labor than when merely
offered in exchange for other goods, or, in other words, by a
demand for commodities; that an increased demand for commodities
does not involve an increased demand for labor, since
this can only be created by capital. the essential difference
is, that the owner of z in one case, by exchanging goods for
a, did not forego his consuming power; in the other case, by
giving z to the unemployed crew, he actually went through the
process of saving by foregoing his personal consumption, and
handing it over to the crew. if the crew use it unproductively,
it is in the end the same as if the owner of z had done
it; but meanwhile the additional laborers were employed. if
the crew be employed productively, then the saving once made
will go on forever, as explained above, and the world will be
the richer by the wealth this additional capital can create.
it may now be objected that, if a is no longer in demand,
the laborers in that industry will be thrown out of employment.
out of that employment certainly, but not out of every
other. one thousand of z was able to purchase certain results
of labor and capital in industry a, when in the hands of its
former owner; and now when in the hands of the crew it will
[pg ]
control, as purchasing power, equivalent results of labor and
capital. the crew may not want the same articles as the former
owner of z, but they will want the equivalents of , of z in
something, and that something will be produced now instead
of a. the whole process may be represented by this diagram.
. z is exchanged
against a, and the crew
remain unemployed.
. here the crew possess
z, and they themselves
exchange z for
whatever a may produce
in satisfaction of their
wants, and the crew are
then employed.
it is possible that the
intervention of money
blinds some minds to a
proper understanding of
the operations described above. the supposition, as given,
applies to a condition of barter, but is equally true if money is
used. imagine a display of all the industries of the world, a,
b, c, ... x, y, z, presented within sight on one large field,
and at the central spot the producer of gold and silver. when
z is produced, it is taken to the gold-counter, and exchanged
for money; when a is produced, the same is done. then the
former money is given for a, and the latter for z, so that in
truth a is exchanged against z through the medium of money,
just as before money was considered. now, it may be said by
an objector, “if a is not wanted, after it is produced, and can
not be sold, because the demand from z has been withdrawn,
then the capital used for a will not be returned, and the laborers
in a will be thrown out of employment.” the answer is,
of course, that the state of things here contemplated is a permanent
and normal one wherein production is correctly adapted
to human desires. if a is found not to be wanted, after the
production of it, an industrial blunder has been committed, and
wealth is wasted just as when burned up. it is ill-assorted production.
the trouble is not in a lack of demand for what a
may produce (of something else), but with the producers of a
in not making that for which there were desires, from ignorance
or lack of early information of the disposition of wealth
z. in practice, however, it will be found that most goods are
made upon “orders,” and, except under peculiar circumstances,
[pg ]
not actually produced unless a market is foreseen. indeed, as
every man knows, the most important function of a successful
business man is the adaptation of production to the market,
that is, to the desires of consumers.
one other form of this question needs brief mention. it is
truly remarked that a large portion of industrial activity is engaged
to-day, not in supplying productive consumption, such
as food, shelter, and clothing, but in supplying the comforts
and luxuries of low and high alike, or unproductive consumption;
now, if there were not a demand for luxuries and comforts,
many vast industries would cease to exist, and labor
would be thrown out of employment. is not a demand for
such commodities, then, a cause of the present employment of
labor? no, it is not. luxuries and comforts are of course
the objects of human wants; but a desire alone, without purchasing
power, can not either buy or produce these commodities.
to obtain a piano, one must produce goods, and this
implies the possession of capital, by which to bring into existence
goods, or purchasing power, to be offered for a piano.
nor is this sufficient. even after a man, a, for example, offers
purchasing power, he will not get a piano unless there exists an
accumulation of unemployed capital, together with labor ready
to manufacture the instrument. if capital were all previously
occupied, no piano could be made, although a stood offering
an equivalent in valuable goods. it may be said that a himself
has the means. he has the wealth, and if he is willing to
forego the use of this wealth, or, in other words, save it by devoting
it to reproduction in the piano industry—that is, create
the capital necessary for the purpose—then the piano can be
made. but this shows again that, not a mere desire, but the
existence of capital, is necessary to the production, and so to
the employment of labor. an increased demand for commodities,
therefore, does not give additional employment to labor,
unless there be capital to support the labor.
some important corollaries result from this proposition:
(a.) when a country by legislation creates a home demand for
commodities, that does not of itself give additional employment
to labor. if the goods had before been purchased abroad,
under free discretion, then if produced at home they must require
more capital and labor, or they would not have been
brought from foreign countries. if produced at home, it would
require, to purchase them, more of what was formerly sent
abroad; or some must do without. the legislation can not,
ipso facto, create capital, and only by an increase of capital
can more employment result. it is possible, however, that
legislation might cause a more effective use of existing capital;
but that must be a question of fact, to be settled by circumstances
[pg ]
in each particular case. it is not a thing to be governed
by principles.
(b.) it follows from the above proposition also that taxes
levied on the rich, and paid by a saving from their consumption
of luxuries, do not fall on the poor because of a lessened demand
for commodities; since, as we have seen, that demand does not
create or diminish the demand for labor. but, if the taxes
levied on the rich are paid by savings from what the rich would
have expended in wages, then if the government spends the
amount of revenue thus taken in the direct purchase of labor,
as of soldiers and sailors, the tax does not fall on the laboring-class
taken as a whole. when the government takes that
wealth which was formerly capital, burns it up, or dissipates it
in war, it ceases to exist any longer as a means of again producing
wealth, or of employing labor.
[pg ]
chapter v. on circulating and fixed capital.
§ . fixed and circulating capital.
of the capital engaged in the production of any commodity,
there is a part which, after being once used, exists
no longer as capital; is no longer capable of rendering service
to production, or at least not the same service, nor to the
same sort of production. such, for example, is the portion
of capital which consists of materials. the tallow and alkali
of which soap is made, once used in the manufacture, are destroyed
as alkali and tallow. in the same division must be
placed the portion of capital which is paid as the wages, or
consumed as the subsistence, of laborers. that part of the
capital of a cotton-spinner which he pays away to his work-people,
once so paid, exists no longer as his capital, or as a
cotton-spinner's capital. capital which in this manner fulfills
the whole of its office in the production in which it is
engaged, by a single use, is called circulating capital. the
term, which is not very appropriate, is derived from the circumstance
that this portion of capital requires to be constantly
renewed by the sale of the finished product, and
when renewed is perpetually parted with in buying materials
and paying wages; so that it does its work, not by being
kept, but by changing hands.
another large portion of capital, however, consists in
instruments of production, of a more or less permanent character;
which produce their effect not by being parted with,
but by being kept; and the efficacy of which is not exhausted
by a single use. to this class belong buildings,
[pg ]
machinery, and all or most things known by the name of implements
or tools. the durability of some of these is considerable,
and their function as productive instruments is
prolonged through many repetitions of the productive operation.
in this class must likewise be included capital sunk
(as the expression is) in permanent improvements of land.
so also the capital expended once for all, in the commencement
of an undertaking, to prepare the way for subsequent
operations: the expense of opening a mine, for example; of
cutting canals, of making roads or docks. other examples
might be added, but these are sufficient. capital which exists
in any of these durable shapes, and the return to which
is spread over a period of corresponding duration, is called
fixed capital.
of fixed capital, some kinds require to be occasionally
or periodically renewed. such are all implements and
buildings: they require, at intervals, partial renewal by
means of repairs, and are at last entirely worn out. in other
cases the capital does not, unless as a consequence of some
unusual accident, require entire renewal. a dock or a canal,
once made, does not require, like a machine, to be made
again, unless purposely destroyed. the most permanent of
all kinds of fixed capital is that employed in giving increased
productiveness to a natural agent, such as land.
to return to the theoretical distinction between fixed and
circulating capital. since all wealth which is destined to be
employed for reproduction comes within the designation of
capital, there are parts of capital which do not agree with
the definition of either species of it; for instance, the stock
of finished goods which a manufacturer or dealer at any time
possesses unsold in his warehouses. but this, though capital
as to its destination, is not yet capital in actual exercise; it is
not engaged in production, but has first to be sold or exchanged,
that is, converted into an equivalent value of some
other commodities, and therefore is not yet either fixed or
circulating capital, but will become either one or the other,
or be eventually divided between them.
[pg ]
§ . increase of fixed capital, when, at the expense of circulating, might be
detrimental to the laborers.
there is a great difference between the effects of
circulating and those of fixed capital, on the amount of the
gross produce of the country. circulating capital being
destroyed as such, the result of a single use must be a reproduction
equal to the whole amount of the circulating capital
used, and a profit besides. this, however, is by no means
necessary in the case of fixed capital. since machinery, for
example, is not wholly consumed by one use, it is not necessary
that it should be wholly replaced from the product of
that use. the machine answers the purpose of its owner if
it brings in, during each interval of time, enough to cover
the expense of repairs, and the deterioration in value which
the machine has sustained during the same time, with a surplus
sufficient to yield the ordinary profit on the entire
value of the machine.
from this it follows that all increase of fixed capital,
when taking place at the expense of circulating, must be, at
least temporarily, prejudicial to the interests of the laborers.
this is true, not of machinery alone, but of all improvements
by which capital is sunk; that is, rendered permanently
incapable of being applied to the maintenance and
remuneration of labor.
it is highly probable that in the twenty-five years preceding
the panic of , owing to the progress of invention, those
industries in the united states employing much machinery
were unduly stimulated in comparison with other industries,
and that the readjustment was a slow and painful process.
after the collapse vast numbers left the manufacturing to
enter the extractive industries.
the argument relied on by most of those who contend
that machinery can never be injurious to the laboring-class
is, that by cheapening production it creates such an increased
demand for the commodity as enables, ere long, a greater
number of persons than ever to find employment in producing
it. the argument does not seem to me to have
the weight commonly ascribed to it. the fact, though too
broadly stated, is, no doubt, often true. the copyists who
were thrown out of employment by the invention of printing
[pg ]
were doubtless soon outnumbered by the compositors
and pressmen who took their place; and the number of laboring
persons now employed in the cotton manufacture is
many times greater than were so occupied previously to the
inventions of hargreaves and arkwright, which shows that,
besides the enormous fixed capital now embarked in the
manufacture, it also employs a far larger circulating capital
than at any former time. but if this capital was drawn
from other employments, if the funds which took the place
of the capital sunk in costly machinery were supplied not
by any additional saving consequent on the improvements,
but by drafts on the general capital of the community, what
better are the laboring-classes for the mere transfer?
there is a machine used for sizing the cotton yarn to prepare
it for weaving, by which it is dried over a steam cylinder,
the wages for attendance on which were only two dollars per
day, as compared with an expenditure for labor of fourteen
dollars per day to accomplish the same ends before the machine
was invented.
all attempts to make out that the laboring-classes as a
collective body can not suffer temporarily by the introduction
of machinery, or by the sinking of capital in permanent
improvements, are, i conceive, necessarily fallacious.
that they would suffer in the particular department of industry
to which the change applies is generally admitted,
and obvious to common sense; but it is often said that,
though employment is withdrawn from labor in one department,
an exactly equivalent employment is opened for it in
others, because what the consumers save in the increased
cheapness of one particular article enables them to augment
their consumption of others, thereby increasing the demand
for other kinds of labor. this is plausible, but, as was
shown in the last chapter, involves a fallacy; demand for
commodities being a totally different thing from demand
[pg ]
for labor. it is true, the consumers have now additional
means of buying other things; but this will not create the
other things, unless there is capital to produce them, and the
improvement has not set at liberty any capital, even if it has
not absorbed some from other employments.
if the improvement has lowered the cost of production, it
has often required less capital (as well as less labor) to produce
the same quantity of goods; or, what is the same thing, an
increased product with the same capital.
§ . —this seldom, if ever, occurs.
nevertheless, i do not believe that, as things are
actually transacted, improvements in production are often, if
ever, injurious, even temporarily, to the laboring-classes in
the aggregate. they would be so if they took place suddenly
to a great amount, because much of the capital sunk
must necessarily in that case be provided from funds already
employed as circulating capital. but improvements are
always introduced very gradually, and are seldom or never
made by withdrawing circulating capital from actual production,
but are made by the employment of the annual
increase. i doubt if there would be found a single example
of a great increase of fixed capital, at a time and place where
circulating capital was not rapidly increasing likewise.
in the united states, while the cost per yard of the manufactured
goods has decreased, and so made accessible to poorer
classes than before, the capital engaged in manufactures has increased
so as to allow a vastly greater number of persons to be
employed, as will be seen by the following comparison of 
with  taken from the last census returns. (compendium,
, pp. , .)
number of establishments.capital (thousands).
average number of hands employed.
total amount paid in wages during the year.,$,,
“a hundred years ago, one person in every family of five
or six must have been absolutely needed to spin and weave by
[pg ]
hand the fabrics required for the scanty clothing of the people;
now one person in two hundred or two hundred and fifty
only need work in the factory to produce the cotton and woolen
fabrics of the most amply clothed nation of the world.”
to these considerations must be added, that, even if improvements
did for a time decrease the aggregate produce
and the circulating capital of the community, they would
not the less tend in the long run to augment both. this
tendency of improvements in production to cause increased
accumulation, and thereby ultimately to increase the gross
produce, even if temporarily diminishing it, will assume a
still more decided character if it should appear that there
are assignable limits both to the accumulation of capital and
to the increase of production from the land, which limits
once attained, all further increase of produce must stop; but
that improvements in production, whatever may be their
other effects, tend to throw one or both of these limits farther
off. now, these are truths which will appear in the
clearest light in a subsequent stage of our investigation. it
will be seen that the quantity of capital which will, or even
which can, be accumulated in any country, and the amount
of gross produce which will, or even which can, be raised,
bear a proportion to the state of the arts of production there
existing; and that every improvement, even if for the time it
diminish the circulating capital and the gross produce, ultimately
makes room for a larger amount of both than could
possibly have existed otherwise. it is this which is the conclusive
answer to the objections against machinery; and the
proof thence arising of the ultimate benefit to laborers of
mechanical inventions, even in the existing state of society,
will hereafter be seen to be conclusive.
[pg ]
chapter vi. of causes affecting the efficiency of production.
§ . general causes of superior productiveness.
the most evident cause of superior productiveness
is what are called natural advantages. these are various.
fertility of soil is one of the principal. the influence of
climate [is another advantage, and] consists in lessening the
physical requirements of the producers.
in spinning very fine cotton thread, england's natural climate
gives in some parts of the country such advantages in
proper moisture and electric conditions that the operation can
be carried on out-of-doors; while in the united states it is
generally necessary to create an artificial atmosphere. in
ordinary spinning in our country more is accomplished when
the wind is in one quarter than in another. the dry northwest
wind in new england reduces the amount of product,
while the dry northeast wind in england has a similar effect,
and it is said has practically driven the cotton-spinners from
manchester to oldham, where the climate is more equably
moist. the full reasons for these facts are not yet ascertained.
experts in the woolen industry, also, explain that the quality
and fiber of wool depend upon the soil and climate where the
sheep are pastured. when ohio sheep are transferred to texas,
in a few years their wool loses the distinctive quality it formerly
possessed, and takes on a new character belonging to the breeds
of texas. the wool produced by one set of climatic conditions
is quite different from that of another set, and is used by the
manufacturers for different purposes.
in hot regions, mankind can exist in comfort with less
perfect housing, less clothing; fuel, that absolute necessary
of life in cold climates, they can almost dispense with, except
for industrial uses. they also require less aliment.
among natural advantages, besides soil and climate, must be
[pg ]
mentioned abundance of mineral productions, in convenient
situations, and capable of being worked with moderate labor.
such are the coal-fields of great britain, which do so much
to compensate its inhabitants for the disadvantages of climate;
and the scarcely inferior resource possessed by this
country and the united states, in a copious supply of an
easily reduced iron-ore, at no great depth below the earth's
surface, and in close proximity to coal-deposits available for
working it. but perhaps a greater advantage than all these
is a maritime situation, especially when accompanied with
good natural harbors; and, next to it, great navigable rivers.
these advantages consist indeed wholly in saving of cost of
carriage. but few, who have not considered the subject,
have any adequate notion how great an extent of economical
advantage this comprises.
as the second of the [general] causes of superior productiveness,
we may rank the greater energy of labor. by this
is not to be understood occasional, but regular and habitual
energy. the third element which determines the productiveness
of the labor of a community is the skill and knowledge
therein existing, whether it be the skill and knowledge
of the laborers themselves or of those who direct their labor.
that the productiveness of the labor of a people is limited
by their knowledge of the arts of life is self-evident, and
that any progress in those arts, any improved application of
the objects or powers of nature to industrial uses, enables the
same quantity and intensity of labor to raise a greater produce.
one principal department of these improvements
consists in the invention and use of tools and machinery.
the deficiency of practical good sense, which renders the
majority of the laboring-class such bad calculators—which
makes, for instance, their domestic economy so improvident,
lax, and irregular—must disqualify them for any but a low
grade of intelligent labor, and render their industry far less
productive than with equal energy it otherwise might be.
[pg ]
the moral qualities of the laborers are fully as important to
the efficiency and worth of their labor as the intellectual.
independently of the effects of intemperance upon their bodily
and mental faculties, and of flighty, unsteady habits upon
the energy and continuity of their work (points so easily
understood as not to require being insisted upon), it is well
worthy of meditation how much of the aggregate effect of
their labor depends on their trustworthiness.
among the secondary causes which determine the productiveness
of productive agents, the most important is security.
by security i mean the completeness of the protection
which society affords to its members.
§ . combination and division of labor increase productiveness.
in the enumeration of the circumstances which promote
the productiveness of labor, we have left one untouched,
which is co-operation, or the combined action of numbers.
of this great aid to production, a single department, known
by the name of division of labor, has engaged a large share
of the attention of political economists; most deservedly, indeed,
but to the exclusion of other cases and exemplifications
of the same comprehensive law. in the lifting of heavy
weights, for example, in the felling of trees, in the sawing
of timber, in the gathering of much hay or corn during a
short period of fine weather, in draining a large extent of
land during the short season when such a work may be properly
conducted, in the pulling of ropes on board ship, in the
rowing of large boats, in some mining operations, in the
erection of a scaffolding for building, and in the breaking of
stones for the repair of a road, so that the whole of the road
shall always be kept in good order: in all these simple operations,
and thousands more, it is absolutely necessary that
many persons should work together, at the same time, in the
same place, and in the same way. [but] in the present state of
society, the breeding and feeding of sheep is the occupation
of one set of people; dressing the wool to prepare it for the
spinner is that of another; spinning it into thread, of a third;
weaving the thread into broadcloth, of a fourth; dyeing the
cloth, of a fifth; making it into a coat, of a sixth; without
[pg ]
counting the multitude of carriers, merchants, factors, and
retailers put in requisition at the successive stages of this
progress.
without some separation of employments, very few things
would be produced at all. suppose a set of persons, or a
number of families, all employed precisely in the same manner;
each family settled on a piece of its own land, on which
it grows by its labor the food required for its own sustenance,
and, as there are no persons to buy any surplus produce where
all are producers, each family has to produce within itself
whatever other articles it consumes. in such circumstances,
if the soil was tolerably fertile, and population did not tread
too closely on the heels of subsistence, there would be, no
doubt, some kind of domestic manufactures; clothing for the
family might, perhaps, be spun and woven within it, by the
labor, probably, of the women (a first step in the separation
of employments); and a dwelling of some sort would be
erected and kept in repair by their united labor. but beyond
simple food (precarious, too, from the variations of the seasons),
coarse clothing, and very imperfect lodging, it would
be scarcely possible that the family should produce anything
more.
suppose that a company of artificers, provided with tools,
and with food sufficient to maintain them for a year, arrive in
the country and establish themselves in the midst of the population.
these new settlers occupy themselves in producing
articles of use or ornament adapted to the taste of a simple
people; and before their food is exhausted they have produced
these in considerable quantity, and are ready to exchange
them for more food. the economical position of
the landed population is now most materially altered. they
have an opportunity given them of acquiring comforts and
luxuries. things which, while they depended solely upon
their own labor, they never could have obtained, because
they could not have produced, are now accessible to them if
they can succeed in producing an additional quantity of food
and necessaries. they are thus incited to increase the productiveness
[pg ]
of their industry. the new settlers constitute
what is called a market for surplus agricultural produce; and
their arrival has enriched the settlement, not only by the
manufactured articles which they produce, but by the food
which would not have been produced unless they had been
there to consume it.
there is no inconsistency between this doctrine and the
proposition we before
maintained, that a market for commodities
does not constitute employment for labor. the labor of
the agriculturists was already provided with employment;
they are not indebted to the demand of the new-comers for
being able to maintain themselves. what that demand does
for them is to call their labor into increased vigor and efficiency;
to stimulate them, by new motives, to new exertions.
from these considerations it appears that a country will
seldom have a productive agriculture unless it has a large
town population, or, the only available substitute, a large export
trade in agricultural produce to supply a population
elsewhere. i use the phrase “town population” for shortness,
to imply a population non-agricultural.
it is found that the productive power of labor is increased
by carrying the separation further and further; by
breaking down more and more every process of industry
into parts, so that each laborer shall confine himself to an
ever smaller number of simple operations. and thus, in
time, arise those remarkable cases of what is called the division
of labor, with which all readers on subjects of this nature
are familiar. adam smith's illustration from pin-making,
though so well known, is so much to the point that i
will venture once more to transcribe it: “the business of
making a pin is divided into about eighteen distinct operations.
one man draws out the wire, another straights it, a
third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top
for receiving the head; to make the head requires two or
three distinct operations; to put it on, is a peculiar business;
[pg ]
to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself
to put them into the paper.... i have seen a small manufactory
where ten men only were employed, and where some
of them, consequently, performed two or three distinct operations.
but though they were very poor, and therefore but
indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery,
they could, when they exerted themselves, make among
them about twelve pounds of pins in a day. there are in a
pound upward of four thousand pins of a middling size.
those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upward
of forty-eight thousand pins in a day. each person,
therefore, making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins,
might be considered as making four thousand eight hundred
pins in a day. but if they had all wrought separately
and independently, and without any of them having been
educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could not
each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a
day.”
§ . advantages of division of labor.
the causes of the increased efficiency given to labor
by the division of employments are some of them too familiar
to require specification; but it is worth while to attempt
a complete enumeration of them. by adam smith they
are reduced to three: “first, the increase of dexterity in
every particular workman; secondly, the saving of the time
which is commonly lost in passing from one species of work
to another; and, lastly, the invention of a great number of
machines which facilitate and abridge labor, and enable one
man to do the work of many.”
(.) of these, the increase of dexterity of the individual
workman is the most obvious and universal. it does not follow
that because a thing has been done oftener it will be
done better. that depends on the intelligence of the workman,
and on the degree in which his mind works along with
his hands. but it will be done more easily. this is as true
of mental operations as of bodily. even a child, after much
practice, sums up a column of figures with a rapidity which
resembles intuition. the act of speaking any language, of
[pg ]
reading fluently, of playing music at sight, are cases as remarkable
as they are familiar. among bodily acts, dancing,
gymnastic exercises, ease and brilliancy of execution on a
musical instrument, are examples of the rapidity and facility
acquired by repetition. in simpler manual operations the
effect is, of course, still sooner produced.
(.) the second advantage enumerated by adam smith as
arising from the division of labor is one on which i can not
help thinking that more stress is laid by him and others than
it deserves. to do full justice to his opinion, i will quote
his own exposition of it: “it is impossible to pass very
quickly from one kind of work to another, that is carried on
in a different place, and with quite different tools. a country
weaver, who cultivates a small farm, must lose a good
deal of time in passing from his loom to the field, and from
the field to his loom. when the two trades can be carried
on in the same workhouse, the loss of time is no doubt much
less. it is even in this case, however, very considerable. a
man commonly saunters a little in turning his hand from one
sort of employment to another.” i am very far from implying
that these considerations are of no weight; but i
think there are counter-considerations which are overlooked.
if one kind of muscular or mental labor is different from
another, for that very reason it is to some extent a rest from
that other; and if the greatest vigor is not at once obtained
in the second occupation, neither could the first have been
indefinitely prolonged without some relaxation of energy.
it is a matter of common experience that a change of occupation
will often afford relief where complete repose would
otherwise be necessary, and that a person can work many
more hours without fatigue at a succession of occupations,
than if confined during the whole time to one. different
occupations employ different muscles, or different energies
of the mind, some of which rest and are refreshed while
[pg ]
others work. bodily labor itself rests from mental, and
conversely. the variety itself has an invigorating effect on
what, for want of a more philosophical appellation, we must
term the animal spirits—so important to the efficiency of
all work not mechanical, and not unimportant even to that.
(.) the third advantage attributed by adam smith to the
division of labor is, to a certain extent, real. inventions
tending to save labor in a particular operation are more likely
to occur to any one in proportion as his thoughts are intensely
directed to that occupation, and continually employed
upon it.
this also can not be wholly true. “the founder of the
cotton manufacture was a barber. the inventor of the power-loom
was a clergyman. a farmer devised the application of the
screw-propeller. a fancy-goods shopkeeper is one of the most
enterprising experimentalists in agriculture. the most remarkable
architectural design of our day has been furnished by a
gardener. the first person who supplied london with water
was a goldsmith. the first extensive maker of english roads
was a blind man, bred to no trade. the father of english inland
navigation was a duke, and his engineer was a millwright. the
first great builder of iron bridges was a stone-mason, and the
greatest railway engineer commenced his life as a colliery
engineer.”
(.) the greatest advantage (next to the dexterity of the
workmen) derived from the minute division of labor which
takes place in modern manufacturing industry, is one not
mentioned by adam smith, but to which attention has been
drawn by mr. babbage: the more economical distribution of
labor by classing the work-people according to their capacity.
different parts of the same series of operations require unequal
degrees of skill and bodily strength; and those who
have skill enough for the most difficult, or strength enough
for the hardest parts of the labor, are made much more useful
by being employed solely in them; the operations which
everybody is capable of being left to those who are fit for
no others.
[pg ]
the division of labor, as all writers on the subject have
remarked, is limited by the extent of the market. if, by
the separation of pin-making into ten distinct employments,
forty-eight thousand pins can be made in a day, this separation
will only be advisable if the number of accessible consumers
is such as to require, every day, something like
forty-eight thousand pins. if there is only a demand for
twenty-four thousand, the division of labor can only be advantageously
carried to the extent which will every day produce
that smaller number. the increase of the general
riches of the world, when accompanied with freedom of
commercial intercourse, improvements in navigation, and inland
communication by roads, canals, or railways, tends to
give increased productiveness to the labor of every nation
in particular, by enabling each locality to supply with its
special products so much larger a market that a great extension
of the division of labor in their production is an ordinary
consequence. the division of labor is also limited, in
many cases, by the nature of the employment. agriculture,
for example, is not susceptible of so great a division of occupations
as many branches of manufactures, because its different
operations can not possibly be simultaneous.
(.) “in the examples given above the advantage obtained
was derived from the mere fact of the separation of employments,
altogether independently of the mode in which the
separated employments were distributed among the persons
carrying them on, as well as of the places in which they were
conducted. but a further gain arises when the employments
are of a kind which, in order to their effective performance,
call for special capacities in the workman, or special natural
resources in the scene of operation. there would be a manifest
waste of special power in compelling to a mere mechanical
or routine pursuit a man who is fitted to excel in a professional
career; and similarly, if a branch of industry were established
on some site which offered greater facilities to an industry of
another sort, a waste, analogous in character, would be incurred.
in a word, while a great number of the occupations
in which men engage are such as, with proper preparation for
them, might equally well be carried on by any of those engaged
in them, or in any of the localities in which they are
respectively established, there are others which demand for
[pg ]
their effective performance special personal qualifications and
special local conditions; and the general effectiveness of productive
industry will, other things being equal, be proportioned
to the completeness with which the adaptation is accomplished
between occupation on the one hand and individuals and localities
on the other.”
§ . production on a large and production on a small scale.
whenever it is essential to the greatest efficiency of
labor that many laborers should combine, the scale of the
enterprise must be such as to bring many laborers together,
and the capital must be large enough to maintain them.
still more needful is this when the nature of the employment
allows, and the extent of the possible market encourages,
a considerable division of labor. the larger the
enterprise the further the division of labor may be carried.
this is one of the principal causes of large manufactories.
every increase of business would enable the
whole to be carried on with a proportionally smaller amount
of labor.
as a general rule, the expenses of a business do not increase
by any means proportionally to the quantity of business.
let us take as an example a set of operations which we
are accustomed to see carried on by one great establishment,
that of the post-office. suppose that the business, let us
say only of the letter-post, instead of being centralized in a
single concern, were divided among five or six competing
companies. each of these would be obliged to maintain
almost as large an establishment as is now sufficient for the
whole. since each must arrange for receiving and delivering
letters in all parts of the town, each must send letter-carriers
into every street, and almost every alley, and this,
too, as many times in the day as is now done by the post-office,
if the service is to be as well performed. each must
have an office for receiving letters in every neighborhood,
with all subsidiary arrangements for collecting the letters
from the different offices and redistributing them. to this
must be added the much greater number of superior officers
[pg ]
who would be required to check and control the subordinates,
implying not only a greater cost in salaries for such responsible
officers, but the necessity, perhaps, of being satisfied in
many instances with an inferior standard of qualification,
and so failing in the object.
whether or not the advantages obtained by operating on
a large scale preponderate in any particular case over the
more watchful attention and greater regard to minor gains
and losses usually found in small establishments, can be ascertained,
in a state of free competition, by an unfailing test.
wherever there are large and small establishments in the
same business, that one of the two which in existing circumstances
carries on the production at greatest advantage will
be able to undersell the other. the power of permanently
underselling can only, generally speaking, be derived from
increased effectiveness of labor; and this, when obtained by
a more extended division of employment, or by a classification
tending to a better economy of skill, always implies a
greater produce from the same labor, and not merely the
same produce from less labor; it increases not the surplus
only, but the gross produce of industry. if an increased
quantity of the particular article is not required, and part of
the laborers in consequence lose their employment, the capital
which maintained and employed them is also set at
liberty, and the general produce of the country is increased
by some other application of their labor.
a considerable part of the saving of labor effected by
substituting the large system of production for the small, is
the saving in the labor of the capitalists themselves. if a
hundred producers with small capitals carry on separately
the same business, the superintendence of each concern will
probably require the whole attention of the person conducting
it, sufficiently, at least, to hinder his time or thoughts
from being disposable for anything else; while a single
manufacturer possessing a capital equal to the sum of theirs,
with ten or a dozen clerks, could conduct the whole of their
amount of business, and have leisure, too, for other occupations.
[pg ]
production on a large scale is greatly promoted by the
practice of forming a large capital by the combination of
many small contributions; or, in other words, by the formation
of stock companies. the advantages of the principle are
important, [since] () many undertakings require an amount
of capital beyond the means of the richest individual or private
partnership. [of course] the government can alone be
looked to for any of those works for which a great combination
of means is requisite, because it can obtain those means
by compulsory taxation, and is already accustomed to the
conduct of large operations. for reasons, however, which
are tolerably well known, government agency for the conduct
of industrial operations is generally one of the least
eligible of resources when any other is available. of [the
advantages referred to above] one of the most important is
() that which relates to the intellectual and active qualifications
of the directing head. the stimulus of individual
interest is some security for exertion, but exertion is of little
avail if the intelligence exerted is of an inferior order, which
it must necessarily be in the majority of concerns carried
on by the persons chiefly interested in them. where the
concern is large, and can afford a remuneration sufficient to
attract a class of candidates superior to the common average,
it is possible to select for the general management, and for all
the skilled employments of a subordinate kind, persons of a
degree of acquirement and cultivated intelligence which more
than compensates for their inferior interest in the result. it
must be further remarked that it is not a necessary consequence
of joint-stock management that the persons employed,
whether in superior or in subordinate offices, should
be paid wholly by fixed salaries. in the case of the managers
of joint-stock companies, and of the superintending and
controlling officers in many private establishments, it is a
common enough practice to connect their pecuniary interest
with the interest of their employers, by giving them part
of their remuneration in the form of a percentage on the
profits.
[pg ]
the possibility of substituting the large system of production
for the small depends, of course, in the first place, on
the extent of the market. the large system can only be advantageous
when a large amount of business is to be done:
it implies, therefore, either a populous and flourishing community,
or a great opening for exportation.
in the countries in which there are the largest markets,
the widest diffusion of commercial confidence and enterprise,
the greatest annual increase of capital, and the greatest number
of large capitals owned by individuals, there is a tendency
to substitute more and more, in one branch of industry
after another, large establishments for small ones. these
are almost always able to undersell the smaller tradesmen,
partly, it is understood, by means of division of labor, and
the economy occasioned by limiting the employment of
skilled agency to cases where skill is required; and partly,
no doubt, by the saving of labor arising from the great scale
of the transactions; as it costs no more time, and not much
more exertion of mind, to make a large purchase, for example,
than a small one, and very much less than to make a
number of small ones. with a view merely to production,
and to the greatest efficiency of labor, this change is wholly
beneficial.
a single large company very often, instead of being a
monopoly, is generally better than two large companies; for
there is little likelihood of competition and lower prices when
the competitors are so few as to be able to agree not to compete.
as mr. mill says in regard to parallel railroads: “no one can
desire to see the enormous waste of capital and land (not to
speak of increased nuisance) involved in the construction of a
second railway to connect the same places already united by
an existing one; while the two would not do the work better
than it could be done by one, and after a short time would
probably be amalgamated.” the actual tendency of charges
to diminish on the railways, before the matter of parallel railways
was suggested is clearly seen by reference to chart v
(p. ).
[pg ]
chapter vii. of the law of the increase of labor.
§ . the law of the increase of production depends on those of three
elements—labor. capital, and land.
production is not a fixed but an increasing thing.
when not kept back by bad institutions, or a low state of
the arts of life, the produce of industry has usually tended to
increase; stimulated not only by the desire of the producers
to augment their means of consumption, but by the increasing
number of the consumers.
we have seen that the essential requisites of production
are three—labor, capital, and natural agents; the term capital
including all external and physical requisites which are
products of labor, the term natural agents all those which are
not. the increase of production, therefore, depends on the
properties of these elements. it is a result of the increase
either of the elements themselves, or of their productiveness.
we proceed to consider the three elements successively, with
reference to this effect; or, in other words, the law of the
increase of production, viewed in respect of its dependence,
first on labor, secondly on capital, and lastly on land.
§ . the law of population.
the increase of labor is the increase of mankind; of
population. the power of multiplication inherent in all
organic life may be regarded as infinite. there are many
species of vegetables of which a single plant will produce in
one year the germs of a thousand; if only two come to maturity,
in fourteen years the two will have multiplied to sixteen
thousand and more. it is but a moderate case of fecundity
in animals to be capable of quadrupling their numbers
in a single year; if they only do as much in half a century,
[pg ]
ten thousand will have swelled within two centuries to upward
to two millions and a half. the capacity of increase is
necessarily in a geometrical progression: the numerical ratio
alone is different.
to this property of organized beings, the human species
forms no exception. its power of increase is indefinite, and
the actual multiplication would be extraordinarily rapid, if
the power were exercised to the utmost. it never is exercised
to the utmost, and yet, in the most favorable circumstances
known to exist, which are those of a fertile region
colonized from an industrious and civilized community,
population has continued, for several generations, independently
of fresh immigration, to double itself in not much
more than twenty years.
years.population.food. millsx millsx millsx millsx millsx
by this table it will be seen that if
population can double itself in twenty-five
years, and if food can only be increased
by as much as x (the subsistence
of eleven millions) by additional application
of another equal quantity of labor on
the same land in each period, then at the
end of one hundred years there would be
the disproportion of one hundred and seventy-six
millions of people, with subsistence
for only fifty-five millions. of course, this is prevented
either by checking population to the amount of the subsistence;
by sending off the surplus population; or by bringing in
food from new lands.
in the united states to  population has doubled itself
about every twenty years, while in france there is practically
no increase of population. it is stated that the white population
of the united states between  and  increased
. per cent, deducting immigration. the extraordinary
advance of population with us, where subsistence is easily attainable,
is to be seen in the chart on the next page (no. iii),
which shows the striking rapidity of increase in the united
states when compared with the older countries of europe. the
steady demand for land can be seen by the gradual westward
movement of the center of population, as seen in chart no. iv
(p. ), and by the rapid settlement of the distant parts of
our country, as shown by the two charts (frontispieces), which
represent to the eye by heavier colors the areas of the more
densely settled districts in  and in .
[pg ]
chart iii: population of european countries, xixth century.
[pg ]
§ . by what checks the increase of population is practically limited.
the obstacle to a just understanding of the subject
arises from too confused a notion of the causes which, at
most times and places, keep the actual increase of mankind
so far behind the capacity.
the conduct of human creatures is more or less influenced
by foresight of consequences, and by some impulses superior
to mere animal instincts; and they do not, therefore, propagate
like swine, but are capable, though in very unequal
degrees, of being withheld by prudence, or by the social
affections, from giving existence to beings born only to misery
and premature death.
malthus found an explanation of the anomaly that in the
swiss villages, with the longest average duration of life, there
were the fewest births, by noting that no one married until a
cow-herd's cottage became vacant, and precisely because the
tenants lived so long were the new-comers long kept out of a
place.
in proportion as mankind rise above the condition of the
beast, population is restrained by the fear of want, rather
than by want itself. even where there is no question of
starvation, many are similarly acted upon by the apprehension
of losing what have come to be regarded as the decencies
of their situation in life. among the middle classes, in
many individual instances, there is an additional restraint
exercised from the desire of doing more than maintaining
their circumstances—of improving them; but such a desire
is rarely found, or rarely has that effect, in the laboring-classes.
if they can bring up a family as they were themselves
brought up, even the prudent among them are usually
satisfied. too often they do not think even of that, but rely
on fortune, or on the resources to be found in legal or voluntary
charity.
chart iv: westward movement of center of population.
this, in effect, is the well-known malthusian doctrine. the
thorough reader will also consult the original “essay” of malthus.
mr. bowen
and other writers oppose it, saying it has
[pg ]
“no relation to the times
in which we live, or to any
which are near at hand.”
he thinks the productive
power of the whole world
prevents the necessity of
considering the pressure of
population upon subsistence
as an actuality now or in
the future. this, however,
does not deny the existence
of malthus's principles, but
opposes them only on the
methods of their action. mr.
rickards holds that man's
food—as, e.g., wheat—has
the power to increase geometrically
faster than man;
but he omits to consider that
for the growth of this food
land is demanded; that land
is not capable of such geometrical
increase; and that
without it the food can not
be grown. of course, any
extension of the land area,
as happened when england
abolished the corn laws and
drew her food from our prairies,
removes the previous
pressure of population on
subsistence. no believer in
the malthusian doctrine is
so absurd as to hold that
the growth of population
actually exceeds subsistence,
but that there is a
“constant tendency in all animated life to increase beyond the
nourishment prepared for it,” no one can possibly doubt. this
is not inconsistent with the fact that subsistence has at any time
increased faster than population. it is as if a block of wood
on the floor were acted on by two opposing forces, one tending
to move it forward, one backward: if it moves backward, that
does not prove the absence of any force working to move it forward,
but only that the other force is the stronger of the two,
[pg ]
and that the final motion is the resultant of the two forces. it
is only near-sighted generalization to say that since the block
moves forward, there is therefore no opposing force to its advance.
mr. doubleday maintains that, as people become better
fed, they become unprolific. mr. mill's answer, referring to
the large families of the english peerage, is unfortunate. in
sweden the increase of the peasantry is six times that of the
middle classes, and fourteen times that of the nobility. the
diminishing fertility of new england families gives a truer
explanation, when it is seen that with the progress in material
wealth later marriages are the rule. when new-englanders
emigrate to the western states, where labor is in demand and
where it is less burdensome to have large families, there is no
question as to their fertility.
(.) in a very backward state of society, like that of
europe in the middle ages, and many parts of asia at present,
population is kept down by actual starvation. the
starvation does not take place in ordinary years, but in seasons
of scarcity, which in those states of society are much
more frequent and more extreme than europe is now accustomed
to. (.) in a more improved state, few, even among
the poorest of the people, are limited to actual necessaries,
and to a bare sufficiency of those: and the increase is kept
within bounds, not by excess of deaths, but by limitation of
births.
the limitation is brought about in various ways.
in some countries, it is the result of prudent or conscientious
self-restraint. there is a condition to which the laboring-people
are habituated; they perceive that, by having too
numerous families, they must sink below that condition, or
fail to transmit it to their children; and this they do not
choose to submit to.
there are other cases in which the prudence and forethought,
which perhaps might not be exercised by the people
[pg ]
themselves, are exercised by the state for their benefit; marriage
not being permitted until the contracting parties can
show that they have the prospect of a comfortable support.
there are places, again, in which the restraining cause seems
to be not so much individual prudence, as some general
and perhaps even accidental habit of the country. in the
rural districts of england, during the last century, the
growth of population was very effectually repressed by the
difficulty of obtaining a cottage to live in. it was the custom
for unmarried laborers to lodge and board with their
employers; it was the custom for married laborers to have a
cottage: and the rule of the english poor-laws, by which a
parish was charged with the support of its unemployed poor,
rendered land-owners averse to promote marriage. about
the end of the century, the great demand for men in war
and manufactures made it be thought a patriotic thing to
encourage population: and about the same time the growing
inclination of farmers to live like rich people, favored as it
was by a long period of high prices, made them desirous of
keeping inferiors at a greater distance, and, pecuniary motives
arising from abuses of the poor-laws being superadded,
they gradually drove their laborers into cottages, which the
landowners now no longer refused permission to build.
it is but rarely that improvements in the condition of
the laboring-classes do anything more than give a temporary
margin, speedily filled up by an increase of their numbers.
unless, either by their general improvement in intellectual
and moral culture, or at least by raising their habitual standard
of comfortable living, they can be taught to make a better
use of favorable circumstances, nothing permanent can
be done for them; the most promising schemes end only in
having a more numerous but not a happier people. there
is no doubt that [the standard] is gradually, though slowly,
rising in the more advanced countries of western europe.
[pg ]
subsistence and employment in england have never increased
more rapidly than in the last forty years, but every
census since  showed a smaller proportional increase of
population than that of the period preceding; and the produce
of french agriculture and industry is increasing in a progressive
ratio, while the population exhibits, in every quinquennial
census, a smaller proportion of births to the population.
this brings forward the near connection between land-tenures
and population. france is pre-eminently a country of
small holdings, and it is undoubtedly true that the system has
checked the thoughtless increase of numbers. on his few hectares,
the french peasant sees in the size of his farm and the
amount of its produce the limit of subsistence for himself and
his family; as in no other way does he see beforehand the results
of any lack of food from his lack of prudence. from
 to  the average yearly increase of population was
,; from  to , the golden age of french agriculture,
,; from  to , when agriculture was not
prosperous, ,; from  to  the increase has been
not more than , yearly. in france the question shapes
itself to the peasant proprietor, how many can be subsisted by
the amount of produce, not on an unlimited area of land in
other parts of the world, but on this particular property of a
small size? while in england there are ten births to six deaths,
in france there are about ten births to every nine deaths. in
no country has the doctrine of malthus been more attacked
than in france, and yet in no other country has there been a
more marked obedience to its principles in actual practice.
since the french are practically not at all an emigrating people,
population has strictly adapted itself to subsistence. for
the relative increase of population in france and the united
states, see also the movement of lines indicating the increase
of population in chart no. iii (p. ).
[pg ]
chapter viii. of the law of the increase of capital.
§ . means for saving in the surplus above necessaries.
the requisites of production being labor, capital, and
land, it has been seen from the preceding chapter that the
impediments to the increase of production do not arise from
the first of these elements. but production has other requisites,
and, of these, the one which we shall next consider is
capital. there can not be more people in any country, or
in the world, than can be supported from the produce of
past labor until that of present labor comes in [although it
is not to be supposed that capital consists wholly of food].
we have next, therefore, to inquire into the conditions of the
increase of capital: the causes by which the rapidity of its
increase is determined, and the necessary limitations of that
increase.
since all capital is the product of saving, that is, of abstinence
from present consumption for the sake of a future
good, the increase of capital must depend upon two things—the
amount of the fund from which saving can be made,
and the strength of the dispositions which prompt to it.
[pg ]
(.) the fund from which saving can be made is the surplus
of the produce of labor, after supplying the necessaries
of life to all concerned in the production (including those
employed in replacing the materials, and keeping the fixed
capital in repair). more than this surplus can not be saved
under any circumstances. as much as this, though it never
is saved, always might be. this surplus is the fund from
which the enjoyments, as distinguished from the necessaries
of the producers, are provided; it is the fund from which all
are subsisted who are not themselves engaged in production,
and from which all additions are made to capital. the
capital of the employer forms the revenue of the laborers,
and, if this exceeds the necessaries of life, it gives them a
surplus which they may either expend in enjoyments or save.
it is evident that the whole unproductive consumption of the
laborer can be saved. when it is considered how enormous a
sum is spent by the working-classes in drink alone (and also
in the great reserves of the trades-unions collected for purposes
of strikes), it is indisputable that the laborers have the
margin from which savings can be made, and by which they
themselves may become capitalists. the great accumulations
in the savings-banks by small depositors in the united states
also show somewhat how much is actually saved. in -
there were ,, persons who had deposited in the savings-banks
of the united states $,,,, with an average to
each depositor of $.. the unproductive consumption,
however, of all classes—not merely that of the working-men—is
the possible fund which may be saved. that being the
amount which can be saved, how much will be saved depends
on the strength of the desire to save.
the greater the produce of labor after supporting the
laborers, the more there is which can be saved. the same
thing also partly contributes to determine how much will be
saved. a part of the motive to saving consists in the prospect
of deriving an income from savings; in the fact that
capital, employed in production, is capable of not only reproducing
itself but yielding an increase. the greater the
profit that can be made from capital, the stronger is the motive
to its accumulation.
[pg ]
§ . motive for saving in the surplus above necessaries.
but the disposition to save does not wholly depend
on the external inducement to it; on the amount of profit
to be made from savings. with the same pecuniary inducement,
the inclination is very different, in different persons,
and in different communities.
(.) all accumulation involves the sacrifice of a present,
for the sake of a future good.
this is the fundamental motive underlying the effective
desire of accumulation, and is far more important than any
other. it is, in short, the test of civilization. in order to induce
the laboring-classes to improve their condition and save
capital, it is absolutely necessary to excite in them (by education
or religion) a belief in a future gain greater than the present
sacrifice. it is, to be sure, the whole problem of creating
character, and belongs to sociology and ethics rather than to
political economy.
in weighing the future against the present, the uncertainty
of all things future is a leading element; and that uncertainty
is of very different degrees. “all circumstances,”
therefore, “increasing the probability of the provision
we make for futurity being enjoyed by ourselves or others,
tend” justly and reasonably “to give strength to the effective
desire of accumulation. thus a healthy climate or occupation,
by increasing the probability of life, has a tendency
to add to this desire. when engaged in safe occupations
and living in healthy countries, men are much more
apt to be frugal, than in unhealthy or hazardous occupations
and in climates pernicious to human life. sailors and soldiers
are prodigals. in the west indies, new orleans, the
east indies, the expenditure of the inhabitants is profuse.
the same people, coming to reside in the healthy parts of
europe, and not getting into the vortex of extravagant fashion,
live economically. war and pestilence have always
waste and luxury among the other evils that follow in their
train. for similar reasons, whatever gives security to the
affairs of the community is favorable to the strength of this
principle. in this respect the general prevalence of law and
[pg ]
order and the prospect of the continuance of peace and tranquillity
have considerable influence.”
it is asserted that the prevalence of homicide in certain
parts of the united states has had a vital influence in retarding
the material growth of those sections. the southern states
have received but a very small fraction (from ten to thirteen
per cent) of foreign immigration. “a country where law and
order prevail to perfection may find its material prosperity
checked by a deadly and fatal climate; or, on the other
hand, a people may destroy all the advantages accruing from
matchless natural resources and climate by persistent disregard
of life and property. a rather startling confirmation of this
economic truth is afforded by the fact that homicide has been
as destructive of life in the south as yellow fever. although
there have been forty thousand deaths from yellow fever since
the war, the deaths from homicide, for the same period, have
been even greater.”
the influence of the old slave régime,
and its still existing influences, in checking foreign immigration
into the south can be seen by the colored chart, no. viii,
showing the relative density of foreign-born inhabitants in the
several parts of the united states. the deeper color shows
the greater foreign-born population.
the more perfect the security, the greater will be the
effective strength of the desire of accumulation. where
property is less safe, or the vicissitudes ruinous to fortunes
are more frequent and severe, fewer persons will save at all,
and, of those who do, many will require the inducement of a
higher rate of profit on capital to make them prefer a doubtful
future to the temptation of present enjoyment.
in the circumstances, for example, of a hunting tribe,
“man may be said to be necessarily improvident, and regardless
of futurity, because, in this state, the future presents
nothing which can be with certainty either foreseen or
governed.... besides a want of the motives exciting to
provide for the needs of futurity through means of the abilities
of the present, there is a want of the habits of perception
[pg ]
and action, leading to a constant connection in the mind of
those distant points, and of the series of events serving to
unite them. even, therefore, if motives be awakened capable
of producing the exertion necessary to effect this connection,
there remains the task of training the mind to think and
act so as to establish it.”
§ . examples of deficiency in the strength of this desire.
for instance: “upon the banks of the st. lawrence
there are several little indian villages. the cleared
land is rarely, i may almost say never, cultivated, nor are any
inroads made in the forest for such a purpose. the soil is,
nevertheless, fertile, and, were it not, manure lies in heaps
by their houses. were every family to inclose half an acre
of ground, till it, and plant it in potatoes and maize, it would
yield a sufficiency to support them one half the year. they
suffer, too, every now and then, extreme want, insomuch
that, joined to occasional intemperance, it is rapidly reducing
their numbers. this, to us, so strange apathy proceeds not,
in any great degree, from repugnance to labor; on the contrary,
they apply very diligently to it when its reward is
immediate. it is evidently not the necessary labor that is
the obstacle to more extended culture, but the distant return
from that labor. i am assured, indeed, that among some of
the more remote tribes, the labor thus expended much exceeds
that given by the whites. on the indian, succeeding
years are too distant to make sufficient impression; though,
to obtain what labor may bring about in the course of a few
months, he toils even more assiduously than the white man.”
this view of things is confirmed by the experience of
the jesuits, in their interesting efforts to civilize the indians
of paraguay. the real difficulty was the improvidence of
the people; their inability to think for the future; and the
necessity accordingly of the most unremitting and minute
superintendence on the part of their instructors. “thus at
first, if these gave up to them the care of the oxen with
which they plowed, their indolent thoughtlessness would
probably leave them at evening still yoked to the implement.
worse than this, instances occurred where they cut them up
[pg ]
for supper, thinking, when reprehended, that they sufficiently
excused themselves by saying they were hungry.”
as an example intermediate, in the strength of the effective
desire of accumulation, between the state of things thus
depicted and that of modern europe, the case of the chinese
deserves attention. “durability is one of the chief qualities,
marking a high degree of the effective desire of accumulation.
the testimony of travelers ascribes to the instruments
formed by the chinese a very inferior durability to
similar instruments constructed by europeans. the houses,
we are told, unless of the higher ranks, are in general of
unburnt bricks, of clay, or of hurdles plastered with earth;
the roofs, of reeds fastened to laths. a greater degree of
strength in the effective desire of accumulation would cause
them to be constructed of materials requiring a greater present
expenditure, but being far more durable. from the same
cause, much land, that in other countries would be cultivated,
lies waste. all travelers take notice of large tracts of lands,
chiefly swamps, which continue in a state of nature. to
bring a swamp into tillage is generally a process to complete
which requires several years. it must be previously
drained, the surface long exposed to the sun, and many
operations performed, before it can be made capable of bearing
a crop. though yielding, probably, a very considerable
return for the labor bestowed on it, that return is not made
until a long time has elapsed. the cultivation of such land
implies a greater strength of the effective desire of accumulation
than exists in the empire. the amount of self-denial
would seem to be small. it is their great deficiency in forethought
and frugality in this respect which is the cause of
the scarcities and famines that frequently occur.”
that it is defect of providence, not defect of industry,
that limits production among the chinese, is still more
obvious than in the case of the semi-agriculturized indians.
“where the returns are quick, where the instruments formed
require but little time to bring the events for which they
were formed to an issue,” it is well known that “the great
[pg ]
progress which has been made in the knowledge of the arts
suited to the nature of the country and the wants of its inhabitants”
makes industry energetic and effective. “what
marks the readiness with which labor is forced to form the
most difficult materials into instruments, where these instruments
soon bring to an issue the events for which they are
formed, is the frequent occurrence, on many of their lakes
and rivers, of structures resembling the floating gardens of
the peruvians, rafts covered with vegetable soil and cultivated.
labor in this way draws from the materials on which
it acts very speedy returns. nothing can exceed the luxuriance
of vegetation when the quickening powers of a
genial sun are ministered to by a rich soil and abundant
moisture. it is otherwise, as we have seen, in cases where
the return, though copious, is distant. european travelers are
surprised at meeting these little floating farms by the side of
swamps which only require draining to render them tillable.”
when a country has carried production as far as in the
existing state of knowledge it can be carried with an amount
of return corresponding to the average strength of the effective
desire of accumulation in that country, it has reached
what is called the stationary state; the state in which no
further addition will be made to capital, unless there takes
place either some improvement in the arts of production, or
an increase in the strength of the desire to accumulate. in
the stationary state, though capital does not on the whole
increase, some persons grow richer and others poorer. those
whose degree of providence is below the usual standard
become impoverished, their capital perishes, and makes room
for the savings of those whose effective desire of accumulation
exceeds the average. these become the natural purchasers
of the lands, manufactories, and other instruments of
production owned by their less provident countrymen.
in china, if that country has really attained, as it is supposed
to have done, the stationary state, accumulation has
stopped when the returns to capital are still as high as is indicated
by a rate of interest legally twelve per cent, and practically
[pg ]
varying (it is said) between eighteen and thirty-six.
it is to be presumed, therefore, that no greater amount of capital
than the country already possesses can find employment
at this high rate of profit, and that any lower rate does not
hold out to a chinese sufficient temptation to induce him to
abstain from present enjoyment. what a contrast with
holland, where, during the most flourishing period of its
history, the government was able habitually to borrow at two
per cent, and private individuals, on good security, at three!
§ . examples of excess of this desire.
in [the united states and] the more prosperous
countries of europe, there are to be found abundance of
prodigals: still, in a very numerous portion of the community,
the professional, manufacturing, and trading classes, being
those who, generally speaking, unite more of the means with
more of the motives for saving than any other class, the spirit
of accumulation is so strong that the signs of rapidly increasing
wealth meet every eye: and the great amount of capital
seeking investment excites astonishment, whenever peculiar
circumstances turning much of it into some one channel, such
as railway construction or foreign speculative adventure, bring
the largeness of the total amount into evidence.
there are many circumstances which, in england, give
a peculiar force to the accumulating propensity. the long
exemption of the country from the ravages of war and the
far earlier period than elsewhere at which property was
secure from military violence or arbitrary spoliation have
produced a long-standing and hereditary confidence in the
safety of funds when trusted out of the owner's hands, which
in most other countries is of much more recent origin, and
less firmly established.
the growth of deposit-banking in great britain, therefore,
advances with enormous strides, while in continental countries
it makes very little headway. the disturbed condition of the
country in france, owing to wars, leads the thrifty to hoard
instead of depositing their savings. but in the united states
the same growth is seen as among the english. the net deposits
of the national banks of the united states in  were
$,,, but in  they had increased more than 
[pg ]
per cent to $,,,. deposit accounts are the rule even
with small tradesmen; and the savings-banks of massachusetts
alone show deposits in - of $,,, and those
of new york of $,,. the united states also escapes
from the heavy taxation which in europe is imposed to maintain
an extravagant army and navy chest. the effect of institutions,
moreover, in stimulating the growth of material
prosperity is far more true of the united states than of england,
for the barriers raised against the movement from lower
to higher social classes in the latter country are non-existent
here, and consequently there is more stimulus toward acquiring
the means of bettering a man's social condition.
the geographical causes which have made industry rather
than war the natural source of power and importance to
great britain [and the united states] have turned an unusual
proportion of the most enterprising and energetic characters
into the direction of manufactures and commerce;
into supplying their wants and gratifying their ambition by
producing and saving, rather than by appropriating what
has been produced and saved. much also depended on the
better political institutions of this country, which, by the
scope they have allowed to individual freedom of action,
have encouraged personal activity and self-reliance, while,
by the liberty they confer of association and combination,
they facilitate industrial enterprise on a large scale. the
same institutions, in another of their aspects, give a most
direct and potent stimulus to the desire of acquiring wealth.
the earlier decline of feudalism [in england] having removed
or much weakened invidious distinctions between the
originally trading classes and those who had been accustomed
to despise them, and a polity having grown up which made
wealth the real source of political influence, its acquisition
was invested with a factitious value independent of its intrinsic
utility. and, inasmuch as to be rich without industry
has always hitherto constituted a step in the social scale
above those who are rich by means of industry, it becomes
the object of ambition to save not merely as much as will
afford a large income while in business, but enough to retire
from business and live in affluence on realized gains.
[pg ]
in [the united states,] england, and holland, then, for a
long time past, and now in most other countries in europe,
the second requisite of increased production, increase of capital,
shows no tendency to become deficient. so far as that
element is concerned, production is susceptible of an increase
without any assignable bounds. the limitation to production,
not consisting in any necessary limit to the increase of the
other two elements, labor and capital, must turn upon the
properties of the only element which is inherently, and in
itself, limited in quantity. it must depend on the properties
of land.
[pg ]
chapter ix. of the law of the increase of production from land.
§ . the law of production from the soil, a law of diminishing return
in proportion to the increased application of labor and capital.
land differs from the other elements of production,
labor, and capital, in not being susceptible of indefinite increase.
its extent is limited, and the extent of the more
productive kinds of it more limited still. it is also evident
that the quantity of produce capable of being raised on any
given piece of land is not indefinite. this limited quantity
of land and limited productiveness of it are the real limits
to the increase of production.
the limitation to production from the properties of the
soil is not like the obstacle opposed by a wall, which stands
immovable in one particular spot, and offers no hindrance to
motion short of stopping it entirely. we may rather compare
it to a highly elastic and extensible band, which is
hardly ever so violently stretched that it could not possibly
be stretched any more, yet the pressure of which is felt long
before the final limit is reached, and felt more severely the
nearer that limit is approached.
after a certain, and not very advanced, stage in the progress
of agriculture—as soon, in fact, as mankind have applied
themselves to cultivation with any energy, and have
brought to it any tolerable tools—from that time it is the
law of production from the land, that in any given state of
agricultural skill and knowledge, by increasing the labor, the
produce is not increased in an equal degree; doubling the
labor does not double the produce; or, to express the same
thing in other words, every increase of produce is obtained
[pg ]
by a more than proportional increase in the application of
labor to the land. this general law of agricultural industry
is the most important proposition in political economy. were
the law different, nearly all the phenomena of the production
and distribution of wealth would be other than they are.
it is not generally considered that in the united states,
where in many sparsely settled parts of the country new land
is constantly being brought into cultivation, an additional population
under existing conditions of agricultural skill can be
maintained with constantly increasing returns up to a certain
point before the law of diminishing returns begins to operate.
where more laborers are necessary, and more capital wanted,
to co-operate in a new country before all the land can give its
maximum product, in such a stage of cultivation it can not be
said that the law of diminishing returns has yet practically set in.
when, for the purpose of raising an increase of produce,
recourse is had to inferior land, it is evident that, so far, the
produce does not increase in the same proportion with the
labor. the very meaning of inferior land is land which
with equal labor returns a smaller amount of produce. land
may be inferior either in fertility or in situation. the one
requires a greater proportional amount of labor for growing
the produce, the other for carrying it to market. if the land
a yields a thousand quarters of wheat to a given outlay in
wages, manure, etc., and, in order to raise another thousand,
recourse must be had to the land b, which is either less
fertile or more distant from the market, the two thousand
quarters will cost more than twice as much labor as the
original thousand, and the produce of agriculture will be
increased in a less ratio than the labor employed in procuring
it.
instead of cultivating the land b, it would be possible,
by higher cultivation, to make the land a produce more.
it might be plowed or harrowed twice instead of once, or
three times instead of twice; it might be dug instead of
being plowed; after plowing, it might be gone over with
a hoe instead of a harrow, and the soil more completely pulverized;
it might be oftener or more thoroughly weeded;
[pg ]
the implements used might be of higher finish, or more
elaborate construction; a greater quantity or more expensive
kinds of manure might be applied, or, when applied, they
might be more carefully mixed and incorporated with the soil.
the example of market-gardens in the vicinity of great
cities and towns shows how the intensive culture permits an
increase of labor and capital with larger returns. these lands,
by their situation, are superior lands for this particular purpose,
although they might be inferior lands as regards absolute
productiveness when compared with the rich wheat-lands of
dakota. new england and new jersey farms, generally
speaking, no longer attempt the culture of grains, but (when
driven out of that culture by the great railway lines which
have opened up the west) they have arranged themselves in a
scale of adaptability for stock, grass, fruit, dairy, or vegetable
farming; and have thereby given greater profits to their owners
than the same land did under the old régime. even on
lands where any grain can still be grown, corn, buckwheat, barley,
oats, and rye, cover the cultivated areas instead of wheat.
inferior lands, or lands at a greater distance from the
market, of course yield an inferior return, and an increasing
demand can not be supplied from them unless at an
augmentation of cost, and therefore of price. if the additional
demand could continue to be supplied from the superior
lands, by applying additional labor and capital, at no
greater proportional cost than that at which they yield the
quantity first demanded of them, the owners or farmers of
those lands could undersell all others, and engross the whole
market. lands of a lower degree of fertility or in a more
remote situation might indeed be cultivated by their proprietors,
for the sake of subsistence or independence; but
it never could be the interest of any one to farm them for
profit. that a profit can be made from them, sufficient to
attract capital to such an investment, is a proof that cultivation
on the more eligible lands has reached a point beyond
which any greater application of labor and capital would
yield, at the best, no greater return than can be obtained at
the same expense from less fertile or less favorably situated
lands.
[pg ]
“it is long,” says a late traveler in the united
states,
“before an english eye becomes reconciled to the lightness
of the crops and the careless farming (as we should call it)
which is apparent. one forgets that, where land is so plentiful
and labor so dear as it is here, a totally different principle
must be pursued from that which prevails in populous countries,
and that the consequence will of course be a want of
tidiness, as it were, and finish, about everything which requires
labor.” of the two causes mentioned, the plentifulness
of land seems to me the true explanation, rather than
the dearness of labor; for, however dear labor may be, when
food is wanted, labor will always be applied to producing it
in preference to anything else. but this labor is more effective
for its end by being applied to fresh soil than if it were
employed in bringing the soil already occupied into higher
cultivation.
the western movement of what might be called the “wheat-center”
is quite perceptible. until recently minnesota has
been a great wheat-producing state, and vast tracts of land
were there planted with that grain when the soil was first
broken. the profits on the first few crops have been enormous,
but it is now said to be more desirable for wheat-growers
to move onward to newer lands, and to sell the land to cultivators
of a different class (of fruit and varied products), who
produce for a denser population. so that (in ) dakota,
instead of minnesota, has become the district of the greatest
wheat production.
only when no soils remain to be broken up, but such as
either from distance or inferior quality require a considerable
rise of price to render their cultivation profitable, can it
become advantageous to apply the high farming of europe
to any american lands; except, perhaps, in the immediate
vicinity of towns, where saving in cost of carriage may compensate
for great inferiority in the return from the soil itself.
[pg ]
the principle which has now been stated must be received,
no doubt, with certain explanations and limitations.
even after the land is so highly cultivated that the mere
application of additional labor, or of an additional amount of
ordinary dressing, would yield no return proportioned to the
expense, it may still happen that the application of a much
greater additional labor and capital to improving the soil
itself, by draining or permanent manures, would be as liberally
remunerated by the produce as any portion of the labor
and capital already employed. it would sometimes be much
more amply remunerated. this could not be, if capital always
sought and found the most advantageous employment.
§ . antagonist principle to the law of diminishing return;
the progress of improvements in production.
that the produce of land increases,
cæteris paribus,
in a diminishing ratio to the increase in the labor employed,
is, as we have said (allowing for occasional and temporary
exceptions), the universal law of agricultural industry. this
principle, however, has been denied. so much so, indeed,
that (it is affirmed) the worst land now in cultivation produces
as much food per acre, and even as much to a given
amount of labor, as our ancestors contrived to extract from
the richest soils in england.
the law of diminishing returns is the physical fact upon
which the economic doctrine of rent is based, and requires careful
attention. carey asserts, instead, that there is a law of
increasing productiveness, since, as men grow in numbers and
intelligence, there arises an ability to get more from the
soil.
some objectors even deny that different grades of land are
cultivated, and that there is no need of taking inferior soils
into cultivation. if this were true, why would not one half an
acre of land be as good as a whole state? johnston says:
“in a country and among poor settlers ... poor land is a
relative term. land is called poor which is not suitable to a
poor man, which on mere clearing and burning will not yield
good first crops. thus that which is poor land for a poor man
may prove rich land to a rich man.” moreover, as is constantly
the case in our country, it often happens that a railway
may bring new lands into competition with old lands in a given
[pg ]
market; of which the most conspicuous example is the competition
of western grain-fields with the eastern farms. in
these older districts, before the competition came, there was a
given series of grades in the cultivated land; after the railway
was built there was a disarrangement of the old series, some
going out of cultivation, some remaining, and some of the new
lands entering the list. the result is a new series of grades
better suited to satisfy the wants of men.
this, however, does not prove that the law of which we
have been speaking does not exist, but only that there is
some antagonizing principle at work, capable for a time of
making head against the law. such an agency there is, in
habitual antagonism to the law of diminishing return from
land; and to the consideration of this we shall now proceed.
it is no other than the progress of civilization. the most obvious
[part of it] is the progress of agricultural knowledge, skill,
and invention. improved processes of agriculture are of two
kinds: () some enable the land to yield a greater absolute
produce, without an equivalent increase of labor; () others
have not the power of increasing the produce, but have that of
diminishing the labor and expense by which it is obtained.
(.) among the first are to be reckoned the disuse of fallows,
by means of the rotation of crops; and the introduction of new
articles of cultivation capable of entering advantageously into
the rotation. the change made in agriculture toward the
close of the last century, by the introduction of turnip-husbandry,
is spoken of as amounting to a revolution. next in
order comes the introduction of new articles of food, containing
a greater amount of sustenance, like the potato, or more
productive species or varieties of the same plant, such as the
swedish turnip. in the same class of improvements must
be placed a better knowledge of the properties of manures,
and of the most effectual modes of applying them; the introduction
of new and more powerful fertilizing agents, such as
guano, and the conversion to the same purpose of substances
previously wasted; inventions like subsoil-plowing or tile-draining,
by which the produce of some kinds of lands is so
greatly multiplied; improvements in the breed or feeding of
[pg ]
laboring cattle; augmented stock, of the animals which consume
and convert into human food what would otherwise be
wasted; and the like. (.) the other sort of improvements,
those which diminish labor, but without increasing the capacity
of the land to produce, are such as the improved construction
of tools; the introduction of new instruments which
spare manual labor, as the winnowing and thrashing machines.
these improvements do not add to the productiveness
of the land, but they are equally calculated with the
former to counteract the tendency in the cost of production
of agricultural produce, to rise with the progress of population
and demand.
§ . —in railways.
analogous in effect to this second class of agricultural
improvements are improved means of communication.
good roads are equivalent to good tools. it is of no consequence
whether the economy of labor takes place in extracting
the produce from the soil, or in conveying it to the place
where it is to be consumed.
the functions performed by railways in the system of
production is highly important. they are among the most
influential causes affecting the cost of producing commodities,
particularly those which satisfy the primary wants of man, of
which food is the chief. the amount of tonnage carried is
enormous; and the cost of this service to the producers and
consumers of the united states is a question of very great
magnitude. the serious reduction in the cost of transportation
on the railways will be a surprise to all who have not followed
the matter very closely; the more so, that it has been brought
about by natural causes, and independent of legislation. corn,
meat, and dairy products form, it is said, at least  per cent,
and coal and timber about  per cent, of the tonnage moved
on all the railways of the united states. if a lowered cost of
transportation has come about, it has then cost less to move the
main articles of immediate necessity. had the charge in 
remained as high even as it was from  to , the number
of tons carried in  would have cost the united states from
$,, to $,, more than the charge actually
made, owing to the reductions by the railways. it seems, however,
that this process of reduction culminated about . in
order to show the facts of this process, note the changes in
the following chart, no. v. the railways of the state of new
york are taken, but the same is also true of those of ohio:
[pg ]
chart v.
cost of  barrels of flour,  beef,  pork,
 bushels wheat,  corn,  oats,  pounds butter,  lard, and
 fleece wool, in new york city, at the average of each year,
compiled by months, in gold; compared graphically with the
decrease in the charge per ton per mile, on all the railroads of
the state of new york, during the same period.
year.price in gold of staple farm products. (dollars)
charge for carrying one ton one mile. (cents)
decrease in the railroad expenses per ton. (cents)
decrease in the profits of the railroads for carrying one ton.
 (cents)...
in  the charge per ton per mile was . cents, as compared with .
in .
tons moved  m. in  by railroads of n.y.
,,,at rate of , would cost$,,actual cost in ,,saving to the state$,,
[pg ]
the explanation of this reduced cost is given by mr. edward
atkinson as () the competition of water-ways, () the competition
of one railway with another, and () the competition of
other countries, which forces our railways to try to lay our
staple products down in foreign markets at a price which will
warrant continued shipment. besides these reasons, much
ought also () to be assigned to the progress of inventions and
the reduced cost of steel and all appliances necessary to the
railways.
the large importance of the railways shows itself in an
influence on general business prosperity, and as a place for
large investments of a rapidly growing capital. the building
of railways, however, has been going on, at some times with
greater speed than at others. instead of , miles of railways
at the close of our war, we have now () over ,
miles. how the additional mileage has been built year by
year, with two distinct eras of increased building—one from
 to , and another from  to —may be seen by
the shorter lines of the subjoined chart, no. vi.
that speculation has been excited at different times by the
opening up of our western country, there can be no doubt.
and if a comparison be made with chart no. xvii
(book iv,
chap. iii), which gives the total grain-crops of the united
states, it will be seen that since , although our population has
increased from -½ per cent to  per cent, our grain-crops only
 per cent, yet our railway mileage has increased  per cent.
the extent to which the united states has carried railway-building,
as compared with european countries, although we
have a very much greater area, is distinctly shown by chart
no. vii. this application of one form of improvement to
oppose the law of diminishing returns in the united states
has produced extraordinary results, especially when we consider
that we are probably not yet using all our best lands,
or, in other words, that we have not yet felt the law of diminishing
returns in some large districts.
chart vi.
miles of railroad in operation on the st january in each year, and the
miles added in the year ensuing.
year.miles of railroad.miles added.,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
railways and canals are virtually a diminution of the cost
of production of all things sent to market by them; and literally
so of all those the appliances and aids for producing
which they serve to transmit. by their means land can be
[pg ]
cultivated, which would not otherwise have remunerated the
cultivators without a rise of price. improvements in navigation
have, with respect to food or materials brought from
beyond sea, a corresponding effect.
§ . —in manufactures.
from similar considerations, it appears that many
purely mechanical improvements, which have, apparently, at
least, no peculiar connection with agriculture, nevertheless
enable a given amount of food to be obtained with a smaller
expenditure of labor. a great improvement in the process
of smelting iron would tend to cheapen agricultural implements,
diminish the cost of railroads, of wagons and carts,
ships, and perhaps buildings, and many other things to which
iron is not at present applied, because it is too costly; and
would thence diminish the cost of production of food. the
same effect would follow from an improvement in those processes
of what may be termed manufacture, to which the
material of food is subjected after it is separated from the
ground. the first application of wind or water power to
grind corn tended to cheapen bread as much as a very important
discovery in agriculture would have done; and any
great improvement in the construction of corn-mills would
have, in proportion, a similar influence.
those manufacturing improvements which can not be
made instrumental to facilitate, in any of its stages, the actual
production of food, and therefore do not help to counteract
or retard the diminution of the proportional return to labor
from the soil, have, however, another effect, which is practically
equivalent. what they do not prevent, they yet, in
some degree, compensate
for.
chart vii.
ratio of miles of railroad to the areas of states and
countries—united states and europe. the relative proportion is  mile railroad
to  square miles of area.
no.name.rank in size.
relative.massachusettsbelgiumengland and walesnew jerseyconnecticutrhode islandohioillinoispennsylvaniadelawareindiananew hampshireswitzerlandnew yorkiowagerman empirescotlandmarylandvermontirelandmichiganfrancedenmarknetherlandsmissouriwisconsinaustrian empirevirginiaitalygeorgiakansaskentuckysouth carolinatennesseeminnesotaalabamawest virginiaroumanianorth carolinamainenebraskamississippispainportugalswedenarkansaslouisianacoloradocaliforniaturkeytexasutahfloridadakotarussia in europenevadanorwayoregonbulgarianew mexicowyomingindian territorywashingtonarizonaidahogreecemontanabosnia and herzegovinaserviaeastern roumeliamontenegroandorra
(the united states have substantially one mile of railway to each  inhabitants.
europe has one mile to each , inhabitants, if russia be included; about
one mile to each ,, exclusive of russia.)
the materials of manufactures being all drawn from the
land, and many of them from agriculture, which supplies in
particular the entire material of clothing, the general law
of production from the land, the law of diminishing return,
must in the last resort be applicable to manufacturing as
well as to agricultural history. as population increases, and
[pg ]
the power of the land to yield increased produce is strained
harder and harder, any additional supply of material, as well
as of food, must be obtained by a more than proportionally
increasing expenditure of labor. but the cost of the material
forming generally a very small portion of the entire cost
of the manufacture, the agricultural labor concerned in the
production of manufactured goods is but a small fraction of
the whole labor worked up in the commodity.
mr. babbage
gives an interesting illustration of this principle.
bar-iron of the value of £ became worth, when manufactured
into—
£slit-iron, for nails.natural steel.horseshoes.gun-barrels, ordinary.wood-saws.scissors, best.penknife-blades.sword-handles, polished steel.
it can not, however, be said of such manufactures as coarse
cotton cloth, wherein the increased cost of raw cotton causes
an immediate effect upon the price of the cloth, that the cost
of the materials forms but a small portion of the cost of the
manufacture.
all the labor [not engaged in preparing materials] tends
constantly and strongly toward diminution, as the amount of
production increases. manufactures are vastly more susceptible
than agriculture of mechanical improvements and contrivances
for saving labor. in manufactures, accordingly,
the causes tending to increase the productiveness of industry
preponderate greatly over the one cause which tends to diminish
it; and the increase of production, called forth by the
progress of society, takes place, not at an increasing, but at
a continually diminishing proportional cost. this fact has
manifested itself in the progressive fall of the prices and
values of almost every kind of manufactured goods during
two centuries past; a fall accelerated by the mechanical inventions
of the last seventy or eighty years, and susceptible
[pg ]
of being prolonged and extended beyond any limit which
it would be safe to specify. the benefit might even extend
to the poorest class. the increased cheapness of clothing
and lodging might make up to them for the augmented cost
of their food.
there is, thus, no possible improvement in the arts of
production which does not in one or another mode exercise
an antagonistic influence to the law of diminishing return to
agricultural labor. nor is it only industrial improvements
which have this effect. improvements in government, and
almost every kind of moral and social advancement, operate
in the same manner. we may say the same of improvements
in education. the intelligence of the workman
is a most important element in the productiveness of labor.
the carefulness, economy, and general trustworthiness of
laborers are as important as their intelligence. friendly relations
and a community of interest and feeling between
laborers and employers are eminently so. in the rich and idle
classes, increased mental energy, more solid instruction, and
stronger feelings of conscience, public spirit, or philanthropy,
would qualify them to originate and promote the most valuable
improvements, both in the economical resources of their
country and in its institutions and customs.
§ . law holds true of mining.
we must observe that what we have said of agriculture
is true, with little variation, of the other occupations
which it represents; of all the arts which extract materials
from the globe. mining industry, for example, usually yields
an increase of produce at a more than proportional increase
of expense.
it does worse, for even its customary annual produce requires
to be extracted by a greater and greater expenditure
of labor and capital. as a mine does not reproduce the coal
or ore taken from it, not only are all mines at last exhausted,
but even when they as yet show no signs of exhaustion they
must be worked at a continually increasing cost; shafts must
be sunk deeper, galleries driven farther, greater power applied
to keep them clear of water; the produce must be
[pg ]
lifted from a greater depth, or conveyed a greater distance.
the law of diminishing return applies therefore to mining
in a still more unqualified sense than to agriculture; but the
antagonizing agency, that of improvements in production,
also applies in a still greater degree. mining operations are
more susceptible of mechanical improvements than agricultural:
the first great application of the steam-engine was to
mining; and there are unlimited possibilities of improvement
in the chemical processes by which the metals are extracted.
there is another contingency, of no unfrequent
occurrence, which avails to counterbalance the progress of
all existing mines toward exhaustion: this is, the discovery
of new ones, equal or superior in richness.
professor jevons has applied this economic law to the industrial
situation of england. while explaining that the
supply of cheap coal is the basis of english manufacturing
prosperity, yet he insists that, if the demand for coal is constantly
increasing, the point must inevitably be reached in the
future when the increased supply can be obtained only at a
higher cost. when coal costs england as much as it does any
other nation, then her exclusive industrial advantage will cease
to exist. in the united states the outlying iron deposits of
lake superior, lake champlain, and pennsylvania, so geologists
tell us, will find competition arising from the new grades
of greater productiveness in the richer deposits of states like
alabama. in that case we shall be going from poorer to better
grades of iron-mines, but after the change is made a series of
different grades of productiveness will be established as before.
to resume: all natural agents which are limited in quantity
are not only limited in their ultimate productive power,
but, long before that power is stretched to the utmost, they
yield to any additional demands on progressively harder
terms. this law may, however, be suspended, or temporarily
controlled, by whatever adds to the general power of mankind
over nature, and especially by any extension of their
knowledge, and their consequent command, of the properties
and powers of natural agents.
[pg ]
chapter x. consequences of the foregoing laws.
§ . remedies for weakness of the principle of accumulation.
from the preceding exposition it appears that the
limit to the increase of production is twofold: from deficiency
of capital, or of land. production comes to a pause, either
because the effective desire of accumulation is not sufficient
to give rise to any further increase of capital, or because,
however disposed the possessors of surplus income may be
to save a portion of it, the limited land at the disposal of the
community does not permit additional capital to be employed
with such a return as would be an equivalent to them
for their abstinence.
in countries where the principle of accumulation is as
weak as it is in the various nations of asia, the desideratum
economically considered is an increase of industry, and of
the effective desire of accumulation. the means are, first,
a better government: more complete security of property;
moderate taxes, and freedom from arbitrary exaction under
the name of taxes; a more permanent and more advantageous
tenure of land, securing to the cultivator as far as possible
the undivided benefits of the industry, skill, and economy
he may exert. secondly, improvement of the public intelligence.
thirdly, the introduction of foreign arts, which raise
the returns derivable from additional capital to a rate corresponding
to the low strength of the desire of accumulation.
an excellent example of what might be done by this process
is to be seen under our very eyes in the present development
of mexico, to which american capital and enterprise have been
[pg ]
so prominently drawn of late. all these proposed remedies,
if put into use in mexico, would undoubtedly result in a striking
increase of wealth.
§ . even where the desire to accumulate is strong,
population must be kept within the limits of population from land.
but there are other countries, and england [and the
united states are] at the head of them, in which neither the
spirit of industry nor the effective desire of accumulation
need any encouragement. in these countries there would
never be any deficiency of capital, if its increase were never
checked or brought to a stand by too great a diminution of
its returns. it is the tendency of the returns to a progressive
diminution which causes the increase of production to be
often attended with a deterioration in the condition of the
producers; and this tendency, which would in time put an
end to increase of production altogether, is a result of the
necessary and inherent conditions of production from the
land.
this, of course, is based on the supposition that no new
lands, such as those of the united states, can be opened for
cultivation. if there is no prohibition to the importation of
cheaper food, new and richer land in any part of the world,
within reach of the given country, is an influence which works
against the tendency. yet the tendency, or economic law, is
there all the same, forever working.
in all countries which have passed beyond a very early
stage in the progress of agriculture, every increase in the
demand for food, occasioned by increased population, will
always, unless there is a simultaneous improvement in production,
diminish the share which on a fair division would
fall to each individual. an increased production, in default
of unoccupied tracts of fertile land, or of fresh improvements
tending to cheapen commodities, can never be obtained
but by increasing the labor in more than the same
proportion. the population must either work harder or eat
less, or obtain their usual food by sacrificing a part of their
other customary comforts. whenever this necessity is postponed,
it is because the improvements which facilitate production
continue progressive; because the contrivances of
mankind for making their labor more effective keep up an
[pg ]
equal struggle with nature, and extort fresh resources from
her reluctant powers as fast as human necessities occupy and
engross the old.
from this results the important corollary, that the necessity
of restraining population is not, as many persons believe,
peculiar to a condition of great inequality of property.
a greater number of people can not, in any given state of
civilization, be collectively so well provided for as a smaller.
the niggardliness of nature,
not the injustice of society, is
the cause of the penalty attached to over-population. an
unjust distribution of wealth does not even aggravate the
evil, but, at most, causes it to be somewhat earlier felt. it
is in vain to say that all mouths which the increase of mankind
calls into existence bring with them hands. the new
mouths require as much food as the old ones, and the hands
do not produce as much.
after a degree of density has been attained, sufficient to
allow the principal benefits of combination of labor, all further
increase tends in itself to mischief, so far as regards the
average condition of the people; but the progress of improvement
has a counteracting operation, and allows of increased
numbers without any deterioration, and even consistently
with a higher average of comfort. improvement
must here be understood in a wide sense, including not only
new industrial inventions, or an extended use of those already
known, but improvements in institutions, education, opinions,
and human affairs generally, provided they tend, as
almost all improvements do, to give new motives or new
facilities to production.
the increase in the population of the united states has
been enormous, as already seen, but the increase of production
has been still greater, owing to the fertility of our land, to improvements
in the arts, and to our great genius for invention,
as may be seen by the following table (amounts in the second
[pg ]
column are given in millions). the steady increase of the
valuation of our wealth goes on faster than the increase of
population, so that it manifests itself in a larger average wealth
to each inhabitant.
decades.valuation.
per cent of increase.population.
per cent of increase.per capital valuation.$,..,,
if the productive powers of the country increase as rapidly
as advancing numbers call for an augmentation of
produce, it is not necessary to obtain that augmentation by
the cultivation of soils more sterile than the worst already
under culture, or by applying additional labor to the old soils
at a diminished advantage; or at all events this loss of power
is compensated by the increased efficiency with which, in the
progress of improvement, labor is employed in manufactures.
in one way or the other, the increased population is
provided for, and all are as well off as before. but if the
growth of human power over nature is suspended or slackened,
and population does not slacken its increase; if, with
only the existing command over natural agencies, those
agencies are called upon for an increased produce; this
greater produce will not be afforded to the increased population,
without either demanding on the average a greater
effort from each, or on the average reducing each to a smaller
ration out of the aggregate produce.
ever since the great mechanical inventions of watt,
arkwright, and their contemporaries, the return to labor has
probably increased as fast as the population; and would
[pg ]
even have outstripped it, if that very augmentation of return
had not called forth an additional portion of the inherent
power of multiplication in the human species. during the
twenty or thirty years last elapsed, so rapid has been the extension
of improved processes of agriculture [in england],
that even the land yields a greater produce in proportion to
the labor employed; the average price of corn had become
decidedly lower, even before the repeal of the corn laws had
so materially lightened, for the time being, the pressure of
population upon production. but though improvement may
during a certain space of time keep up with, or even surpass,
the actual increase of population, it assuredly never comes
up to the rate of increase of which population is capable:
and nothing could have prevented a general deterioration
in the condition of the human race, were it not that population
has in fact been restrained. had it been restrained
still more, and the same improvements taken place, there
would have been a larger dividend than there now is, for the
nation or the species at large. the new ground wrung
from nature by the improvements would not have been all
tied up in the support of mere numbers. though the
gross produce would not have been so great, there would
have been a greater produce per head of the population.
§ . necessity of restraining population not superseded by free
trade in food.
when the growth of numbers outstrips the progress
of improvement, and a country is driven to obtain the means
of subsistence on terms more and more unfavorable, by the
inability of its land to meet additional demands except on
more onerous conditions, there are two expedients, by which
it may hope to mitigate that disagreeable necessity, even
though no change should take place in the habits of the
people with respect to their rate of increase. one of these
expedients is the importation of food from abroad. the
other is emigration.
the admission of cheaper food from a foreign country is
equivalent to an agricultural invention by which food could
be raised at a similarly diminished cost at home. it equally
increases the productive power of labor. the return was
[pg ]
before, so much food for so much labor employed in the
growth of food: the return is now, a greater quantity of
food for the same labor employed in producing cottons or
hardware, or some other commodity to be given in exchange
for food. the one improvement, like the other, throws
back the decline of the productive power of labor by a
certain distance: but in the one case, as in the other, it immediately
resumes its course; the tide which has receded,
instantly begins to readvance. it might seem, indeed, that,
when a country draws its supply of food from so wide a surface
as the whole habitable globe, so little impression can be
produced on that great expanse by any increase of mouths
in one small corner of it that the inhabitants of the country
may double and treble their numbers without feeling
the effect in any increased tension of the springs of production,
or any enhancement of the price of food throughout
the world. but in this calculation several things are overlooked.
in the first place, the foreign regions from which corn
can be imported do not comprise the whole globe, but those
parts of it almost alone which are in the immediate neighborhood
of coasts or navigable rivers; and of such there is
not, in the productive regions of the earth, so great a multitude
as to suffice during an indefinite time for a rapidly
growing demand, without an increasing strain on the productive
powers of the soil.
in the next place, even if the supply were drawn from
the whole instead of a small part of the surface of the exporting
countries, the quantity of food would still be limited,
which could be obtained from them without an increase
of the proportional cost. the countries which export
food may be divided into two classes: those in which the
effective desire of accumulation is strong, and those in
which it is weak. in australia and the united states of
america, the effective desire of accumulation is strong;
capital increases fast, and the production of food might be
very rapidly extended. but in such countries population
[pg ]
also increases with extraordinary rapidity. their agriculture
has to provide for their own expanding numbers, as
well as for those of the importing countries. they must,
therefore, from the nature of the case, be rapidly driven, if
not to less fertile, at least what is equivalent, to remoter
and less accessible lands, and to modes of cultivation like
those of old countries, less productive in proportion to the
labor and expense.
the extraordinary resources of the united states are scarcely
understood even by americans. chart no. xviii (see
book iv, chap. iii)
may give some idea of the agricultural
possibilities of our land. it will be seen from this that the
quantity of fertile land in but one of our states—texas—is
greater than that of austria-hungary.
but the countries which have at the same time cheap
food and great industrial prosperity are few, being only those
in which the arts of civilized life have been transferred full-grown
to a rich and uncultivated soil. among old countries,
those which are able to export food, are able only because
their industry is in a very backward state, because capital,
and hence population, have never increased sufficiently to
make food rise to a higher price. such countries are russia,
poland, and hungary.
the law, therefore, of diminishing return to industry,
whenever population makes a more rapid progress than improvement,
is not solely applicable to countries which are
fed from their own soil, but in substance applies quite as
much to those which are willing to draw their food from
any accessible quarter that can afford it cheapest.
§ . —nor by emigration.
besides the importation of corn, there is another
resource which can be invoked by a nation whose increasing
numbers press hard, not against their capital, but against
the productive capacity of their land: i mean emigration,
especially in the form of colonization. of this remedy the
efficacy as far as it goes is real, since it consists in seeking
elsewhere those unoccupied tracts of fertile land which, if
they existed at home, would enable the demand of an increasing
[pg ]
population to be met without any falling off in the
productiveness of labor. accordingly, when the region to
be colonized is near at hand, and the habits and tastes of
the people sufficiently migratory, this remedy is completely
effectual. the migration from the older parts of the american
confederation to the new territories, which is to all intents
and purposes colonization, is what enables population
to go on unchecked throughout the union without having
yet diminished the return to industry, or increased the difficulty
of earning a subsistence.
how strictly true this is may be seen by examining the map
given in the last census returns, showing the residence of the
natives of the state of new york. the greater or less frequency
of natives of new york, residing in other states, is
shown by different degrees of shading on the map. a large
district westward as far as the mississippi shows a density of
natives of new york of from two to six to a square mile, and
a lesser density from minnesota to indian territory, on the
other side of the mississippi. the same is shown of other older
states. the explanation of the movement can not be anything
else than the same as that for the larger movement from europe
to america.
there is no probability that even under the most enlightened
arrangements (in older countries) a permanent stream of
emigration could be kept up, sufficient to take off, as in
america, all that portion of the annual increase (when proceeding
at its greatest rapidity) which, being in excess of
the progress made during the same short period in the arts
of life, tends to render living more difficult for every averagely
situated individual in the community. and, unless this
can be done, emigration can not, even in an economical point
of view, dispense with the necessity of checks to population.
the influence of immigration to the united states from
european countries, in lessening the tension in the relation
between food and numbers, is one of the most marked events
in this century. the united states has received about one
fourth of its total population in  from abroad since the
foundation of the republic, as will be seen by this table:
[pg ]
total immigration into the
united states.
periods.numbers.from -
,-,-,-,,-,,-,,-,,-,,total,,
of this number, ,, came
from the british isles, of which ,,
were irish.
there came ,, germans,
, scandinavians, and ,
french. (see united states “statistical
abstract,” , , .)
the causes operating on this
movement of men—a movement
unequaled in history—are undoubtedly
economic. like the
migration of the early teutonic
races from the baltic to southern
europe, it is due to the pressure
of numbers on subsistence.
a still more interesting study
is that of the causes which attempt
to explain the direction of
this stream after it has reached
our shores. it is a definite fact
that the old slave states have
hitherto received practically
none of this vast foreign immigration.
the actual distribution
of the foreign born in the
united states is to be seen in a
most interesting way by aid of
the colored map, chart no. viii,
giving the different densities of
foreign-born population in different parts of the union. it seems
almost certain that the general belief hitherto in the insecurity
of life and property in the old slave states has worked against
the material prosperity of that section.
the different ages of the native- and foreign-born inhabitants
of the united states may be seen from the accompanying
diagrams
comparing the aggregate population of the united
states with the foreign-born. this may profitably be compared
with a similar diagram relating to the chinese in the
united states (book ii, chap. iii, § ).
aggregate: .
the figures give the number of thousands of each sex.
decade of life.males.females.
foreign: .
decade of life.males.females.
[pg ]
book ii. distribution.
chapter i. of property.
§ . individual property and its opponents.
the laws and conditions of the production of
wealth partake of the character of physical truths. there
is nothing optional or arbitrary in them. it is not so with
the distribution of wealth. that is a matter of human institution
solely. the things once there, mankind, individually
or collectively, can do with them as they like. they can
place them at the disposal of whomsoever they please, and
on whatever terms. the distribution of wealth depends
on the laws and customs of society. the rules by which it
is determined are what the opinions and feelings of the ruling
portion of the community make them, and are very different
in different ages and countries; and might be still
more different, if mankind so chose. we have here to consider,
not the causes, but the consequences, of the rules according
to which wealth may be distributed. those, at least,
are as little arbitrary, and have as much the character of
physical laws, as the laws of production.
we proceed, then, to the consideration of the different
modes of distributing the produce of land and labor, which
have been adopted in practice, or may be conceived in theory.
among these, our attention is first claimed by that
primary and fundamental institution, on which, unless in
[pg ]
some exceptional and very limited cases, the economical
arrangements of society have always rested, though in
its secondary features it has varied, and is liable to vary.
i mean, of course, the institution of individual property.
private property, as an institution, did not owe its origin
to any of those considerations of utility which plead for
the maintenance of it when established. enough is known
of rude ages, both from history and from analogous states of
society in our own time, to show that tribunals (which always
precede laws) were originally established, not to determine
rights, but to repress violence and terminate quarrels.
with this object chiefly in view, they naturally enough gave
legal effect to first occupancy, by treating as the aggressor
the person who first commenced violence, by turning, or attempting
to turn, another out of possession.
in considering the institution of property as a question
in social philosophy, we must leave out of consideration its
actual origin in any of the existing nations of europe. we
may suppose a community unhampered by any previous possession;
a body of colonists, occupying for the first time an
uninhabited country. (.) if private property were adopted,
we must presume that it would be accompanied by none of
the initial inequalities and injustice which obstruct the beneficial
operation of the principle in old society. every full-grown
man or woman, we must suppose, would be secured
in the unfettered use and disposal of his or her bodily and
mental faculties; and the instruments of production, the
land and tools, would be divided fairly among them, so that
all might start, in respect to outward appliances, on equal
terms. it is possible also to conceive that, in this original
apportionment, compensation might be made for the injuries
of nature, and the balance redressed by assigning to the less
robust members of the community advantages in the distribution,
sufficient to put them on a par with the rest. but
the division, once made, would not again be interfered with;
individuals would be left to their own exertions and to the
[pg ]
ordinary chances for making an advantageous use of what
was assigned to them. (.) if individual property, on the
contrary, were excluded, the plan which must be adopted
would be to hold the land and all instruments of production
as the joint property of the community, and to carry on the
operations of industry on the common account. the direction
of the labor of the community would devolve upon a
magistrate or magistrates, whom we may suppose elected by
the suffrages of the community, and whom we must assume
to be voluntarily obeyed by them. the division of the
produce would in like manner be a public act. the principle
might either be that of complete equality, or of apportionment
to the necessities or deserts of individuals, in whatever
manner might be conformable to the ideas of justice or
policy prevailing in the community.
the assailants of the principle of individual property
may be divided into two classes: () those whose scheme
implies absolute equality in the distribution of the physical
means of life and enjoyment, and () those who admit inequality,
but grounded on some principle, or supposed principle,
of justice or general expediency, and not, like so many
of the existing social inequalities, dependent on accident
alone. the characteristic name for this [first] economical
system is communism, a word of continental origin, only
of late introduced into this country. the word socialism,
which originated among the english communists, and was
assumed by them as a name to designate their own doctrine,
is now, on the continent, employed in a larger sense; not
necessarily implying communism, or the entire abolition of
private property, but applied to any system which requires
that the land and the instruments of production should be
the property, not of individuals, but of communities, or associations,
or of the government.
it should be said, moreover, that socialism is to-day used in
the distinct sense of a system which abolishes private property,
and places the control of the capital, labor, and combined industries
of the country in the hands of the state. the essence
[pg ]
of modern socialism is the appeal to state-help and the weakening
of individual self-help. collectivism is also a term now
used by german and french writers to describe an organization
of the industries of a country under a collective instead of an
individual management. collectivism is but the french expression
for the system of state socialism.
§ . the case for communism against private property presented.
the objection ordinarily made to a system of community
of property and equal distribution of the produce,
that each person would be incessantly occupied in evading
his fair share of the work, points, undoubtedly, to a real
difficulty. but those who urge this objection forget to how
great an extent the same difficulty exists under the system
on which nine tenths of the business of society is now conducted.
and though the “master's eye,” when the master
is vigilant and intelligent, is of proverbial value, it must be
remembered that, in a socialist farm or manufactory, each
laborer would be under the eye, not of one master, but of
the whole community. if communistic labor might be less
vigorous than that of a peasant proprietor, or a workman
laboring on his own account, it would probably be more energetic
than that of a laborer for hire, who has no personal
interest in the matter at all.
another of the objections to communism is that if every
member of the community were assured of subsistence for
himself and any number of children, on the sole condition of
willingness to work, prudential restraint on the multiplication
of mankind would be at an end, and population would
start forward at a rate which would reduce the community
through successive stages of increasing discomfort to actual
starvation. but communism is precisely the state of things
in which opinion might be expected to declare itself with
greatest intensity against this kind of selfish intemperance.
an augmentation of numbers which diminished the comfort
or increased the toil of the mass would then cause (which now
it does not) immediate and unmistakable inconvenience to
every individual in the association; inconvenience which
could not then be imputed to the avarice of employers, or
the unjust privileges of the rich.
[pg ]
a more real difficulty is that of fairly apportioning the
labor of the community among its members. there are
many kinds of work, and by what standard are they to be
measured one against another? who is to judge how much
cotton-spinning, or distributing goods from the stores, or
brick-laying, or chimney-sweeping, is equivalent to so much
plowing? besides, even in the same kind of work, nominal
equality of labor would be so great a real inequality that
the feeling of justice would revolt against its being enforced.
all persons are not equally fit for all labor; and the same
quantity of labor is an unequal burden on the weak and the
strong, the hardy and the delicate, the quick and the slow,
the dull and the intelligent.
if, therefore, the choice were to be made between communism
with all its chances and the present state of society
with all its sufferings and injustices, all the difficulties, great
or small, of communism, would be but as dust in the balance.
but, to make the comparison applicable, we must compare
communism at its best with the régime
of individual property,
not as it is, but as it might be made. the laws of
property have never yet conformed to the principles on
which the justification of private property rests. they have
made property of things which never ought to be property,
and absolute property where only a qualified property ought
to exist. private property, in every defense made of it, is
supposed to mean the guarantee to individuals of the fruits
of their own labor and abstinence. the guarantee to them
of the fruits of the labor and abstinence of others, transmitted
to them without any merit or exertion of their own, is
not of the essence of the institution, but a mere incidental
consequence, which, when it reaches a certain height, does
not promote, but conflicts with the ends which render private
property legitimate. to judge of the final destination
of the institution of property, we must suppose everything
[pg ]
rectified which causes the institution to work in a manner
opposed to that equitable principle, of proportion between
remuneration and exertion, on which, in every vindication of
it that will bear the light, it is assumed to be grounded. we
must also suppose two conditions realized, without which
neither communism nor any other laws or institutions could
make the condition of the mass of mankind other than degraded
and miserable. one of these conditions is, universal
education; the other, a due limitation of the numbers of the
community. with these, there could be no poverty, even
under the present social institutions: and, these being supposed,
the question of socialism is not, as generally stated by
socialists, a question of flying to the sole refuge against the
evils which now bear down humanity, but a mere question
of comparative advantages, which futurity must determine.
we are too ignorant either of what individual agency in its
best form, or socialism in its best form, can accomplish, to be
qualified to decide which of the two will be the ultimate
form of human society.
if a conjecture may be hazarded, the decision will probably
depend mainly on one consideration, viz., which of the
two systems is consistent with the greatest amount of human
liberty and spontaneity. it is yet to be ascertained whether
the communistic scheme would be consistent with that multiform
development of human nature, those manifold unlikenesses,
that diversity of tastes and talents, and variety of
intellectual points of view, which not only form a great part
of the interest of human life, but, by bringing intellects into
stimulating collision and by presenting to each innumerable
notions that he would not have conceived of himself, are the
mainspring of mental and moral progression.
§ . the socialists who appeal to state-help.
for general purposes, a clearer understanding of the
various schemes may be gained by observing that () one class
of socialists intend to include the state itself within their plan,
and () another class aim to form separate communities inside
the state, and under its protection.
of this first system there are no present examples; but
the object of most of the socialistic organizations in the united
[pg ]
states and europe is to strive for the assumption by the
state of the production and distribution of wealth. at present
the most active socialists are to be found in germany. the
origin of this influence, however, is to be traced to france.
louis blanc,
in his “organisation du travail,” considers property
the great scourge of society. the government, he asserts,
should regulate production; raise money to be appropriated
without interest for creating state workshops, in which the
workmen should elect their own overseers, and all receive the
same wages; and the sums needed should be raised from the
abolition of collateral inheritance. the important practical
part of his scheme was that the great state workshops, aided
by the government, would make private competition in those
industries impossible, and thus bring about the change from
the private to the socialistic system.
the founder of modern german socialism was karl marx,
and almost the only socialist who pretended to economic
knowledge. he aimed his attack on the present social system
against the question of value, by asserting that the amount
of labor necessary for the production of an article is the sole
measure of its exchange value. it follows from this that the
[pg ]
right of property in the article vests wholly in the laborer,
while the capitalist, if he claims a share of the product, is nothing
less than a robber. no just system, he avers, can properly
exist so long as the rate of wages is fixed by free contract between
the employer and laborer; therefore the only remedy is
the nationalization of all the elements of production, land, tools,
materials, and all existing appliances, which involves, of course,
the destruction of the institution of private property. an obvious
weakness in this scheme is the provision that the government
should determine what goods are to be produced, and
that every one is bound to perform that work which is assigned
by the state. in this there is no choice of work, and the
tyranny of one master would be supplanted by the tyranny
of a greater multiplex master in the officers of government.
moreover, it can not be admitted that exchange value is determined
by the quantity of labor alone. every one knows
that the result of ten days' labor of a skilled watch-maker does
not exchange for the result of ten days' labor of an unskilled
hodman. of two men making shoes, one may produce a good
the other a poor article, although both may work the same
length of time; so that their exchange value ought not to be
determined by the mere quantity of labor expended. above
all, marx would extend the equality of wages for the same
time to the manager and superintendent also. in other words,
he proposes to take away all the incentives to the acquirement
or exercise of superior and signal ability in every work of life,
the result of which would inevitably lead to a deadening extension
of mediocrity.
this system gained an undue attention because it was
made the instrument of a socialist propaganda under the leadership
of ferdinand lassalle. this active leader, in ,
founded the german “workingmen's union,” a year earlier
than the “international association.” in  liebknecht
and his friends established the “social democratic workingmen's
party,” which after some difficulties absorbed the followers
of lassalle in a congress at gotha in , and form the
[pg ]
present socialist party in germany. their programme, as
announced at gotha, is as follows:
i. labor is the source of all riches and of all culture. as
general profitable labor can only be done by the human society,
the whole product of labor belongs to society—i.e., to all its
members—who have the same duties and the same right to
work, each according to his reasonable wants.
in the present society the means of work are the monopoly
of the class of capitalists. the class of workingmen thus become
dependent on them, and consequently are given over to
all degrees of misery and servitude.
in order to emancipate labor it is requisite that the means
of work be transformed into the common property of society,
that all production be regulated by associations, and that the
entire product of labor be turned over to society and justly
distributed for the benefit of all.
none but the working-class itself can emancipate labor, as
in relation to it all other classes are only a reactionary mass.
ii. led by these principles, the german social workingmen's
party, by all legal means, strives for a free state and society,
the breaking down of the iron laws of wages by abolishing
the system of hired workingmen, by abolishing exploitation in
every shape, and doing away with all social and political inequality.
the german social workingmen's party, although first
working within its national confines, is fully conscious of the
international character of the general workingmen's movement,
and is resolved to fulfill all duties which it imposes on each
workingman in order to realize the fraternity of all men.
the german social workingmen's party, for the purpose
of preparing the way, and for the solution of the social problem,
demands the creation of social productive associations, to
be supported by the state government, and under the control
of the working-people. the productive associations are to be
founded in such numbers that the social organization of the
whole production can be effected by them.
the german social workingmen's party requires as the
basis of state government:
. universal, equal, direct, and secret suffrage, which, beginning
with the twentieth year, obliges all citizens to vote in
all state, county, and town elections. election-day must be a
sunday or a holiday.
. direct legislation by the people; decision as to war and
peace by the people.
[pg ]
. general capability of bearing arms; popular defense in
place of standing armies.
. abolition of all exceptional laws, especially those relating
to the press, public meetings, and associations—in short, of all
laws which hinder the free expression of ideas and thought.
. gratuitous administration of justice by the people.
. general and equal, popular and gratuitous education by
the government in all classes and institutes of learning; general
duty to attend school; religion to be declared a private affair.
the german social workingmen's party insists on realizing
in the present state of society:
. the largest possible extension of political rights and
freedom in conformity to the above six demands.
. a single progressive income-tax for state, counties, and
towns, instead of those which are imposed at present, and in
place of indirect taxes, which unequally burden the people.
. unlimited right of combination.
. a normal working-day corresponding with the wants of
society; prohibition of sunday labor.
. prohibition of children's work and of women's work, so
far as it injures their health and morality.
. protective laws for the life and health of workingmen;
sanitary control of their dwellings; superintendence of mines,
factories, industry, and home work by officers chosen by the
workingmen; an effectual law guaranteeing the responsibility
of employers.
. regulation of prison-work.
. unrestricted self-government of all banks established for
the mutual assistance of workingmen.
the above scheme also represents very well the character of
the socialist agitators in the united states, who are themselves
chiefly foreigners, and have foreign conceptions of socialism.
on this form of socialism it is interesting to have mr. mill's
later opinions in his own words.
“among those who call themselves socialists, two kinds
of persons may be distinguished. there are, in the first
place, () those whose plans for a new order of society, in
which private property and individual competition are to be
superseded and other motives to action substituted, are on
the scale of a village community or township, and would be
applied to an entire country by the multiplication of such
[pg ]
self-acting units; of this character are the systems of owen,
of fourier, and the more thoughtful and philosophic socialists
generally. the other class () who are more a product
of the continent than of great britain, and may be called
the revolutionary socialists, propose to themselves a much
bolder stroke. their scheme is the management of the
whole productive resources of the country by one central
authority, the general government. and with this view
some of them avow as their purpose that the working-classes,
or somebody in their behalf, should take possession
of all the property of the country, and administer it for the
general benefit. the aim of that is to substitute the new
rule for the old at a single stroke, and to exchange the
amount of good realized under the present system, and its
large possibilities of improvement, for a plunge without any
preparation into the most extreme form of the problem of
carrying on the whole round of the operations of social life
without the motive power which has always hitherto worked
the social machinery. it must be acknowledged that those
who would play this game on the strength of their own
private opinion, unconfirmed as yet by any experimental
verification, must have a serene confidence in their own
wisdom on the one hand, and a recklessness of people's sufferings
on the other, which robespierre and st. just, hitherto
the typical instances of those united attributes, scarcely
came up to.”
§ . of various minor schemes, communistic and socialistic.
[of the schemes to be tried within a state], the
two elaborate forms of non-communistic socialism known
as saint-simonism and fourierism are totally free from the
objections usually urged against communism. the saint-simonian
scheme does not contemplate an equal, but an
[pg ]
unequal division of the produce; it does not propose that
all should be occupied alike, but differently, according to
their vocation or capacity; the function of each being assigned,
like grades in a regiment, by the choice of the directing
authority, and the remuneration being by salary, proportioned
to the importance, in the eyes of that authority,
of the function itself, and the merits of the person who fulfills
it. but to suppose that one or a few human beings,
howsoever selected, could, by whatever machinery of subordinate
agency, be qualified to adapt each person's work
to his capacity, and proportion each person's remuneration
to his merits, is a supposition almost too chimerical to be
reasoned against.
the most skillfully combined, and with the greatest foresight
of objections, of all the forms of socialism is that commonly
known as fourierism. this system does not contemplate
the abolition of private property, nor even of inheritance:
on the contrary, it avowedly takes into consideration,
as an element in the distribution of the produce,
capital as well as labor. it proposes that the operations of
industry should be carried on by associations of about two
thousand members, combining their labor on a district of
about a square league in extent, under the guidance of
chiefs selected by themselves (the “phalanstery”). in the
distribution a certain minimum is first assigned for the
subsistence of every member of the community, whether
capable or not of labor. the remainder of the produce
is shared in certain proportions, to be determined beforehand,
among the three elements, labor, capital, and talent.
[pg ]
the capital of the community may be owned in unequal
shares by different members, who would in that case receive,
as in any other joint-stock company, proportional dividends.
the claim of each person on the share of the produce
apportioned to talent is estimated by the grade or rank
which the individual occupies in the several groups of laborers
to which he or she belongs, these grades being in all
cases conferred by the choice of his or her companions.
the remuneration, when received, would not of necessity be
expended or enjoyed in common; there would be separate
ménages for all who
preferred them, and no other community
of living is contemplated than that all the members of
the association should reside in the same pile of buildings;
for saving of labor and expense, not only in building, but
in every branch of domestic economy; and in order that,
the whole buying and selling operations of the community
being performed by a single agent, the enormous portion of
the produce of industry now carried off by the profits of
mere distributors might be reduced to the smallest amount
possible.
fourierism was tried in west virginia by american disciples,
and it was advocated by horace greeley. a modified
form appeared in the famous community at brook farm (near
dedham, massachusetts), which drew there george ripley,
margaret fuller, and even george william curtis and nathaniel
hawthorne.
there have been many smaller communities established in
the united states, but it can not be said that they have been
successful from the point of view either of numbers or material
prosperity. the followers of rapp, or the harmonists, in
pennsylvania and indiana; the owenites, in indiana; the
community of zoar, in ohio; the inspirationists, in new york
[pg ]
and iowa; the perfectionists, at oneida and wallingford—are
all evidently suffering from the difficulties due to the absence of
family life, from the increasing spirit of personal independence
which carries away the younger members of the organizations,
and the want of that executive ability which distinguishes the
successful manager in private enterprises.
§ . the socialist objections to the present order of society examined.
“the attacks on the present social order are vigorous
and earnest, but open to the charge of exaggeration.
“in the first place, it is unhappily true that the wages of
ordinary labor, in all the countries of europe, are wretchedly
insufficient to supply the physical and moral necessities of
the population in any tolerable measure. but when it is
further alleged that even this insufficient remuneration has a
tendency to diminish; that there is, in the words of m. louis
blanc, une baisse
continue des salaires; the assertion is in
opposition to all accurate information, and to many notorious
facts. it has yet to be proved that there is any country
in the civilized world where the ordinary wages of labor, estimated
either in money or in articles of consumption, are
declining; while in many they are, on the whole, on the increase;
and an increase which is becoming, not slower, but
more rapid. there are, occasionally, branches of industry
which are being gradually superseded by something else,
and in those, until production accommodates itself to demand,
wages are depressed.
“m. louis blanc appears to have fallen into the same error
which was at first committed by malthus and his followers,
that of supposing because population has a greater power of
[pg ]
increase than subsistence, its pressure upon subsistence must
be always growing more severe. it is a great point gained
for truth when it comes to be seen that the tendency to over-population
is a fact which communism, as well as the existing
order of society, would have to deal with. however
this may be, experience shows that in the existing state of
society the pressure of population on subsistence, which is
the principal cause of low wages, though a great, is not an
increasing evil; on the contrary, the progress of all that is
called civilization has a tendency to diminish it, partly by
the more rapid increase of the means of employing and maintaining
labor, partly by the increased facilities opened to
labor for transporting itself to new countries and unoccupied
fields of employment, and partly by a general improvement
in the intelligence and prudence of the population. it is,
of course, open to discussion what form of society has the
greatest power of dealing successfully with the pressure of
population on subsistence, and on this question there is
much to be said for socialism; but it has no just claim
to be considered as the sole means of preventing the
general and growing degradation of the mass of mankind
through the peculiar tendency of poverty to produce over-population.
“next, it must be observed that socialists generally, and
even the most enlightened of them, have a very imperfect
and one-sided notion of the operation of competition. they
see half its effects, and overlook the other half. they forget
that competition is a cause of high prices and values as well
as of low; that the buyers of labor and of commodities compete
with one another as well as the sellers; and that, if it is
competition which keeps the prices of labor and commodities
as low as they are, it is competition which keeps them from
falling still lower. to meet this consideration, socialists are
reduced to affirm that, when the richest competitor has got
rid of all his rivals, he commands the market and can demand
any price he pleases. but in the ordinary branches of
industry no one rich competitor has it in his power to drive
[pg ]
out all the smaller ones. some businesses show a tendency
to pass out of the hands of small producers or dealers into a
smaller number of larger ones; but the cases in which this
happens are those in which the possession of a larger capital
permits the adoption of more powerful machinery, more
efficient by more expensive processes, or a better organized
and more economical mode of carrying on business, and this
enables the large dealer legitimately and permanently to
supply the commodity cheaper than can be done on the small
scale; to the great advantage of the consumers, and therefore
of the laboring-classes, and diminishing, pro tanto, that
waste of the resources of the community so much complained
of by socialists, the unnecessary multiplication of mere distributors,
and of the various other classes whom fourier calls
the parasites of industry.
“another point on which there is much misapprehension
on the part of socialists, as well as of trades-unionists and
other partisans of labor against capital, relates to the proportion
in which the produce of the country is really shared and
the amount of what is actually diverted from those who produce
it, to enrich other persons. when, for instance, a capitalist
invests £, in his business, and draws from it an income
of (suppose) £, a year, the common impression is
as if he were the beneficial owner both of the £, and
of the £,, while the laborers own nothing but their wages.
the truth, however, is that he only obtains the £, on
condition of applying no part of the £, to his own
use. he has the legal control over it, and might squander
it if he chose, but if he did he would not have the
£, a year also. for all personal purposes they have
the capital and he has but the profits, which it only yields
to him on condition that the capital itself is employed in
satisfying not his own wants, but those of laborers. even
of his own share a small part only belongs to him as the
owner of capital. the portion of the produce which falls
to capital merely as capital is measured by the interest of
money, since that is all that the owner of capital obtains
[pg ]
when he contributes to production nothing except the capital
itself.
“the result of our review of the various difficulties of socialism
has led us to the conclusion that the various schemes
for managing the productive resources of the country by
public instead of private agency have a case for a trial, and
some of them may eventually establish their claims to preference
over the existing order of things, but that they are at
present workable only by the élite of mankind, and have
yet to prove their power of training mankind at large to the state
of improvement which they presuppose.”
§ . property in land different from property in movables.
it is next to be considered what is included in the
idea of private property and by what considerations the application
of the principle should be bounded.
the institution of property, when limited to its essential
elements, consists in the recognition, in each person, of a
right to the exclusive disposal of what he or she have produced
by their own exertions, or received either by gift or
by fair agreement, without force or fraud, from those who
produced it. the foundation of the whole is, the right of
producers to what they themselves have produced. nothing
is implied in property but the right of each to his (or her)
own faculties, to what he can produce by them, and to whatever
he can get for them in a fair market: together with his
right to give this to any other person if he chooses, and the
right of that other to receive and enjoy it.
it follows, therefore, that although the right of bequest,
or gift after death, forms part of the idea of private property,
the right of inheritance, as distinguished from bequest, does
not. that the property of persons who have made no disposition
of it during their lifetime should pass first to their
children, and, failing them, to the nearest relations, may be
a proper arrangement or not, but is no consequence of the
principle of private property. i see no reason why collateral
inheritance should exist at all. mr. bentham long ago proposed,
and other high authorities have agreed in the opinion,
that, if there are no heirs either in the descending or in the
[pg ]
ascending line, the property, in case of intestacy, should escheat
to the state. the parent owes to society to endeavor
to make the child a good and valuable member of it, and
owes to the children to provide, so far as depends on him,
such education, and such appliances and means, as will enable
them to start with a fair chance of achieving by their
own exertions a successful life. to this every child has a
claim; and i can not admit that as a child he has a claim to
more.
the essential principle of property being to assure to all
persons what they have produced by their labor and accumulated
by their abstinence, this principle can not apply to what
is not the produce of labor, the raw material of the earth. if
the land derived its productive power wholly from nature,
and not at all from industry, or if there were any means of
discriminating what is derived from each source, it not only
would not be necessary, but it would be the height of injustice,
to let the gift of nature be engrossed by individuals.
[but] the use of the land in agriculture must indeed, for the
time being, be of necessity exclusive; the same person who
has plowed and sown must be permitted to reap.
but though land is not the produce of industry, most of
its valuable qualities are so. labor is not only requisite for
using, but almost equally so for fashioning, the instrument.
considerable labor is often required at the commencement,
to clear the land for cultivation. in many cases, even when
cleared, its productiveness is wholly the effect of labor and
art. one of the barrenest soils in the world, composed of
the material of the goodwin sands, the pays de waes in
flanders, has been so fertilized by industry as to have become
one of the most productive in europe. cultivation
also requires buildings and fences, which are wholly the produce
of labor. the fruits of this industry can not be reaped
in a short period. the labor and outlay are immediate, the
benefit is spread over many years, perhaps over all future
time. a holder will not incur this labor and outlay when
strangers and not himself will be benefited by it. if he
[pg ]
undertakes such improvements, he must have a sufficient
period before him in which to profit by them; and he is in
no way so sure of having always a sufficient period as when
his tenure is perpetual.
these are the reasons which form the justification, in an
economical point of view, of property in land. it is seen
that they are only valid in so far as the proprietor of land is
its improver. whenever, in any country, the proprietor,
generally speaking, ceases to be the improver, political economy
has nothing to say in defense of landed property, as there
established.
when the “sacredness of property” is talked of, it
should always be remembered that any such sacredness
does not belong in the same degree to landed property. no
man made the land. it is the original inheritance of the
whole species. its appropriation is wholly a question of
general expediency. when private property in land is not
expedient, it is unjust. the reverse is the case with property
in movables, and in all things the product of labor:
over these, the owner's power both of use and of exclusion
should be absolute, except where positive evil to others
would result from it; but, in the case of land, no exclusive
right should be permitted in any individual which can not
be shown to be productive of positive good. to be allowed
any exclusive right at all, over a portion of the common inheritance,
while there are others who have no portion, is
already a privilege. no quantity of movable goods which
a person can acquire by his labor prevents others from acquiring
the like by the same means; but, from the very
nature of the case, whoever owns land keeps others out
of the enjoyment of it. when land is not intended to be
cultivated, no good reason can in general be given for its
being private property at all. even in the case of cultivated
land, a man whom, though only one among millions, the law
permits to hold thousands of acres as his single share, is not
entitled to think that all this is given to him to use and
abuse, and deal with as if it concerned nobody but himself.
[pg ]
the rents or profits which he can obtain from it are at
his sole disposal; but with regard to the land, in everything
which he does with it, and in everything which he abstains
from doing, he is morally bound, and should, whenever the
case admits, be legally compelled to make his interest and
pleasure consistent with the public good.
[pg ]
chapter ii. of wages.
§ . of competition and custom.
political economists generally, and english political
economists above others, have been accustomed to lay
almost exclusive stress upon the first of [two] agencies
[competition and custom]; to exaggerate the effect of competition,
and to take into little account the other and conflicting
principle. they are apt to express themselves as
if they thought that competition actually does, in all cases,
whatever it can be shown to be the tendency of competition
to do. this is partly intelligible, if we consider that only
through the principle of competition has political economy
any pretension to the character of a science. so far as rents,
profits, wages, prices, are determined by competition, laws
may be assigned for them. assume competition to be their
exclusive regulator, and principles of broad generality and
scientific precision may be laid down, according to which
they will be regulated. the political economist justly deems
this his proper business: and, as an abstract or hypothetical
science, political economy can not be required to do, and indeed
can not do, anything more. but it would be a great
misconception of the actual course of human affairs to suppose
that competition exercises in fact this unlimited sway.
i am not speaking of monopolies, either natural or artificial,
or of any interferences of authority with the liberty of production
or exchange. such disturbing causes have always
been allowed for by political economists. i speak of cases
in which there is nothing to restrain competition; no hindrance
[pg ]
to it either in the nature of the case or in artificial
obstacles; yet in which the result is not determined by
competition, but by custom or usage; competition either
not taking place at all, or producing its effect in quite a different
manner from that which is ordinarily assumed to be
natural to it.
as stated by mr. cairnes, political economy is a science
just as is any recognized physical science—astronomy, chemistry,
physiology. the economic “facts we find existing are
the results of causes, between which and them the connection
is constant and invariable. it is, then, the constant relations
exhibited in economic phenomena that we have in view when
we speak of the laws of the phenomena of wealth; and in the
exposition of these laws consists the science of political economy.”
it is to be remembered that economic laws are tendencies,
not actual descriptions of any given conditions in this or
that place.
competition, in fact, has only become in any considerable
degree the governing principle of contracts, at a comparatively
modern period. the further we look back into history,
the more we see all transactions and engagements under
the influence of fixed customs. the relations, more especially
between the land-owner and the cultivator, and the
payments made by the latter to the former, are, in all states
of society but the most modern, determined by the usage of
the country. the custom of the country is the universal
rule; nobody thinks of raising or lowering rents, or of letting
land, on other than the customary conditions. competition,
as a regulator of rent, has no existence.
prices, whenever there was no monopoly, came earlier
under the influence of competition, and are much more universally
subject to it, than rents. the wholesale trade, in
the great articles of commerce, is really under the dominion
of competition. but retail price, the price paid by the
actual consumer, seems to feel very slowly and imperfectly
the effect of competition; and, when competition does exist,
[pg ]
it often, instead of lowering prices, merely divides the gains
of the high price among a greater number of dealers. the
influence of competition is making itself felt more and more
through the principal branches of retail trade in the large
towns.
all professional remuneration is regulated by custom.
the fees of physicians, surgeons, and barristers, the charges
of attorneys, are nearly invariable. not certainly for want
of abundant competition in those professions, but because
the competition operates by diminishing each competitor's
chance of fees, not by lowering the fees themselves.
these observations must be received as a general correction
to be applied whenever relevant, whether expressly
mentioned or not, to the conclusions contained in the subsequent
portions of this treatise. our reasonings must, in
general, proceed as if the known and natural effects of competition
were actually produced by it, in all cases in which
it is not restrained by some positive obstacle. where competition,
though free to exist, does not exist, or where it
exists, but has its natural consequences overruled by any
other agency, the conclusions will fail more or less of being
applicable. to escape error, we ought, in applying the conclusions
of political economy to the actual affairs of life, to
consider not only what will happen supposing the maximum
of competition, but how far the result will be affected if
competition falls short of the maximum.
§ . the wages-fund, and the objections to it considered.
under the head of wages are to be considered, first,
the causes which determine or influence the wages of labor
generally, and secondly, the differences that exist between
the wages of different employments. it is convenient to
keep these two classes of considerations separate; and in
discussing the law of wages, to proceed in the first instance
as if there were no other kind of labor than common unskilled
labor, of the average degree of hardness and disagreeableness.
competition, however, must be regarded, in the present
state of society, as the principal regulator of wages, and custom
[pg ]
or individual character only as a modifying circumstance,
and that in a comparatively slight degree.
wages, then, depend mainly upon the demand and supply
of labor; or, as it is often expressed, on the proportion
between population and capital. by population is here
meant the number only of the laboring-class, or rather of
those who work for hire; and by capital, only circulating
capital, and not even the whole of that, but the part which
is expended in the direct purchase of labor. to this, however,
must be added all funds which, without forming a part
of capital, are paid in exchange for labor, such as the wages
of soldiers, domestic servants, and all other unproductive
laborers. there is unfortunately no mode of expressing, by
one familiar term, the aggregate of what may be called the
wages-fund of a country: and, as the wages of productive
labor form nearly the whole of that fund, it is usual to overlook
the smaller and less important part, and to say that
wages depend on population and capital. it will be convenient
to employ this expression, remembering, however,
to consider it as elliptical, and not as a literal statement of
the entire truth.
with these limitations of the terms, wages not only depend
upon the relative amount of capital and population,
but can not, under the rule of competition, be affected by
anything else. wages (meaning, of course, the general rate)
can not rise, but by an increase of the aggregate funds
employed in hiring laborers, or a diminution in the number
of the competitors for hire; nor fall, except either by a
diminution of the funds devoted to paying labor, or by an
increase in the number of laborers to be paid.
this is the simple statement of the well-known wages-fund
theory, which has given rise to no little animated discussion.
few economists now assent to this doctrine when stated as
above, and without changes. the first attack on this explanation
of the rate of wages came from what is now a very scarce
pamphlet, written by f. d. longe, entitled “a refutation of
the wage-fund theory of modern political economy” ().
because laborers do not really compete with each other, he
[pg ]
regarded the idea of average wages as absurd as the idea of an
average price of ships and cloth; he declared that there was no
predetermined wages-fund necessarily expended on labor; and
that “demand for commodities” determined the amount of
wealth devoted to paying wages (p. ). while the so-called
wages-fund limits the total amount which the laborers can receive,
the employer would try to get his workmen at as much less
than that amount as possible, so that the aggregate fund would
have no bearing on the actual amount paid in wages. the
quantity of work to be done, he asserts, determines the quantity
of labor to be employed. about the same time (but unknown
to mr. longe), w. t. thornton was studying the same
subject, and attracted considerable attention by his publication,
“on labor” (), which in book ii, chap. i, contained an
extended argument to show that demand and supply (i.e., the
proportion between wages-fund and laborers) did not regulate
wages, and denied the existence of a predetermined wages-fund
fixed in amount. his attack, however, assumes a very different
conception of an economic law from that which we think right to
insist upon. the character of mankind being what it is, it will
be for their interest to invest so
much and no more in labor, and
we must believe that in this sense
there is a predetermination of
wealth to be paid in wages. in
order to make good investments,
a certain amount must, if capitalists
follow their best interests,
go to the payment of labor. mr.
thornton's argument attracted
the more attention because mr.
mill admitted that mr. thornton
had induced him to abandon his
wages-fund theory. the subject
was, however, taken up, re-examined
by mr. cairnes,
and stated in a truer form. (.) the
total wealth of a country (circle a in the diagram) is the outside
limit of its capital. how much capital will be saved out of this
depends upon the effective desire of accumulation in the community
(as set forth in book i, chap. viii).
the size of circle
b within circle a, therefore, depends on the character of the
people. the wages-fund, then, depends ultimately on the extent
of a, and proximately on the extent of b. it can never
[pg ]
be larger than b. so far, at least, its amount is “predetermined”
in the economic sense by general laws regarding the
accumulation of capital and the expectation of profit. circle
b contracts and expands under influences which have nothing
to do with the immediate bargains between capitalists and laborers.
(.) another influence now comes in to affect the amount
of capital actually paid as wages, one also governed by general
causes outside the reach of laborer or capitalist, that is, the
state of the arts of production. in production, the particular
conditions of each industry will determine how much capital
is to be set apart for raw material, how much for machinery,
buildings, and all forms of fixed capital, and how many laborers
will be assigned to a given machine for a given amount of
material. with some kinds of hand-made goods the largest
share of capital goes to wages, a less amount for materials,
and a very small proportion for machinery and tools. in
many branches of agriculture and small farming this holds true.
the converse, however, is true in many manufactures, where
machinery is largely used. no two industries will maintain
the same proportion between the three elements. the nature
of the industry, therefore, will determine whether a greater or
a less share of capital will be spent in wages. it is needless to
say that this condition of things is not one to be changed at
the demand of either of the two parties to production, labor
and capital; it responds only to the advance of mechanical science
or general intelligence. it is impossible, then, to escape
the conclusion that general causes restrict the amount which
will, under any normal investment, go to the payment of
wages. only within the limits set by these forces can any
further expansion or contraction take place. (.) within these
limits, of course, minor changes may take place, so that the
fund can not be said to be “fixed” or “absolutely predetermined”;
but these changes must take place within such narrow
limits that they do not much affect the practical side of
the question. how these changes act, may be seen in a part of
the following illustration of the above principles:
suppose a cotton-mill established in one of the valleys of
vermont, for the management of which the owner has $,
of capital. of this, $, is given for buildings, machinery,
and plant. if he turns over his remaining capital ($,)
each month, we will suppose that $, spent in raw materials
will keep five hundred men occupied at a monthly expenditure
of $,. the present state of cotton-manufacture
itself settles the relation between a given quantity of raw cotton
and a certain amount of machinery. a fixed amount of
cotton, no more, no less, can be spun by each spindle and
woven by each loom; and the nature of the process determines
[pg ]
the number of laborers to each machine. this proportion is
something which an owner must obey, if he expects to compete
with other manufacturers: the relationship is fixed for, not by,
him. now, each of the five hundred laborers being supposed
to receive on an average $. a day, imagine an influx of a
body of french canadians who offer to work, on an average,
for eighty cents a day. the five hundred men will now receive
but $, monthly instead of $,, as before, as a wages-fund;
the monthly payment for wages now is nearly seven per
cent, while formerly it was nearly nine per cent of the total
capital invested ($,). thus it will be seen that the
wages-fund can change with a change in the supply of labor:
but the point to be noticed is that it is a change in the subdivision,
$,, of the total $,. that is, this alteration
can take place only within the limits set by the nature of the
industry. now, if this $, (i.e., $, less $,) saved
out of the wages-fund were to be reinvested, it must necessarily
be divided between raw materials, fixed capital, and wages
in the existing relations, that is, only seven per cent of the new
$, would be added to the wages-fund. it is worth while
calling attention to this, if for no other reason than to show
that in this way a change can be readily made in the wages-fund
by natural movements; and that no one can be so absurd
as to say that it is absolutely fixed in amount. but it certainly
is “predetermined” in the economic sense, in that any reinvestments,
as well as former funds, must necessarily be distributed
according to the above general principles, independent of
the “higgling” in the labor market. the following is mr.
cairnes's statement of the amount and “predetermination” of
the wages-fund:
“i believe that, in the existing state of the national wealth,
the character of englishmen being what it is, a certain prospect
of profit will ‘determine’ a certain proportion of this
wealth to productive investment; that the amount thus ‘determined’
will increase as the field for investment is extended,
and that it will not increase beyond what this field can find
employment for at that rate of profit which satisfies english
commercial expectation. further, i believe that, investment
thus taking place, the form which it shall assume will be ‘determined’
by the nature of the national industries—‘determined,’
not under acts of parliament, or in virtue of any physical
law, but through the influence of the investor's interests;
while this, the form of the investment, will again ‘determine’
the proportion of the whole capital which shall be paid as
[pg ]
wages to laborers.” in this excellent and masterly conception,
the doctrine of a wages-fund is not open to the objections
usually urged against it. indeed, with the exception of professor
fawcett, scarcely any economist believes in an absolutely
fixed wages-fund. in this sense, then, and in view of the
above explanation, it will be understood what is meant by saying
that wages depend upon the proportion of the wages-fund
to the number of the wage-receivers.
in applying these principles to the question of strikes, it is
evident enough that if they result in an actual expansion of the
whole circle b, by forcing saving from unproductive expenditure,
a real addition, of some extent, may be made to the
wages-fund; but only by increasing the total capital. if, however,
they attempt to increase one of the elements of capital, the
wages-fund, without also adding to the other elements, fixed
capital and materials, in the proportion fixed by the nature of
the industry, they will destroy all possibility of continuing that
production in the normal way, and the capitalist must withdraw
from the enterprise.
francis a. walker has also offered a solution of this problem
in his “wages question” (), in which he holds that
“wages are, in a philosophical view of the subject, paid out of
the product of present industry, and hence that production
furnishes the true measure of wages” (p. ). “it is the
prospect of a profit in production which determines the employer
to hire laborers; it is the anticipated value of the product
which determines how much he can pay him” (p. ).
no doubt wages can be (and often are) paid out of the current
product; but what amount? what is the principle of distribution?
wherever the incoming product is a moral certainty
(and, unless this is true, in no case could wages be paid out of
the future product), saving is as effective upon it as upon the
actual accumulations of the past; and the amount of the coming
product which will be saved and used as capital is determined
by the same principles which govern the saving of past products.
an increase of circle a by a larger production makes
possible an increase of circle b, but whether it will be enlarged
[pg ]
or not depends on the principle of accumulation. the larger
the total production of wealth, the greater the possible wages,
all must admit; but it does not seem clear that general walker
has given us a solution of the real question at issue. the
larger the house you build, the larger the rooms may be; but
it does not follow that the rooms will be necessarily large—as
any inmate of a summer hotel will testify.
§ . examination of some popular opinions respecting wages.
there are, however, some facts in apparent contradiction
to this [the wages-fund] doctrine, which it is incumbent
on us to consider and explain.
. for instance, it is a common saying that wages are high
when trade is good. the demand for labor in any particular
employment is more pressing, and higher wages are
paid, when there is a brisk demand for the commodity produced;
and the contrary when there is what is called a
stagnation: then work-people are dismissed, and those who
are retained must submit to a reduction of wages; though
in these cases there is neither more nor less capital than before.
this is true; and is one of those complications in the
concrete phenomena which obscure and disguise the operation
of general causes; but it is not really inconsistent with
the principles laid down. capital which the owner does
not employ in purchasing labor, but keeps idle in his hands,
is the same thing to the laborers, for the time being, as
if it did not exist. all capital is, from the variations of
trade, occasionally in this state. a manufacturer, finding
a slack demand for his commodity, forbears to employ laborers
in increasing a stock which he finds it difficult to
dispose of; or if he goes on until all his capital is locked up
in unsold goods, then at least he must of necessity pause
until he can get paid for some of them. but no one expects
either of these states to be permanent; if he did, he would
at the first opportunity remove his capital to some other
occupation, in which it would still continue to employ labor.
the capital remains unemployed for a time, during
which the labor market is overstocked, and wages fall.
afterward the demand revives, and perhaps becomes unusually
brisk, enabling the manufacturer to sell his commodity
[pg ]
even faster than he can produce it; his whole capital
is then brought into complete efficiency, and, if he is able,
he borrows capital in addition, which would otherwise have
gone into some other employment. these, however, are
but temporary fluctuations: the capital now lying idle will
next year be in active employment, that which is this year
unable to keep up with the demand will in its turn be locked
up in crowded warehouses; and wages in these several departments
will ebb and flow accordingly: but nothing can
permanently alter general wages, except an increase or a
diminution of capital itself (always meaning by the term,
the funds of all sorts, destined for the payment of labor) compared
with the quantity of labor offering itself to be hired.
. again, it is another common notion that high prices
make high wages; because the producers and dealers, being
better off, can afford to pay more to their laborers. i have
already said that a brisk demand, which causes temporary
high prices, causes also temporary high wages. but high
prices, in themselves, can only raise wages if the dealers,
receiving more, are induced to save more, and make an
addition to their capital, or at least to their purchases of
labor. wages will probably be temporarily higher in the
employment in which prices have risen, and somewhat lower
in other employments: in which case, while the first half of
the phenomenon excites notice, the other is generally overlooked,
or, if observed, is not ascribed to the cause which
really produced it. nor will the partial rise of wages last
long: for, though the dealers in that one employment gain
more, it does not follow that there is room to employ a
greater amount of savings in their own business: their increasing
capital will probably flow over into other employments,
and there counterbalance the diminution previously
made in the demand for labor by the diminished savings of
other classes.
a clear distinction must be made between real wages and
money wages; the former is of importance to the laborer as
being his real receipts. the quantity of commodities satisfying
[pg ]
his desires which the laborer receives for his exertion constitutes
his real wages. the mere amount of money he receives
for his exertions, irrespective of what the money will exchange
for, forms his money wages. since the functions of money
have not yet been explained, it is difficult to discuss the relation
between prices and money wages here. but, as the total
value of the products in a certain industry is the sum out of
which both money wages and profits are paid, this total will
rise or fall (efficiency of labor remaining the same) with the
price of the particular article. if the price rises, profits will
be greater than elsewhere, and more capital will be invested in
that one business; that is, the capital will be a demand for
more labor, and, until equalization is accomplished in all trades
between wages and profits, money wages will be higher in
some trades than in others.
when reference is had to the connection between real
wages and prices, the question is a different one. general
high prices would not change general real wages. but if high
prices cause higher money wages in particular branches of trade,
then, because the movement is not general, there will accrue, to
those receiving more money, the means to buy more of real
wages. and, as in practice, changes in prices which arise from
an increased demand are partial, and not general, it often happens
that high prices produce high real wages (not general high
wages) in some, not in all employments. (for a further study
of this relation between prices and wages the reader is advised
to recall this discussion in connection with that in a later part
of the volume, book iii, chaps. xx and
. another opinion often maintained is, that wages (meaning
of course money wages) vary with the price of food;
rising when it rises, and falling when it falls. this opinion
is, i conceive, only partially true; and, in so far as true, in
no way affects the dependence of wages on the proportion
between capital and labor: since the price of food, when
it affects wages at all, affects them through that law. dear
or cheap food caused by variety of seasons does not affect
wages (unless they are artificially adjusted to it by law or
charity): or rather, it has some tendency to affect them in
the contrary way to that supposed; since in times of scarcity
people generally compete more violently for employment,
and lower the labor market against themselves. but dearness
[pg ]
or cheapness of food, when of a permanent character,
and capable of being calculated on beforehand, may affect
wages. (.) in the first place, if the laborers have, as is often
the case, no more than enough to keep them in working
condition and enable them barely to support the ordinary
number of children, it follows that, if food grows permanently
dearer without a rise of wages, a greater number of
the children will prematurely die; and thus wages will
ultimately be higher, but only because the number of people
will be smaller, than if food had remained cheap. (.)
but, secondly, even though wages were high enough to admit
of food's becoming more costly without depriving the laborers
and their families of necessaries; though they could
bear, physically speaking, to be worse off, perhaps they
would not consent to be so. they might have habits of
comfort which were to them as necessaries, and sooner than
forego which, they would put an additional restraint on
their power of multiplication; so that wages would rise,
not by increase of deaths but by diminution of births. in
these cases, then, wages do adapt themselves to the price
of food, though after an interval of almost a generation.
if wages were previously so high that they could bear reduction,
to which the obstacle was a high standard of comfort
habitual among the laborers, a rise of the price of food, or
any other disadvantageous change in their circumstances,
may operate in two ways: (a) it may correct itself by a rise
of wages, brought about through a gradual effect on the prudential
check to population; or (b) it may permanently lower
the standard of living of the class, in case their previous
habits in respect of population prove stronger than their
previous habits in respect of comfort. in that case the injury
done to them will be permanent, and their deteriorated
condition will become a new minimum, tending to perpetuate
[pg ]
itself as the more ample minimum did before. it is to
be feared that, of the two modes in which the cause may
operate, the last (b) is the most frequent, or at all events
sufficiently so to render all propositions, ascribing a self-repairing
quality to the calamities which befall the laboring-classes,
practically of no validity.
the converse case occurs when, by improvements in agriculture,
the repeal of corn laws, or other such causes, the
necessaries of the laborers are cheapened, and they are enabled
with the same [money] wages to command greater comforts
than before. wages will not fall immediately: it is even
possible that they may rise; but they will fall at last, so as
to leave the laborers no better off than before, unless during
this interval of prosperity the standard of comfort regarded
as indispensable by the class is permanently raised. unfortunately
this salutary effect is by no means to be counted
upon: it is a much more difficult thing to raise, than to
lower, the scale of living which the laborers will consider as
more indispensable than marrying and having a family.
according to all experience, a great increase invariably takes
place in the number of marriages in seasons of cheap food
and full employment.
this is to be seen by some brief statistics of marriages in
vermont and massachusetts.
year.vermontmassachusetts,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
in vermont, while the average number of marriages was
reached in  and , it fell off on the breaking out of the
war; rose in , under the fair progress of the northern
arms; again fell off in , during
the period of discouragement; and
since  has kept a steadily
higher average. in manufacturing
massachusetts the number fell earlier
than in agricultural vermont,
at the beginning of the difficulties.
, july to jan.,, jan. to july,, july to jan.,, jan. to july,, july to jan.,
the effects of the financial panic of , in massachusetts,
[pg ]
show a similar movement in the number of marriages. the
crisis came in october, . in the three months following
that date there were  less marriages.
to produce permanent advantage, the temporary cause
operating upon them must be sufficient to make a great change
in their condition—a change such as will be felt for many
years, notwithstanding any stimulus which it may give during
one generation to the increase of people. when, indeed,
the improvement is of this signal character, and a generation
grows up which has always been used to an improved scale
of comfort, the habits of this new generation in respect to
population become formed upon a higher minimum, and the
improvement in their condition becomes permanent.
§ . certain rare circumstances excepted, high wages imply restraints
on population.
wages depend, then, on the proportion between the
number of the laboring population and the capital or other
funds devoted to the purchase of labor; we will say, for
shortness, the capital. if wages are higher at one time or
place than at another, if the subsistence and comfort of the
class of hired laborers are more ample, it is for no other
reason than because capital bears a greater proportion to
population. it is not the absolute amount of accumulation
or of production that is of importance to the laboring-class;
it is not the amount even of the funds destined for distribution
among the laborers; it is the proportion between those
funds and the numbers among whom they are shared. the
condition of the class can be bettered in no other way than
by altering that proportion to their advantage: and every
scheme for their benefit which does not proceed on this as its
foundation is, for all permanent purposes, a delusion.
in countries like north america and the australian colonies,
where the knowledge and arts of civilized life and a
high effective desire of accumulation coexist with a boundless
extent of unoccupied land, the growth of capital easily
keeps pace with the utmost possible increase of population,
and is chiefly retarded by the impracticability of obtaining
laborers enough. all, therefore, who can possibly be born
can find employment without overstocking the market: every
[pg ]
laboring family enjoys in abundance the necessaries, many
of the comforts, and some of the luxuries of life; and, unless
in case of individual misconduct, or actual inability to
work, poverty does not, and dependence need not, exist.
[in england] so gigantic has been the progress of the cotton
manufacture since the inventions of watt and arkwright,
that the capital engaged in it has probably quadrupled in the
time which population requires for doubling. while, therefore,
it has attracted from other employments nearly all the
hands which geographical circumstances and the habits or
inclinations of the people rendered available; and while the
demand it created for infant labor has enlisted the immediate
pecuniary interest of the operatives in favor of promoting,
instead of restraining, the increase of population; nevertheless
wages in the great seats of the manufacture are still so
high that the collective earnings of a family amount, on an
average of years, to a very satisfactory sum; and there is as
yet no sign of decrease, while the effect has also been felt
in raising the general standard of agricultural wages in the
counties adjoining.
but those circumstances of a country, or of an occupation,
in which population can with impunity increase at its
utmost rate, are rare and transitory. very few are the countries
presenting the needful union of conditions. either the
industrial arts are backward and stationary, and capital therefore
increases slowly, or, the effective desire of accumulation
being low, the increase soon reaches its limit; or, even though
both these elements are at their highest known degree, the
increase of capital is checked, because there is not fresh land
to be resorted to of as good quality as that already occupied.
though capital should for a time double itself simultaneously
with population, if all this capital and population are to
find employment on the same land, they can not, without
an unexampled succession of agricultural inventions, continue
doubling the produce; therefore, if wages do not fall, profits
must; and, when profits fall, increase of capital is slackened.
except, therefore, in the very peculiar cases which i have
[pg ]
just noticed, of which the only one of any practical importance
is that of a new colony, or a country in circumstances
equivalent to it, it is impossible that population should increase
at its utmost rate without lowering wages. in no old
country does population increase at anything like its utmost
rate; in most, at a very moderate rate: in some countries,
not at all. these facts are only to be accounted for in two
ways. either the whole number of births which nature
admits of, and which happen in some circumstances, do not
take place; or, if they do, a large proportion of those who
are born, die. the retardation of increase results either from
mortality or prudence; from mr. malthus's positive, or from
his preventive check: and one or the other of these must
and does exist, and very powerfully too, in all old societies.
wherever population is not kept down by the prudence
either of individuals or of the state, it is kept down by starvation
or disease.
§ . due restriction of population the only safeguard of a laboring-class.
where a laboring-class who have no property but
their daily wages, and no hope of acquiring it, refrain from
over-rapid multiplication, the cause, i believe, has always
hitherto been, either actual legal restraint, or a custom of
some sort which, without intention on their part, insensibly
molds their conduct, or affords immediate inducements not
to marry. it is not generally known in how many countries
of europe direct legal obstacles are opposed to improvident
marriages.
where there is no general law restrictive of marriage,
there are often customs equivalent to it. when the guilds
or trade corporations of the middle ages were in vigor, their
by-laws or regulations were conceived with a very vigilant
eye to the advantage which the trade derived from limiting
competition; and they made it very effectually the interest
of artisans not to marry until after passing through the two
stages of apprentice and journeyman, and attaining the rank
of master.
unhappily, sentimentality rather than common sense
usually presides over the discussions of these subjects. discussions
[pg ]
on the condition of the laborers, lamentations over
its wretchedness, denunciations of all who are supposed to
be indifferent to it, projects of one kind or another for improving
it, were in no country and in no time of the world
so rife as in the present generation; but there is a tacit
agreement to ignore totally the law of wages, or to dismiss
it in a parenthesis, with such terms as “hard-hearted malthusianism”;
as if it were not a thousand times more hard-hearted
to tell human beings that they may, than that they
may not, call into existence swarms of creatures who are
sure to be miserable, and most likely to be depraved!
i ask, then, is it true or not, that if their numbers were
fewer they would obtain higher wages? this is the question,
and no other: and it is idle to divert attention from it,
by attacking any incidental position of malthus or some
other writer, and pretending that to refute that is to disprove
the principle of population. some, for instance, have
achieved an easy victory over a passing remark of mr. malthus,
hazarded chiefly by way of illustration, that the increase
of food may perhaps be assumed to take place in an arithmetical
ratio, while population increases in a geometrical:
when every candid reader knows that mr. malthus laid no
stress on this unlucky attempt to give numerical precision to
things which do not admit of it, and every person capable
of reasoning must see that it is wholly superfluous to his
argument. others have attached immense importance to
a correction which more recent political economists have
made in the mere language of the earlier followers of mr.
malthus. several writers had said that it is the tendency
of population to increase faster than the means of subsistence.
the assertion was true in the sense in which they
meant it, namely, that population would in most circumstances
increase faster than the means of subsistence, if it
were not checked either by mortality or by prudence. but
inasmuch as these checks act with unequal force at different
times and places, it was possible to interpret the language of
these writers as if they had meant that population is usually
[pg ]
gaining ground upon subsistence, and the poverty of the
people becoming greater. under this interpretation of their
meaning, it was urged that the reverse is the truth: that as
civilization advances, the prudential check tends to become
stronger, and population to slacken its rate of increase, relatively
to subsistence; and that it is an error to maintain
that population, in any improving community, tends to increase
faster than, or even so fast as, subsistence. the word
tendency
is here used in a totally different sense from that
of the writers who affirmed the proposition; but waiving the
verbal question, is it not allowed, on both sides, that in old
countries population presses too closely upon the means of
subsistence?
[pg ]
chapter iii. of remedies for low wages.
§ . a legal or customary minimum of wages, with a guarantee of
employment.
the simplest expedient which can be imagined for
keeping the wages of labor up to the desirable point would
be to fix them by law; and this is virtually the object aimed
at in a variety of plans which have at different times been,
or still are, current, for remodeling the relation between
laborers and employers. no one, probably, ever suggested
that wages should be absolutely fixed, since the interests of
all concerned often require that they should be variable; but
some have proposed to fix a minimum of wages, leaving the
variations above that point to be adjusted by competition.
another plan, which has found many advocates among the
leaders of the operatives, is that councils should be formed,
which in england have been called local boards of trade, in
france “conseils de prud'hommes,” and other names; consisting
of delegates from the work-people and from the employers,
who, meeting in conference, should agree upon a
rate of wages, and promulgate it from authority, to be binding
generally on employers and workmen; the ground of
decision being, not the state of the labor market, but natural
equity; to provide that the workmen shall have reasonable
wages, and the capitalist reasonable profits.
the one expedient most suggested by politicians and labor-reformers
in the united states is an eight-hour law, mandatory
upon all employers. it is to be remembered, however, that in
very many industries piece-work exists, and if a diminution of
hours is enforced, that will mean a serious reduction in the
amount of wages which can be possibly earned in a day.
[pg ]
even if all industries were alike in the matter of arranging
their work, this plan means higher wages for the same work,
or the same wages for less work, and so an increased cost of
labor. this would, then, take its effect on profits at once; and
the effects would be probably seen in a withdrawal of capital
from many industries, where, as now, the profits are very low.
it must be recalled, however, that in the united states there
has been, under the influence of natural causes, unaided by
legislation, a very marked reduction in the hours of labor, accompanied
by an increase of wages. for example, in ,
rhode island operatives in the carding-room of the cotton-mills
worked fourteen hours a day for $. a week, while in 
they work eleven hours and receive $. a week. this result
is most probably due to the gain arising from the invention of
labor-saving machinery.
others again (but these are rather philanthropists interesting
themselves for the laboring-classes, than the laboring
people themselves) are shy of admitting the interference of
authority in contracts for labor: they fear that if law intervened,
it would intervene rashly and ignorantly; they are
convinced that two parties, with opposite interests, attempting
to adjust those interests by negotiation through their
representatives on principles of equity, when no rule could
be laid down to determine what was equitable, would merely
exasperate their differences instead of healing them; but
what it is useless to attempt by the legal sanction, these persons
desire to compass by the moral. every employer, they
think, ought to give sufficient wages; and if he does it not
willingly, should be compelled to it by general opinion; the
test of sufficient wages being their own feelings, or what they
suppose to be those of the public. this is, i think, a fair
representation of a considerable body of existing opinion on
the subject.
i desire to confine my remarks to the principle involved
in all these suggestions, without taking into account practical
difficulties, serious as these must at once be seen to be. i
shall suppose that by one or other of these contrivances
wages could be kept above the point to which they would
be brought by competition. this is as much as to say, above
the highest rate which can be afforded by the existing capital
[pg ]
consistently with employing all the laborers. for it is a
mistake to suppose that competition merely keeps down
wages. it is equally the means by which they are kept up.
when there are any laborers unemployed, these, unless maintained
by charity, become competitors for hire, and wages
fall; but when all who were out of work have found employment,
wages will not, under the freest system of competition,
fall lower. there are strange notions afloat concerning
the nature of competition. some people seem to imagine
that its effect is something indefinite; that the competition
of sellers may lower prices, and the competition of laborers
may lower wages, down to zero, or some unassignable minimum.
nothing can be more unfounded. goods can only
be lowered in price by competition to the point which calls
forth buyers sufficient to take them off; and wages can only
be lowered by competition until room is made to admit all
the laborers to a share in the distribution of the wages-fund.
if they fell below this point, a portion of capital would remain
unemployed for want of laborers; a counter-competition
would commence on the side of capitalists, and wages
would rise.
the assumption in the last chapter in regard to competition
and custom should be kept in mind in all this reasoning. as
a matter of fact, there is not that mobility of labor which insures
so free an operation of competition that equality of payment
always exists. in reality there is no competition at all
between the lower grades of laborers and the higher classes of
skilled labor. of course, the tendency is as explained by mr.
mill, and as time goes on there is a distinctly greater mobility
of labor visible. vast numbers pass from scandinavia and
other countries of europe to the united states, or from england
to australia, urged by the desire to go from a community
of low to one of higher wages.
since, therefore, the rate of wages which results from
competition distributes the whole wages-fund among the
whole laboring population, if law or opinion succeeds in
fixing wages above this rate, some laborers are kept out of
employment; and as it is not the intention of the philanthropists
that these should starve, they must be provided for
[pg ]
by a forced increase of the wages-fund—by a compulsory
saving. it is nothing to fix a minimum of wages unless
there be a provision that work, or wages at least, be found
for all who apply for it. this, accordingly, is always part
of the scheme, and is consistent with the ideas of more people
than would approve of either a legal or a moral minimum
of wages. popular sentiment looks upon it as the duty of
the rich, or of the state, to find employment for all the poor.
if the moral influence of opinion does not induce the rich to
spare from their consumption enough to set all the poor at
work at “reasonable wages,” it is supposed to be incumbent
on the state to lay on taxes for the purpose, either by local
rates or votes of public money. the proportion between
labor and the wages-fund would thus be modified to the advantage
of the laborers, not by restriction of population, but
by an increase of capital.
§ . —would require as a condition legal measures for repression of
population.
if this claim on society could be limited to the existing
generation; if nothing more were necessary than a compulsory
accumulation, sufficient to provide permanent employment
at ample wages for the existing numbers of the
people; such a proposition would have no more strenuous
supporter than myself. society mainly consists of those who
live by bodily labor; and if society, that is, if the laborers,
lend their physical force to protect individuals in the enjoyment
of superfluities, they are entitled to do so, and have
always done so, with the reservation of a power to tax those
superfluities for purposes of public utility; among which
purposes the subsistence of the people is the foremost.
since no one is responsible for having been born, no pecuniary
sacrifice is too great to be made by those who have
more than enough, for the purpose of securing enough to all
persons already in existence.
but it is another thing altogether when those who have
produced and accumulated are called upon to abstain from
consuming until they have given food and clothing, not only
to all who now exist, but to all whom these or their descendants
may think fit to call into existence. such an obligation
[pg ]
acknowledged and acted upon, would suspend all checks,
both positive and preventive; there would be nothing to
hinder population from starting forward at its rapidest rate;
and as the natural increase of capital would, at the best, not
be more rapid than before, taxation, to make up the growing
deficiency, must advance with the same gigantic strides.
but let them work ever so efficiently, the increasing population
could not, as we have so often shown, increase the produce
proportionally; the surplus, after all were fed, would
bear a less and less proportion to the whole produce and to
the population: and the increase of people going on in a constant
ratio, while the increase of produce went on in a diminishing
ratio, the surplus would in time be wholly absorbed;
taxation for the support of the poor would engross the whole
income of the country; the payers and the receivers would
be melted down into one mass.
it would be possible for the state to guarantee employment
at ample wages to all who are born. but if it does
this, it is bound in self-protection, and for the sake of every
purpose for which government exists, to provide that no person
shall be born without its consent. to give profusely to
the people, whether under the name of charity or of employment,
without placing them under such influences that prudential
motives shall act powerfully upon them, is to lavish
the means of benefiting mankind without attaining the object.
but remove the regulation of their wages from their
own control; guarantee to them a certain payment, either by
law or by the feeding of the community; and no amount of
comfort that you can give them will make either them or
their descendants look to their own self-restraint as the proper
means for preserving them in that state.
the famous poor-laws of elizabeth, enacted in , were
at first intended to relieve the destitute poor, sick, aged, and
impotent, but in their administration a share was given to all
who begged it. employers, of course, found it cheaper to hire
labor partly paid for by the parish, and the independent farm-laborer
who would not go on the parish found his own wages
lowered by this kind of competition. this continued a crying
[pg ]
evil until it reached the proportions described by may: “as
the cost of pauperism, thus encouraged, was increasing, the
poorer rate-payers were themselves reduced to poverty. the
soil was ill-cultivated by pauper labor, and its rental consumed
by parish rates. in a period of fifty years, the poor-rates were
quadrupled, and had reached, in , the enormous amount
of £,,. in many parishes they were approaching the
annual value of the land itself.” the old poor-laws were repealed,
and there went into effect in  the workhouse system,
which, while not denying subsistence to all those born,
required that the giving of aid should be made as disagreeable
as possible, in order to stimulate among the poor a feeling of
repugnance to all aid from the community. this is also the
general idea of poor-relief in the united states.
the cultivation of the principle of self-help in each laborer
is certainly the right object at which to aim. in the united
states voluntary charitable organizations have associated together,
in some cities, in order to scrutinize all cases of poverty
through a number of visitors in each district, who advise
and counsel the unfortunate, but never give money. this system
has been very successful, and, by basing its operations on
the principle of self-help, has given the best proof of its right
to an increasing influence.
§ . allowances in aid of wages and the standard of living.
next to the attempts to regulate wages, and provide
artificially that all who are willing to work shall receive an
adequate price for their labor, we have to consider another
class of popular remedies, which do not profess to interfere
with freedom of contract; which leave wages to be fixed by
the competition of the market, but, when they are considered
insufficient, endeavor by some subsidiary resource to make
up to the laborers for the insufficiency. of this nature was
the allowance system. the principle of this scheme being
avowedly that of adapting the means of every family to its
necessities, it was a natural consequence that more should be
given to the married than to the single, and to those who had
large families than to those who had not: in fact, an allowance
was usually granted for every child. it is obvious that
this is merely another mode of fixing a minimum of wages.
there is a rate of wages, either the lowest on which the
[pg ]
people can, or the lowest on which they will consent, to live.
we will suppose this to be seven shillings a week. shocked
at the wretchedness of this pittance, the parish authorities
humanely make it up to ten. but the laborers are accustomed
to seven, and though they would gladly have more,
will live on that (as the fact proves) rather than restrain the
instinct of multiplication. their habits will not be altered
for the better by giving them parish pay. receiving three
shillings from the parish, they will be as well off as before,
though they should increase sufficiently to bring down wages
to four shillings. they will accordingly people down to that
point; or, perhaps, without waiting for an increase of numbers,
there are unemployed laborers enough in the workhouse
to produce the effect at once. it is well known that the allowance
system did practically operate in the mode described,
and that under its influence wages sank to a lower rate than
had been known in england before.
the operation of a low standard upon the wages of those in
the community who have a higher one, has been seen in the
united states to a certain extent by the landing on our shores
of chinese laborers, who maintain a decidedly lower standard
of living than either their american or irish competitors. if
they come in such numbers as to retain their lower standard
by forming a group by themselves, and are thereby not assimilated
into the body
of laborers who have
a higher standard of
comfort, they can, to
the extent of their
ability to do work,
drive other laborers
out of employment.
this, moreover, is
exactly what was
done by the irish, who
drove americans out
of the mills of new england, and who are now being driven
out, probably, by the french canadians, with a standard lower
than the irish. the chinese come here now without their
families, as may be seen by the accompanying diagram, in
which the shaded side represents the males on the left, and the
unshaded the females on the right, of the perpendicular line.
decade.males.females.
[pg ]
the horizontal lines show the ages, the largest number being
about thirty years of age. it will be noted how many come in
the prime of life, and how few children and females there are.
it need hardly be said that the economic side of a question
is here discussed, which requires for its solution many ethical
and political considerations besides.
§ . grounds for expecting improvement in public opinion on the subject
of population.
by what means, then, is poverty to be contended
against? how is the evil of low wages to be remedied?
if the expedients usually recommended for the purpose are
not adapted to it, can no others be thought of? is the
problem incapable of solution? can political economy do
nothing, but only object to everything, and demonstrate that
nothing can be done? those who think it hopeless that the
laboring-classes should be induced to practice a sufficient
degree of prudence in regard to the increase of their families,
because they have hitherto stopped short of that point,
show an inability to estimate the ordinary principles of
human action. nothing more would probably be necessary
to secure that result, than an opinion generally diffused that
it was desirable.
but let us try to imagine what would happen if the idea
became general among the laboring-class that the competition
of too great numbers was the principal cause of their
poverty. we are often told that the most thorough perception
of the dependence of wages on population will not influence
the conduct of a laboring-man, because it is not the
children he himself can have that will produce any effect in
generally depressing the labor market. true, and it is also
true that one soldier's running away will not lose the battle;
accordingly, it is not that consideration which keeps each
soldier in his rank: it is the disgrace which naturally and
inevitably attends on conduct by any one individual which,
if pursued by a majority, everybody can see would be fatal.
men are seldom found to brave the general opinion of their
class, unless supported either by some principle higher than
regard for opinion, or by some strong body of opinion elsewhere.
if the opinion were once generally established among the
[pg ]
laboring-class that their welfare required a due regulation
of the numbers of families, the respectable and well-conducted
of the body would conform to the prescription, and
only those would exempt themselves from it who were in
the habit of making light of social obligations generally;
and there would be then an evident justification for converting
the moral obligation against bringing children into the
world, who are a burden to the community, into a legal
one; just as in many other cases of the progress of opinion,
the law ends by enforcing against recalcitrant minorities
obligations which, to be useful, must be general, and which,
from a sense of their utility, a large majority have voluntarily
consented to take upon themselves.
the dependence of wages on the number of the competitors
for employment is so far from hard of comprehension,
or unintelligible to the laboring-classes, that by great bodies
of them it is already recognized and habitually acted on. it
is familiar to all trades-unions: every successful combination
to keep up wages owes its success to contrivances for
restricting the number of competitors; all skilled trades are
anxious to keep down their own numbers, and many impose,
or endeavor to impose, as a condition upon employers, that
they shall not take more than a prescribed number of apprentices.
there is, of course, a great difference between limiting
their numbers by excluding other people, and doing the
same thing by a restraint imposed on themselves; but the
one as much as the other shows a clear perception of the relation
between their numbers and their remuneration. the
principle is understood in its application to any one employment,
but not to the general mass of employment. for this
there are several reasons: first, the operation of causes is
more easily and distinctly seen in the more circumscribed
field; secondly, skilled artisans are a more intelligent class
than ordinary manual laborers; and the habit of concert,
and of passing in review their general condition as
a trade, keeps up a better understanding of their collective
interests; thirdly and lastly, they are the most
[pg ]
provident, because they are the best off, and have the most
to preserve.
§ . twofold means of elevating the habits of the laboring-people; by education,
and by foreign and home colonization.
for the purpose, therefore, of altering the habits of
the laboring people, there is need of a twofold action, directed
simultaneously upon their intelligence and their poverty.
an effective national education of the children of the laboring-class
is the first thing needful; and, coincidently with
this, a system of measures which shall (as the revolution
did in france) extinguish extreme poverty for one whole
generation. without entering into disputable points, it may
be asserted without scruple that the aim of all intellectual
training for the mass of the people should be to cultivate
common sense; to qualify them for forming a sound practical
judgment of the circumstances by which they are surrounded.
[but] education is not compatible with extreme
poverty. it is impossible effectually to teach an indigent
population. toward effecting this object there are two resources
available, without wrong to any one, without any of
the liabilities of mischief attendant on voluntary or legal
charity, and not only without weakening, but on the contrary
strengthening, every incentive to industry, and every
motive to forethought.
the first is a great national measure of colonization. i
mean, a grant of public money, sufficient to remove at once,
and establish in the colonies, a considerable fraction of the
youthful agricultural population. it has been shown by
others that colonization on an adequate scale might be so
conducted as to cost the country nothing, or nothing that
would not be certainly repaid; and that the funds required,
even by way of advance, would not be drawn from the capital
employed in maintaining labor, but from that surplus
which can not find employment at such profit as constitutes
an adequate remuneration for the abstinence of the possessor,
and which is therefore sent abroad for investment, or wasted
at home in reckless speculations.
the second resource would be to devote all common
land, hereafter brought into cultivation, to raising a class of
[pg ]
small proprietors. what i would propose is, that common
land should be divided into sections of five acres or thereabout,
to be conferred in absolute property on individuals
of the laboring-class who would reclaim and bring them into
cultivation by their own labor.
this suggestion works to the same purpose as the proposal
that our government should retain its public lands and aid in
the formation of a great number of small farmers, rather than,
by huge grants, to foster large holdings in the western states
and territories.
the preference should be given to such laborers, and
there are many of them, as had saved enough to maintain
them until their first crop was got in, or whose character
was such as to induce some responsible person to advance
to them the requisite amount on their personal security.
the tools, the manure, and in some cases the subsistence
also, might be supplied by the parish, or by the state; interest
for the advance, at the rate yielded by the public funds,
being laid on as a perpetual quitrent, with power to the
peasant to redeem it at any time for a moderate number of
years' purchase. these little landed estates might, if it were
thought necessary, be indivisible by law; though, if the plan
worked in the manner designed, i should not apprehend any
objectionable degree of subdivision. in case of intestacy,
and in default of amicable arrangement among the heirs,
they might be bought by government at their value, and re-granted
to some other laborer who could give security for the
price. the desire to possess one of these small properties
would probably become, as on the continent, an inducement
to prudence and economy pervading the whole laboring population;
and that great desideratum among a people of hired
laborers would be provided, an intermediate class between
them and their employers; affording them the double advantage
of an object for their hopes, and, as there would be
good reason to anticipate, an example for their imitation.
[pg ]
it would, however, be of little avail that either or both
of these measures of relief should be adopted, unless on such
a scale as would enable the whole body of hired laborers
remaining on the soil to obtain not merely employment, but
a large addition to the present wages—such an addition as
would enable them to live and bring up their children in a
degree of comfort and independence to which they have
hitherto been strangers.
[pg ]
chapter iv. of the differences of wages in different employments.
§ . differences of wages arising from different degrees of attractiveness in
different employments.
in treating of wages, we have hitherto confined ourselves
to the causes which operate on them generally, and
en masse; the laws which govern the remuneration of
ordinary or average labor, without reference to the existence of
different kinds of work which are habitually paid at different
rates, depending in some degree on different laws. we
will now take into consideration these differences, and examine
in what manner they affect or are affected by the conclusions
already established.
the differences, says [adam smith], arise partly “from
certain circumstances in the employments themselves, which
either really, or at least in the imaginations of men, make
up for a small pecuniary gain in some, and counterbalance
a great one in others.” these circumstances he considers to
be: “first, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments
themselves; secondly, the easiness and cheapness,
or the difficulty and expense of learning them; thirdly, the
constancy or inconstancy of employment in them; fourthly,
the small or great trust which must be reposed in those who
exercise them; and, fifthly, the probability or improbability
of success in them.”
(.) “the wages of labor vary with the ease or hardship,
the cleanliness or dirtiness, the honorableness or dishonorableness
of the employment. a journeyman blacksmith,
though an artificer, seldom earns so much in twelve hours
as a collier, who is only a laborer, does in eight. his work
[pg ]
is not quite so dirty, is less dangerous, and is carried on in
daylight and above ground. honor makes a great part of
the reward of all honorable professions. in point of pecuniary
gain, all things considered,” their recompense is, in his
opinion, below the average. “disgrace has the contrary
effect. the trade of a butcher is a brutal and an odious
business; but it is in most places more profitable than the
greater part of common trades. the most detestable of all
employments, that of the public executioner, is, in proportion
to the quantity of work done, better paid than any common
trade whatever.”
(.) “employment is much more constant,” continues
adam smith, “in some trades than in others. in the greater
part of manufactures, a journeyman may be pretty sure
of employment almost every day in the year that he is able
to work. a mason or brick-layer, on the contrary, can work
neither in hard frost nor in foul weather, and his employment
at all other times depends upon the occasional calls of
his customers. he is liable, in consequence, to be frequently
without any. what he earns, therefore, while he is employed,
must not only maintain him while he is idle, but
make him some compensation for those anxious and desponding
moments which the thought of so precarious a situation
must sometimes occasion.”
“when () the inconstancy of the employment is combined
with () the hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness
of the work, it sometimes raises the wages of the most common
labor above those of the most skillful artificers. a
collier working by the piece is supposed, at newcastle, to
earn commonly about double, and in many parts of scotland
about three times, the wages of common labor. his high
wages arise altogether from the hardship, disagreeableness,
and dirtiness of his work. his employment may, upon most
occasions, be as constant as he pleases. the coal-heavers in
london exercise a trade which in hardship, dirtiness, and
disagreeableness almost equals that of colliers; and from
the unavoidable irregularity in the arrivals of coal-ships, the
[pg ]
employment of the greater part of them is necessarily very
inconstant. if colliers, therefore, commonly earn double and
triple the wages of common labor, it ought not to seem unreasonable
that coal-heavers should sometimes earn four or
five times those wages. in the inquiry made into their condition
a few years ago, it was found that, at the rate at which
they were then paid, they could earn about four times the
wages of common labor in london.”
these inequalities of remuneration, which are supposed
to compensate for the disagreeable circumstances of particular
employments, would, under certain conditions, be natural
consequences of perfectly free competition: and as between
employments of about the same grade, and filled by nearly
the same description of people, they are, no doubt, for the
most part, realized in practice.
but it is altogether a false view of the state of facts to
present this as the relation which generally exists between
agreeable and disagreeable employments. the really exhausting
and the really repulsive labors, instead of being
better paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst
of all, because performed by those who have no choice. if
the laborers in the aggregate, instead of exceeding, fell short
of the amount of employment, work which was generally
disliked would not be undertaken, except for more than
ordinary wages. but when the supply of labor so far exceeds
the demand that to find employment at all is an uncertainty,
and to be offered it on any terms a favor, the case is
totally the reverse. partly from this cause, and partly from
the natural and artificial monopolies, which will be spoken of
presently, the inequalities of wages are generally in an opposite
direction to the equitable principle of compensation,
erroneously represented by adam smith as the general law
of the remuneration of labor.
(.) one of the points best illustrated by adam smith is
the influence exercised on the remuneration of an employment
by the uncertainty of success in it. if the chances are
great of total failure, the reward in case of success must be
[pg ]
sufficient to make up, in the general estimation, for those
adverse chances. put your son apprentice to a shoemaker,
there is little doubt of his learning to make a pair of shoes;
but send him to study the law, it is at least twenty to one if
ever he makes such proficiency as will enable him to live by
the business. in a perfectly fair lottery, those who draw the
prizes ought to gain all that is lost by those who draw the
blanks. in a profession where twenty fail for one that succeeds,
that one ought to gain all that should have been gained
by the unsuccessful twenty. how extravagant soever the
fees of counselors-at-law may sometimes appear, their real
retribution is never equal to this.
§ . differences arising from natural monopolies.
the preceding are cases in which inequality of
remuneration is necessary to produce equality of attractiveness,
and are examples of the equalizing effect of free competition.
the following are cases of real inequality, and
arise from a different principle.
(.) “the wages of labor vary according to the small or
great trust which must be reposed in the workmen. the
wages of goldsmiths and jewelers are everywhere superior
to those of many other workmen, not only of equal but of
much superior ingenuity, on account of the precious materials
with which they are intrusted.” the superiority of
reward is not here the consequence of competition, but of its
absence: not a compensation for disadvantages inherent in
the employment, but an extra advantage; a kind of monopoly
price, the effect not of a legal, but of what has been termed
a natural monopoly. if all laborers were trustworthy, it
would not be necessary to give extra pay to working goldsmiths
on account of the trust. the degree of integrity required
being supposed to be uncommon, those who can make
it appear that they possess it are able to take advantage of
the peculiarity, and obtain higher pay in proportion to its
rarity.
this same explanation of a natural monopoly applies exactly
to the causes which give able executive managers, who
watch over productive operations, the usually high rewards for
[pg ]
labor under the name of “wages of superintendence.” if successful
managers of cotton or woolen mills were as plentiful, in
proportion to the demand for them, as ordinary artisans, in
proportion to the demand for them, then the former would get
no higher rewards than the latter. able executive and business
managers secure high wages solely on the ground—as explained
above—of monopoly; that is, because their numbers,
owing to natural causes, are few relatively to the demand for
them in every industry in the land.
(.) some employments require a much longer time to
learn, and a much more expensive course of instruction, than
others; and to this extent there is, as explained by adam
smith, an inherent reason for their being more highly remunerated.
wages, consequently, must yield, over and above
the ordinary amount, an annuity sufficient to repay these
sums, with the common rate of profit, within the number of
years [the laborer] can expect to live and be in working condition.
but, independently of these or any other artificial monopolies,
there is a natural monopoly in favor of skilled
laborers against the unskilled, which makes the difference of
reward exceed, sometimes in a manifold proportion, what is
sufficient merely to equalize their advantages. but the fact
that a course of instruction is required, of even a low degree
of costliness, or that the laborer must be maintained for a
considerable time from other sources, suffices everywhere to
exclude the great body of the laboring people from the possibility
of any such competition. until lately, all employments
which required even the humble education of reading
and writing could be recruited only from a select class, the
majority having had no opportunity of acquiring those attainments.
here is found the germ of the idea, which has been elaborately
worked out by mr. cairnes in his theory of non-competing
groups of laborers: “what we find, in effect, is not a
whole population competing indiscriminately for all occupations,
but a series of industrial layers superposed on one another,
within each of which the various candidates for employment
[pg ]
possess a real and effective power of selection, while
those occupying the several strata are, for all purposes of
effective competition, practically isolated from each other.”
(mr. mill certainly understood this fully, and stated it clearly
again in book iii, chap. ii, § .)
the changes, however, now so rapidly taking place in
usages and ideas, are undermining all these distinctions; the
habits or disabilities which chained people to their hereditary
condition are fast wearing away, and every class is exposed
to increased and increasing competition from at least the
class immediately below it. the general relaxation of conventional
barriers, and the increased facilities of education
which already are, and will be in a much greater degree,
brought within the reach of all, tend to produce, among
many excellent effects, one which is the reverse: they tend
to bring down the wages of skilled labor.
§ . effect on wages of the competition of persons having other means of
support.
a modifying circumstance still remains to be noticed,
which interferes to some extent with the operation of
the principles thus far brought to view. while it is true, as
a general rule, that the earnings of skilled labor, and especially
of any labor which requires school education, are at a
monopoly rate, from the impossibility, to the mass of the
people, of obtaining that education, it is also true that the
policy of nations, or the bounty of individuals, formerly did
much to counteract the effect of this limitation of competition,
by offering eleemosynary instruction to a much larger
class of persons than could have obtained the same advantages
by paying their price.
[adam smith has pointed out that] “whenever the law
has attempted to regulate the wages of workmen, it has always
been rather to lower them than to raise them. but the
law has upon many occasions attempted to raise the wages of
curates, and, for the dignity of the church, to oblige the
rectors of parishes to give them more than the wretched
maintenance which they themselves might be willing to accept
of. and in both cases the law seems to have been
equally ineffectual, and has never been either able to raise
[pg ]
the wages of curates or to sink those of laborers to the degree
that was intended, because it has never been able to hinder
either the one from being willing to accept of less than the
legal allowance, on account of the indigence of their situation
and the multitude of their competitors, or the other
from receiving more, on account of the contrary competition
of those who expected to derive either profit or pleasure from
employing them.”
although the highest pecuniary prizes of successful authorship
are incomparably greater than at any former period,
yet on any rational calculation of the chances, in the existing
competition, scarcely any writer can hope to gain a living by
books, and to do so by magazines and reviews becomes daily
more difficult. it is only the more troublesome and disagreeable
kinds of literary labor, and those which confer no personal
celebrity, such as most of those connected with newspapers,
or with the smaller periodicals, on which an educated
person can now rely for subsistence. of these, the remuneration
is, on the whole, decidedly high; because, though exposed
to the competition of what used to be called “poor
scholars” (persons who have received a learned education
from some public or private charity), they are exempt from
that of amateurs, those who have other means of support
being seldom candidates for such employments.
when an occupation is carried on chiefly by persons who
derive the main portion of their subsistence from other
sources, its remuneration may be lower almost to any extent
than the wages of equally severe labor in other employments.
the principal example of the kind is domestic
manufactures. when spinning and knitting were carried on
in every cottage, by families deriving their principal support
from agriculture, the price at which their produce was sold
(which constituted the remuneration of their labor) was often
so low that there would have been required great perfection
of machinery to undersell it. the amount of the remuneration
in such a case depends chiefly upon whether the quantity
of the commodity produced by this description of labor
[pg ]
suffices to supply the whole of the demand. if it does not,
and there is consequently a necessity for some laborers who
devote themselves entirely to the employment, the price of
the article must be sufficient to pay those laborers at the ordinary
rate, and to reward, therefore, very handsomely the domestic
producers. but if the demand is so limited that the
domestic manufacture can do more than satisfy it, the price
is naturally kept down to the lowest rate at which peasant
families think it worth while to continue the production.
thus far, as to the remuneration of the subsidiary employment;
but the effect to the laborers of having this additional
resource is almost certain to be (unless peculiar counteracting
causes intervene) a proportional diminution of the wages
of their main occupation.
for the same reason it is found that,
cæteris paribus,
those trades are generally the worst paid in which the wife
and children of the artisan aid in the work. the income
which the habits of the class demand, and down to which
they are almost sure to multiply, is made up in those trades
by the earnings of the whole family, while in others the
same income must be obtained by the labor of the man alone.
it is even probable that their collective earnings will amount
to a smaller sum than those of the man alone in other trades,
because the prudential restraint on marriage is unusually weak
when the only consequence immediately felt is an improvement
of circumstances, the joint earnings of the two going
further in their domestic economy after marriage than before.
this statement seems to be borne out by the statistics of
wages both in england and the united states. in our cotton-mills,
where women do certain kinds of work equally well with
men, the wages of the men are lower than in outside employments
into which women can not enter.
blacksmiths, per week: $.
family of four: drawers-in, cotton-mill—man, per week: $.
family of four: drawers-in, cotton-mill—woman, per week: $.
family of four: tenders, two boys: $.
total: $.
[pg ]
in this case the family of four all together receive only
about the same as the wages of the single blacksmith alone.
§ . wages of women, why lower than those of men.
where men and women work at the same employment,
if it be one for which they are equally fitted in point
of physical power, they are not always unequally paid.
women in factories sometimes earn as much as men; and
so they do in hand-loom weaving, which, being paid by the
piece, brings their efficiency to a sure test. when the efficiency
is equal, but the pay unequal, the only explanation that
can be given is custom. but the principal question relates
to the peculiar employments of women. the remuneration
of these is always, i believe, greatly below that of employments
of equal skill and equal disagreeableness carried on
by men. in some of these cases the explanation is evidently
that already given: as in the case of domestic servants, whose
wages, speaking generally, are not determined by competition,
but are greatly in excess of the market value of the
labor, and in this excess, as in almost all things which are
regulated by custom, the male sex obtains by far the largest
share. in the occupations in which employers take full advantage
of competition, the low wages of women, as compared
with the ordinary earnings of men, are a proof that
the employments are overstocked: that although so much
smaller a number of women than of men support themselves
by wages, the occupations which law and usage make
accessible to them are comparatively so few that the field of
their employment is still more overcrowded.
yet within the employments open to women, such as millinery
and dress-making, certain women are able to charge
excessively high prices for work, because, having obtained a
reputation for especial skill and taste, they can exact in the
high prices of their articles what is really their high wages.
within these employments women are unable to earn a living
not so much by the lack of work, as by not bringing to their
occupation that amount of skill and those business qualities
(owing, of course, to their being brought up unaccustomed to
business methods) which are requisite for the success of any
one, either man or woman.
[pg ]
it must be observed that, as matters now stand, a sufficient
degree of overcrowding may depress the wages of
women to a much lower minimum than those of men. the
wages, at least of single women, must be equal to their support,
but need not be more than equal to it; the minimum,
in their case, is the pittance absolutely requisite for the
sustenance of one human being. now the lowest point
to which the most superabundant competition can permanently
depress the wages of a man is always somewhat more
than this. where the wife of a laboring-man does not by
general custom contribute to his earnings, the man's wages
must be at least sufficient to support himself, a wife, and
a number of children adequate to keep up the population,
since, if it were less, the population would not be
kept up.
§ . differences of wages arising from laws, combinations, or customs.
thus far we have, throughout this discussion, proceeded
on the supposition that competition is free, so far as
regards human interference; being limited only by natural
causes, or by the unintended effect of general social circumstances.
but law or custom may interfere to limit competition.
if apprentice laws, or the regulations of corporate
bodies, make the access to a particular employment slow,
costly, or difficult, the wages of that employment may be
kept much above their natural proportion to the wages of
common labor. in some trades, however, and to some extent,
the combinations of workmen produce a similar effect.
those combinations always fail to uphold wages at an artificial
rate unless they also limit the number of competitors.
putting aside the atrocities sometimes committed by workmen
in the way of personal outrage or intimidation, which
can not be too rigidly repressed, if the present state of the
general habits of the people were to remain forever unimproved,
these partial combinations, in so far as they do succeed
in keeping up the wages of any trade by limiting its
numbers, might be looked upon as simply intrenching round
a particular spot against the inroads of over-population, and
making the wages of the class depend upon their own rate of
[pg ]
increase, instead of depending on that of a more reckless and
improvident class than themselves.
to conclude this subject, i must repeat an observation
already made, that there are kinds of labor of which the
wages are fixed by custom, and not by competition. such
are the fees or charges of professional persons—of physicians,
surgeons, barristers, and even attorneys.
[pg ]
chapter v. of profits.
§ . profits include interest and risk; but, correctly speaking, do not
include wages of superintendence.
having treated of the laborer's share of the produce,
we next proceed to the share of the capitalist; the profits of
capital or stock; the gains of the person who advances the
expenses of production—who, from funds in his possession,
pays the wages of the laborers, or supports them during the
work; who supplies the requisite buildings, materials, and
tools or machinery; and to whom, by the usual terms of the
contract, the produce belongs, to be disposed of at his pleasure.
after indemnifying him for his outlay, there commonly
remains a surplus, which is his profit; the net income
from his capital [and skill]; the amount which he can afford
to expend in necessaries or pleasures, or from which by further
saving he can add to his wealth.
as the wages of the laborer are the remuneration of labor,
so [a part of] the profits of the capitalist are properly,
according to mr. senior's well-chosen expression, the remuneration
of abstinence. they are what he gains by forbearing
to consume his capital for his own uses, and allowing it
to be consumed by productive laborers for their uses. for
this forbearance he requires a recompense.
of the gains, however, which the possession of a capital
enables a person to make, () a part only is properly an
equivalent for the use of the capital itself; namely, as much
as a solvent person would be willing to pay for the loan of it.
this, which as everybody knows is called interest, is all that
a person is enabled to get by merely abstaining from the
[pg ]
immediate consumption of his capital, and allowing it to be
used for productive purposes by others. the remuneration
which is obtained in any country for mere abstinence is
measured by the current rate of interest on the best security;
such security as precludes any appreciable chance of losing
the principal. what a person expects to gain, who superintends
the employment of his own capital, is always more, and
generally much more, than this. the rate of profit greatly
exceeds the rate of interest. (.) the surplus is partly compensation
for risk. by lending his capital on unexceptionable
security he runs little or no risk. but if he embarks in
business on his own account, he always exposes his capital to
some, and in many cases to very great, danger of partial or
total loss. for this danger he must be compensated, otherwise
he will not incur it. (.) he must likewise be remunerated
for the devotion of his time and labor. the control of
the operations of industry usually belongs to the person who
supplies the whole or the greatest part of the funds by which
they are carried on, and who, according to the ordinary arrangement,
is either alone interested, or is the person most
interested (at least directly), in the result. to exercise this
control with efficiency, if the concern is large and complicated,
requires great assiduity, and often no ordinary skill.
this assiduity and skill must be remunerated.
the gross profits from capital, the gains returned to those
who supply the funds for production, must suffice for these
three purposes; and the three parts into which profit may
be considered as resolving itself may be described respectively
as interest, insurance, and wages of superintendence.
inasmuch as risk is the cause affecting the rate of interest,
it would be much simpler to consider the whole reward for abstinence
as interest, the rate of which is affected by the risk;
and to carefully exclude from the profits of capital the payment
for “assiduity and skill,” which is distinctly wages of labor.
the “wages of superintendence,” as every one on a moment's
reflection must admit, have no necessary connection whatever
with the possession of capital. the thing with which the laborer
is occupied does not give the reason for associating his
[pg ]
wages with the name of that thing; because a highly-qualified
manager supervises the operations of capital, it does not follow
that he has capital, or should be regarded as being paid for the
possession of capital. the man who shovels ashes is not paid
wages of ashes, any more than a man who superintends other
people's capital is paid the reward of capital. the payment
for services, in the one case as in the other, depends upon the
skill of the manager, just as it does with an ordinary mechanic,
rising or falling with his fitness for the peculiar work. skill
as a manager is the cause; the amount of the remuneration is
the consequence. if so, then the wages of superintendence
have no logical connection, in the economic sense, with capital
as the thing which determines the amount of its reward,
any more than it affects the wages of any and all labor. the
payment for the use of capital, simply as capital, may be seen
by the amount which a widow who is not engaged in active
business receives from her property invested as trust funds.
moreover, it is less and less true that the manager of the operations
of industry is necessarily the capitalist. to see this,
mark the executive managers (called “treasurers” by custom)
of cotton and woolen mills, who receive a remuneration entirely
distinct from any capital they may have invested in the
shares of the corporation; and the officials of the great mutual
insurance companies, who receive the wages of managers, but
for managing the capital of others. a large—by far the largest—part
of what is usually called profit, therefore, should be
treated as wages, and the forces which govern its amount are
the same as those affecting the amounts of all other kinds of
wages, such as are discussed in the preceding chapter. the
acknowledgment of this distinction is of extreme importance,
and affects, in a profound way, the whole question of distribution.
to include “wages of superintendence” in profits of
capital is to unnecessarily complicate one of the most serious
economic questions—namely, the relations of capital and labor.
§ . the minimum of profits; what produces variations in the amount
of profits.
the lowest rate of profit that can permanently exist
is that which is barely adequate, at the given place and time,
to afford an equivalent for the abstinence, risk, and exertion
implied in the employment of capital. from the gross profit
has first to be deducted as much as will form a fund sufficient
on the average to cover all losses incident to the employment.
next, it must afford such an equivalent to the owner
of the capital for forbearing to consume it as is then and
there a sufficient motive to him to persist in his abstinence.
how much will be required to form this equivalent depends
[pg ]
on the comparative value placed, in the given society, upon
the present and the future (in the words formerly used): on
the strength of the effective desire of accumulation. further,
after covering all losses, and remunerating the owner
for forbearing to consume, there must be something left to
recompense the labor and skill of the person who devotes
his time to the business.
such, then, is the minimum of profits: but that minimum
is exceedingly variable, and at some times and places
extremely low, on account of the great variableness of two
out of its three elements. that the rate of necessary remuneration
for abstinence, or in other words the effective desire
of accumulation, differs widely in different states of society
and civilization, has been seen in a former chapter. there
is a still wider difference in the element which consists in
compensation for risk.
the remuneration of capital in different employments,
much more than the remuneration of labor, varies according
to the circumstances which render one employment more attractive
or more repulsive than another. the profits, for example,
of retail trade, in proportion to the capital employed,
exceed those of wholesale dealers or manufacturers, for this
reason among others, that there is less consideration attached
to the employment. the greatest, however, of these differences,
is that caused by difference of risk. the profits of a
gunpowder-manufacturer must be considerably greater than
the average, to make up for the peculiar risks to which he
and his property are constantly exposed. when, however,
as in the case of marine adventure, the peculiar risks are
capable of being, and commonly are, commuted for a fixed
payment, the premium of insurance takes its regular place
among the charges of production, and the compensation
which the owner of the ship or cargo receives for that payment
does not appear in the estimate of his profits, but is
included in the replacement of his capital.
the minimum of profits can not properly include wages of
superintendence, nor is it so included, practically, in mr. mill's
[pg ]
discussions on the minimum of profits in a later part of this
volume. the operation of the various elements in changing the
amount of profits might be expressed as follows: as between
different countries and communities, who have a different effective
desire of accumulation, profits may vary with the element
of interest and risk; within the same district, where interest
is generally the same on the same security, profits may
vary with the risk attached to different industries; and, within
the same occupations, interest and risk being given, the wages
of superintendence may make a greater variation than either
of the other two causes—since a skillful manager may make a
large return, a poor one none at all. or between two employments,
interest and risk remaining the same, wages of superintendence
sometimes produce a wide difference.
the portion, too, of the gross profit, which forms the
remuneration for the labor and skill of the dealer or producer,
is very different in different employments. this is
the explanation always given of the extraordinary rate of
apothecaries' profit. there are cases, again, in which a considerable
amount of labor and skill is required to conduct a
business necessarily of limited extent. in such cases a higher
than common rate of profit is necessary to yield only the
common rate of remuneration.
all the natural monopolies (meaning thereby those which
are created by circumstances, and not by law) which produce
or aggravate the disparities in the remuneration of different
kinds of labor, operate similarly between different employments
of capital.
in this passage mr. mill points out distinctly that the movement
up and down in the wages of a manager are governed by
the same laws as those which regulate differences in the different
rewards of labor, but yet he connects it improperly with
capital. it will be seen that mr. mill uses the term “gross
profit” on the next page in order to avoid the difficulty, which
rises unconsciously in his mind, of the anomalous presence of
the wages of the manager in the question of profit.
§ . general tendency of profits to an equality.
after due allowance is made for these various causes
of inequality, namely, difference in the risk or agreeableness
of different employments, and natural or artificial monopolies
[which give greater or less wages of superintendence],
[pg ]
the rate of profit on capital in all employments tends
to an equality. that portion of profit which is properly
interest, and which forms the real remuneration for abstinence,
is strictly the same at the same time and place, whatever
be the employment. the rate of interest, on equally
good security, does not vary according to the destination of
the principal, though it does vary from time to time very
much, according to the circumstances of the market.
it is far otherwise with gross profit, which, though (as
will presently be seen) it does not vary much from employment
to employment, varies very greatly from individual to
individual, and can scarcely be in any two cases the same.
it depends on the knowledge, talents, economy, and energy
of the capitalist himself, or of the agents whom he employs;
on the accidents of personal connection; and even on chance.
hardly any two dealers in the same trade, even if their commodities
are equally good and equally cheap, carry on their
business at the same expense, or turn over their capital in
the same time. that equal capitals give equal profits, as a
general maxim of trade, would be as false as that equal age
or size gives equal bodily strength, or that equal reading or
experience gives equal knowledge. the effect depends as
much upon twenty other things as upon the single cause
specified. on an average (whatever may be the occasional
fluctuations) the various employments of capital are on such
a footing as to hold out, not equal profits, but equal expectations
of profit, to persons of average abilities and advantages.
by equal, i mean after making compensation for any
inferiority in the agreeableness or safety of an employment.
if the case were not so; if there were, evidently, and to
common experience, more favorable chances of pecuniary
success in one business than in others, more persons would
engage their capital in the business. if, on the contrary, a
business is not considered thriving; if the chances of profit
in it are thought to be inferior to those in other employments;
capital gradually leaves it, or at least new capital is
not attracted to it; and by this change in the distribution of
[pg ]
capital between the less profitable and the more profitable
employments, a sort of balance is restored.
this may be easily shown by a diagram in
which the capital in one employment is represented
by a b, and which exceeds c d, that in
another employment, by the amount of a f. it
is not necessary that the whole of the excess,
a f should be transferred to c d to make the
two capitals equal, but only a e, which, added
to c d, brings
c d to an equality with e b.
this equalizing process, commonly described
as the transfer of capital from one employment
to another, is not necessarily the onerous, slow,
and almost impracticable operation which it is very often
represented to be. in the first place, it does not always
imply the actual removal of capital already embarked in an
employment. in a rapidly progressive state of capital, the
adjustment often takes place by means of the new accumulations
of each year, which direct themselves in preference
toward the more thriving trades. even when a real transfer
of capital is necessary, it is by no means implied that any
of those who are engaged in the unprofitable employment
relinquish business and break up their establishments. the
numerous and multifarious channels of credit through which,
in commercial nations, unemployed capital diffuses itself over
the field of employment, flowing over in greater abundance
to the lower levels, are the means by which the equalization
is accomplished. the process consists in a limitation by one
class of dealers or producers and an extension by the other
of that portion of their business which is carried on with borrowed
capital.
“political economists say that capital sets toward the most
profitable trades, and that it rapidly leaves the less profitable
and non-paying trades. but in ordinary countries this is a slow
process, and some persons, who want to have ocular demonstrations
of abstract truths, have been inclined to doubt it because
they could not see it. the process would be visible
enough if you could only see the books of the bill-brokers and
the bankers. if the iron-trade ceases to be as profitable as
[pg ]
usual, less iron is sold; the fewer the sales the fewer the bills;
and in consequence the number of iron bills [at the banks] is
diminished. on the other hand, if, in consequence of a bad
harvest, the corn trade becomes on a sudden profitable, immediately
‘corn bills’ are created in large numbers, and, if good,
are discounted [at the banks]. thus capital runs as surely
and instantly where it is most wanted, and where there is most
to be made of it, as water runs to find its level.”
in the case of an altogether declining trade, in which it
is necessary that the production should be, not occasionally
varied, but greatly and permanently diminished, or perhaps
stopped altogether, the process of extricating the capital is,
no doubt, tardy and difficult, and almost always attended with
considerable loss; much of the capital fixed in machinery,
buildings, permanent works, etc., being either not applicable
to any other purpose, or only applicable after expensive alterations;
and time being seldom given for effecting the change
in the mode in which it would be effected with least loss,
namely, by not replacing the fixed capital as it wears out.
there is besides, in totally changing the destination of a capital,
so great a sacrifice of established connection, and of acquired
skill and experience, that people are always very slow
in resolving upon it, and hardly ever do so until long after
a change of fortune has become hopeless.
in general, then, although profits are very different to
different individuals, and to the same individual in different
years, there can not be much diversity at the same time and
place in the average profits of different employments (other
than the standing differences necessary to compensate for difference
of attractiveness), except for short periods, or when
some great permanent revulsion has overtaken a particular
trade. it is true that, to persons with the same amount of
original means, there is more chance of making a large fortune
in some employments than in others. but it would be
found that in those same employments bankruptcies also are
more frequent, and that the chance of greater success is balanced
by a greater probability of complete failure.
[pg ]
§ . the cause of the existence of any profit; the advances of capitalists
consist of wages of labor.
the preceding remarks have, i hope, sufficiently
elucidated what is meant by the common phrase, “the ordinary
rate of profit,” and the sense in which, and the limitations
under which, this ordinary rate has a real existence. it
now remains to consider what causes determine its amount.
the cause of profit is, that labor produces more than is required
for its support; the reason why capital yields a profit
is, because food, clothing, materials, and tools last longer than
the time which is required to produce them; so that if a capitalist
supplies a party of laborers with these things, on condition
of receiving all they produce, they will, in addition to
reproducing their own necessaries and instruments, have a
portion of their time remaining, to work for the capitalist.
we thus see that profit arises, not from the incident of exchange,
but from the productive power of labor; and the
general profit of the country is always what the productive
power of labor makes it, whether any exchange takes place
or not. i proceed, in expansion of the considerations thus
briefly indicated, to exhibit more minutely the mode in which
the rate of profit is determined.
i assume, throughout, the state of things which, where
the laborers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with
few exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist advances
the whole expenses, including the entire remuneration
of the laborer. that he should do so is not a matter of
inherent necessity; the laborer might wait until the production
is complete for all that part of his wages which exceeds
mere necessaries, and even for the whole, if he has funds in
hand sufficient for his temporary support. but in the latter
case the laborer is to that extent really a capitalist, investing
capital in the concern, by supplying a portion of the funds
necessary for carrying it on; and even in the former case
he may be looked upon in the same light, since, contributing
his labor at less than the market price, he may be regarded
as lending the difference to his employer, and receiving it
back with interest (on whatever principle computed) from
the proceeds of the enterprise.
[pg ]
the capitalist, then, may be assumed to make all the
advances and receive all the produce. his profit consists of
the excess of the produce above the advances; his rate of
profit is the ratio which that excess bears to the amount
advanced.
for example, if a advances , bushels of corn to laborers
in return for , yards of cloth (and if one bushel of
corn sells for the same sum as one yard of cloth), his profit
consists of , yards of cloth. the ratio of the excess, ,,
to ,, the outlay, or  per cent, is the rate of profit. it is
not the ratio of , to ,.
but what do the advances consist of? it is, for the present,
necessary to suppose that the capitalist does not pay
any rent; has not to purchase the use of any appropriated
natural agent. the nature of rent, however, we have not
yet taken into consideration; and it will hereafter appear
that no practical error, on the question we are now examining,
is produced by disregarding it.
if, then, leaving rent out of the question, we inquire in
what it is that the advances of the capitalist, for purposes of
production, consist, we shall find that they consist of wages
of labor.
a large portion of the expenditure of every capitalist
consists in the direct payment of wages. what does not consist
of this is composed of materials and implements, including
buildings. but materials and implements are produced
by labor; and as our supposed capitalist is not meant to represent
a single employment, but to be a type of the productive
industry of the whole country, we may suppose that he
makes his own tools and raises his own materials. he does
this by means of previous advances, which, again, consist
wholly of wages. if we suppose him to buy the materials
and tools instead of producing them, the case is not altered:
he then repays to a previous producer the wages which that
previous producer has paid. it is true he repays it to him
with a profit; and, if he had produced the things himself, he
himself must have had that profit on this part of his outlay
[pg ]
as well as on every other part. the fact, however, remains,
that in the whole process of production, beginning with the
materials and tools and ending with the finished product, all
the advances have consisted of nothing but wages, except
that certain of the capitalists concerned have, for the sake of
general convenience, had their share of profit paid to them
before the operation was completed.
this idea may be more clear, perhaps, if we imagine a large
corporation, not only making woolen cloth, but owning sheep-ranches,
where the raw materials are produced; the shops
where all machinery is made; and who even produce on their
own property all the food, clothing, shelter, and consumption
of the laborers employed by them. a line of division may be
passed through the returns in all these branches of the industry,
separating what is wages from what is profit. then it can
be easily imagined that all the returns on one side, representing
profits, go to capitalists, no matter whether they are thousands
in number, or only one capitalist typifying the rest, or a
single corporation acting for many small capitalists.
§ . the rate of profit depends on the cost of labor.
it thus appears that the two elements on which, and
which alone, the gains of the capitalists depend, are, first, the
magnitude of the produce, in other words, the productive
power of labor; and secondly, the proportion of that produce
obtained by the laborers themselves; the ratio which the remuneration
of the laborers bears to the amount they produce.
we thus arrive at the conclusion of ricardo and others,
that the rate of profits depends upon wages; rising as wages
fall, and falling as wages rise. in adopting, however, this
doctrine, i must insist upon making a most necessary alteration
in its wording. instead of saying that profits depend
on wages, let us say (what ricardo really meant) that they
depend on the cost of labor.
this is an entirely different question from that concerning
the rate of wages before discussed (book
ii, chap. ii). that
had to do with the amount of the capital which each laborer,
on an average, received as real wages, and this average rate
was affected by the number of competitors for labor, as compared
with the existing capital, taking into account the nature
of the industries in a country. an increase of population,
bringing more laborers to compete for employment, will lower
[pg ]
the average amount of real wages received by each one; and a
decrease of population will bring about the reverse. the rate of
wages, however, now that we are considering the matter from
the point of view of the capitalist, is but one of the things to
be considered affecting cost of labor. the former question was
one as to the distribution of capital; the latter is one as to the
amount by which the total production is greater than the total
capital advanced. since all capital consists of advances to labor,
the present inquiry is one in regard to the quantity of advances
compared with the quantity returned; that is, the relation of
the total capital to the total production arising from the use of
that capital. in the diagram before used (p. ) the question
is not how the contents of circle b are to be distributed, but the
relative size of circle b to circle a. in order to produce circle
a, it is necessary to advance what is represented by circle b.
wages and the cost of labor; what labor brings in to
the laborer and what it costs to the capitalist are ideas
quite distinct, and which it is of the utmost importance to
keep so. for this purpose it is essential not to designate
them, as is almost always done, by the same name. wages,
in public discussions, both oral and printed, being looked
upon from the same point of view of the payers, much
oftener than from that of the receivers, nothing is more common
than to say that wages are high or low, meaning only
that the cost of labor [to the capitalist] is high or low. the
reverse of this would be oftener the truth: the cost of labor
is frequently at its highest where wages are lowest. this
may arise from two causes. (.) in the first place, the labor,
though cheap, may be inefficient.
the facts presented by mr. brassey very fully illustrate
this principle. although french workmen in their ship-yards
receive less wages for the same kind of work than the english
workmen in english yards, yet it costs less per ton to build
ships in england than in france. the same correspondence
between high wages and efficient work was found to be true of
railway construction in different parts of the world. with
different character, varying amounts of industrial energy, varying
intelligence, and endurance, different people do not have
the same efficiency of labor. it is ascertained that inefficiency
is, as a rule, accompanied by low wages. even though wages
paid for ordinary labor in constructing railways were in india
[pg ]
only from nine to twelve cents a day, and in england from
seventy-five to eighty-seven cents a day, yet it cost as much to
build a mile of railway in india as in england. the english
laborer gave a full equivalent for his higher wages. moreover,
while an english weaver tends from two to three times as
many looms as his russian competitor, the workman in the
united states, it is said, will tend even more than the englishman.
in american sailing-vessels, also, a less number of sailors,
relatively to the tonnage, is required than in english sailing-ships.
mr. brassey, besides, came to the conclusion that the
working power, or efficiency, of ordinary english laborers was
to the french as five to three.
(.) the other cause which renders wages and the cost of
labor no real criteria of one another is the varying costliness
of the articles which the laborer consumes. if these are
cheap, wages, in the sense which is of importance to the
laborer, may be high, and yet the cost of labor may be low;
if dear, the laborer may be wretchedly off, though his labor
may cost much to the capitalist. this last is the condition
of a country over-peopled in relation to its land; in which,
food being dear, the poorness of the laborer's real reward
does not prevent labor from costing much to the purchaser,
and low wages and low profits coexist. the opposite case
is exemplified in the united states of america. the laborer
there enjoys a greater abundance of comforts than in any
other country of the world, except some of the newest colonies;
but owing to the cheap price at which these comforts
can be obtained (combined with the great efficiency of the
labor), the cost of labor to the capitalist is considerably lower
than in europe. it must be so, since the rate of profit is
higher; as indicated by the rate of interest, which is six per
cent at new york when it is three or three and a quarter
per cent in london.
the cost of labor, then, is, in the language of mathematics,
a function of three variables: () the efficiency of labor;
() the wages of labor (meaning thereby the real reward [or
real wages] of the laborer); and () the greater or less cost
[pg ]
at which the articles composing that real reward can be produced
or purchased. it is plain that the cost of labor to the
capitalist must be influenced by each of these three circumstances,
and by no others. these, therefore, are also the circumstances
which determine the rate of profit; and it can not
be in any way affected except through one or other of them.
the efficiency of labor, in this connection, is highly important
in its practical aspects, and as affecting the labor question,
because as a function of cost of labor, that is, as an element
affecting the quantity of things advanced to the laborers
in comparison with the quantity of things returned to the employer,
it includes the whole influence of machinery, labor-saving
devices, and the results of invention. the quantity of
produce depends, for a given advance, on the kind of machinery,
the speed with which it is run, and on the general state of
the arts and industrial inventions. the extent to which the
productive capacity of a single laborer has been increased in
the united states has been almost incredible. instead of
weaving cloth by hand, as was done a hundred years ago,
“one operative in lowell, working one year, can produce the
cotton fabric needed for the year's supply of , to ,
chinese.” moreover, there is no question as to the fact that
no nation in the world compares with ours in the power to invent,
construct, and manage the most ingenious and complicated
machinery. the inventive faculty belongs to every class
in our country; and, in studying cost of labor, it must be well
borne in mind that the efficiency of american labor, particularly
as combined with mechanical appliances, is one of the
great causes of our enormous production. the result of this,
for instance, has been that, without lowering profits, although
the price of cloth has been greatly reduced, employers have
been able to raise the wages of operatives, and shorten their
hours of labor, because machinery has so vastly increased the
production for a given outlay. as one of a few facts showing
this tendency in the last fifty years, note the following table,
taken from the books of the namquit cotton-mill in bristol,
rhode island:
kind of labor...card-room help, per week$.$.card-strippers, per week..weavers, per week..carding-room overseer, per week..
the hours per week
have decreased in the
same time from  to ,
while the product of the
mill in pounds has increased
 per cent. it
may be unnecessary, perhaps,
to say that these figures represent the current wages in
[pg ]
other mills at the same periods; and that these facts can be
sustained by the records of other mills.
in its economic effect we must also consider, under efficiency,
the whole question of natural advantages of soil, climate,
and natural resources. laborers of the same skill, paid
the same real wages, of the same cost, will produce a vastly
greater amount of wheat in dakota than in vermont or england.
this is the chief reason why profits are so high in the
united states. in many industries we have very marked natural
advantages, which permits a high reward to labor, and yet
yields a high profit to the capitalist. this applies not merely
to agriculture, but to all the extractive industries, such as the
production of petroleum, wood, copper, etc.
in short, the whole matter of ease and difficulty of production,
of high or low cost of production, taking it in the sense
of great or little sacrifice (compare carefully
book iii, chap.
ii, § ), comes in under the element of efficiency, in cost of
labor. the reader can not be too strongly urged to connect
different parts of the economic system together. and the
questions of cost of labor and cost of production are of
paramount importance to a proper understanding of political
economy.
if labor generally became more efficient, without being
more highly rewarded; if, without its becoming less efficient,
its remuneration fell, no increase taking place in the
cost of the articles composing that remuneration; or if those
articles became less costly, without the laborers obtaining
more of them; in any one of these three cases, profits would
rise. if, on the contrary, labor became less efficient (as it
might do from diminished bodily vigor in the people, destruction
of fixed capital, or deteriorated education); or if
the laborer obtained a higher remuneration, without any increased
cheapness in the things composing it; or if, without
his obtaining more, that which he did obtain became more
costly; profits, in all these cases, would suffer a diminution.
and there is no other combination of circumstances in which
the general rate of profit of a country, in all employments
indifferently, can either fall or rise.
the connection of profit with the three constituents of cost
of labor may probably be better seen by aid of the following
illustration; it being premised that as yet money is not used,
[pg ]
and that the laborers are paid in the articles which their
money wages would have bought had money been used. for
simplicity we will suppose that all articles of the laborer's consumption
are represented by corn. imagine a large woolen-mill
employing  men, and paying them in corn; and suppose
that one yard of woolen cloth exchanges for one bushel of corn
in the open market. in the beginning, with a given condition
of efficiency, suppose that each man produces on an average
, yards of cloth, for which he is paid , bushels of corn:
 men, each producing , yards, give a total product of , yards.
 men, each paid , bushels, cause an outlay of , yards.
profit: , yards.
(.) now suppose a change increasing the efficiency of labor
to such an extent that each laborer produces , instead
of , yards, then the account will stand, if the other elements
remain unchanged:
 men, each producing , yards, give a total product of , yards.
 men, each paid , bushels, cause an outlay of , yards.
profit: , yards.
(.) if efficiency and the cost of producing food remain
the same as at first, suppose a change to occur which raises
the quantity of corn each laborer receives from , to ,,
or, as it is called, increases his real wages—then the account
will be:
 men, each producing , yards, give a total product of , yards.
 men, each paid , bushels, cause an outlay of , yards.
profit: , yards.
(.) if efficiency and real wages remain the same, suppose
such an increase in the cost to the employers of obtaining
corn that they are obliged to give one and one tenth yard of
their goods for one bushel of corn (, bushels of corn costing
them , yards of cloth), then the statement will read:
 men, each producing , yards, give a total product of , yards.
 men, each paid , bushels, cause an outlay of , yards.
profit: , yards.
[pg ]
chapter vi. of rent.
§ . rent the effect of a natural monopoly.
the requisites of production being labor, capital,
and natural agents, the only person, besides the laborer and
the capitalist, whose consent is necessary to production, and
who can claim a share of the produce as the price of that
consent, is the person who, by the arrangements of society,
possesses exclusive power over some natural agent. the
land is the principal of the natural agents which are capable
of being appropriated, and the consideration paid for its use
is called rent. landed proprietors are the only class, of any
numbers or importance, who have a claim to a share in the
distribution of the produce, through their ownership of something
which neither they nor any one else have produced.
if there be any other cases of a similar nature, they will be
easily understood, when the nature and laws of rent are
comprehended.
it is at once evident that rent is the effect of a monopoly.
the reason why land-owners are able to require rent
for their land is, that it is a commodity which many want,
and which no one can obtain but from them. if all the land
of the country belonged to one person, he could fix the rent
at his pleasure. this case, however, is nowhere known to
exist; and the only remaining supposition is that of free
competition; the land-owners being supposed to be, as in
fact they are, too numerous to combine.
the ratio of the land to the cultivators shows the limited
quantity of land. it is very desirable to keep the connection
[pg ]
of one part of the subject with another wherever possible.
“agricultural rent, as it actually exists,” says mr.
cairnes,
truly, “is not a consequence of the monopoly of the soil, but
of its diminishing productiveness.” the doctrine of rent depends
upon the law of diminishing returns; and it is only by
the pressure of population upon land that the lessened productiveness
of land, whether because of poorer qualities or poorer
situations, is made apparent. or, to take things in their natural
sequence, an increase of population necessitates more food;
and this implies a resort to more expensive methods, or poorer
soils, so soon as land is pushed to the extent that it will not
yield an increased crop for the same application of labor and
capital as formerly. different qualities of land, then, being
in cultivation at the same time, the better qualities must, of
course, yield a greater return than the poorer, and the conditions
then exist under which land pays rent. those, therefore,
who admit the law of diminishing returns are inevitably led to
the doctrine of rent.
§ . no land can pay rent except land of such quality or situation as exists in
less quantity than the demand.
a thing which is limited in quantity, even though
its possessors do not act in concert, is still a monopolized
article. but even when monopolized, a thing which is the
gift of nature, and requires no labor or outlay as the condition
of its existence, will, if there be competition among
the holders of it, command a price only if it exist in less
quantity than the demand.
if the whole land of a country were required for cultivation,
all of it might yield a rent. but in no country of any
extent do the wants of the population require that all the
land, which is capable of cultivation, should be cultivated.
the food and other agricultural produce which the people
need, and which they are willing and able to pay for at a
price which remunerates the grower, may always be obtained
without cultivating all the land; sometimes without cultivating
more than a small part of it; the more fertile lands,
or those in the more convenient situations, being of course
preferred. there is always, therefore, some land which can
not, in existing circumstances, pay any rent; and no land
ever pays rent unless, in point of fertility or situation, it
belongs to those superior kinds which exist in less quantity
[pg ]
than the demand—which can not be made to yield all the
produce required for the community, unless on terms still
less advantageous than the resort to less favored soils. (.)
the worst land which can be cultivated as a means of subsistence
is that which will just replace the seed and the food
of the laborers employed on it, together with what dr. chalmers
calls their secondaries; that is, the laborers required
for supplying them with tools, and with the remaining necessaries
of life. whether any given land is capable of doing
more than this is not a question of political economy, but of
physical fact. the supposition leaves nothing for profits,
nor anything for the laborers except necessaries: the land,
therefore, can only be cultivated by the laborers themselves,
or else at a pecuniary loss; and, a fortiori, can not in
any contingency afford a rent. (.) the worst land which can be
cultivated as an investment for capital is that which, after
replacing the seed, not only feeds the agricultural laborers
and their secondaries, but affords them the current rate of
wages, which may extend to much more than mere necessaries,
and leaves, for those who have advanced the wages of
these two classes of laborers, a surplus equal to the profit
they could have expected from any other employment of
their capital. (.) whether any given land can do more than
this is not merely a physical question, but depends partly
on the market value of agricultural produce. what the
land can do for the laborers and for the capitalist, beyond
feeding all whom it directly or indirectly employs, of course
depends upon what the remainder of the produce can be
sold for. the higher the market value of produce, the
lower are the soils to which cultivation can descend, consistently
with affording to the capital employed the ordinary
rate of profit.
as, however, differences of fertility slide into one another
by insensible gradations; and differences of accessibility,
that is, of distance from markets do the same; and
since there is land so barren that it could not pay for its
cultivation at any price; it is evident that, whatever the
[pg ]
price may be, there must in any extensive region be some
land which at that price will just pay the wages of the cultivators,
and yield to the capital employed the ordinary
profit, and no more. until, therefore, the price rises higher,
or until some improvement raises that particular land to a
higher place in the scale of fertility, it can not pay any rent.
it is evident, however, that the community needs the produce
of this quality of land; since, if the lands more fertile
or better situated than it could have sufficed to supply the
wants of society, the price would not have risen so high as
to render its cultivation profitable. this land, therefore,
will be cultivated; and we may lay it down as a principle
that, so long as any of the land of a country which is fit for
cultivation, and not withheld from it by legal or other factitious
obstacles, is not cultivated, the worst land in actual
cultivation (in point of fertility and situation together) pays
no rent.
§ . the rent of land is the excess of its return above the return to the worst
land in cultivation.
if, then, of the land in cultivation, the part which
yields least return to the labor and capital employed on it
gives only the ordinary profit of capital, without leaving
anything for rent, a standard [i.e., the “margin of cultivation”]
is afforded for estimating the amount of rent which
will be yielded by all other land. any land yields just as
much more than the ordinary profits of stock as it yields
more than what is returned by the worst land in cultivation.
the surplus is what the farmer can afford to pay as rent to
the landlord; and since, if he did not so pay it, he would
receive more than the ordinary rate of profit, the competition
of other capitalists, that competition which equalizes
the profits of different capitals, will enable the landlord to
appropriate it. the rent, therefore, which any land will
yield, is the excess of its produce, beyond what would be
returned to the same capital if employed on the worst land
in cultivation.
it has been denied that there can be any land in cultivation
which pays no rent, because landlords (it is contended)
would not allow their land to be occupied without payment.
[pg ]
inferior land, however, does not usually occupy, without
interruption, many square miles of ground; it is dispersed
here and there, with patches of better land intermixed, and
the same person who rents the better land obtains along
with it the inferior soils which alternate with it. he pays
a rent, nominally for the whole farm, but calculated on the
produce of those parts alone (however small a portion of
the whole) which are capable of returning more than the
common rate of profit. it is thus scientifically true that
the remaining parts pay no rent.
this point seems to need some illustration. suppose that
all the lands in a community are of five different grades of
productiveness. when the price of agricultural produce was
such that grades one, two, and three all came into cultivation,
lands of poorer quality would not be cultivated. when a man
rents a farm, he always gets land of varying degrees of fertility
within its limits. now, in determining what he ought to
pay as rent, the farmer will agree to give that which will still
leave him a profit on his working capital; if in his fields he
finds land which would not enter into the question of rental,
because it did not yield more than the profit on working it,
after he rented the farm he would find it to his interest to cultivate
it, simply because it yielded him a profit, and because
he was not obliged to pay rent upon it; if required to pay rent
for it, he would lose the ordinary rate of profit, would have no
reason for cultivating it, of course, and would throw it out of
cultivation. moreover, suppose that lands down to grade three
paid rent when a took the farm; now, if the price of produce
rises slightly, grade four may pay something, but possibly not
enough to warrant any rent going to a landlord. a will put
capital on it for this return, but certainly not until the price
warrants it; that is, not until the price will return him at least
the cost of working the land, plus the profit on his outlay. but
the community needed this land, or the price would not have
gone up to the point which makes possible its cultivation even
for a profit, without rent. there must always be somewhere
some land affected in just this way.
§ . —or to the capital employed in the least advantageous
circumstances.
let us, however, suppose that there were a validity
in this objection, which can by no means be conceded to it;
that, when the demand of the community had forced up food
to such a price as would remunerate the expense of producing
it from a certain quality of soil, it happened nevertheless
[pg ]
that all the soil of that quality was withheld from cultivation,
the increase of produce, which the wants of society required,
would for the time be obtained wholly (as it always is partially),
not by an extension of cultivation, but by an increased
application of labor and capital to land already cultivated.
now we have already seen that this increased application
of capital, other things being unaltered, is always attended
with a smaller proportional return. the rise of price enables
measures to be taken for increasing the produce, which could
not have been taken with profit at the previous price. the
farmer uses more expensive manures, or manures land which
he formerly left to nature; or procures lime or marl from a
distance, as a dressing for the soil; or pulverizes or weeds
it more thoroughly; or drains, irrigates, or subsoils portions
of it, which at former prices would not have paid the cost
of the operation; and so forth. the farmer or improver
will only consider whether the outlay he makes for the purpose
will be returned to him with the ordinary profit, and
not whether any surplus will remain for rent. even, therefore,
if it were the fact that there is never any land taken
into cultivation, for which rent, and that too of an amount
worth taking into consideration, was not paid, it would be
true, nevertheless, that there is always some agricultural
capital which pays no rent, because it returns nothing beyond
the ordinary rate of profit: this capital being the portion
of capital last applied—that to which the last addition
to the produce was due; or (to express the essentials of the
case in one phrase) that which is applied in the least favorable
circumstances. but the same amount of demand and
the same price, which enable this least productive portion of
capital barely to replace itself with the ordinary profit, enable
every other portion to yield a surplus proportioned to
the advantage it possesses. and this surplus it is which
competition enables the landlord to appropriate.
if land were all occupied, and of only one grade, the first
installment of labor and capital produced, we will say, twenty
bushels of wheat; when the price of wheat rose, and it became
[pg ]
profitable to resort to greater expense on the soil, a second installment
of the same amount of labor and capital when applied,
however, only yielded fifteen bushels more; a third, ten bushels
more; and a fourth, five bushels more. the soil now gives fifty
bushels only under the highest pressure. but, if it was profitable
to invest the same installment of labor and capital simply
for the five bushels that at first had received a return of twenty
bushels, the price must have gone up so that five bushels should
sell for as much as the twenty did formerly; so,
mutatis mutandis,
of installments second and third. so that if the demand
is such as to require all of the fifty bushels, the agricultural
capital which produced the five bushels will be the standard
according to which the rent of the capital, which grew twenty,
fifteen, and ten bushels respectively, is measured. the principle
is exactly the same as if equal installments of capital and
labor were invested on four different grades of land returning
twenty, fifteen, ten, and five bushels for each installment. or,
as if in the table on page , a, b, c, and d each represented
different installments of the same amount of labor and capital
put upon the same spot of ground, instead of being, as there,
put upon different grades of land.
the rent of all land is measured by the excess of the return
to the whole capital employed on it above what is necessary
to replace the capital with the ordinary rate of profit,
or, in other words, above what the same capital would yield
if it were all employed in as disadvantageous circumstances
as the least productive portion of it: whether that least productive
portion of capital is rendered so by being employed
on the worst soil, or by being expended in extorting more
produce from land which already yielded as much as it could
be made to part with on easier terms.
it will be true that the farmer requires the ordinary rate
of profit on the whole of his capital; that whatever it returns
to him beyond this he is obliged to pay to the landlord, but
will not consent to pay more; that there is a portion of capital
applied to agriculture in such circumstances of productiveness
as to yield only the ordinary profits; and that the
difference between the produce of this and of any other capital
of similar amount is the measure of the tribute which that
other capital can and will pay, under the name of rent, to
the landlord. this constitutes a law of rent, as near the
[pg ]
truth as such a law can possibly be; though of course modified
or disturbed, in individual cases, by pending contracts,
individual miscalculations, the influence of habit, and even
the particular feelings and dispositions of the persons concerned.
the law of rent, in the economic sense, operates in the
united states as truly as elsewhere, although there is no separate
class of landlords here. with us, almost all land is owned
by the cultivator; so that two functions, those of the landlord
and farmer, are both united in one person. although one payment
is made, it is still just as distinctly made up of two parts,
one of which is a payment to the owner for the superior quality
of his soil, and the other a payment (to the same person, if the
owner is the cultivator) of profit on the farmer's working capital.
land which in the united states will only return enough
to pay a profit on this capital can not pay any rent. and land
which can pay more than a profit on this working capital, returns
that excess as rent, even if the farmer is also the owner
and landlord. the principle which regulates the amount of
that excess—which is the essential point—is the principle which
determines the amount of economic rent, and it holds true in
the united states or finland, provided only that different
grades of land are called into cultivation. the governing
principle is the same, no matter whether a payment is made to
one man as profit and to another as rent, or whether the two
payments are made to the same man in two capacities. it has
been urged that the law of rent does not hold in the united
states, because “the price of grain and other agricultural produce
has not risen in proportion to the increase of our numbers,
as it ought to have done if ricardo's theory were true, but has
fallen, since , though since that time our population has
been more than tripled.” this overlooks the fact that we
have not even yet taken up all our best agricultural lands, so
that for some products the law of diminishing productiveness
has not yet shown itself. the reason is, that the extension of
our railway system has only of late years brought the really
good grain-lands into cultivation. the fact that there has been
no rise in agricultural products is due to the enormous extent of
marvelously fertile grain-lands in the west, and to the cheapness
of transportation from those districts to the seaboard.
for a general understanding of the law of rent the following
table will show how, under constant increase of population
(represented by four different advances of population, in the
[pg ]
first column), first the best and then the poorer lands are
brought into cultivation. we will suppose () that the most
fertile land, a, at first pays no rent; then (), when more food
is wanted than land a can supply, it will be profitable to till
land b, but which, as yet, pays no rent. but if eighteen bushels
are a sufficient return to a given amount of labor and capital,
then when an equal amount of labor and capital engaged
on a returns twenty-four bushels, six of that are beyond the
ordinary profit, and form the rent on land a, and so on; c will
next be the line of comparison, and then d; as the poorer soils
are cultivated, the rent of a increases:
population increase.a
 bushels
 bushels bushels
 bushelstotal productrent in bushels
total productrent in bushels
total productrent in bushels
total productrent in bushelsi.....
§ . opposing views of the law of rent.
under the name of rent, many payments are commonly
included, which are not a remuneration for the original
powers of the land itself, but for capital expended on
it. the buildings are as distinct a thing from the farm as
the stock or the timber on it; and what is paid for them can
no more be called rent of land than a payment for cattle
would be, if it were the custom that the landlord should
stock the farm for the tenant. the buildings, like the cattle,
are not land, but capital, regularly consumed and reproduced;
and all payments made in consideration for them are properly
interest.
but with regard to capital actually sunk in improvements,
and not requiring periodical renewal, but spent once for all
in giving the land a permanent increase of productiveness,
it appears to me that the return made to such capital loses
altogether the character of profits, and is governed by the
principles of rent. it is true that a landlord will not expend
capital in improving his estate unless he expects from the
improvement an increase of income surpassing the interest
[pg ]
of his outlay. prospectively, this increase of income may
be regarded as profit; but, when the expense has been incurred
and the improvement made, the rent of the improved
land is governed by the same rules as that of the unimproved.
mr. carey (as well as bastiat) has declared that there is a
law of increasing returns from land. he points out that everything
now existing could be reproduced to-day at a less cost
than that involved in its original production, owing to our
advance in skill, knowledge, and all the arts of production;
that, for example, it costs less to make an axe now than it did
five hundred years ago; so also with a farm, since a farm of a
given amount of productiveness can be brought into cultivation
at less cost to-day than that originally spent upon it.
the gain of society has, we all admit, been such that we produce
almost everything at a less cost now than long ago; but
to class a farm and an axe together overlooks, in the most
remarkable way, the fact that land can not be created by labor
and capital, while axes can, and that too indefinitely. nor can
the produce from the land be increased indefinitely at a diminishing
cost. this is sometimes denied by the appeal to facts:
“it can be abundantly proved that, if we take any two periods
sufficiently distant to afford a fair test, whether fifty or one
hundred or five hundred years, the production of the land
relatively to the labor employed upon it has progressively become
greater and greater.” but this does not prove that an
existing tendency to diminishing returns has not been more
than offset by the progress of the arts and improvements.
“the advance of a ship against wind and tide is [no] proof
that there is no wind and tide.”
in a work entitled “the past, the present, and the
future,” mr. carey takes [a] ground of objection to the
ricardo theory of rent, namely, that in point of historical
fact the lands first brought under cultivation are not the
most fertile, but the barren lands. “we find the settler invariably
occupying the high and thin lands requiring little
clearing and no drainage. with the growth of population
and wealth, other soils yielding a larger return to labor are
always brought into activity, with a constantly increasing
return to the labor expended upon them.”
in whatever order the lands come into cultivation, those
[pg ]
which when cultivated yield the least return, in proportion
to the labor required for their culture, will always regulate
the price of agricultural produce; and all other lands will
pay a rent simply equivalent to the excess of their produce
over this minimum. whatever unguarded expressions may
have been occasionally used in describing the law of rent,
these two propositions are all that was ever intended by it.
if, indeed, mr. carey could show that the return to labor
from the land, agricultural skill and science being supposed
the same, is not a diminishing return, he would overthrow a
principle much more fundamental than any law of rent.
but in this he has wholly failed.
another objection taken against the law of diminishing
returns, and so against the law of rent, is that the potential increase
of food, e.g., of a grain of wheat, is far greater than
that of man.
no one disputes the fact that one grain of wheat
can reproduce itself more times than man, and that too in a
geometric increase; but not without land. a grain of wheat
needs land in which it can multiply itself, and this necessary
element of its increase is limited; and it is the very thing
which limits the multiplication of the grains of wheat. on
the same piece of land, one can not get more than what comes
from one act of reproduction in the grain. if one grain produces
 of its kind, doubling the capital will not repeatedly
cause a geometric increase in the ratio of reproduction of each
grain on this same land, so that one grain, by one process, produces
of its kind , , , or ,, because you can not
multiply the land in any such ratio as would accompany this
potential reduplication of the grain. this objection would not
seem worth answering, were it not that it furnishes some difficulty
to really honest inquirers.
others, again, allege as an objection against ricardo, that
if all land were of equal fertility it might still yield a rent.
but ricardo says precisely the same. it is also distinctly a
portion of ricardo's doctrine that, even apart from differences
of situation, the land of a country supposed to be of
uniform fertility would, all of it, on a certain supposition,
pay rent, namely, if the demand of the community required
[pg ]
that it should all be cultivated, and cultivated beyond the
point at which a further application of capital begins to be
attended with a smaller proportional return.
this is simply the question, before discussed, whether, if
only one class of land were cultivated, some agricultural capital
would pay rent or not. it all depends on the fact whether
population—and so the demand for food—has increased to the
point where it calls out a recognition of the diminishing productiveness
of the soil. in that case different capitals would
be invested, so that there would be different returns to the
same amount of capital; and the prior or more advantageous
investments of capital on the land would yield more than the
ordinary rate of profit, which could be claimed as rent.
a. l. perry admits the law of diminishing returns, but
holds that, “as land is capital, and as every form of capital
may be loaned or rented, and thus become fruitful in the hands
of another, the rent of land does not differ essentially in its
nature from the rent of buildings in cities, or from the interest
of money.” henry george admits ricardo's law of rent to its
full extent, but very curiously says: “irrespective of the increase
of population, the effect of improvements in methods of
production and exchange is to increase rent.... the effect of
labor-saving improvements will be to increase the production
of wealth. now, for the production of wealth, two things are
required, labor and land. therefore, the effect of labor-saving
improvements will be to extend the demand for land, and,
wherever the limit of the quality of land in use is reached, to
bring into cultivation lands of less natural productiveness, or
to extend cultivation on the same lands to a point of lower
natural productiveness. and thus, while the primary effect of
labor-saving improvements is to increase the power of labor,
the secondary effect is to extend cultivation, and, where this
lowers the margin of cultivation, to increase rent.” francis
bowen rejects ricardo's law, and says, “rent depends, not
on the increase, but on the distribution, of the population”—asserting
that the existence of large cities and towns determines
the amount of rent paid by neighboring land.
[pg ]
§ . rent does not enter into the cost of production of
agricultural produce.
rent does not really form any part of the expenses
of [agricultural] production, or of the advances of the capitalist.
the grounds on which this assertion was made are
now apparent. it is true that all tenant-farmers, and many
other classes of producers, pay rent. but we have now seen
that whoever cultivates land, paying a rent for it, gets in return
for his rent an instrument of superior power to other
instruments of the same kind for which no rent is paid. the
superiority of the instrument is in exact proportion to the
rent paid for it. if a few persons had steam-engines of superior
power to all others in existence, but limited by physical
laws to a number short of the demand, the rent which a
manufacturer would be willing to pay for one of these steam-engines
could not be looked upon as an addition to his outlay,
because by the use of it he would save in his other expenses
the equivalent of what it cost him: without it he could not
do the same quantity of work, unless at an additional expense
equal to the rent. the same thing is true of land.
the real expenses of production are those incurred on the
worst land, or by the capital employed in the least favorable
circumstances. this land or capital pays, as we have seen,
no rent, but the expenses to which it is subject cause all
other land or agricultural capital to be subjected to an equivalent
expense in the form of rent. whoever does pay rent
gets back its full value in extra advantages, and the rent
which he pays does not place him in a worse position than,
but only in the same position as, his fellow-producer who pays
no rent, but whose instrument is one of inferior efficiency.
soils are of every grade: some, which if cultivated, might
replace the capital, but give no profit; some give a slight
but not an ordinary profit; some, the ordinary profit. that
is, “there is a point up to which it is profitable to cultivate,
and beyond which it is not profitable to cultivate. the price
of corn will not, for any long time, remain at a higher rate
than is sufficient to cover with ordinary profit the cost of that
portion of the general crop which is raised at greatest
expense.”
for similar reasons the price will not remain at a
[pg ]
lower rate. if, then, the cost of production of grain is determined
by that land which replaces the capital, yields only the
ordinary profit, and pays no rent, rent forms no part of this
cost, since that land does not and can not pay any rent.
mcleod,
however, says it is not the cost of production which
regulates the value of agricultural produce, but the value which
regulates the cost.
[pg ]
book iii. exchange.
chapter i. of value.
§ . definitions of value in use, exchange value, and price.
it is evident that, of the two great departments of
political economy, the production of wealth and its distribution,
the consideration of value has to do with the latter
alone; and with that only so far as competition, and not
usage or custom, is the distributing agency.
the use of a thing, in political economy, means its capacity
to satisfy a desire, or serve a purpose. diamonds
have this capacity in a high degree, and, unless they had it,
would not bear any price. value in use, or, as mr. de quincey
calls it, teleologic value, is the extreme limit of value in
exchange. the exchange value of a thing may fall short, to
any amount, of its value in use; but that it can ever exceed
the value in use implies a contradiction; it supposes that
persons will give, to possess a thing, more than the utmost
value which they themselves put upon it, as a means of gratifying
their inclinations.
the word value, when used without adjunct, always
means, in political economy, value in exchange.
exchange value requires to be distinguished from price.
writers have employed price to express the value of a thing
in relation to money—the quantity of money for which it
will exchange. by the price of a thing, therefore, we shall
[pg ]
henceforth understand its value in money; by the value, or
exchange value of a thing, its general power of purchasing;
the command which its possession gives over purchasable
commodities in general. what is meant by command over
commodities in general? the same thing exchanges for a
greater quantity of some commodities, and for a very small
quantity of others. a coat may exchange for less bread this
year than last, if the harvest has been bad, but for more glass
or iron, if a tax has been taken off those commodities, or an
improvement made in their manufacture. has the value of
the coat, under these circumstances, fallen or risen? it is
impossible to say: all that can be said is, that it has fallen in
relation to one thing, and risen in respect to another. suppose,
for example, that an invention has been made in machinery,
by which broadcloth could be woven at half the
former cost. the effect of this would be to lower the value
of a coat, and, if lowered by this cause, it would be lowered
not in relation to bread only or to glass only, but to all purchasable
things, except such as happened to be affected at
the very time by a similar depressing cause. those [changes]
which originate in the commodities with which we compare
it affect its value in relation to those commodities; but those
which originate in itself affect its value in relation to all
commodities.
there is such a thing as a general rise of prices. all
commodities may rise in their money price. but there can
not be a general rise of values. it is a contradiction in
terms. a can only rise in value by exchanging for a greater
quantity of b and c; in which case these must exchange for
a smaller quantity of a. all things can not rise relatively
to one another. if one half of the commodities in the market
rise in exchange value, the very terms imply a fall of the
other half; and, reciprocally, the fall implies a rise. things
which are exchanged for one another can no more all fall, or
all rise, than a dozen runners can each outrun all the rest, or
a hundred trees all overtop one another. a general rise or a
general fall of prices is merely tantamount to an alteration
[pg ]
in the value of money, and is a matter of complete indifference,
save in so far as it affects existing contracts for receiving
and paying fixed pecuniary amounts.
before commencing the inquiry into the laws of value
and price, i have one further observation to make. i must
give warning, once for all, that the cases i contemplate are
those in which values and prices are determined by competition
alone. in so far only as they are thus determined, can
they be reduced to any assignable law. the buyers must be
supposed as studious to buy cheap as the sellers to sell dear.
the reader is advised to study the definitions of value given
by other writers. cairnes defines value as “the ratio in which
commodities in open market are exchanged against each other.”
f. a. walker holds that “value is the power which an article
confers upon its possessor, irrespective of legal authority or
personal sentiments, of commanding, in exchange for itself,
the labor, or the products of the labor, of others.” carey
says, “value is the measure of the resistance to be overcome
in obtaining those commodities or things required for our purposes—of
the power of nature over man.” value is thus, with
him, the antithesis of wealth, which is (according to carey) the
power of man over nature. in this school, value is the service
rendered by any one who supplies the article for the use
of another. this is also bastiat's idea, “le rapport de deux
services échangés.” following bastiat, a. l.
perry defines
value as “always and everywhere the relation of mutual purchase
established between two services by their exchange.”
roscher explains exchange value as “the quality which makes
them exchangeable against other goods.” he also makes a
distinction between utility and value in use: “utility is a
quality of things themselves, in relation, it is true, to human
wants. value in use is a quality imputed to them, the result
of man's thought, or his view of them. thus, for instance, in
a beleaguered city, the stores of food do not increase in utility,
but their value in use does.” levasseur regards value as “the
relation resulting from exchange”—le
rapport resultant de l'échange. cherbuliez asserts that “the
value of a product or
[pg ]
of a service can be expressed only as the products or services
which it obtains in exchange.... if i exchange the thing a
against b, a is the value of b, b is the value of a.”
jevons
defines value as “proportion in exchange.”
§ . conditions of value: utility, difficulty of attainment,
and transferableness.
that a thing may have any value in exchange, two
conditions are necessary. . it must be of some use; that is
(as already explained), it must conduce to some purpose, satisfy
some desire. no one will pay a price, or part with anything
which serves some of his purposes, to obtain a thing
which serves none of them. . but, secondly, the thing
must not only have some utility, there must also be some
difficulty in its attainment.
the question is one as to the conditions essential to the existence
of any value. very justly cairnes adds also a third
condition, “the possibility of transferring the possession of the
articles which are the subject of the exchange.” for instance,
a cargo of wheat at the bottom of the sea has value in use and
difficulty of attainment, but it is not transferable. jevons (following
j. b. say) maintains that “value depends entirely on
utility.” if utility means the power to satisfy a desire, things
which merely have utility and no difficulty of attainment could
have no exchange value. f. a. walker believes that “value
depends wholly on the relation between demand and supply.”
carey holds that value depends merely on the cost of reproduction
of the given article. roscher finds that exchange value
is “based on a combination of value in use with cost value.”
cherbuliez
calls the conditions of value two, “the ability to
give satisfaction, and inability of attainment without effort.
the first element is subjective; it is determined wholly by the
needs or desires of the parties to the exchange. the second is
objective; it depends upon material considerations, which are
the conditions of the existence of the thing, and upon which the
needs of the persons exchanging have no influence whatever.”
it is, as usual, one of cherbuliez's clear expositions. a. l.
perry
states that, “while value always takes its rise in the
desires of men, it is never realized except through the
efforts of men, and through these efforts as mutually exchanged.”
[pg ]
the difficulty of attainment which determines value is
not always the same kind of difficulty: (.) it sometimes
consists in an absolute limitation of the supply. there are
things of which it is physically impossible to increase the
quantity beyond certain narrow limits. such are those wines
which can be grown only in peculiar circumstances of soil, climate,
and exposure. such also are ancient sculptures; pictures
by the old masters; rare books or coins, or other articles of
antiquarian curiosity. among such may also be reckoned
houses and building-ground, in a town of definite extent.
de quincey
has presented some ingenious diagrams to
represent the operations of the two constituents of value in
each of the three following cases: u represents the
power of the article to satisfy some desire, and d
difficulty of attainment. in the first case, exchange
value is not hindered by d from going up to any
height, and so it rises and falls entirely according
to the force of u. d being practically infinite,
the horizontal line, exchange value, is not kept
down by d, but it rises just as far as u, the desires
of purchasers, may carry it.
(.) but there is another category (embracing the majority
of all things that are bought and sold), in which the obstacle
to attainment consists only in the labor and expense
requisite to produce the commodity. without a certain
labor and expense it can not be had; but, when any one is
willing to incur these, there needs be no limit to the multiplication
of the product. if there were laborers enough and
machinery enough, cottons, woolens, or linens might be produced
by thousands of yards for every single yard now manufactured.
in case () the horizontal line, representing
exchange value, follows the force of d entirely.
the utility of the article is very great, but the
value is only limited by the difficulty of obtaining
it. so far as u is concerned, exchange
value can go up a great distance, but will go no
higher than the point where the article can be
[pg ]
obtained. the dotted lines underneath the horizontal line indicate
that the exchange value of articles in this class tend to
fall in value.
(.) there is a third case, intermediate between the two
preceding, and rather more complex, which i shall at present
merely indicate, but the importance of which in political
economy is extremely great. there are commodities which
can be multiplied to an indefinite extent by labor and expenditure,
but not by a fixed amount of labor and expenditure.
only a limited quantity can be produced at a given
cost; if more is wanted, it must be produced at a greater
cost. to this class, as has been often repeated, agricultural
produce belongs, and generally all the rude produce of the
earth; and this peculiarity is a source of very important consequences;
one of which is the necessity of a limit to population;
and another, the payment of rent.
in case () articles like agricultural produce have a very
great power to satisfy desires, and if scarce would
have a high value. so far as u is concerned, here
also, as in case (), exchange value might mount
upward to almost any height, but it can go no
higher than d permits. in commodities of this
class, affected by the law of diminishing returns,
the tendency is for d to increase, and so for exchange
value to rise, as indicated by the dotted lines
above that of the exchange value.
§ . commodities limited in quantity by the law of demand and supply:
general working of this law.
these being the three classes, in one or other of
which all things that are bought and sold must take their
place, we shall consider them in their order. and first, of
things absolutely limited in quantity, such as ancient sculptures
or pictures.
of such things it is commonly said that their value depends
on their scarcity; others say that the value depends
on the demand and supply. but this statement requires
much explanation. the supply of a commodity is an intelligible
expression: it means the quantity offered for sale;
the quantity that is to be had, at a given time and place, by
those who wish to purchase it. but what is meant by the
demand? not the mere desire for the commodity. a beggar
[pg ]
may desire a diamond; but his desire, however great,
will have no influence on the price. writers have therefore
given a more limited sense to demand, and have defined
it, the wish to possess, combined with the power of
purchasing.
to distinguish demand in this technical sense from
the demand which is synonymous with desire, they call the
former effectual demand.
general supply consists in the commodities offered in exchange
for other commodities; general demand likewise, if no
money exists, consists in the commodities offered as purchasing
power in exchange for other commodities. that is, one can
not increase the demand for certain things without increasing
the supply of some articles which will be received in exchange
for the desired commodities. demand is based upon the production
of articles having exchange value, in its economic
sense; and the measure of this demand is necessarily the quantity
of commodities offered in exchange for the desired goods.
general demand and supply are thus reciprocal to each other.
but as soon as money, or general purchasing power, is introduced,
mr. cairnes defines “demand as the desire for commodities
or services, seeking its end by an offer of general purchasing
power; and supply, as the desire for general purchasing
power, seeking its end by an offer of specific commodities or
services.” but many persons find a difficulty because they
insist upon separating the idea of supply from that of demand,
owing to the fact that producers seem to be a distinct class in
the community, different from consumers. that they are in
reality the same persons can be easily explained by the following
statement: “a certain number of people, a, b, c, d, e,
f, etc., are engaged in industrial occupations—a produces for
b, c, d, e, f; b for a, c, d, e, f; c for a, b, d, e, f, and
so on. in each case the producer and the consumers are distinct,
and hence, by a very natural fallacy, it is concluded that
the whole body of consumers is distinct from the whole body of
producers, whereas they consist of precisely the same persons.”
but in regard to demand and supply of particular commodities
(not general demand and supply), the increase of the demand
[pg ]
is not necessarily followed by an increased supply, or
vice versa. out of the total production (which constitutes
general demand) a varying amount, sometimes more, sometimes
less, may be directed by the desires of men to the purchase of
some given thing. this should be borne in mind, in connection
with the future discussion of over-production. the identity
of general demand with general supply shows there can be
no general over-production: but so long as there exists the possibility
that the demand for a particular commodity may diminish
without a corresponding effect being thereby produced on
the supply of that commodity, by a necessary connection, we
see that there may be over-production of particular commodities;
that is, a production in excess of the demand.
the proper mathematical analogy [between demand and
supply] is that of an equation. if unequal at any moment,
competition equalizes them, and the manner in which this is
done is by an adjustment of the value. if the demand increases,
the value rises; if the demand diminishes, the value
falls; again, if the supply falls off, the value rises; and falls,
if the supply is increased. the rise or the fall continues
until the demand and supply are again equal to one another:
and the value which a commodity will bring in any market
is no other than the value which, in that market, gives a
demand just sufficient to carry off the existing or expected
supply.
mr. cairnes finally defined market value as the price
“which is sufficient, and no more than sufficient, to carry the
existing supply over, with such a surplus as circumstances
may render advisable, to meet the new supplies forthcoming,”
which is nothing more than a paraphrase of the words “existing
or expected supply” just used by mr. mill. it seems
unnecessary, therefore, that mr. cairnes should have added:
“according to mr. mill, the actual market price is the price
which equalizes supply and demand in a given market; as i
view the case, the ‘proper market price’ is the price which
equalizes supply and demand, not as existing in the particular
market, but in the larger sense which i have assigned to the
terms. to this price the actual market price will, according
to my view, approximate, in proportion to the intelligence and
knowledge of the dealers.”
[pg ]
adam smith, who introduced the expression “effectual
demand,” employed it to denote the demand of those who
are willing and able to give for the commodity what he calls
its natural price—that is, the price which will enable it to be
permanently produced and brought to market.
this, then, is the law of value, with respect to all commodities
not susceptible of being multiplied at pleasure.
§ . miscellaneous cases falling under this law.
there are but few commodities which are naturally
and necessarily limited in supply. but any commodity
whatever may be artificially so. the monopolist can fix the
value as high as he pleases, short of what the consumer either
could not or would not pay; but he can only do so by limiting
the supply. monopoly value, therefore, does not depend
on any peculiar principle, but is a mere variety of the ordinary
case of demand and supply.
again, though there are few commodities which are at
all times and forever unsusceptible of increase of supply,
any commodity whatever may be temporarily so; and with
some commodities this is habitually the case. agricultural
produce, for example, can not be increased in quantity before
the next harvest; the quantity of corn already existing in
the world is all that can be had for sometimes a year to
come. during that interval, corn is practically assimilated
to things of which the quantity can not be increased. in the
case of most commodities, it requires a certain time to increase
their quantity; and if the demand increases, then,
until a corresponding supply can be brought forward, that
is, until the supply can accommodate itself to the demand,
the value will so rise as to accommodate the demand to the
supply.
there is another case the exact converse of this. there
are some articles of which the supply may be indefinitely
increased, but can not be rapidly diminished. there are
things so durable that the quantity in existence is at all times
very great in comparison with the annual produce. gold
[pg ]
and the more durable metals are things of this sort, and
also houses. the supply of such things might be at once
diminished by destroying them; but to do this could only
be the interest of the possessor if he had a monopoly of the
article, and could repay himself for the destruction of a part
by the increased value of the remainder. the value, therefore,
of such things may continue for a long time so low,
either from excess of supply or falling off in the demand, as
to put a complete stop to further production; the diminution
of supply by wearing out being so slow a process that a
long time is requisite, even under a total suspension of production,
to restore the original value. during that interval
the value will be regulated solely by supply and demand,
and will rise very gradually as the existing stock wears out,
until there is again a remunerating value, and production
resumes its course.
the total value of gold and silver in the world is variously
estimated at from $,,, to $,,,; while
the annual production of both gold and silver in the world
during  was only $,,. the loss of gold by
abrasion is about / annually, and of silver about /, but
much depends on the size of the coin. a change in the annual
production of the precious metals can have a perceptible effect
on their value only after such a time as will permit the change
to affect the existing quantity in a way somewhat comparable
with its previous amount. the quantity, however, of wheat
produced is nearly all consumed between harvests; and the
annual supply bears a very large ratio to the existing quantity.
consequently the price of wheat will be very seriously affected
by the quantity coming from the annual product.
finally, there are commodities of which, though capable
of being increased or diminished to a great and even an unlimited
extent, the value never depends upon anything but
demand and supply. this is the case, in particular, with the
commodity labor, of the value of which we have treated
copiously in the preceding book; and there are many cases
besides in which we shall find it necessary to call in this
[pg ]
principle to solve difficult questions of exchange value. this
will be particularly exemplified when we treat of international
values; that is, of the terms of interchange between
things produced in different countries, or, to speak more generally,
in distant places.
§ . commodities which are susceptible of indefinite multiplication without
increase of cost. law of their value cost of production.
when the production of a commodity is the effect of
labor and expenditure, whether the commodity is susceptible
of unlimited multiplication or not, there is a minimum value
which is the essential condition of its being permanently
produced. the value at any particular time is the result of
supply and demand, and is always that which is necessary
to create a market for the existing supply. but unless that
value is sufficient to repay the cost of production, and to
afford, besides, the ordinary expectation of profit, the commodity
will not continue to be produced. capitalists will
not go on permanently producing at a loss. when such
profit is evidently not to be had, if people do not actually
withdraw their capital, they at least abstain from replacing
it when consumed. the cost of production, together with
the ordinary profit, may, therefore, be called the necessary
price or value of all things made by labor and capital. nobody
willingly produces in the prospect of loss.
when a commodity is not only made by labor and capital,
but can be made by them in indefinite quantity, this
necessary value, the minimum with which the producers
will be content, is also, if competition is free and active, the
maximum which they can expect. if the value of a commodity
is such that it repays the cost of production not only
with the customary but with a higher rate of profit, capital
rushes to share in this extra gain, and, by increasing the supply
of the article, reduces its value. this is not a mere supposition
or surmise, but a fact familiar to those conversant
with commercial operations. whenever a new line of business
presents itself, offering a hope of unusual profits, and
whenever any established trade or manufacture is believed
to be yielding a greater profit than customary, there is sure
to be in a short time so large a production or importation of
[pg ]
the commodity as not only destroys the extra profit, but
generally goes beyond the mark, and sinks the value as much
too low as it had before been raised too high, until the over-supply
is corrected by a total or partial suspension of further
production. as already intimated, these variations in the
quantity produced do not presuppose or require that any
person should change his employment. those whose business
is thriving, increase their produce by availing themselves
more largely of their credit, while those who are not
making the ordinary profit, restrict their operations, and (in
manufacturing phrase) work short time. in this mode is
surely and speedily effected the equalization, not of profits,
perhaps, but of the expectations of profit, in different occupations.
as a general rule, then, things tend to exchange for one
another at such values as will enable each producer to be
repaid the cost of production with the ordinary profit; in
other words, such as will give to all producers the same rate
of profit on their outlay. but in order that the profit may
be equal where the outlay, that is, the cost of production,
is equal, things must on the average exchange for one another
in the ratio of their cost of production; things of
which the cost of production is the same, must be of the
same value.
mr. mill has here used cost of production almost exactly
in the sense of cost of labor, and as excluding profit (while in
the next chapter he includes some part of profit in the analysis).
it will be well, for the sake of definiteness, to collect the
phrases above in which he describes cost of production: “unless
that value is sufficient to repay the cost of production, and
to afford, besides, the ordinary expectation of profit, the commodity
will not continue to be produced”; “the cost of production,
together with the ordinary profit, may therefore be
called the necessary price, or value”; “it repays the cost of
production, not only with the customary, but with a higher
rate of profit”; “the cost of production with the ordinary
profit—in other words, such as will give to all producers the
same rate of profit on their outlay”; “that the profit may be
[pg ]
equal where the outlay, that is, the cost of production, is equal.”
this is a view which distinctly uses cost of production in the
sense of the outlay to the capitalist, or cost of labor. in no
other way can profit vary with “cost of production” than in the
sense that it is what a given article “costs to the capitalist”;
but that is mr. mill's definition of cost of labor (p. ).
it is, however, very puzzling when in the next section he speaks of
“the natural value, that is, the cost of production.” above,
value included cost of production and profit also. having
thus pointed out what is mr. mill's conception of cost of production,
it will remain for us in the next chapter to consider
whether any other view of it is more satisfactory.
adam smith and ricardo have called that value of a
thing which is proportional to its cost of production, its
natural value (or its natural price). they meant by this,
the point about which the value oscillates, and to which it
always tends to return; the center value, toward which, as
adam smith expresses it, the market value of a thing is
constantly gravitating; and any deviation from which is
but a temporary irregularity which, the moment it exists,
sets forces in motion tending to correct it. on an average
of years sufficient to enable the oscillations on one side of
the central line to be compensated by those on the other,
the market value agrees with the natural value; but it very
seldom coincides exactly with it at any particular time. the
sea everywhere tends to a level, but it never is at an exact
level; its surface is always ruffled by waves, and often agitated
by storms. it is enough that no point, at least in the
open sea, is permanently higher than another. each place
is alternately elevated and depressed; but the ocean preserves
its level.
§ . the value of these commodities confirm, in the long run, to their
cost of production through the operation of demand and supply.
the latent influence by which the values of things
are made to conform in the long run to the cost of production
is the variation that would otherwise take place in the
supply of the commodity. the supply would be increased
if the thing continued to sell above the ratio of its cost of production,
and would be diminished if it fell below that ratio.
if one dollar covers the expense of making one spade, then
when a spade, by virtue of a sudden demand, rises in value to one
[pg ]
dollar and ten cents, the manufacturers get an extra profit of
ten cents. this could not long remain so, because other capital
would enter this industry, and so increase the supply that
one spade would sell for only one dollar; then all would receive
the average profit. if, owing to a cessation of demand for
spades, the price fell to ninety cents, then the manufacturers
would lose ten cents on each one made and sold. thereupon
they would cease to do a losing business, capital would be
withdrawn, and spades would not be made until the supply was
suited to the necessary expense of making them (one dollar).
in this way, whenever there is a departure of the value from
the normal cost, there is set in motion ipso facto a series of
forces which automatically restores the value to that cost. so
here again we see the nature of an economic law: the value
may not often correspond exactly with cost of production, but
there is a tendency in all values to conform to that cost, and
this tendency they irresistibly obey. a body possessing weight
does not move downward under all circumstances (stones may
be thrown upward), but the law of gravitation holds true, nevertheless.
there is no need that there should be any actual alteration
of supply; and when there is, the alteration, if permanent,
is not the cause but the consequence of the alteration
in value. if, indeed, the supply could not be increased, no
diminution in the cost of production would lower the value;
but there is by no means any necessity that it should. the
mere possibility often suffices; the dealers are aware of what
would happen, and their mutual competition makes them
anticipate the result by lowering the price.
before the electric light was yet known as a feasible means
of lighting (in ), the mere rumor of edison's invention,
before it was made public, and long before it became practicable,
caused a serious fall in the price of gas stocks.
it is, therefore, strictly correct to say that the value of
things which can be increased in quantity at pleasure does
not depend (except accidentally, and during the time necessary
for production to adjust itself) upon demand and supply;
on the contrary, demand and supply depend upon it.
there is a demand for a certain quantity of the commodity
at its natural or cost value, and to that the supply in the
long run endeavors to conform.
[pg ]
mr. cairnes fitly says: “the supply of a commodity always
tends to adapt itself to the demand at the normal price.
i may here say briefly that by the normal price of a commodity
i mean that price which suffices, and no more than suffices,
to yield to the producers what is considered to be the
average and usual remuneration on such sacrifices as they
undergo.”
when at any time it fails of so conforming, it is either
from miscalculation, or from a change in some of the elements
of the problem; either in the natural value, that is,
in the cost of production, or in the demand, from an alteration
in public taste, or in the number or wealth of the consumers.
if a value different from the natural value be necessary
to make the demand equal to the supply, the market
value will deviate from the natural value; but only for a
time, for the permanent tendency of supply is to conform
itself to the demand which is found by experience to exist
for the commodity when selling at its natural value. if the
supply is either more or less than this, it is so accidentally,
and affords either more or less than the ordinary rate of
profit, which, under free and active competition, can not
long continue to be the case.
to recapitulate: demand and supply govern the value
of all things which can not be indefinitely increased; except
that even for them, when produced by industry, there is a
minimum value, determined by the cost of production. but
in all things which admit of indefinite multiplication, demand
and supply only determine the perturbations of value
during a period which can not exceed the length of time
necessary for altering the supply. while thus ruling the
oscillations of value, they themselves obey a superior force,
which makes value gravitate toward cost of production, and
which would settle it and keep it there, if fresh disturbing
influences were not continually arising to make it again deviate.
[pg ]
chapter ii. ultimate analysis of cost of production.
§ . of labor, the principal element in cost of production.
the component elements of cost of production have
been set forth in the first part of this
inquiry. the principal
of them, and so much the principal as to be nearly the
sole, was found to be labor. what the production of a thing
costs to its producer, or its series of producers, is the labor
expended in producing it. if we consider as the producer
the capitalist who makes the advances, the word labor may
be replaced by the word wages: what the produce costs to
him, is the wages which he has had to pay. at the first
glance, indeed, this seems to be only a part of his outlay,
since he has not only paid wages to laborers, but has likewise
provided them with tools, materials, and perhaps buildings.
these tools, materials, and buildings, however, were produced
by labor and capital; and their value, like that of the
article to the production of which they are subservient, depends
on cost of production, which again is resolvable into
labor. the cost of production of broadcloth does not wholly
consist in the wages of weavers; which alone are directly
paid by the cloth-manufacturer. it consists also of the wages
of spinners and wool-combers, and, it may be added, of shepherds,
all of which the clothier has paid for in the price of
yarn. it consists, too, of the wages of builders and brick-makers,
which he has reimbursed in the contract price of
erecting his factory. it partly consists of the wages of machine-makers,
iron-founders, and miners. and to these must
be added the wages of the carriers who transported any of
[pg ]
the means and appliances of the production to the place
where they were to be used, and the product itself to the
place where it is to be sold.
confirmation is here given, in the above words, of the
opinion that, in mr. mill's mind, cost of production was looked
at wholly from the stand-point of the capitalist, and was identical
with cost of labor to the capitalist.
the value of commodities, therefore, depends principally
(we shall presently see whether it depends solely) on the
quantity of labor required for their production, including
in the idea of production that of conveyance to the market.
but since the cost of production to the capitalist is not labor
but wages, and since wages may be either greater or less, the
quantity of labor being the same, it would seem that the
value of the product can not be determined solely by the
quantity of labor, but by the quantity together with the remuneration,
and that values must partly depend on wages.
now the relation of one thing to another can not be altered
by any cause which affects them both alike. a rise or fall of
general wages is a fact which affects all commodities in the
same manner, and therefore affords no reason why they should
exchange for each other in one rather than in another proportion.
though there is no such thing as a general rise of
values, there is such a thing as a general rise of prices. as
soon as we form distinctly the idea of values, we see that
high or low wages can have nothing to do with them; but
that high wages make high prices, is a popular and widely
spread opinion. the whole amount of error involved in this
proposition can only be seen thoroughly when we come to
the theory of money; at present we need only say that if it
be true, there can be no such thing as a real rise of wages;
for if wages could not rise without a proportional rise of the
price of everything, they could not, for any substantial purpose,
rise at all. it must be remembered, too, that general
high prices, even supposing them to exist, can be of no use
to a producer or dealer, considered as such; for, if they increase
his money returns, they increase in the same degree
[pg ]
all his expenses. there is no mode in which capitalists can
compensate themselves for a high cost of labor, through any
action on values or prices. it can not be prevented from
taking its effect in low profits. if the laborers really get
more, that is, get the produce of more labor, a smaller percentage
must remain for profit.
§ . wages affect values, only if different in different employments;
“non-competing groups.”
although, however, general wages, whether high or
low, do not affect values, yet if wages are higher in one employment
than another, or if they rise or fall permanently in
one employment without doing so in others, these inequalities
do really operate upon values. things, for example,
which are made by skilled labor, exchange for the produce
of a much greater quantity of unskilled labor, for no reason
but because the labor is more highly paid. we have before
remarked that the difficulty of passing from one class of employments
to a class greatly superior has hitherto caused the
wages of all those classes of laborers who are separated from
one another by any very marked barrier to depend more
than might be supposed upon the increase of the population
of each class considered separately, and that the inequalities
in the remuneration of labor are much greater than could
exist if the competition of the laboring people generally
could be brought practically to bear on each particular employment.
it follows from this that wages in different employments
do not rise or fall simultaneously, but are, for
short and sometimes even for long periods, nearly independent
of one another. all such disparities evidently alter the
relative cost of production of different commodities, and will
therefore be completely represented in their natural or average
value.
this is again a clear recognition of the influence of mr.
cairnes's theory of “non-competing groups.”
wages do enter into value. the relative wages of the
labor necessary for producing different commodities affect
their value just as much as the relative quantities of labor.
[pg ]
it is true, the absolute wages paid have no effect upon values;
but neither has the absolute quantity of labor. if that were
to vary simultaneously and equally in all commodities, values
would not be affected. if, for instance, the general efficiency
of all labor were increased, so that all things without exception
could be produced in the same quantity as before with a
smaller amount of labor, no trace of this general diminution
of cost of production would show itself in the values of commodities.
§ . profits an element in cost of production.
thus far of labor or wages as an element in cost of
production. but in our analysis, in the first book, of the
requisites of production, we found that there is another necessary
element in it besides labor. there is also capital; and
this being the result of abstinence, the produce, or its value,
must be sufficient to remunerate, not only all the labor required,
but the abstinence of all the persons by whom the
remuneration of the different classes of laborers was advanced.
the return from abstinence is profit. and profit,
we have also seen, is not exclusively the surplus remaining
to the capitalist after he has been compensated for his outlay,
but forms, in most cases, no unimportant part of the outlay
itself. the flax-spinner, part of whose expenses consists of
the purchase of flax and of machinery, has had to pay, in
their price, not only the wages of the labor by which the flax
was grown and the machinery made, but the profits of the
grower, the flax-dresser, the miner, the iron-founder, and the
machine-maker. all these profits, together with those of
the spinner himself, were again advanced by the weaver, in
the price of his material—linen yarn; and along with them
the profits of a fresh set of machine-makers, and of the miners
and iron-workers who supplied them with their metallic
material. all these advances form part of the cost of production
of linen. profits, therefore, as well as wages, enter
into the cost of production which determines the value of
the produce.
§ . cost of production properly represented by sacrifice, or cost, to the
laborer as well as to the capitalist; the relation of this conception to the
cost of labor.
in discussing cost of labor (supra, pp.
, ), mr.
mill found that the advances of the immediate producer consisted
[pg ]
not only of wages, but also of tools, materials, etc., in the
price of which he was including the profits of an auxiliary capitalist
who advanced the capital for making these tools, etc.
but, then, if a line of division were to be passed down through
all these advances, separating wages from profits, he urged that,
if all the capitalists (auxiliary and immediate both) were one,
all the advances of the capitalist might be considered as wages.
profits did not form a part of the outlay to the capitalists in
the former analysis. and this seems correct enough. now,
however, he suggests that the outlay of the immediate producers
should include the profit of the auxiliary capitalist. more
than this, mr. mill now includes in cost to the capitalist the
profit of the immediate capitalist. for example, in his illustration
of the manufacture of linen, he includes not merely
the profit of the auxiliary capital engaged in spinning and
weaving, but the profit of the immediate and last capitalist, the
linen-manufacturer, also. this includes in the cost of producing
an article a profit not realized until after the commodity is
produced.
it is now time to give a more correct idea of cost of production.
every one admits, for example, that the “cost of production”
of wheat is less in the united states than in england. if,
for instance, three men with a capital of one hundred dollars may
on a plot of ground, a, in the united states produce one hundred
bushels of wheat, it will happen that the same men and capital
will only produce sixty bushels on ground, b, in england.
in ordinary language, then, we say that the cost of production
is greater in england than in the united states, because the
same labor and capital here produce one hundred bushels for
sixty in england; or, what amounts to the same thing, that less
labor and capital could produce sixty bushels in the united
states than sixty bushels in england. if we suppose that one
fourth of the crop is profit, and three fourths is assigned to
wages in both countries, then in the united states the one
hundred dollars of capital receives twenty-five bushels of profit,
while in england it receives only fifteen; and the three men
receive as wages in the united states twenty-five bushels each,
while in england they receive only fifteen bushels each. the
first important induction to be made is that where cost of production
[pg ]
is low, wages and profits are high. the high productiveness
of extractive industries in the united states is the
reason why wages and profits are higher here than in older
countries.
now the second important question is, is cost of production
made up of wages and profits, and is it true that the cost rises
with a rise of wages and profits? certainly not. wages and
profits are both higher in the united states than in england,
but no one is so absurd as to say that the cost of production of
wheat (as above explained) is higher here than there. it is
exactly because cost of production of wheat is lower in the
united states that wages and profits measured in wheat are
higher here than in england. therefore, it can not be granted,
as mr. mill expounds the doctrine, that cost of production is
made up of wages and profits. when we speak of an increased
cost of production of a given article, we mean that its
production requires more labor and capital than before; and of
a decrease in cost of production, that it requires less labor and
capital than before; meaning by “more labor” that a given
quality of labor is exerted for a longer or shorter time, and by
“more capital” that a greater or less quantity of wealth abstained
from is employed for a longer or shorter time; or, in
other words, that laborers and capitalists undergo more or less
sacrifice in exertion and abstinence, respectively, to attain a
given result. this is the contribution to cost of production
made by mr. cairnes, and briefly defined as follows: “in the
case of labor, the cost of producing a given commodity will be
represented by the number of average laborers employed in its
production—regard at the same time being had to the severity
of the work and the degree of risk it involves—multiplied by
the duration of their labors. in that of abstinence, the principle
is analogous; the sacrifice will be measured by the quantity of
wealth abstained from, taken in connection with the risk incurred,
and multiplied by the duration of the abstinence.”
this view of cost of production takes into consideration,
in the act of production, what mr. mill does not include, the
cost, or real sacrifice, to the laborer as well as to the capitalist.
it may, then, be well to state the relations of cost of production,
taken in this better sense, to value.
within competing groups, where there is free choice for
labor and capital to select the most remunerative occupations,
the hardest and most disagreeable employments will be
best paid, and the wages and profits will be in proportion to
the sacrifice involved in each case. if so, the amount paid
in wages and profits represents the sacrifices in each case.
[pg ]
now, the aggregate product of an industry is the source from
which is drawn its wages and profits: the aggregate wages
and profits, therefore, must vary with the value of the total
product. if the total value depart from the sum hitherto sufficient
to pay the given wages and profits, then some will be
paid proportionally less than their sacrifice. the value of a
commodity, therefore, within the competing group, must conform
to the costs of production. if, for example (a), the value
at any time were such as not to give the laborer the usual
equivalent for his sacrifice, he would change his employment
to another within the group where he could get it; if (b) the
share of the capitalist were at any time insufficient to give him
the usual reward for his abstinence, he would change the investment
of his capital. therefore, within such limits as allow a
free competition of labor and capital, value must conform itself
to cost of production.
not so, however, with the products of non-competing industrial
groups. as shown by mr. mill, labor does not pass freely
from one employment to another; and it must be said that
capital does not either, although vastly more ready to move
than labor. in a large and thinly settled country capital does
not move freely over the whole area of industry; if it did, different
rates of profit would not prevail, as we all know they
do, in the united states. now, as before stated, the total
value of the commodities resulting from the exertions of each
group of producers is the source from which wages and profits
are drawn. the aggregate wages and profits in each industry
will vary with the value of the aggregate products. but this
total value depends upon what it will exchange for of the
products of other groups; that is, this value depends on the
reciprocal demand of one group for the commodities of the
other groups, as compared with the demand of the other groups
for its products. for example, although cost of production is
low in group a, if the demand from outside groups were to be
strong, the exchange value of a's products would rise, and a
would get more of other goods in exchange; that is, the total
produce is large, but a second increment, arising from a higher
exchange value, is to be shared among a's laborers and capitalists.
a few years ago, about -, the value of wheat in
the united states rose because of the increased demand from
europe, where the harvests had been unusually deficient.
there had been no falling off in the productiveness of the
farming industry of the united states to cause the increased
price; but the relative demand of other industrial groups for
wheat, the product of the farming industry, raised the exchange
value of wheat, and so increased the industrial rewards
of those engaged as laborers and capitalists in farming. so
[pg ]
it is to be concluded that since there is no free movement of
labor and capital between non-competing groups, wages and
profits may constantly remain at rates which are not in correspondence
with the actual sacrifice, or cost, to labor and capital
in different groups; hence, their products do not exchange for
each other in proportion to their costs of production. reciprocal
demand is the law of their value.
it will be said, at once, that the foregoing conception of
cost of production is entirely opposed to the language of practical
men of affairs. they constantly speak of higher or lower
wages as increasing their cost of production, or as affecting
their ability to compete with foreigners. so universal a usage
implies a foundation of truth which demands attention. wages
do represent cost to the capitalist, that is, the chief part of the
outlay he makes in order to get a given return; but we have
already seen this, and, in the language of political economy,
termed it “cost of labor” to the capitalist. when the business
world use the phrase cost of production, they use it in the
sense of cost of labor, as hitherto explained. when they are
obliged by strikers to pay more wages, they say that it increases
their “cost of production,” meaning the cost to them of getting
their product, and that it affects their profits. this, then,
will show that there is no objection to be urged, in its true
sense, against the phrase cost of production, arising from its
misuse in the common language of business.
the real connection between the proper conception of cost
of production and cost of labor is, however, worth attention.
it touches cost of labor through that one of its elements called
“efficiency of labor.” the more productive an industry is, the
higher its wages and profits may be, and it is exactly at this
point that more attention should be given to the relations of
labor and capital. if productiveness can be increased, higher
wages as well as higher profits are possible. the proper understanding
of the idea that where cost of production is low
wages and profits are high, throws a flood of light on many
industrial questions in the united states. in the connection
in which it stands, as i have shown, to cost of labor, it means
that if commodities can be produced at a less sacrifice to labor
and capital by the use of machinery and new processes, higher
wages are consistent with a lower price of the given product.
it explains the fact that, owing to skill or natural resources,
labor, although paid much higher rates, can produce articles
cheaper than laborers who are less highly paid. mr. brassey
has pointed out that english wages are higher than on the
continent; and yet england, through low cost of production,
[pg ]
owing to skill, natural resources, etc., can produce so much
more of commodities for a given outlay that (while keeping
her usual rate of profit) she can generally undersell her competitors
who employ cheaper labor. the same observations
apply to the united states; but the question of foreign competition
will be further discussed (book iii, chap. xx)
after we have studied international trade and values.
“and here it may be well to state precisely what is to be
understood by a ‘fluctuation of the market,’ as distinguished
from those changes of normal price which we have been considering.
normal price, as we have seen, is governed, according
to the circumstances of the case [as to whether there is
free industrial competition or not], by one or other of two
causes—cost of production and reciprocal demand. a change
in normal price, therefore, is a change which is the consequence
of an alteration in one or other of these conditions. so long
as the determining condition—be it cost of production or reciprocal
demand—remains constant, the normal price must be considered
as remaining constant; but, the normal price remaining
constant, the market price (which, as we have seen, depends
on the opinion of dealers respecting the state of supply and
demand in relation to the particular article) may undergo a
change—may deviate, that is to say, either upward or downward
from the normal level. such changes of price, occurring
while the permanent conditions of production remain unaffected,
can only be temporary, calling into action, as they do,
forces which at once tend to restore the normal state of things:
they may therefore be properly described as ‘fluctuations of
the market.’ ”
§ . when profits vary from employment to employment, or are spread over
unequal lengths of time, they affect values accordingly.
value, however, being purely relative, can not depend
upon absolute profits, no more than upon absolute
wages, but upon relative profits only. high general profits
can not, any more than high general wages, be a cause of
high values, because high general values are an absurdity and
a contradiction. in so far as profits enter into the cost of
production of all things, they can not affect the value of any.
it is only by entering in a greater degree into the cost of
production of some things than of others, that they can have
any influence on value.
profits, however, may enter more largely into the conditions
of production of one commodity than of another, even
[pg ]
though there be no difference in the rate of profit between
the two employments. the one commodity may be called
upon to yield a profit during a longer period of time than
the other. the example by which this case is usually illustrated
is that of wine. suppose a quantity of wine and a
quantity of cloth, made by equal amounts of labor, and that
labor paid at the same rate. the cloth does not improve by
keeping; the wine does. suppose that, to attain the desired
quality, the wine requires to be kept five years. the producer
or dealer will not keep it, unless at the end of five
years he can sell it for as much more than the cloth as
amounts to five years' profit, accumulated at compound interest.
the wine and the cloth were made by the same original
outlay. here, then, is a case in which the natural values,
relatively to one another, of two commodities, do not conform
to their cost of production alone, but to their cost of production
plus something else—unless, indeed, for the sake of
generality in the expression, we include the profit which the
wine-merchant foregoes during the five years, in the cost of
production of the wine, looking upon it as a kind of additional
outlay, over and above his other advances, for which
outlay he must be indemnified at last.
regarding cost of production as the amounts of labor and
abstinence required in production, and not as mr. mill regards
it, as the amounts of wages and profits, the above is simply a
case where, in the production of wine, there is a longer duration
of the abstinence than in the production of cloth. if there
is a free movement of labor and capital between the two industries,
they will exchange for each other in proportion to the
sacrifices involved; so that the wine would exchange for more
of cloth, because there was more sacrifice undergone. the
same explanation also holds good in the following illustration:
all commodities made by machinery are assimilated, at
least approximately, to the wine in the preceding example.
in comparison with things made wholly by immediate labor,
profits enter more largely into their cost of production.
suppose two commodities, a and b, each requiring a year
for its production, by means of a capital which we will on
[pg ]
this occasion denote by money, and suppose it to be £,.
a is made wholly by immediate labor, the whole £,
being expended directly in wages. b is made by means
of labor which cost £ and a machine which cost £,
and the machine is worn out by one year's use. the two
commodities will be of exactly the same value, which, if
computed in money, and if profits are  per cent per annum,
will be £,. but of this £,, in the case of a,
only £, or one sixth, is profit; while in the case of b
there is not only the £, but as much of £ (the price
of the machine) as consisted of the profits of the machine-maker;
which, if we suppose the machine also to have taken
a year for its production, is again one sixth. so that in the
case of a only one sixth of the entire return is profit, while
in b the element of profit comprises not only a sixth of the
whole, but an additional sixth of a large part.
from the unequal proportion in which, in different employments,
profits enter into the advances of the capitalist,
and therefore into the returns required by him, two consequences
follow in regard to value. (). one is, that commodities
do not exchange in the ratio simply of the quantities of
labor required to produce them; not even if we allow for
the unequal rates at which different kinds of labor are permanently
remunerated.
(.) a second consequence is, that every rise or fall of general
profits will have an effect on values. not, indeed, by
raising or lowering them generally (which, as we have so often
said, is a contradiction and an impossibility), but by altering
the proportion in which the values of things are affected by
the unequal lengths of time for which profit is due. when
two things, though made by equal labor, are of unequal value
because the one is called upon to yield profit for a greater
number of years or months than the other, this difference of
value will be greater when profits are greater, and less when
they are less. the wine which has to yield five years' profit
more than the cloth will surpass it in value much more if
profits are forty per cent than if they are only twenty.
[pg ]
it follows from this that even a general rise of wages,
when it involves a real increase in the cost of labor, does in
some degree influence values. it does not affect them in the
manner vulgarly supposed, by raising them universally; but
an increase in the cost of labor lowers profits, and therefore
lowers in natural values the things into which profits enter
in a greater proportion than the average, and raises those
into which they enter in a less proportion than the average.
all commodities in the production of which machinery bears
a large part, especially if the machinery is very durable, are
lowered in their relative value when profits fall; or, what
is equivalent, other things are raised in value relatively to
them. this truth is sometimes expressed in a phraseology
more plausible than sound, by saying that a rise of wages
raises the value of things made by labor in comparison with
those made by machinery. but things made by machinery,
just as much as any other things, are made by labor—namely,
the labor which made the machinery itself—the only difference
being that profits enter somewhat more largely into the
production of things for which machinery is used, though
the principal item of the outlay is still labor.
§ . occasional elements in cost of production; taxes and ground-rent.
cost of production consists of several elements, some
of which are constant and universal, others occasional. the
universal elements of cost of production are the wages of
the labor, and the profits of the capital. the occasional elements
are taxes, and any extra cost occasioned by a scarcity
value of some of the requisites. besides the natural and
necessary elements in cost of production—labor and profits—there
are others which are artificial and casual, as, for instance,
a tax. the taxes on hops and malt are as much a
part of the cost of production of those articles as the wages
of the laborers. the expenses which the law imposes, as
well as those which the nature of things imposes, must be
reimbursed with the ordinary profit from the value of the
produce, or the things will not continue to be produced.
but the influence of taxation on value is subject to the same
conditions as the influence of wages and of profits. it is not
[pg ]
general taxation, but differential taxation, that produces the
effect. if all productions were taxed so as to take an equal
percentage from all profits, relative values would be in no
way disturbed. if only a few commodities were taxed, their
value would rise; and if only a few were left untaxed, their
value would fall.
but the case in which scarcity value chiefly operates in
adding to cost of production is the case of natural agents.
these, when unappropriated, and to be had for the taking,
do not enter into the cost of production, save to the extent
of the labor which may be necessary to fit them for use.
even when appropriated, they do not (as we have already
seen) bear a value from the mere fact of the appropriation,
but only from scarcity—that is, from limitation of supply.
but it is equally certain that they often do bear a scarcity
value.
no one can deny that rent sometimes enters into cost of
production [of other than agricultural products]. if i buy
or rent a piece of ground, and build a cloth-manufactory on
it, the ground-rent forms legitimately a part of my expenses
of production, which must be repaid by the product. and
since all factories are built on ground, and most of them in
places where ground is peculiarly valuable, the rent paid for
it must, on the average, be compensated in the values of all
things made in factories. in what sense it is true that rent
does not enter into the cost of production or affect the value
of agricultural produce will be shown in the succeeding
chapter.
these occasional elements in cost of production, such as
taxes, insurance, ground-rent, etc., are to be considered as just
so much of an increase in the quantity of capital required for
the operation involved in the particular production, and, consequently,
result in an increased cost of production, because
there is either more abstinence, or abstinence for a longer time,
to be rewarded. these elements, therefore, if they are not universal
(or common to all articles), will affect the exchange value
of commodities, wherever there is a free competition.
[pg ]
chapter iii. of rent, in its relation to value.
§ . commodities which are susceptible of indefinite multiplication, but not
without increase of cost. law of their value, cost of production in the most
unfavorable existing circumstances.
we have investigated the laws which determine the
value of two classes of commodities—the small class which,
being limited to a definite quantity, have their value entirely
determined by demand and supply, save that their cost of
production (if they have any) constitutes a minimum below
which they can not permanently fall; and the large class,
which can be multiplied ad libitum by labor and capital, and
of which the cost of production fixes the maximum as well
as the minimum at which they can permanently exchange [if
there be free competition]. but there is still a third kind of
commodities to be considered—those which have, not one,
but several costs of production; which can always be increased
in quantity by labor and capital, but not by the same
amount of labor and capital; of which so much may be produced
at a given cost, but a further quantity not without a
greater cost. these commodities form an intermediate class,
partaking of the character of both the others. the principal
of them is agricultural produce. we have already made
abundant reference to the fundamental truth that in agriculture,
the state of the art being given, doubling the labor
does not double the produce; that, if an increased quantity
of produce is required, the additional supply is obtained at
a greater cost than the first. where a hundred quarters of
corn are all that is at present required from the lands of a
given village, if the growth of population made it necessary
to raise a hundred more, either by breaking up worse land
now uncultivated, or by a more elaborate cultivation of the
land already under the plow, the additional hundred, or
some part of them, at least, might cost double or treble as
much per quarter as the former supply.
[pg ]
if the first hundred quarters were all raised at the same
expense (only the best land being cultivated), and if that
expense would be remunerated with the ordinary profit by
a price of s. the quarter, the natural price of wheat, so
long as no more than that quantity was required, would be
s.; and it could only rise above or fall below that price
from vicissitudes of seasons, or other casual variations in supply.
but if the population of the district advanced, a time
would arrive when more than a hundred quarters would be
necessary to feed it. we must suppose that there is no
access to any foreign supply. by the hypothesis, no more
than a hundred quarters can be produced in the district, unless
by either bringing worse land into cultivation, or altering
the system of culture to a more expensive one. neither
of these things will be done without a rise in price. this
rise of price will gradually be brought about by the increasing
demand. so long as the price has risen, but not risen
enough to repay with the ordinary profit the cost of producing
an additional quantity, the increased value of the
limited supply partakes of the nature of a scarcity value.
suppose that it will not answer to cultivate the second best
land, or land of the second degree of remoteness, for a less
return than s. the quarter; and that this price is also necessary
to remunerate the expensive operations by which an
increased produce might be raised from land of the first
quality. if so, the price will rise, through the increased demand,
until it reaches s. that will now be the natural
price; being the price without which the quantity, for which
society has a demand at that price, will not be produced. at
that price, however, society can go on for some time longer;
could go on perhaps forever, if population did not increase.
the price, having attained that point, will not again permanently
recede (though it may fall temporarily from accidental
abundance); nor will it advance further, so long as society
can obtain the supply it requires without a second increase
of the cost of production.
in the case supposed, different portions of the supply of
[pg ]
corn have different costs of production. though the twenty,
or fifty, or one hundred and fifty quarters additional have
been produced at a cost proportional to s., the original
hundred quarters per annum are still produced at a cost only
proportional to s. this is self-evident, if the original and
the additional supply are produced on different qualities of
land. it is equally true if they are produced on the same
land. suppose that land of the best quality, which produced
one hundred quarters at s., has been made to produce one
hundred and fifty by an expensive process, which it would
not answer to undertake without a price of s. the cost
which requires s. is incurred for the sake of fifty quarters
alone: the first hundred might have continued forever to
be produced at the original cost, and with the benefit, on
that quantity, of the whole rise of price caused by the increased
demand: no one, therefore, will incur the additional
expense for the sake of the additional fifty, unless they alone
will pay for the whole of it. the fifty, therefore, will be
produced at their natural price, proportioned to the cost of
their production; while the other hundred will now bring in
s. a quarter more than their natural price—than the price
corresponding to, and sufficing to remunerate, their lower
cost of production.
if the production of any, even the smallest, portion of
the supply requires as a necessary condition a certain price,
that price will be obtained for all the rest. we are not able
to buy one loaf cheaper than another because the corn from
which it was made, being grown on a richer soil, has cost less
to the grower. the value, therefore, of an article (meaning
its natural, which is the same with its average value) is determined
by the cost of that portion of the supply which is
produced and brought to market at the greatest expense.
this is the law of value of the third of the three classes
into which all commodities are divided.
§ . such commodities, when produced in circumstances more favorable, yield a
rent equal to the difference of cost.
if the portion of produce raised in the most unfavorable
circumstances obtains a value proportioned to its cost
of production; all the portions raised in more favorable circumstances,
[pg ]
selling as they must do at the same value, obtain
a value more than proportioned to their cost of production.
the owners, however, of those portions of the produce
enjoy a privilege; they obtain a value which yields them
more than the ordinary profit. the advantage depends on
the possession of a natural agent of peculiar quality, as, for
instance, of more fertile land than that which determines the
general value of the commodity; and when this natural
agent is not owned by themselves, the person who does
own it is able to exact from them, in the form of rent, the
whole extra gain derived from its use. we are thus brought
by another road to the law of rent, investigated in the concluding
chapter of the second book. rent, we again see,
is the difference between the unequal returns to different
parts of the capital employed on the soil. whatever surplus
any portion of agricultural capital produces, beyond
what is produced by the same amount of capital on the
worst soil, or under the most expensive mode of cultivation,
which the existing demands of society compel a recourse to,
that surplus will naturally be paid as rent from that capital,
to the owner of the land on which it is employed.
the discussion of rent is here followed wholly from the
point of view of value, while before (book ii,
chap. vi) the
law of rent was reached through a limitation of the quantity
of land due to the influence of population. in the former case
the rent and produce were stated in bushels. by introducing
price now (as the convenient symbol of value), instead of the
separate increased demands of population in our illustration
than used (p. ), it will be seen how the same operation,
looking at it solely in respect to value, brings us to the same law:
price per bushel.a
bcd bushels
 bushels bushels
 bushelstotal value of product.rent.
total value of product.rent.
total value of product.rent.
total value of product.$.$.$.
[pg ]
it was long thought by political economists, among the
rest even by adam smith, that the produce of land is always
at a monopoly value, because (they said), in addition
to the ordinary rate of profit, it always yields something
further for rent. this we now see to be erroneous. a thing
can not be at a monopoly value when its supply can be increased
to an indefinite extent if we are only willing to
incur the cost. as long as there is any land fit for cultivation,
which at the existing price can not be profitably cultivated
at all, there must be some land a little better, which
will yield the ordinary profit, but allow nothing for rent:
and that land, if within the boundary of a farm, will be
cultivated by the farmer; if not so, probably by the proprietor,
or by some other person on sufferance. some such
land at least, under cultivation, there can scarcely fail to be.
rent, therefore, forms no part of the cost of production
which determines the value of agricultural produce. the
land or the capital most unfavorably circumstanced among
those actually employed, pays no rent, and that land or capital
determines the cost of production which regulates the
value of the whole produce. thus rent is, as we have already
seen, no cause of value, but the price of the privilege
which the inequality of the returns to different portions of
agricultural produce confers on all except the least favored
portion.
rent, in short, merely equalizes the profits of different
farming capitals, by enabling the landlord to appropriate
all extra gains occasioned by superiority of natural advantages.
if all landlords were unanimously to forego their
rent, they would but transfer it to the farmers, without
benefiting the consumer; for the existing price of corn
would still be an indispensable condition of the production
of part of the existing supply, and if a part obtained that
price the whole would obtain it. rent, therefore, unless
artificially increased by restrictive laws, is no burden on
the consumer: it does not raise the price of corn, and is no
otherwise a detriment to the public than inasmuch as if the
[pg ]
state had retained it, or imposed an equivalent in the shape
of a land-tax, it would then have been a fund applicable to
general instead of private advantage.
the nationalization of the land, consequently, would not
benefit the laboring-classes a whit through lowering the price
to them, or any consumer, of food or agricultural produce.
§ . rent of mines and fisheries and ground-rent of buildings, and cases of gain
analogous to rent.
agricultural productions are not the only commodities
which have several different costs of production at once,
and which, in consequence of that difference, and in proportion
to it, afford a rent. mines are also an instance. almost
all kinds of raw material extracted from the interior
of the earth—metals, coals, precious stones, etc.—are obtained
from mines differing considerably in fertility—that
is, yielding very different quantities of the product to the
same quantity of labor and capital. there are, perhaps,
cases in which it is impossible to extract from a particular
vein, in a given time, more than a certain quantity of ore,
because there is only a limited surface of the vein exposed,
on which more than a certain number of laborers can not be
simultaneously employed. but this is not true of all mines.
in collieries, for example, some other cause of limitation
must be sought for. in some instances the owners limit the
quantity raised, in order not too rapidly to exhaust the mine;
in others there are said to be combinations of owners, to keep
up a monopoly price by limiting the production. whatever
be the causes, it is a fact that mines of different degrees of
richness are in operation, and since the value of the produce
must be proportional to the cost of production at the worst
mine (fertility and situation taken together), it is more than
proportional to that of the best. all mines superior in produce
to the worst actually worked will yield, therefore, a
rent equal to the excess. they may yield more; and the
worst mine may itself yield a rent. mines being comparatively
few, their qualities do not graduate gently into one
another, as the qualities of land do; and the demand may be
such as to keep the value of the produce considerably above
the cost of production at the worst mine now worked, without
[pg ]
being sufficient to bring into operation a still worse.
during the interval, the produce is really at a scarcity value.
fisheries are another example. fisheries in the open sea
are not appropriated, but fisheries in lakes or rivers almost
always are so, and likewise oyster-beds or other particular
fishing-grounds on coasts. we may take salmon-fisheries as
an example of the whole class. some rivers are far more
productive in salmon than others. none, however, without
being exhausted, can supply more than a very limited demand.
all others, therefore, will, if appropriated, afford a
rent equal to the value of their superiority.
both in the case of mines and of fisheries, the natural
order of events is liable to be interrupted by the opening of
a new mine, or a new fishery, of superior quality to some of
those already in use. in this case, when things have permanently
adjusted themselves, the result will be that the scale
of qualities which supply the market will have been cut
short at the lower end, while a new insertion will have been
made in the scale at some point higher up; and the worst
mine or fishery in use—the one which regulates the rents
of the superior qualities and the value of the commodity—will
be a mine or fishery of better quality than that by
which they were previously regulated.
the ground-rent of a building, and the rent of a garden
or park attached to it, will not be less than the rent which
the same land would afford in agriculture, but may be greater
than this to an indefinite amount; the surplus being either
in consideration of beauty or of convenience, the convenience
often consisting in superior facilities for pecuniary gain.
sites of remarkable beauty are generally limited in supply,
and therefore, if in great demand, are at a scarcity value.
sites superior only in convenience are governed as to their
value by the ordinary principles of rent. the ground-rent
of a house in a small village is but little higher than the rent
of a similar patch of ground in the open fields.
suppose the various kinds of land to be represented by the
alphabet; that those below o pay no agricultural rent, and that
[pg ]
all lands increase in fertility and situation as we approach the
beginning of the alphabet, but which, as far up as k, are used
in agriculture; that higher than k all are more profitably used
for building purposes, viz.:
now it will happen that land is chosen for building purposes
irrespective of its fertility for agricultural purposes. it will
not be true, as some may think, that no land will be used for
building until it will pay a ground-rent greater than the greatest
agricultural rent paid by any piece of land. it is not true,
for example, if n be selected for a building-lot, that it must
pay a ground-rent as high as the agricultural rent of k, the
most fertile land cultivated in agriculture. it must pay a
ground-rent higher only than it itself would pay, if cultivated.
it is only necessary that it pay more than the same (not better)
land would pay as rent if used only in agriculture.
the rents of wharfage, dock, and harbor room, water-power,
and many other privileges, may be analyzed on similar
principles. take the case, for example, of a patent or
exclusive privilege for the use of a process by which the
cost of production is lessened. if the value of the product
continues to be regulated by what it costs to those who are
obliged to persist in the old process, the patentee will make
an extra profit equal to the advantage which his process possesses
over theirs. this extra profit is essentially similar to
rent, and sometimes even assumes the form of it, the patentee
allowing to other producers the use of his privilege in consideration
of an annual payment.
the extra gains which any producer or dealer obtains
through superior talents for business, or superior business
arrangements, are very much of a similar kind. if all his
competitors had the same advantages, and used them, the
benefit would be transferred to their customers through the
diminished value of the article; he only retains it for himself
because he is able to bring his commodity to market at
a lower cost, while its value is determined by a higher.
[pg ]
§ . résumé of the laws of value of each of the three
classes of commodities.
a general résumé of the laws of value, where a free
movement of labor and capital exists, may now be briefly made
in the following form:
exchange value has three conditions, viz.:
. utility, or ability to satisfy a desire (u).
. difficulty of attainment (d), according to which there are three classes of
commodities.
. transferableness.
of the second condition, there are three classes:
. those limited in supply—e.g., ancient pictures or monopolized articles.
. those whose supply is capable of indefinite increase by the use of
labor and capital.
. those whose supply is gained at a gradually increasing cost, under the law
of diminishing returns.
of those limited in supply, their value is regulated by demand and supply.
the only limit is u.
of those whose supply is capable of indefinite increase, their normal and permanent
value is regulated by cost of production, and their temporary or market value is
regulated by demand and supply, oscillating around cost of production (which consists
of the amount of labor and abstinence required).
of those whose supply is gained at a gradually increasing cost, their normal value is
regulated by the cost of production of that portion of the whole amount of the whole
amount needed, which is brought to market at the greatest expense, and their market
value is regulated by demand and supply (as in class ).
if there be no free competition between industries, then the
value of those commodities which has been said, in the above
classification, to depend on cost of production, will be governed
by the law of reciprocal demand.
[pg ]
chapter iv. of money.
§ . the three functions of money—a common denominator of value,
a medium of exchange, a “standard of value”.
having proceeded thus far in ascertaining the general
laws of value, without introducing the idea of money
(except occasionally for illustration), it is time that we should
now superadd that idea, and consider in what manner the
principles of the mutual interchange of commodities are
affected by the use of what is termed a medium of exchange.
as professor jevons has pointed out, money performs three
distinct services, capable of being separated by the mind, and
worthy of separate definition and explanation:
. a common measure, or common denominator, of value.
. a medium of exchange.
. a standard of value.
f. a. walker, however, says: “money is the medium of
exchange. whatever performs this function, does this work,
is money, no matter what it is made of.... that which does
the money-work is the money-thing.”
(.) [if we had no money] the first and most obvious [inconvenience]
would be the want of a common measure for
values of different sorts. if a tailor had only coats, and
wanted to buy bread or a horse, it would be very troublesome
to ascertain how much bread he ought to obtain for a coat,
or how many coats he should give for a horse. the calculation
must be recommenced on different data every time he
bartered his coats for a different kind of article, and there
could be no current price or regular quotations of value. as
it is much easier to compare different lengths by expressing
[pg ]
them in a common language of feet and inches, so it is much
easier to compare values by means of a common language of
[dollars and cents].
the need of a common denominator of values (an excellent
term, introduced by storch), to whose terms the values of all
other commodities may be reduced, and so compared, is as
great as that the inhabitants of the different states of the
united states should have a common language as a means by
which ideas could be communicated to the whole nation. a
man may have a horse, whose value he wishes to compare in
some common term with the value of his house, although he
might not wish to sell either. a valuation by the state for
taxation could not exist but for this common denominator, or
register, of value.
(.) the second function is that of a medium of exchange.
the distinction between this function and the common denominator
of value is that the latter measures value, the former
transfers value. the man owning the horse, after having measured
its value by comparison with a given thing, may now wish
to exchange it for other things. this discloses the need of another
quality in money.
the inconveniences of barter are so great that, without
some more commodious means of effecting exchanges, the
division of employments could hardly have been carried to
any considerable extent. a tailor, who had nothing but
coats, might starve before he could find any person having
bread to sell who wanted a coat: besides, he would not want
as much bread at a time as would be worth a coat, and the
coat could not be divided. every person, therefore, would
at all times hasten to dispose of his commodity in exchange
for anything which, though it might not be fitted to his own
immediate wants, was in great and general demand, and
easily divisible, so that he might be sure of being able to
purchase with it whatever was offered for sale. the thing
which people would select to keep by them for making purchases
must be one which, besides being divisible and generally
desired, does not deteriorate by keeping. this reduces
the choice to a small number of articles.
this need is well explained by the following facts furnished
by professor jevons: “some years since, mademoiselle zélie,
[pg ]
a singer of the théâtre lyrique at paris, made a professional
tour round the world, and gave a concert in the society islands.
in exchange for an air from ‘norma’ and a few other songs,
she was to receive a third part of the receipts. when counted,
her share was found to consist of three pigs, twenty-three turkeys,
forty-four chickens, five thousand cocoanuts, besides considerable
quantities of bananas, lemons, and oranges. in the
society islands, however, pieces of money were very scarce;
and, as mademoiselle could not consume any considerable portion
of the receipts herself, it became necessary in the mean
time to feed the pigs and poultry with the fruit.”
(.) the third function desired of money is what is usually
termed a “standard of value.” it is, perhaps, better expressed
by f. a. walker as a “standard of deferred payments.” its
existence is due to the desire to have a means of comparing the
purchasing power of a commodity at one time with its purchasing
power at another distant time; that is, that for long contracts,
exchanges may be in unchanged ratios at the beginning
and at the end of the contracts. there is no distinction between
this function and the first, except one arising from the
introduction of time. at the same time and place, the “standard
of value” is given in the common denominator of value.
a measure of value,
in the ordinary sense of the word
measure, would mean something by comparison with which
we may ascertain what is the value of any other thing.
when we consider, further, that value itself is relative, and
that two things are necessary to constitute it, independently
of the third thing which is to measure it, we may define a
measure of value to be something, by comparing with which
any two other things, we may infer their value in relation
to one another.
in this sense, any commodity will serve as a measure of
value at a given time and place; since we can always infer
the proportion in which things exchange for one another,
when we know the proportion in which each exchanges for
any third thing. to serve as a convenient measure of value
is one of the functions of the commodity selected as a medium
[pg ]
of exchange. it is in that commodity that the values
of all other things are habitually estimated.
but the desideratum sought by political economists is
not a measure of the value of things at the same time and
place, but a measure of the value of the same thing at different
times and places: something by comparison with
which it may be known whether any given thing is of
greater or less value now than a century ago, or in this
country than in america or china. to enable the money
price of a thing at two different periods to measure the
quantity of things in general which it will exchange for, the
same sum of money must correspond at both periods to the
same quantity of things in general—that is, money must
always have the same exchange value, the same general purchasing
power. now, not only is this not true of money, or
of any other commodity, but we can not even suppose any
state of circumstances in which it would be true.
it being very clear that money, or the precious metals, do
not themselves remain absolutely stable in value for long periods,
the only way in which a “standard of value” can be properly
established is by the proposed “multiple standard of
value,” stated as follows:
“a number of articles in general use—corn, beef, potatoes,
wool, cotton, silk, tea, sugar, coffee, indigo, timber, iron, coal,
and others—shall be taken, in a definite quantity of each, so
many pounds, or bushels, or cords, or yards, to form a standard
required. the value of these articles, in the quantities specified,
and all of standard quality, shall be ascertained monthly
or weekly by government, and the total sum [in money] which
would then purchase this bill of goods shall be, thereupon,
officially promulgated. persons may then, if they choose, make
their contracts for future payments in terms of this multiple
or tabular standard.”
a, who had borrowed $, of b in
 for ten years, would make note of the total money value
of all these articles composing the multiple standard, which we
will suppose is $ in . consequently, a would promise
to pay b eight multiple units in ten years (that is, eight times
$, or $,). but, if other things change in value relatively
[pg ]
to money during these ten years, the same sum of money—$,—in
 will not return to b the same just amount
of purchasing power which he parted with in . now, if,
in , when his note falls due, the government list is examined,
and it is found that commodities in general have fallen in
value relatively to gold, the multiple unit will not amount to
as much gold as it did in ; perhaps each unit may be
rated only at $. in that case, a is obliged to pay back but
eight multiple units, which costs him only $ in money, while
b receives from a the same amount of purchasing power over
other commodities which he loaned to him. b had no just claim
to ten units, since the fall of all commodities relatively to gold
was not due to his exertions. on the other hand, if, between
 and , prices had risen, mutatis mutandis, the eight
units would have cost a more than $, in gold; but he would
have been justly obliged to return the same amount of purchasing
power to b which he received from him.
§ . gold and silver, why fitted for those purposes.
by a tacit concurrence, almost all nations, at a very
early period, fixed upon certain metals, and especially gold
and silver, to serve this purpose. no other substances unite
the necessary qualities in so great a degree, with so many
subordinate advantages. these were the things which it
most pleased every one to possess, and which there was most
certainty of finding others willing to receive in exchange
for any kind of produce. they were among the most imperishable
of all substances. they were also portable, and,
containing great value in small bulk, were easily hid; a consideration
of much importance in an age of insecurity.
jewels are inferior to gold and silver in the quality of
divisibility; and are of very various qualities, not to be accurately
discriminated without great trouble. gold and silver
are eminently divisible, and, when pure, always of the
same quality; and their purity may be ascertained and certified
by a public authority.
jevons has more fully stated the requisites for a perfect
money as—
. value.. portability.. indestructibility.. homogeneity.. divisibility.. stability of value.. cognizability.
[pg ]
accordingly, though furs have been employed as money
in some countries, cattle in others, in chinese tartary cubes
of tea closely pressed together, the shells called cowries on
the coast of western africa, and in abyssinia at this day
blocks of rock-salt, gold and silver have been generally preferred
by nations which were able to obtain them, either by
industry, commerce, or conquest. to the qualities which
originally recommended them, another came to be added,
the importance of which only unfolded itself by degrees.
of all commodities, they are among the least influenced by
any of the causes which produce fluctuations of value. no
commodity is quite free from such fluctuations. gold and
silver have sustained, since the beginning of history, one
great permanent alteration of value, from the discovery of
the american mines.
in the present age the opening of new sources of supply,
so abundant as the ural mountains, california, and australia,
may be the commencement of another period of decline, on
the limits of which it would be useless at present to speculate.
but, on the whole, no commodities are so little exposed
to causes of variation. they fluctuate less than almost
any other things in their cost of production. and, from
their durability, the total quantity in existence is at all times
so great in proportion to the annual supply, that the effect
on value even of a change in the cost of production is not
sudden: a very long time being required to diminish materially
the quantity in existence, and even to increase it very
greatly not being a rapid process. gold and silver, therefore,
are more fit than any other commodity to be the subject
of engagements for receiving or paying a given quantity
at some distant period.
since mr. mill wrote, two great changes in the production
of the precious metals have occurred. the discoveries of gold,
briefly referred to by him, have led to an enormous increase of
the existing fund of gold (see chart no. ix,
chap. vi), and a
fall in the value of gold within twenty years after the discoveries,
according to mr. jevons's celebrated study, of from nine
[pg ]
to fifteen per cent. another change took place, a change in
the value, of silver, in , which has resulted in a permanent
fall of its value since that time (see chart no. x,
chap. vii).
before that date, silver sold at about d.
per ounce in the central market of the world, london; and now it remains about
d. per ounce, although it once fell to
d., in july, . in
spite of mr. mill's expressions of confidence in their stability of
value—although certainly more stable than other commodities—the
events of the last thirty-five years have fully shown that
neither gold nor silver—silver far less than gold—can successfully
serve as a perfect “standard of value” for any considerable
length of time.
when gold and silver had become virtually a medium
of exchange, by becoming the things for which people generally
sold, and with which they generally bought, whatever
they had to sell or to buy, the contrivance of coining obviously
suggested itself. by this process the metal was
divided into convenient portions, of any degree of smallness,
and bearing a recognized proportion to one another; and the
trouble was saved of weighing and assaying at every change
of possessors—an inconvenience which, on the occasion of
small purchases, would soon have become insupportable.
governments found it their interest to take the operation
into their own hands, and to interdict all coining by private
persons.
§ . money a mere contrivance for facilitating exchanges, which does not
affect the laws of value.
it must be evident, however, that the mere introduction
of a particular mode of exchanging things for one
another, by first exchanging a thing for money, and then exchanging
the money for something else, makes no difference
in the essential character of transactions. it is not with
money that things are really purchased. nobody's income
(except that of the gold or silver miner) is derived from the
precious metals. the [dollars or cents] which a person receives
weekly or yearly are not what constitutes his income;
they are a sort of tickets or orders which he can present for
payment at any shop he pleases, and which entitle him to receive
a certain value of any commodity that he makes choice
of. the farmer pays his laborers and his landlord in these
tickets, as the most convenient plan for himself and them;
[pg ]
but their real income is their share of his corn, cattle, and
hay, and it makes no essential difference whether he distributes
it to them directly, or sells it for them and gives
them the price. there can not, in short, be intrinsically a
more insignificant thing, in the economy of society, than
money; except in the character of a contrivance for sparing
time and labor. it is a machine for doing quickly and commodiously
what would be done, though less quickly and
commodiously, without it; and, like many other kinds of
machinery, it only exerts a distinct and independent influence
of its own when it gets out of order.
the introduction of money does not interfere with the
operation of any of the laws of value laid down in the preceding
chapters. the reasons which make the temporary or
market value of things depend on the demand and supply,
and their average and permanent values upon their cost of
production, are as applicable to a money system as to a system
of barter. things which by barter would exchange for
one another will, if sold for money, sell for an equal amount
of it, and so will exchange for one another still, though the
process of exchanging them will consist of two operations
instead of only one. the relations of commodities to one
another remain unaltered by money; the only new relation
introduced is their relation to money itself; how much or
how little money they will exchange for; in other words,
how the exchange value of money itself is determined.
money is a commodity, and its value is determined like that
of other commodities, temporarily by demand and supply,
permanently and on the average by cost of production.
[pg ]
chapter v. of the value of money, as dependent on demand and supply.
§ . value of money, an ambiguous expression.
the value of money is to appearance an expression as
precise, as free from possibility of misunderstanding, as any
in science. the value of a thing is what it will exchange
for; the value of money is what money will exchange for,
the purchasing power of money. if prices are low, money
will buy much of other things, and is of high value; if prices
are high, it will buy little of other things, and is of low
value. the value of money is inversely as general prices;
falling as they rise, and rising as they fall. when one person
lends to another, as well as when he pays wages or rent
to another, what he transfers is not the mere money, but a
right to a certain value of the produce of the country, to be
selected at pleasure; the lender having first bought this
right, by giving for it a portion of his capital. what he
really lends is so much capital; the money is the mere instrument
of transfer. but the capital usually passes from the
lender to the receiver through the means either of money, or
of an order to receive money, and at any rate it is in money
that the capital is computed and estimated. hence, borrowing
capital is universally called borrowing money; the loan
market is called the money market; those who have their
capital disposable for investment on loan are called the moneyed
class; and the equivalent given for the use of capital,
or, in other words, interest, is not only called the interest of
money, but, by a grosser perversion of terms, the value of
money.
§ . the value of money depends on its quantity.
the value or purchasing power of money depends,
[pg ]
in the first instance, on demand and supply. but demand
and supply, in relation to money, present themselves in a
somewhat different shape from the demand and supply of
other things.
the supply of a commodity means the quantity offered
for sale. but it is not usual to speak of offering money for
sale. people are not usually said to buy or sell money.
this, however, is merely an accident of language. in point
of fact, money is bought and sold like other things, whenever
other things are bought and sold for money. whoever sells
corn, or tallow, or cotton, buys money. whoever buys bread,
or wine, or clothes, sells money to the dealer in those articles.
the money with which people are offering to buy, is money
offered for sale. the supply of money, then, is the quantity
of it which people are wanting to lay out; that is, all the
money they have in their possession, except what they are
hoarding, or at least keeping by them as a reserve for future
contingencies. the supply of money, in short, is all the
money in circulation at the time.
the demand for money, again, consists of all the goods
offered for sale. every seller of goods is a buyer of money,
and the goods he brings with him constitute his demand.
the demand for money differs from the demand for other
things in this, that it is limited only by the means of the
purchaser.
in this last statement mr. mill is misled by his former definition
of demand as “quantity demanded.” he has the true idea
of demand in this case regarding money; but the demand for
money does not, as he thinks, differ from the demand for other
things, inasmuch as, in our corrected view of demand for other
things (p. ), it was found that the demand for other things
than money was also limited by the means of the purchaser.
[pg ]
as the whole of the goods in the market compose the
demand for money, so the whole of the money constitutes
the demand for goods. the money and the goods are seeking
each other for the purpose of being exchanged. they
are reciprocally supply and demand to one another. it is
indifferent whether, in characterizing the phenomena, we
speak of the demand and supply of goods, or the supply and
the demand of money. they are equivalent expressions.
supposing the money in the hands of individuals to be
increased, the wants and inclinations of the community collectively
in respect to consumption remaining exactly the
same, the increase of demand would reach all things equally,
and there would be a universal rise of prices. let us rather
suppose, therefore, that to every pound, or shilling, or penny
in the possession of any one, another pound, shilling, or
penny were suddenly added. there would be an increased
money demand, and consequently an increased money value,
or price, for things of all sorts. this increased value would
do no good to any one; would make no difference, except
that of having to reckon [dollars and cents] in higher numbers.
it would be an increase of values only as estimated in
money, a thing only wanted to buy other things with; and
would not enable any one to buy more of them than before.
prices would have risen in a certain ratio, and the value of
money would have fallen in the same ratio.
it is to be remarked that this ratio would be precisely
that in which the quantity of money had been increased. if
the whole money in circulation was doubled, prices would be
doubled. if it was only increased one fourth, prices would
rise one fourth. there would be one fourth more money, all
of which would be used to purchase goods of some description.
when there had been time for the increased supply
of money to reach all markets, or (according to the conventional
metaphor) to permeate all the channels of circulation,
all prices would have risen one fourth. but the general rise
of price is independent of this diffusing and equalizing process.
even if some prices were raised more, and others less,
[pg ]
the average rise would be one fourth. this is a necessary
consequence of the fact that a fourth more money would
have been given for only the same quantity of goods. general
prices, therefore, would in any case be a fourth higher.
so that the value of money, other things being the same,
varies inversely as its quantity; every increase of quantity
lowering the value, and every diminution raising it, in a ratio
exactly equivalent. this, it must be observed, is a property
peculiar to money. we did not find it to be true of commodities
generally, that every diminution of supply raised
the value exactly in proportion to the deficiency, or that
every increase lowered it in the precise ratio of the excess.
some things are usually affected in a greater ratio than that
of the excess or deficiency, others usually in a less; because,
in ordinary cases of demand, the desire, being for the thing
itself, may be stronger or weaker; and the amount of what
people are willing to expend on it, being in any case a limited
quantity, may be affected in very unequal degrees by
difficulty or facility of attainment. but in the case of
money, which is desired as the means of universal purchase,
the demand consists of everything which people have to sell;
and the only limit to what they are willing to give, is the
limit set by their having nothing more to offer. the whole
of the goods being in any case exchanged for the whole of
the money which comes into the market to be laid out, they
will sell for less or more of it, exactly according as less or
more is brought.
§ . —together with the rapidity of circulation.
it might be supposed that there is always in circulation
in a country a quantity of money equal in value to the
whole of the goods then and there on sale. but this would
be a complete misapprehension. the money laid out is
equal in value to the goods it purchases; but the quantity of
money laid out is not the same thing with the quantity in
circulation. as the money passes from hand to hand, the
same piece of money is laid out many times before all the
things on sale at one time are purchased and finally removed
from the market; and each pound or dollar must be counted
[pg ]
for as many pounds or dollars as the number of times it
changes hands in order to effect this object.
if we assume the quantity of goods on sale, and the number
of times those goods are resold, to be fixed quantities, the
value of money will depend upon its quantity, together with
the average number of times that each piece changes hands
in the process. the whole of the goods sold (counting each
resale of the same goods as so much added to the goods) have
been exchanged for the whole of the money, multiplied by
the number of purchases made on the average by each piece.
consequently, the amount of goods and of transactions being
the same, the value of money is inversely as its quantity
multiplied by what is called the rapidity of circulation. and
the quantity of money in circulation is equal to the money
value of all the goods sold, divided by the number which
expresses the rapidity of circulation.
this may be expressed in mathematical language, where v
is the value of money, q is the quantity in circulation, and r
the number expressing the rapidity of circulation, as follows:
the phrase, rapidity of circulation, requires some comment.
it must not be understood to mean the number of
purchases made by each piece of money in a given time.
time is not the thing to be considered. the state of society
may be such that each piece of money hardly performs more
than one purchase in a year; but if this arises from the
small number of transactions—from the small amount of
business done, the want of activity in traffic, or because
what traffic there is mostly takes place by barter—it constitutes
no reason why prices should be lower, or the value of
money higher. the essential point is, not how often the
same money changes hands in a given time, but how often
it changes hands in order to perform a given amount of
traffic. we must compare the number of purchases made
by the money in a given time, not with the time itself, but
with the goods sold in that same time. if each piece of
[pg ]
money changes hands on an average ten times while goods
are sold to the value of a million sterling, it is evident that
the money required to circulate those goods is £,.
and, conversely, if the money in circulation is £,, and
each piece changes hands, by the purchase of goods, ten times
in a month, the sales of goods for money which take place
every month must amount, on the average, to £,,.
[the essential point to be considered is] the average number
of purchases made by each piece in order to affect a given
pecuniary amount of transactions.
“there is no doubt that the rapidity of circulation varies
very much between one country and another. a thrifty people
with slight banking facilities, like the french, swiss, belgians,
and dutch, hoard coin much more than an improvident
people like the english, or even a careful people, with a perfect
banking system, like the scotch. many circumstances,
too, affect the rapidity of circulation. railways and rapid
steamboats enable coin and bullion to be more swiftly remitted
than of old; telegraphs prevent its needless removal, and the
acceleration of the mails has a like effect.” “so different are
the commercial habits of different peoples, that there evidently
exists no proportion whatever between the amount of currency
in a country and the aggregate of the exchanges which can be
effected by it.”
§ . explanations and limitations of this principle.
the proposition which we have laid down respecting
the dependence of general prices upon the quantity of money
in circulation must be understood as applying only to a state
of things in which money—that is, gold or silver—is the exclusive
instrument of exchange, and actually passes from
hand to hand at every purchase, credit in any of its shapes
being unknown. when credit comes into play as a means
of purchasing, distinct from money in hand, we shall hereafter
find that the connection between prices and the amount
of the circulating medium is much less direct and intimate,
and that such connection as does exist no longer admits of
so simple a mode of expression. that an increase of the
quantity of money raises prices, and a diminution lowers
them, is the most elementary proposition in the theory of
[pg ]
currency, and without it we should have no key to any of
the others. in any state of things, however, except the
simple and primitive one which we have supposed, the
proposition is only true, other things being the same.
it is habitually assumed that whenever there is a greater
amount of money in the country, or in existence, a rise of
prices must necessarily follow. but this is by no means an
inevitable consequence. in no commodity is it the quantity
in existence, but the quantity offered for sale, that determines
the value. whatever may be the quantity of money
in the country, only that part of it will affect prices which
goes into the market of commodities, and is there actually
exchanged against goods. whatever increases the amount
of this portion of the money in the country tends to raise
prices.
this statement needs modification, since the change in the
amounts of specie in the bank reserves, particularly of england
and the united states, determines the amount of credit
and purchasing power granted, and so affects prices in that
way; but prices are affected not by this specie being actually
exchanged against goods.
it frequently happens that money to a considerable
amount is brought into the country, is there actually invested
as capital, and again flows out, without having ever
once acted upon the markets of commodities, but only upon
the market of securities, or, as it is commonly though improperly
called, the money market.
a foreigner landing in the country with a treasure might
very probably prefer to invest his fortune at interest; which
we shall suppose him to do in the most obvious way by becoming
a competitor for a portion of the stock, railway debentures,
mercantile bills, mortgages, etc., which are at all
times in the hands of the public. by doing this he would
raise the prices of those different securities, or in other
words would lower the rate of interest; and since this
would disturb the relation previously existing between the
rate of interest on capital in the country itself and that in
[pg ]
foreign countries, it would probably induce some of those
who had floating capital seeking employment to send it
abroad for foreign investment, rather than buy securities at
home at the advanced price. as much money might thus
go out as had previously come in, while the prices of commodities
would have shown no trace of its temporary presence.
this is a case highly deserving of attention; and it is
a fact now beginning to be recognized that the passage of
the precious metals from country to country is determined
much more than was formerly supposed by the state of the
loan market in different countries, and much less by the state
of prices.
if there be, at any time, an increase in the number of
money transactions, a thing continually liable to happen
from differences in the activity of speculation, and even in
the time of year (since certain kinds of business are transacted
only at particular seasons), an increase of the currency
which is only proportional to this increase of transactions,
and is of no longer duration, has no tendency to raise prices.
for example, bankers in eastern cities each year send in
the autumn to the west, as the crops are gathered, very large
sums of money, to settle transactions in the buying and selling
of grain, wool, etc., but it again flows back to the great centers
of business in a short time, in payment of purchases from
eastern merchants.
[pg ]
chapter vi. of the value of money, as dependent on cost of production.
§ . the value of money, in a state of freedom, conforms to the value of the
bullion contained in it.
but money, no more than commodities in general,
has its value definitely determined by demand and supply.
the ultimate regulator of its value is cost of production.
we are supposing, of course, that things are left to themselves.
governments have not always left things to themselves.
it was, until lately, the policy of all governments to
interdict the exportation and the melting of money; while,
by encouraging the exportation and impeding the importation
of other things, they endeavored to have a stream of
money constantly flowing in. by this course they gratified
two prejudices: they drew, or thought that they drew, more
money into the country, which they believed to be tantamount
to more wealth; and they gave, or thought that they
gave, to all producers and dealers, high prices, which, though
no real advantage, people are always inclined to suppose to
be one.
we are, however, to suppose a state, not of artificial regulation,
but of freedom. in that state, and assuming no charge
to be made for coinage, the value of money will conform to
the value of the bullion of which it is made. a pound-weight
of gold or silver in coin, and the same weight in an ingot,
will precisely exchange for one another. on the supposition
of freedom, the metal can not be worth more in the state of
bullion than of coin; for as it can be melted without any loss
of time, and with hardly any expense, this would of course
be done until the quantity in circulation was so much diminished
[pg ]
as to equalize its value with that of the same weight in
bullion. it may be thought, however, that the coin, though
it can not be of less, may be, and being a manufactured article
will naturally be, of greater value than the bullion contained
in it, on the same principle on which linen cloth is
of more value than an equal weight of linen yarn. this
would be true, were it not that government, in this country
and in some others, coins money gratis for any one who furnishes
the metal. if government, however, throws the expense
of coinage, as is reasonable, upon the holder, by making
a charge to cover the expense (which is done by giving back
rather less in coin than has been received in bullion, and is
called levying a seigniorage), the coin will rise, to the extent
of the seigniorage, above the value of the bullion. if the
mint kept back one per cent, to pay the expense of coinage,
it would be against the interest of the holders of bullion to
have it coined, until the coin was more valuable than the
bullion by at least that fraction. the coin, therefore, would
be kept one per cent higher in value, which could only be
by keeping it one per cent less in quantity, than if its coinage
were gratuitous.
in the united states there was no charge for seigniorage
on gold and silver to , when one half of one per cent was
charged as interest on the delay if coin was immediately delivered
on the deposit of bullion; in  it was reduced to
one fifth of one per cent; and in , by a provision of the
resumption act, it was wholly abolished (the depositor, however,
paying for the copper alloy). for the trade-dollars, as
was consistent with their being only coined ingots and not legal
money, a seigniorage was charged equal simply to the expense
of coinage, which was one and a quarter per cent at
philadelphia, and one and a half per cent at san francisco on
the tale value.
§ . —which is determined by the cost of production.
the value of money, then, conforms permanently,
and in a state of freedom almost immediately, to the value
of the metal of which it is made; with the addition, or not,
of the expenses of coinage, according as those expenses are
borne by the individual or by the state.
to the majority of civilized countries gold and silver are
[pg ]
foreign products: and the circumstances which govern the
values of foreign products present some questions which we
are not yet ready to examine. for the present, therefore,
we must suppose the country which is the subject of our inquiries
to be supplied with gold and silver by its own mines
[as in the case of the united states], reserving for future
consideration how far our conclusions require modification
to adapt them to the more usual case.
of the three classes into which commodities are divided—those
absolutely limited in supply, those which may be
had in unlimited quantity at a given cost of production, and
those which may be had in unlimited quantity, but at an
increasing cost of production—the precious metals, being the
produce of mines, belong to the third class. their natural
value, therefore, is in the long run proportional to their cost
of production in the most unfavorable existing circumstances,
that is, at the worst mine which it is necessary to work in
order to obtain the required supply. a pound weight of
gold will, in the gold-producing countries, ultimately tend
to exchange for as much of every other commodity as is
produced at a cost equal to its own; meaning by its own
cost the cost in labor and expense at the least productive
sources of supply which the then existing demand makes it
necessary to work. the average value of gold is made to
conform to its natural value in the same manner as the values
of other things are made to conform to their natural value.
suppose that it were selling above its natural value; that is,
above the value which is an equivalent for the labor and expense
of mining, and for the risks attending a branch of industry
in which nine out of ten experiments have usually
been failures. a part of the mass of floating capital which
is on the lookout for investment would take the direction
of mining enterprise; the supply would thus be increased,
and the value would fall. if, on the contrary, it were selling
below its natural value, miners would not be obtaining
the ordinary profit; they would slacken their works; if the
depreciation was great, some of the inferior mines would
[pg ]
perhaps stop working altogether: and a falling off in the
annual supply, preventing the annual wear and tear from
being completely compensated, would by degrees reduce the
quantity, and restore the value.
when examined more closely, the following are the details
of the process: if gold is above its natural or cost
value—the coin, as we have seen, conforming in its value
to the bullion—money will be of high value, and the prices
of all things, labor included, will be low. these low prices
will lower the expenses of all producers; but, as their returns
will also be lowered, no advantage will be obtained by any
producer, except the producer of gold; whose returns from
his mine, not depending on price, will be the same as before,
and, his expenses being less, he will obtain extra profits, and
will be stimulated to increase his production. e converso,
if the metal is below its natural value; since this is as much
as to say that prices are high, and the money expenses of all
producers unusually great; for this, however, all other producers
will be compensated by increased money returns; the
miner alone will extract from his mine no more metal than
before, while his expenses will be greater: his profits, therefore,
being diminished or annihilated, he will diminish his
production, if not abandon his employment.
in this manner it is that the value of money is made to
conform to the cost of production of the metal of which it is
made. it may be well, however, to repeat (what has been
said before) that the adjustment takes a long time to effect,
in the case of a commodity so generally desired and at the
same time so durable as the precious metals. being so
largely used, not only as money but for plate and ornament,
there is at all times a very large quantity of these metals in
existence: while they are so slowly worn out that a comparatively
small annual production is sufficient to keep up
the supply, and to make any addition to it which may be
required by the increase of goods to be circulated, or by the
increased demand for gold and silver articles by wealthy consumers.
even if this small annual supply were stopped entirely,
[pg ]
it would require many years to reduce the quantity
so much as to make any very material difference in prices.
the quantity may be increased much more rapidly than it
can be diminished; but the increase must be very great before
it can make itself much felt over such a mass of the
precious metals as exists in the whole commercial world.
and hence the effects of all changes in the conditions of
production of the precious metals are at first, and continue
to be for many years, questions of quantity only, with little
reference to cost of production. more especially is this the
case when, as at the present time, many new sources of supply
have been simultaneously opened, most of them practicable
by labor alone, without any capital in advance beyond
a pickaxe and a week's food, and when the operations are as
yet wholly experimental, the comparative permanent productiveness
of the different sources being entirely unascertained.
for the facts in regard to the production of the precious metals,
see the investigation by dr. adolf
soetbeer, from which
chart ix has been taken. it is worthy of careful study. the
figures in each period, at the top of the respective spaces, give the
average annual production during those years. the last period
has been added by me from figures taken from the reports of
the director of the united states mint. other accessible
sources, for the production of the precious metals, are the
tables in the appendices to the report of the committee to
the house of commons on the “depreciation of silver”
(); the french official procès-verbaux of the international
monetary conference of , which give soetbeer's
figures to a later date than his publication above mentioned;
the various papers in the british parliamentary documents;
and the reports of the director of our mint. since  more
gold has been produced than in the whole period preceding,
from  to . previous to  the annual average product
of gold, out of the total product of both gold and silver,
was thirty-six per cent; for the twenty-six years ending in
, it has been seventy and one half per cent. the result
has been a rise in gold prices certainly down to , as shown
by the following chart.
[pg ]
it will be observed how much
higher the prices rose
during the depression after 
than it was during a period of
similar conditions after .
the result, it may be said, was
predicted by chevalier.
chart ix.
chart showing the production of the precious metals,
according to value, from  to .
years.silver.gold.total.-$,,$,,
chart showing rise of average gold prices after the gold
discoveries of  to .
the fall of prices from 
to , owing to the commercial
panic in the former year,
however, is regarded, somewhat
unjustly, in my opinion, as an
evidence of an appreciation of
gold. mr. giffen's paper in
the “statistical journal,” vol.
xlii, is the basis on which mr.
goschen founded an argument
in the “journal of the institute
of bankers” (london), may,
, and which attracted considerable
attention. on the other
side, see bourne, “statistical
journal,” vol. xlii. the claim
that the value of gold has risen
seems particularly hasty, especially
when we consider that after
the panics of  and 
the value of money rose, for reasons
not affecting gold, respectively
fifteen and twenty-five
per cent.
the very thing for which the precious metals are most recommended
for use as the materials of money—their durability—is
also the very thing which has, for all practical purposes,
excepted them from the law of cost of production, and caused
[pg ]
their value to depend practically upon the law of demand and
supply. their durability is the reason of the vast accumulations
in existence, and this it is which makes the annual product
very small in relation to the whole existing supply, and so
prevents its value from conforming, except after a long term
of years, to the cost of production of the annual supply.
§ . this law, how related to the principle laid down in the preceding
chapter.
since, however, the value of money really conforms,
like that of other things, though more slowly, to its cost of
production, some political economists have objected altogether
to the statement that the value of money depends on
its quantity combined with the rapidity of circulation, which,
they think, is assuming a law for money that does not exist
for any other commodity, when the truth is that it is governed
by the very same laws. to this we may answer, in
the first place, that the statement in question assumes no
peculiar law. it is simply the law of demand and supply,
which is acknowledged to be applicable to all commodities,
and which, in the case of money, as of most other things, is
controlled, but not set aside, by the law of cost of production,
since cost of production would have no effect on value
if it could have none on supply. but, secondly, there really
is, in one respect, a closer connection between the value of
money and its quantity than between the values of other
things and their quantity. the value of other things conforms
to the changes in the cost of production, without requiring,
as a condition, that there should be any actual
alteration of the supply: the potential alteration is sufficient;
and, if there even be an actual alteration, it is but a
temporary one, except in so far as the altered value may
make a difference in the demand, and so require an increase
or diminution of supply, as a consequence, not a cause, of the
alteration in value. now, this is also true of gold and silver,
considered as articles of expenditure for ornament and luxury;
but it is not true of money. if the permanent cost of
production of gold were reduced one fourth, it might happen
that there would not be more of it bought for plate,
gilding, or jewelry, than before; and if so, though the value
would fall, the quantity extracted from the mines for these
[pg ]
purposes would be no greater than previously. not so with
the portion used as money: that portion could not fall in
value one fourth unless actually increased one fourth; for,
at prices one fourth higher, one fourth more money would
be required to make the accustomed purchases; and, if this
were not forthcoming, some of the commodities would be
without purchasers, and prices could not be kept up. alterations,
therefore, in the cost of production of the precious
metals do not act upon the value of money except just in
proportion as they increase or diminish its quantity; which
can not be said of any other commodity. it would, therefore,
i conceive, be an error, both scientifically and practically, to
discard the proposition which asserts a connection between
the value of money and its quantity.
there are cases, however, in which the potential change of
the precious metals affects their value as money in the same
way that it affects the value of other things. such a case
was the change in the value of silver in . the usual causes
assigned for that serious fall in value were the greatly increased
production from the mines of nevada; the demonetization of
silver by germany; and the decreased demand for export to
india. it is true that the exports of silver from england to
india fell off from about $,, in - to about
$,, in -; but none of the increased nevada
silver was exported from the united states to london, nor had germany
put more than $,, of her silver on the market;
and yet the price of silver so fell that the depreciation
amounted to -¼ per cent as compared with the average price
between  and . the change in value, however, took
place without any corresponding change in the actual quantity
in circulation. the relation between prices and the quantities
of the precious metals is, therefore, not so exact, certainly as
regards silver, as mr. mill would have us believe; and thus
their values conform more nearly to the general law of demand
and supply in the same way that it affects things other than
money.
it is evident, however, that the cost of production, in
the long run, regulates the quantity; and that every country
(temporary fluctuation excepted) will possess, and have in
[pg ]
circulation, just that quantity of money which will perform
all the exchanges required of it, consistently with maintaining
a value conformable to its cost of production. the
prices of things will, on the average, be such that money
will exchange for its own cost in all other goods: and, precisely
because the quantity can not be prevented from affecting
the value, the quantity itself will (by a sort of self-acting
machinery) be kept at the amount consistent with that standard
of prices—at the amount necessary for performing, at
those prices, all the business required of it.
[pg ]
chapter vii. of a double standard and subsidiary coins.
§ . objections to a double standard.
though the qualities necessary to fit any commodity
for being used as money are rarely united in any considerable
perfection, there are two commodities which possess
them in an eminent and nearly an equal degree—the two
precious metals, as they are called—gold and silver. some
nations have accordingly attempted to compose their circulating
medium of these two metals indiscriminately.
there is an obvious convenience in making use of the
more costly metal for larger payments, and the cheaper one
for smaller; and the only question relates to the mode in
which this can best be done. the mode most frequently
adopted has been to establish between the two metals a fixed
proportion [to decide by law, for example, that sixteen
grains of silver should be equivalent to one grain of gold];
and it being left free to every one who has a [dollar] to pay,
either to pay it in the one metal or in the other.
if [their] natural or cost values always continued to bear
the same ratio to one another, the arrangement would be unobjectionable.
this, however, is far from being the fact.
gold and silver, though the least variable in value of all
commodities, are not invariable, and do not always vary
simultaneously. silver, for example, was lowered in permanent
value more than gold by the discovery of the american
mines; and those small variations of value which take place
occasionally do not affect both metals alike. suppose such
a variation to take place—the value of the two metals relatively
to one another no longer agreeing with their rated
[pg ]
proportion—one or other of them will now be rated below its
bullion value, and there will be a profit to be made by melting
it.
suppose, for example, that gold rises in value relatively
to silver, so that the quantity of gold in a sovereign is now
worth more than the quantity of silver in twenty shillings.
two consequences will ensue. no debtor will any longer
find it his interest to pay in gold. he will always pay in
silver, because twenty shillings are a legal tender for a debt
of one pound, and he can procure silver convertible into
twenty shillings for less gold than that contained in a sovereign.
the other consequence will be that, unless a sovereign
can be sold for more than twenty shillings, all the
sovereigns will be melted, since as bullion they will purchase
a greater number of shillings than they exchange for as coin.
the converse of all this would happen if silver, instead of
gold, were the metal which had risen in comparative value.
a sovereign would not now be worth so much as twenty
shillings, and whoever had a pound to pay would prefer paying
it by a sovereign; while the silver coins would be collected
for the purpose of being melted, and sold as bullion
for gold at their real value—that is, above the legal valuation.
the money of the community, therefore, would never
really consist of both metals, but of the one only which, at
the particular time, best suited the interest of debtors; and
the standard of the currency would be constantly liable to
change from the one metal to the other, at a loss, on each
change, of the expense of coinage on the metal which fell
out of use.
this is the operation by which is carried into effect the law
of sir thomas gresham (a merchant of the time of elizabeth)
to the purport that “money of less value drives out money of
more value,” where both are legal payments among individuals.
a celebrated instance is that where the clipped coins of england
were received by the state on equal terms with new and
perfect coin before . they hanged men and women, but
they did not prevent the operation of gresham's law and the
disappearance of the perfect coins. when the state refused the
clipped coins at legal value, by no longer receiving them in payment
[pg ]
of taxes, the trouble ceased. jevons gives a striking
illustration of the same law: “at the time of the treaty of
 between great britain, the united states, and japan,
which partially opened up the last country to european traders,
a very curious system of currency existed in japan. the most
valuable japanese coin was the kobang, consisting of a thin
oval disk of gold about two inches long, and one and a quarter
inch wide, weighing two hundred grains, and ornamented in a
very primitive manner. it was passing current in the towns of
japan for four silver itzebus, but was worth in english money
about s. d.,
whereas the silver itzebu was equal only to
about s. d.
[four itzebus being worth in english money s.
d.]. the earliest european traders enjoyed a rare opportunity
for making profit. by buying up the kobangs at the native
rating they trebled their money, until the natives, perceiving
what was being done, withdrew from circulation the remainder
of the gold.”
it appears, therefore, that the value of money is liable to
more frequent fluctuations when both metals are a legal tender
at a fixed valuation than when the exclusive standard of
the currency is either gold or silver. instead of being only
affected by variations in the cost of production of one metal,
it is subject to derangement from those of two. the particular
kind of variation to which a currency is rendered
more liable by having two legal standards is a fall of value,
or what is commonly called a depreciation, since practically
that one of the two metals will always be the standard of
which the real has fallen below the rated value. if the tendency
of the metals be to rise in value, all payments will be
made in the one which has risen least; and, if to fall, then
in that which has fallen most.
while liable to “more frequent fluctuations,” prices do not
follow the extreme fluctuations of both metals, as some suppose,
and as is shown by the following diagram. a represents the
line of the value of gold, and b of silver, relatively to some
third commodity represented by the horizontal line. superposing
these curves, c would show the line of extreme variations,
while since prices would follow the metal which falls in
[pg ]
value, d would show the actual course of variations. while
the fluctuations are more frequent in d, they are less extreme
than in c.
chart showing the line of prices under a double standard.
§ . the use of the two metals as money, and the management of subsidiary
coins.
the plan of a double standard is still occasionally
brought forward by here and there a writer or orator as a
great improvement in currency.
it is probable that, with most of its adherents, its chief
merit is its tendency to a sort of depreciation, there being at
all times abundance of supporters for any mode, either open
or covert, of lowering the standard. [but] the advantage
without the disadvantages of a double standard seems to be
best obtained by those nations with whom one only of the
two metals is a legal tender, but the other also is coined, and
allowed to pass for whatever value the market assigns to it.
when this plan is adopted, it is naturally the more costly
metal which is left to be bought and sold as an article of
commerce. but nations which, like england, adopt the
more costly of the two as their standard, resort to a different
expedient for retaining them both in circulation, namely (),
to make silver a legal tender, but only for small payments.
in england no one can be compelled to receive silver in payment
for a larger amount than forty shillings. with this
regulation there is necessarily combined another, namely (),
that silver coin should be rated, in comparison with gold,
somewhat above its intrinsic value; that there should not
[pg ]
be, in twenty shillings, as much silver as is worth a sovereign;
for, if there were, a very slight turn of the market
in its favor would make it worth more than a sovereign, and
it would be profitable to melt the silver coin. the overvaluation
of the silver coin creates an inducement to buy
silver and send it to the mint to be coined, since it is given
back at a higher value than properly belongs to it; this,
however, has been guarded against () by limiting the quantity
of the silver coinage, which is not left, like that of gold,
to the discretion of individuals, but is determined by the
government, and restricted to the amount supposed to be required
for small payments. the only precaution necessary
is, not to put so high a valuation upon the silver as to hold
out a strong temptation to private coining.
§ . the experience of the united states with a double standard from
 to .
the experience of the united states with a double
standard, extending as it does from  to  without a
break, and from  to the present time, is a most valuable
source of instruction in regard to the practical working of bimetallism.
while we have nominally had a double standard,
in reality we have either had one alone, or been in a transition
from one to the other standard; and the history of our coinage
strikingly illustrates the truth that the natural values of the
two metals, in spite of all legislation, so vary relatively to each
other that a constant ratio can not be maintained for any
length of time; and that “the poor money drives out the
good,” according to gresham's statement. for clearness, the
period may be divided, in accordance with the changes of legislation,
into four divisions:
i. -. transition from gold to silver.
ii. -. transition from silver to gold.
iii. -. single gold currency (except -,
the paper period).
iv. -. transition from gold to silver.
i. with the establishment of the mint, hamilton agreed
upon the use of both gold and silver in our money, at a ratio
of  to : that is, that the amount of pure silver in a dollar
should be fifteen times the weight of gold in a dollar. so,
while the various spanish dollars then in circulation in the
united states seemed to contain on the average about -¼
grains of pure silver, and since hamilton believed the relative
market value of gold and silver to be about  to , he
put / of -¼ grains, or -¾ grains of pure gold, into the
gold dollar. it was the best possible example of the bimetallic
[pg ]
system to be found, and the mint ratio was intended to conform
to the market ratio. if this conformity could have been maintained,
there would have been no disturbance. but a cause was
already in operation affecting the supply of one of the metals—silver—wholly
independent of legislation, and without correspondingly
affecting gold.
two periods of production of silver, in which the production
of silver was great relatively to gold, stand out prominently
in the history of that metal. () one was the enormous
yield from the mines of the new world, continuing from 
to about , and () the only other period of great production
at all comparable with it (that is, as regards the production
of silver relatively to gold) was that lasting from  to
, due to the richness of the mexican silver-mines. the
first period of ninety-five years was longer than the second,
which was only forty years; yet while about forty-seven times
as much silver as gold was produced on an average during the
first period, the average annual amount of silver produced
relatively to gold was probably a little greater from  to
. the effect of the first period in lowering the relation
of silver to gold is well recognized in the history of the precious
metals (see chart x for the fall in the value of silver
relatively to gold); that the effect of the second period on the
value of silver has not been greater than was actually caused—it
has not been small—is explicable only by the laws of the
value of money. if you let the same amount of water into a
small reservoir which you let into a large one, the level of the
former will be raised more than the level of the latter. the
great production of the first period was added to a very small
existing stock of silver; that of the second period was added
to a stock increased by the great previous production just mentioned.
the smallness of the annual product relatively to the
total quantity existing in the world requires some time, even
for a production of silver forty-seven times greater than the
gold production, to take its effect on the value of the total
silver stock in existence. the effect of this process was beginning
to be felt soon after the united states decided on a double
standard. for this reason the value of silver was declining about
, and, although the annual silver product fell off seriously
after , the value of silver continued to decline even after
that time, because the increased production, dating back to
, was just beginning to make itself felt. thus we have
the phenomenon—which seems very difficult for some persons
to understand—of a falling off in the annual production of silver,
accompanied by a decrease in its value relatively to gold.
this diminishing value of silver began to affect the coinage
of the united states as early as , and by  the
[pg ]
disappearance of gold was everywhere commented upon. the
process by which this result is produced is a simple one, and
is adopted as soon as a margin of profit is seen arising from a
divergence between the mint and market ratios. in  the
market ratio of gold to silver was  to .—that is, the amount
of gold in a dollar (-¾ grains) would exchange for . times
as many grains of silver in the market, in the form of bullion;
while at the mint, in the form of coin, it would exchange for
only  times as many grains of silver. a broker having ,
gold dollars could buy with them in the market silver bullion
enough (, × . grains) to have coined, when presented
at the mint, , dollars in silver pieces, and yet have left
over as a profit by the operation  grains of silver. so long
as this can be done, silver (the cheapest money) will be presented
at the mint, and gold (the dearest money) will become
an article of merchandise too valuable to be used as money
when the cheaper silver is legally as good. the best money,
therefore, disappears from circulation, as it did in the united
states before , owing to the fall in the value of silver. it
is to be said, that it has been seriously urged by some writers
that silver did not fall, but that gold rose, in value, owing to
the demand of england for resumption in . chronology
kills this view; for the change in the value of silver began too
early to have been due to english measures, even if conclusive
reasons have not been given above why silver should naturally
have fallen in value.
chart x. chart showing the changes in the relative values of
gold and silver from  to . from  to  a space is allotted to each
 years; from  to , to each  years; from  to , to each year.
ii. the change in the relative values of gold and silver finally
forced the united states to change their mint ratio in .
two courses were open to us: () either to increase the quantity
of silver in the dollar until the dollar of silver was intrinsically
worth the gold in the gold dollar; or () debase the
gold dollar-piece until it was reduced in value proportionate to
the depreciation of silver since . the latter expedient,
without any seeming regard to the effect on contracts and the
integrity of our monetary standard, was adopted: . per
cent was taken out of the gold dollar, leaving it containing
. grains of pure gold; and as the silver dollar remained
unchanged (-¼ grains) the mint ratio established was  to
., or, as commonly stated,  to . did this correspond
with the market ratio then existing? no. having seen the
former steady fall in silver, and believing that it would continue,
congress hoped to anticipate any further fall by making
the mint ratio of gold to silver a little larger than the market
ratio. this was done by establishing the mint ratio of  to
., while the market ratio in  was  to .. here,
[pg ]
again, appeared the difficulty arising from the attempt to balance
a ratio on a movable fulcrum. it will be seen that the
act of  set at work forces for another change in the coinage—forces
of a similar kind, but working in exactly the opposite
direction to those previous to . a dollar of gold coin
would now exchange for more grains of silver at the mint
(.) than it would in the form of bullion in the market
(.). therefore it would be more profitable to put gold into
coin than exchange it as bullion. gold was sent to the mint,
while silver began to be withdrawn from circulation, silver
now being more valuable as bullion than as coin. by  a
silver dollar was worth  cents in gold. this movement,
which was displacing silver with gold, received a surprising
and unexpected impetus by the gold discoveries of california
and australia in , before mentioned, and made gold less
valuable relatively to silver, by lowering the value of gold.
here, again, was another natural cause, independent of legislation,
and not to be foreseen, altering the value of one of the
precious metals, and in exactly the opposite direction from that
in the previous period, when silver was lowered by the increase
from the mexican mines. in  a silver dollar was worth
 cents in gold (i.e., of a gold dollar containing . grains);
but, some years before, all silver dollars had disappeared from
use, and only gold was in circulation. for a large part of this
period we had in reality a single standard of gold, the other
metal not being able to stay in the currency.
iii. after our previous experience, the impossibility of retaining
both metals in the coinage together, on equal terms,
now came to be generally recognized, and was accepted by
congress in the legislation of . this act made no further
changes intended to adapt the mint to the market ratios, but
remained satisfied with the gold circulation. but hitherto no
regard had been paid to the principles on which a subsidiary
coinage is based, as explained by mr. mill in the last section
the act of , while acquiescing in the single gold
standard, had for its purpose the readjustment of the subsidiary
coins, which, together with silver dollar-pieces, had all
gone out of circulation. before this, two halves, four quarters,
or ten dimes contained the same quantity of pure silver as
the dollar-piece (-¼ grains); therefore, when it became profitable
to withdraw the dollar-pieces and substitute gold, it gave
exactly the same profit to withdraw two halves or four quarters
in silver. for this reason all the subsidiary silver had
gone out of circulation, and there was no “small change” in
the country. the legislation of  rectified this error: ()
[pg ]
by reducing the quantity of pure silver in a dollar's worth of
subsidiary coin to . grains. by making so much less an
amount of silver equal to a dollar of small coins, it was more
valuable in that shape than as bullion, and there was no reason
for melting it, or withdrawing it (since even if gold and silver
changed considerably in their relative values, . grains of
silver could not easily rise sufficiently to become equal in
value to a gold dollar, when -¼ grains were worth only 
cents of the gold dollar); () this over-valuation of silver in
subsidiary coin would cause a great flow of silver to the mint,
since silver would be more valuable in subsidiary coin than as
bullion; but this was prevented by the provision (section  of
the act of ) that the amount or the small coinage should be
limited according to the discretion of the secretary of the
treasury; and, () in order that the overvalued small coinage
might not be used for purposes other than for effecting change,
its legal-tender power was restricted to payments not exceeding
five dollars. this system, a single gold standard for large,
and silver for small, payments, continued without question, and
with great convenience, until the days of the war, when paper
money (-) drove out (by its cheapness, again) both
gold and silver. paper was far cheaper than the cheapest of
the two metals.
relative values of gold and silver, by months, in .
the mere fact that the silver dollar-piece had not circulated
since even long before  led the authorities to drop
out the provisions for the coinage of silver dollars and in 
remove it from the list of legal coins (at the ratio of  to .,
[pg ]
the obsolete ratio fixed as far back as ). this is what
is known as the “demonetization” of silver. it had no effect
on the circulation of silver dollars, since none were in use, and
had not been for more than twenty-five years. there had been
no desire up to this time to use silver, since it was more expensive
than gold; indeed, it is somewhat humiliating to our sense
of national honor to reflect that it was not until silver fell so
surprisingly in value (in ) that the agitation for its use in
the coinage arose. when a silver dollar was worth  cents,
no one wanted it as a means of liquidating debts; when it
came to be worth  cents, it was capable of serving debtors
even better than the then appreciating greenbacks. thus, while
from  (and even before) we had legally two standards,
of both gold and silver, but really only one, that of gold, from
 to  we had both legally and really only one standard,
that of gold.
it might be here added, that i have spoken of the silver
dollar as containing -¼ grains of pure silver. of course,
alloy is mixed with the pure silver, sufficient, in , to
make the original dollar weigh  grains in all, its “standard”
weight. in  the amount of alloy was changed from
/ to / of the standard weight, which (as the -¼ grains of
pure silver were unchanged) gave the total weight of the dollar
as -½ grains, whence the familiar name assigned to this piece.
in , moreover, the mint was permitted to put its stamp and
devices—to what was not money at all, but a “coined ingot”—on
 grains of pure silver ( grains, standard), known as
the “trade-dollar.” it was intended by this means to make
united states silver more serviceable in the asiatic trade.
oriental nations care almost exclusively for silver in payments.
the mexican silver dollar contained -¼ grains of pure silver;
the japanese yen, -/; and the united states dollar, -¼.
by making the “trade-dollar” slightly heavier than any coin
used in the eastern world, it would give our silver a new market;
and the united states government was simply asked to
certify to the fineness and weight by coining it, provided the
owners of silver paid the expenses of coinage. inadvertently
the trade-dollar was included in the list of coins in the act of
 which were legal tender for payments of five dollars, but,
when this was discovered, it was repealed in . so that the
trade-dollar was not a legal coin, in any sense (although it contained
more silver than the -½-grains dollar). they ceased
to be coined in , to which time there had been made $,,.
iv. in february, , an indiscreet and unreasonable movement
induced congress to authorize the recoinage of the silver
dollar-piece at the obsolete ratio of  ( to .), while the
[pg ]
market ratio was  to .. so extraordinary a reversal of all
sound principles and such blindness to our previous experience
could be explained only by a desire to force this country to
use a silver coinage only, and had its origin with the owners
of silver-mines, aided by the desires of debtors for a cheap
unit in which to absolve themselves from their indebtedness.
there was no pretense of setting up a double standard about
it; for it was evident to the most ignorant that so great a disproportion
between the mint and market ratios must inevitably
lead to the disappearance of gold entirely. this would happen,
if owners could bring their silver freely, in any amounts, to
the mint for coinage (“free coinage”), and so exchange silver
against gold coin for the purpose of withdrawing gold, since
gold would exchange for less as coin than as bullion. this
immediate result was prevented by a provision in the law,
which prevented the “free coinage” of silver, and required the
government itself to buy silver and coin at least $,, in
silver each month. this retarded, but will not ultimately prevent,
the change from the present gold to a single silver standard.
at the rate of $,, a year, it is only a question
of time when the treasury will be obliged to pay out, for
its regular disbursements on the public debt, silver in such
amounts as will drive gold out of circulation. in february,
, it was feared that this was already at hand, and was
practically reached in the august following. unless a repeal
of the law is reached very soon, the uncomfortable spectacle
will be seen of a gradual disarrangement of prices, and consequently
of trade, arising from a change of the standard.
in order that the alternate movements of silver and gold to
the mint for coinage may be seen, there is appended a statement
of the coinage during the above periods, which well
shows the effects of gresham's law.
ratio in the mint and in the market.
period.gold coinage.
silver dollars coined.: (silver lower in market)-
$,,$,,:. (gold lower in market)-
,,,,:. (gold lower in market)-
,,,,single gold standard.-
,,........:. (silver lower, but no free coinage)-
from this it will be seen that there has been an enforced
coinage by the treasury, of almost twice as many silver dollars
[pg ]
since  as were coined in all the history of the mint
before, since the establishment of the government.
it may, perhaps, be asked why the silver dollar of -½
grains, being worth intrinsically only from  to  cents, does
not depreciate to that value. the government buys the silver,
owns the coin, and holds all that it can not induce the public
to receive voluntarily; so that but a part of the total coinage
is out of the treasury. and most of the coins issued are returned
for deposit and silver certificates received in return.
there being no free coinage, and no greater amount in circulation
than satisfies the demand for change, instead of small
bills, the dollar-pieces will circulate at their full value, on the
principle of subsidiary coin, even though overvalued. and the
silver certificates practically go through a process of constant
redemption by being received for customs dues equally with
gold. when they become too great in quantity to be needed
for such purposes, then we may look for the depreciation with
good reason.
there are, then, the following kinds of legal tender in the
united states in : () gold coins (if not below tolerance);
() the silver dollar of -½ grains; () united states notes
(except for customs and interest on the public debt); () subsidiary
silver coinage, to the amount of five dollars; and ()
minor coins, to the amount of twenty-five cents.
the question of a double standard has provoked no little
vehement discussion and has called forth a considerable literature
since the fall of silver in . a body of opinion exists,
best represented in this country by f. a. walker and s. d.
horton, that the relative values of gold and silver may be kept
unchanged, in spite of all natural causes, by the force of law,
which, provided that enough countries join in the plan, shall
fix the ratio of exchange in the coinage for all great commercial
countries, and by this means keep the coinage ratio equivalent
to the bullion ratio. the difficulty with this scheme, even
if it were wholly sufficient, has thus far been in the obstacles
to international agreement. after several international monetary
conferences, in , , and , the project seems
now to have been practically abandoned by all except the most
sanguine. (for a fuller list of authorities on bimetallism, see
appendix i.)
[pg ]
chapter viii. of credit, as a substitute for money.
§ . credit not a creation but a transfer of the means of production.
credit has a great, but not, as many people seem to
suppose, a magical power; it can not make something out of
nothing. how often is an extension of credit talked of as
equivalent to a creation of capital, or as if credit actually
were capital! it seems strange that there should be any
need to point out that, credit being only permission to use
the capital of another person, the means of production can
not be increased by it, but only transferred. if the borrower's
means of production and of employing labor are increased
by the credit given him, the lender's are as much
diminished. the same sum can not be used as capital both
by the owner and also by the person to whom it is lent; it
can not supply its entire value in wages, tools, and materials,
to two sets of laborers at once. it is true that the capital
which a has borrowed from b, and makes use of in his
business, still forms a part of the wealth of b for other purposes;
he can enter into arrangements in reliance on it, and
can borrow, when needful, an equivalent sum on the security
of it; so that to a superficial eye it might seem as if both
b and a had the use of it at once. but the smallest consideration
will show that, when b has parted with his capital to
a, the use of it as capital rests with a alone, and that b has
no other service from it than in so far as his ultimate claim
upon it serves him to obtain the use of another capital from
a third person, c.
§ . in what manner it assists production.
but, though credit is never anything more than a
transfer of capital from hand to hand, it is generally, and
[pg ]
naturally, a transfer to hands more competent to employ the
capital efficiently in production. if there were no such
thing as credit, or if, from general insecurity and want of
confidence, it were scantily practiced, many persons who
possess more or less of capital, but who from their occupations,
or for want of the necessary skill and knowledge, can
not personally superintend its employment, would derive no
benefit from it: their funds would either lie idle, or would
be, perhaps, wasted and annihilated in unskillful attempts
to make them yield a profit. all this capital is now lent at
interest, and made available for production. capital thus
circumstanced forms a large portion of the productive resources
of any commercial country, and is naturally attracted
to those producers or traders who, being in the greatest
business, have the means of employing it to most advantage,
because such are both the most desirous to obtain it and able
to give the best security. although, therefore, the productive
funds of the country are not increased by credit, they
are called into a more complete state of productive activity.
as the confidence on which credit is grounded extends
itself, means are developed by which even the smallest portions
of capital, the sums which each person keeps by him to
meet contingencies, are made available for productive uses.
the principal instruments for this purpose are banks of deposit.
where these do not exist, a prudent person must keep
a sufficient sum unemployed in his own possession to meet
every demand which he has even a slight reason for thinking
himself liable to. when the practice, however, has
grown up of keeping this reserve not in his own custody,
but with a banker, many small sums, previously lying idle,
become aggregated in the banker's hands; and the banker,
being taught by experience what proportion of the amount
is likely to be wanted in a given time, and knowing that, if
one depositor happens to require more than the average,
another will require less, is able to lend the remainder, that
is, the far greater part, to producers and dealers: thereby
adding the amount, not indeed to the capital in existence,
[pg ]
but to that in employment, and making a corresponding addition
to the aggregate production of the community.
while credit is thus indispensable for rendering the
whole capital of the country productive, it is also a means
by which the industrial talent of the country is turned to
better account for purposes of production. many a person
who has either no capital of his own, or very little, but who
has qualifications for business which are known and appreciated
by some possessors of capital, is enabled to obtain
either advances in money, or, more frequently, goods on
credit, by which his industrial capacities are made instrumental
to the increase of the public wealth.
such are, in the most general point of view, the uses of
credit to the productive resources of the world. but these
considerations only apply to the credit given to the industrious
classes—to producers and dealers. credit given by
dealers to unproductive consumers is never an addition, but
always a detriment, to the sources of public wealth. it
makes over in temporary use, not the capital of the unproductive
classes to the productive, but that of the productive
to the unproductive.
§ . function of credit in economizing the use of money.
but a more intricate portion of the theory of credit
is its influence on prices; the chief cause of most of the mercantile
phenomena which perplex observers. in a state of
commerce in which much credit is habitually given, general
prices at any moment depend much more upon the state of
credit than upon the quantity of money. for credit, though
it is not productive power, is purchasing power; and a person
who, having credit, avails himself of it in the purchase
of goods, creates just as much demand for the goods, and
tends quite as much to raise their price, as if he made an
equal amount of purchases with ready money.
the credit which we are now called upon to consider, as
a distinct purchasing power, independent of money, is of
course not credit in its simplest form, that of money lent by
one person to another, and paid directly into his hands; for,
when the borrower expends this in purchases, he makes the
[pg ]
purchases with money, not credit, and exerts no purchasing
power over and above that conferred by the money. the
forms of credit which create purchasing power are those in
which no money passes at the time, and very often none
passes at all, the transaction being included with a mass of
other transactions in an account, and nothing paid but a balance.
this takes place in a variety of ways, which we shall
proceed to examine, beginning, as is our custom, with the
simplest.
first: suppose a and b to be two dealers, who have
transactions with each other both as buyers and as sellers.
a buys from b on credit. b does the like with respect to
a. at the end of the year, the sum of a's debts to b is
set against the sum of b's debts to a, and it is ascertained
to which side a balance is due. this balance, which may be
less than the amount of many of the transactions singly, and
is necessarily less than the sum of the transactions, is all that
is paid in money; and perhaps even this is not paid, but
carried over in an account current to the next year. a
single payment of a hundred pounds may in this manner
suffice to liquidate a long series of transactions, some of
them to the value of thousands.
but, secondly: the debts of a to b may be paid without
the intervention of money, even though there be no reciprocal
debts of b to a. a may satisfy b by making over to
him a debt due to himself from a third person, c. this is
conveniently done by means of a written instrument, called
a bill of exchange, which is, in fact, a transferable order by
a creditor upon his debtor, and when accepted by the debtor,
that is, authenticated by his signature, becomes an acknowledgment
of debt.
§ . bills of exchange.
bills of exchange were first introduced to save the
expense and risk of transporting the precious metals from
place to place.
the trade between new york and liverpool affords a constant
illustration of the uses of a bill of exchange. suppose that
a in new york ships a cargo of wheat, worth $,, or
[pg ]
£,, to b in liverpool; also suppose that c in liverpool
(independently of the negotiations of a and b) ships, about
the same time, a cargo of steel rails to d in new york, also
worth £,. without the use of bills of exchange, b would
have been obliged to send £, in gold across the atlantic,
and so would d, at the risk of loss to both. by the device of
bills of exchange the goods
are really bartered against
each other, and all transmission
of money saved.
a has money due to him in
liverpool, and he sells his
claim to this money to any
one who wants to make a payment in liverpool. going to
his banker (the middle-man between exporters and importers
and the one who deals in such bills) he finds there d, inquiring
for some one who has a claim to money in liverpool, since d
owes c in liverpool for his cargo of steel rails. a makes out
a paper title to the £, which b owes him (i.e., a bill of exchange)
and by selling it to d gets immediately his £, there
in new york. the form in which this is done is as follows:
new york, january , .
at sight [or sixty days after date] of this first bill of exchange
(second and third unpaid), pay to the order of d [the
importer of steel rails] £,, value received, and charge the
same to the account of
[signed] a [exporter of wheat].
to b [buyer of wheat],
liverpool, eng.
d has now paid $,, or £,, to a for a title to
money across the atlantic in liverpool, and with this title he
can pay his debt to c for the rails. d indorses the bill of exchange,
as follows:
pay to the order of c [the seller of steel rails], liverpool,
value in account. d [importer of steel rails].
to b [the buyer of wheat].
by this means d transfers his title to the £, to c,
sends the bill across by mail (“first” in one steamer, “second”
in another, to insure certain transmission) to c, who then calls
upon b to pay him the £, instead of b sending it across
the atlantic to a; and all four persons have made their payments
the more safely by the use of this convenient device.
this is the simplest form of the transaction, and it does not
change the principle on which it is based, when, as is the case,
a banker buys the bills of a, and sells the bills to d—since a
typifies all exporters and d all importers.
[pg ]
bills of exchange having been found convenient as means
of paying debts at distant places without the expense of
transporting the precious metals, their use was afterward
greatly extended from another motive. it is usual in every
trade to give a certain length of credit for goods bought:
three months, six months, a year, even two years, according
to the convenience or custom of the particular trade. a
dealer who has sold goods, for which he is to be paid in six
months, but who desires to receive payment sooner, draws a
bill on his debtor payable in six months, and gets the bill
discounted by a banker or other money-lender, that is, transfers
the bill to him, receiving the amount, minus interest for
the time it has still to run. it has become one of the chief
functions of bills of exchange to serve as a means by which
a debt due from one person can thus be made available for
obtaining credit from another.
bills of exchange are drawn between the various cities of
the united states. in the west, the factor who is purchasing
grain or wool for a new york firm draws on his new york
correspondents, and this bill (usually certified to by the bill of
lading) is presented for discount at the western banks; and,
if there are many bills, funds are possibly sent westward to
meet these demands. but the purchases of the west in new
york will serve, even if a little later in time, somewhat to offset
this drain; and the funds will again move eastward, as goods
move westward, practically bartered against each other by the
use of bills. there is, however, less movement of funds of late,
now that western cities have accumulated more capital of their
own.
the notes given in consequence of a real sale of goods
can not be considered as on that account certainly representing
any actual property. suppose that a sells £ worth
of goods to b at six months' credit, and takes a bill at six
months for it; and that b, within a month after, sells the
same goods, at a like credit, to c, taking a like bill; and
again, that c, after another month, sells them to d, taking
a like bill, and so on. there may then, at the end of six
months, be six bills of £ each existing at the same time,
and every one of these may possibly have been discounted.
[pg ]
of all these bills, then, only one represents any actual property.
the extent of a man's actual sales forms some limit to
the amount of his real notes; and, as it is highly desirable in
commerce that credit should be dealt out to all persons in
some sort of regular and due proportion, the measure of a
man's actual sales, certified by the appearance of his bills
drawn in virtue of those sales, is some rule in the case,
though a very imperfect one in many respects. when a
bill drawn upon one person is paid to another (or even to
the same person) in discharge of a debt or a pecuniary claim,
it does something for which, if the bill did not exist, money
would be required: it performs the functions of currency.
this is a use to which bills of exchange are often applied.
many bills, both domestic and foreign, are at last presented
for payment quite covered with indorsements, each
of which represents either a fresh discounting, or a pecuniary
transaction in which the bill has performed the functions
of money.
§ . promissory notes.
a third form in which credit is employed as a substitute
for currency is that of promissory notes.
the difference between a bill of exchange and a promissory
note is, that the former is an order for the payment of money,
while the latter is a promise to pay money. in a note the
promissor is primarily liable; in a bill the drawer becomes liable
only after an ineffectual resort to the drawee.
in the united states a western merchant who buys $,
worth of cotton goods, for instance, of a boston commission-house
on credit, customarily gives his note for the amount, and
this note is put upon the market, or presented at a bank for
discount. this plan, however, puts all risk upon the one who
discounted the note. in the united states such promissory
notes are the forms of credit most used between merchants and
buyers. the custom, however, is quite different in england
and germany (and generally, it is stated, on the continent),
where bills of exchange are employed in cases where we use a
promissory note. a house in london sells $, worth of cotton
goods to a, in carlisle, on a credit of sixty days, draws a bill
of exchange on a, which is a demand upon a to pay in a given
time (e.g., sixty days), and if “accepted” by him is a legal obligation.
the london house takes this bill (perhaps adding its own
[pg ]
firm name as indorsers to the paper), and presents it for discount
at a london bank. this now explains why it is that,
when a particular industry is prosperous and many goods are
sold, there is more “paper” offered for discount at the banks
(cf. p. ), and why capital flows readily in that direction.
it is chiefly in the latter form [promissory notes] that it
has become, in commercial countries, an express occupation
to issue such substitutes for money. dealers in money wish
to lend, not their capital merely, but their credit, and not
only such portion of their credit as consists of funds actually
deposited with them, but their power of obtaining credit
from the public generally, so far as they think they can safely
employ it. this is done in a very convenient manner by
lending their own promissory notes payable to bearer on demand—the
borrower being willing to accept these as so much
money, because the credit of the lender makes other people
willingly receive them on the same footing, in purchases or
other payments. these notes, therefore, perform all the
functions of currency, and render an equivalent amount of
money, which was previously in circulation, unnecessary.
as, however, being payable on demand, they may be at any
time returned on the issuer, and money demanded for them,
he must, on pain of bankruptcy, keep by him as much money
as will enable him to meet any claims of that sort which can
be expected to occur within the time necessary for providing
himself with more; and prudence also requires that he
should not attempt to issue notes beyond the amount which
experience shows can remain in circulation without being
presented for payment.
the convenience of this mode of (as it were) coining
credit having once been discovered, governments have
availed themselves of the same expedient, and have issued
their own promissory notes in payment of their expenses;
a resource the more useful, because it is the only mode in
which they are able to borrow money without paying interest.
§ . deposits and checks.
a fourth mode of making credit answer the purposes
of money, by which, when carried far enough, money
[pg ]
may be very completely superseded, consists in making payments
by checks. the custom of keeping the spare cash reserved
for immediate use, or against contingent demands, in
the hands of a banker, and making all payments, except
small ones, by orders on bankers, is in this country spreading
to a continually larger portion of the public. if the
person making the payment and the person receiving it
keep their money with the same banker, the payment takes
place without any intervention of money, by the mere transfer
of its amount in the banker's books from the credit of the
payer to that of the receiver. if all persons in [new york]
kept their cash at the same banker's, and made all their payments
by means of checks, no money would be required or
used for any transactions beginning and terminating in [new
york]. this ideal limit is almost attained, in fact, so far
as regards transactions between [wholesale] dealers. it is
chiefly in the retail transactions between dealers and consumers,
and in the payment of wages, that money or bank-notes
now pass, and then only when the amounts are small.
as for the merchants and larger dealers, they habitually
make all payments in the course of their business by checks.
they do not, however, all deal with the same banker, and,
when a gives a check to b, b usually pays it not into the
same but into some other bank. but the convenience of
business has given birth to an arrangement which makes all
the banking-houses of [a] city, for certain purposes, virtually
one establishment. a banker does not send the checks which
are paid into his banking-house to the banks on which they
are drawn, and demand money for them. there is a building
called the clearing-house, to which every [member of
the association] sends, each afternoon, all the checks on other
bankers which he has received during the day, and they are
there exchanged for the checks on him which have come
into the hands of other bankers, the balances only being paid
in money; or even these not in money, but in checks.
a clearing-house is simply a circular railing containing as
many openings as there are banks in the association; a clerk
[pg ]
from each bank presents, in the form of a bundle of checks, at
his opening, all the claims of his bank against all others, and
notes the total amount; a clerk inside takes the checks, distributes
each check to the clerk of the bank against whom it
is drawn, and all that are left at his opening constitute the
total demands of all the other banks against itself; and this
sum total is set off against the given bank's demands upon the
others. the difference, for or against the bank, as the case
may be, may then be settled by a check.
the total amount of exchanges made through the new
york clearing-house in  was $,,, (or about
twenty-five times the total of our national debt in that year),
and the balances paid in money were only . per cent of the
exchanges.
for valuable explanations on this subject, consult
jevons, “money and the mechanism of exchange,” chapters
xix-xxiii. the explanation of the functions of a bank,
chapter xx, is very good.
[pg ]
chapter ix. influence of credit on prices.
§ . what acts on prices is credit, in whatever shape given.
having now formed a general idea of the modes in
which credit is made available as a substitute for money, we
have to consider in what manner the use of these substitutes
affects the value of money, or, what is equivalent, the prices
of commodities. it is hardly necessary to say that the permanent
value of money—the natural and average prices of
commodities—are not in question here. these are determined
by the cost of producing or of obtaining the precious
metals. an ounce of gold or silver will in the long run exchange
for as much of every other commodity as can be produced
or imported at the same cost with itself. and an
order, or note of hand, or bill payable at sight, for an ounce
of gold, while the credit of the giver is unimpaired, is worth
neither more nor less than the gold itself.
it is not, however, with ultimate or average, but with
immediate and temporary prices that we are now concerned.
these, as we have seen, may deviate very widely from the
standard of cost of production. among other causes of
fluctuation, one we have found to be the quantity of money
in circulation. other things being the same, an increase of
the money in circulation raises prices; a diminution lowers
them. if more money is thrown into circulation than the
quantity which can circulate at a value conformable to its
cost of production, the value of money, so long as the excess
lasts, will remain below the standard of cost of production,
and general prices will be sustained above the natural rate.
but we have now found that there are other things, such
[pg ]
as bank-notes, bills of exchange, and checks, which circulate
as money, and perform all the functions of it, and the question
arises, do these various substitutes operate on prices in
the same manner as money itself? i apprehend that bank-notes,
bills, or checks, as such, do not act on prices at all.
what does act on prices is credit, in whatever shape given,
and whether it gives rise to any transferable instruments
capable of passing into circulation or not.
§ . credit a purchasing power, similar to money.
money acts upon prices in no other way than by
being tendered in exchange for commodities. the demand
which influences the prices of commodities consists of the
money offered for them. money not in circulation has no
effect on prices.
in the case, however, of payment by checks, the purchases
are, at any rate, made, though not with the money in
the buyer's possession, yet with money to which he has a
right. but he may make purchases with money which he
only expects to have, or even only pretends to expect. he
may obtain goods in return for his acceptances payable at a
future time, or on his note of hand, or on a simple book-credit—that
is, on a mere promise to pay. all these purchases
have exactly the same effect on price as if they were
made with ready money. the amount of purchasing power
which a person can exercise is composed of all the money
in his possession or due to him, and of all his credit. for
exercising the whole of this power he finds a sufficient motive
only under peculiar circumstances, but he always possesses
it; and the portion of it which he at any time does
exercise is the measure of the effect which he produces on
price.
suppose that, in the expectation that some commodity
will rise in price, he determines not only to invest in it all
his ready money, but to take up on credit, from the producers
or importers, as much of it as their opinion of his
resources will enable him to obtain. every one must see
that by thus acting he produces a greater effect on price
than if he limited his purchases to the money he has actually
[pg ]
in hand. he creates a demand for the article to the full
amount of his money and credit taken together, and raises
the price proportionally to both. and this effect is produced,
though none of the written instruments called substitutes
for currency may be called into existence; though the
transaction may give rise to no bill of exchange, nor to the
issue of a single bank-note. the buyer, instead of taking a
mere book-credit, might have given a bill for the amount,
or might have paid for the goods with bank-notes borrowed
for that purpose from a banker, thus making the purchase
not on his own credit with the seller, but on the banker's
credit with the seller, and his own with the banker. had he
done so, he would have produced as great an effect on price
as by a simple purchase to the same amount on a book-credit,
but no greater effect. the credit itself, not the form and
mode in which it is given, is the operating cause.
§ . great extensions and contractions of credit. phenomena of a
commercial crisis analyzed.
the inclination of the mercantile public to increase
their demand for commodities by making use of all or much
of their credit as a purchasing power depends on their expectation
of profit. when there is a general impression
that the price of some commodity is likely to rise from an
extra demand, a short crop, obstructions to importation, or
any other cause, there is a disposition among dealers to increase
their stocks in order to profit by the expected rise.
this disposition tends in itself to produce the effect which
it looks forward to—a rise of price; and, if the rise is considerable
and progressive, other speculators are attracted,
who, so long as the price has not begun to fall, are willing
to believe that it will continue rising. these, by further
purchases, produce a further advance, and thus a rise of
price, for which there were originally some rational grounds,
is often heightened by merely speculative purchases, until it
greatly exceeds what the original grounds will justify. after
a time this begins to be perceived, the price ceases to rise,
and the holders, thinking it time to realize their gains, are
anxious to sell. then the price begins to decline, the holders
rush into the market to avoid a still greater loss, and,
[pg ]
few being willing to buy in a falling market, the price falls
much more suddenly than it rose. those who have bought
at a higher price than reasonable calculation justified, and
who have been overtaken by the revulsion before they had
realized, are losers in proportion to the greatness of the fall
and to the quantity of the commodity which they hold, or
have bound themselves to pay for.
this is the ideal extreme case of what is called a commercial
crisis. there is said to be a commercial crisis when
a great number of merchants and traders at once either have,
or apprehend that they shall have, a difficulty in meeting
their engagements. the most usual cause of this general
embarrassment is the recoil of prices after they have been
raised by a spirit of speculation, intense in degree, and extending
to many commodities. when, after such a rise, the
reaction comes and prices begin to fall, though at first perhaps
only through the desire of the holders to realize, speculative
purchases cease; but, were this all, prices would only
fall to the level from which they rose, or to that which is
justified by the state of the consumption and of the supply.
they fall, however, much lower; for as, when prices were
rising, and everybody apparently making a fortune, it was
easy to obtain almost any amount of credit, so now, when
everybody seems to be losing, and many fail entirely, it is
with difficulty that firms of known solidity can obtain even
the credit to which they are accustomed, and which it is the
greatest inconvenience to them to be without, because all
dealers have engagements to fulfill, and, nobody feeling sure
that the portion of his means which he has intrusted to
others will be available in time, no one likes to part with
ready money, or to postpone his claim to it. to these rational
considerations there is superadded, in extreme cases,
a panic as unreasoning as the previous over-confidence;
money is borrowed for short periods at almost any rate of
interest, and sales of goods for immediate payment are made
at almost any sacrifice. thus general prices, during a commercial
revulsion, fall as much below the usual level as
[pg ]
during the previous period of speculation they have risen
above it; the fall, as well as the rise, originating not in anything
affecting money, but in the state of credit.
professor jevons seriously advanced a theory that, inasmuch
as the harvests of the world were the causes of good or
bad trade, and that their deficiency would regularly be followed
by commercial distress, then a periodic cause of bad
harvests, if found, would explain the constant recurrence of
commercial crises. this cause he claimed to have found in
the sun-spots, which periodically deprive the crops of that
source of growth which is usually furnished by the sun when
no spots appear. it has not received general acceptance.
in the united states financial disasters have occurred in
, , , -, , and . those of 
and  seem to have been the most serious in their effects;
but this field, so far as scientific study is concerned, has not
been fully worked, and much remains to be learned about these
crises in the united states. the crisis of  was due to
excessive railway-building. it was testified concerning the
new york banks in  that “their capital needed for legitimate
purposes was practically lent out on certain iron rails,
railroad-ties, bridges, and rolling-stock, called railroads, many
of them laid down in places where these materials were practically
useless.”
under the effects due to swift communication by steam,
but especially to the electric telegraph, modern credit is a very
different thing from what it was fifty years ago. now, a
shock on the bourse at vienna is felt the same day at paris,
london, and new york. a commercial crisis in one great
money-center is felt at every other point in the world which
has business connections with it. moreover, as cherbuliez
says: “a country is more subject to crises the more advanced
is its economical development. there are certain maladies
which attack only grown-up persons who have reached a certain
degree of vigor and maturity.”
§ . influence of the different forms of credit on prices.
it does not, indeed, follow that credit will be more
used because it can be. when the state of trade holds out
no particular temptation to make large purchases on credit,
dealers will use only a small portion of the credit-power,
and it will depend only on convenience whether the portion
[pg ]
which they use will be taken in one form or in another.
one single exertion of the credit-power in the form of ()
book-credit, is only the foundation of a single purchase; but,
if () a bill is drawn, that same portion of credit may serve
for as many purchases as the number of times the bill
changes hands; while () every bank-note issued renders
the credit of the banker a purchasing power to that amount
in the hands of all the successive holders, without impairing
any power they may possess of effecting purchases on their
own credit. credit, in short, has exactly the same purchasing
power with money; and as money tells upon prices
not simply in proportion to its amount, but to its amount
multiplied by the number of times it changes hands, so also
does credit; and credit transferable from hand to hand is in
that proportion more potent than credit which only performs
one purchase.
there is a form of credit transactions () by checks on
bankers, and transfers in a banker's books, which is exactly
parallel in every respect to bank-notes, giving equal facilities
to an extension of credit, and capable of acting on prices quite
as powerfully. a bank, instead of lending its notes to a merchant
or dealer, might open an account with him, and credit
the account with the sum it had agreed to advance, on an
understanding that he should not draw out that sum in any
other mode than by drawing checks against it in favor of
those to whom he had occasion to make payments. these
checks might possibly even pass from hand to hand like
bank-notes; more commonly, however, the receiver would
pay them into the hands of his own banker, and when he
wanted the money would draw a fresh check against it; and
hence an objector may urge that as the original check would
very soon be presented for payment, when it must be paid
either in notes or in coin, notes or coin to an equal amount
must be provided as the ultimate means of liquidation. it
is not so, however. the person to whom the check is transferred
may perhaps deal with the same banker, and the
check may return to the very bank on which it was drawn.
[pg ]
this is very often the case in country districts; if so, no
payment will be called for, but a simple transfer in the
banker's books will settle the transaction. if the check is
paid into a different bank, it will not be presented for payment,
but liquidated by set-off against other checks; and,
in a state of circumstances favorable to a general extension
of banking credits, a banker who has granted more credit,
and has therefore more checks drawn on him, will also have
more checks on other bankers paid to him, and will only
have to provide notes or cash for the payment of balances;
for which purpose the ordinary reserve of prudent bankers,
one third of their liabilities, will abundantly suffice.
§ . on what the use of credit depends.
the credit given to any one by those with whom he
deals does not depend on the quantity of bank-notes or coin
in circulation at the time, but on their opinion of his solvency.
if any consideration of a more general character
enters into their calculation, it is only in a time of pressure
on the loan market, when they are not certain of being themselves
able to obtain the credit on which they have been accustomed
to rely; and even then, what they look to is the
general state of the loan market, and not (preconceived theory
apart) the amount of bank-notes. so far, as to the willingness
to give credit. and the willingness of a dealer to
use his credit depends on his expectations of gain, that is, on
his opinion of the probable future price of his commodity;
an opinion grounded either on the rise or fall already going
on, or on his prospective judgment respecting the supply
and the rate of consumption. when a dealer extends his
purchases beyond his immediate means of payment, engaging
to pay at a specified time, he does so in the expectation
either that the transaction will have terminated favorably
before that time arrives, or that he shall then be in possession
of sufficient funds from the proceeds of his other transactions.
the fulfillment of these expectations depends upon
prices, but not specially upon the amount of bank-notes.
it is obvious, however, that prices do not depend on money,
but on purchases. money left with a banker, and not drawn
[pg ]
against, or drawn against for other purposes than buying
commodities, has no effect on prices, any more than credit
which is not used. credit which is used to purchase commodities
affects prices in the same manner as money. money
and credit are thus exactly on a par in their effect on prices.
it is often seen, in our large cities, that money is very plentiful,
but no one seems to wish its use (that is, no one with safe
securities). inability to find investments and to find industries
in which the rate of profit is satisfactory—all of which
depends on the business character and activity of the people—will
prevent credit from being used, no matter how many
bank-notes, or greenbacks, or how much gold there is in the
country. it is impossible to make people invest, simply by increasing
the number of counters by which commodities are
exchanged against each other; that is, by increasing the money.
the reason why more credit is wanted is because men see that
increased production is possible of a kind that will find other
commodities ready to be offered (i.e., demand) in exchange for
that production. normal credit, therefore, on a healthy basis,
increases and slackens with the activity or dullness of trade.
speculation, or the wild extension of credit, on the other hand,
is apt to be begotten by a plethora of money, which has induced
low rates for loans, and moves with the uncertain waves
of popular impression. by normal credit we mean that the
wealth represented by the credit is really at the disposal of the
borrowers; in a crisis, the quantity of wealth supposed to be
represented by credit is very much greater than that at the
disposal of the lenders.
§ . what is essential to the idea of money?
there has been a great amount of discussion and
argument on the question whether several of these forms of
credit, and in particular whether bank-notes, ought to be
considered as money. it seems to be an essential part of
the idea of money that it be legal tender. an inconvertible
paper which is legal tender is universally admitted to be
money; in the french language the phrase
papier-monnaie
actually means inconvertibility, convertible notes being merely
billets à porteur.
an instrument which would be deprived
of all value by the insolvency of a corporation can
not be money in any sense in which money is opposed to
credit. it either is not money, or it is money and credit too.
[pg ]
it would seem, from all study of the essentials of money
(book iii, chapter iv),
that the necessary part of the idea of
money is that it should have value in itself. no one parts with
valuable commodities for a medium of exchange which does not
possess value; and we have seen that legislatures can not control
the natural value of even the precious metals by giving
them legal-tender power. much less could it be done for paper
money. paper, therefore, may, as an instrument of credit, be
a substitute for money; but, in accordance with the above test,
it can not properly be considered as money in the full sense.
of course, paper money, checks, etc., perform some of the functions
of money equally well with the precious metals. f. a.
walker holds that anything is money which performs money-work;
but he excludes checks from his catalogue of things
which may serve as money. it is practically of little importance,
however, what we include under money, so long as its
functions are well understood; it is merely a question of nomenclature,
and need not disturb us.
[pg ]
chapter x. of an inconvertible paper currency.
§ . what determines the value of an inconvertible paper money?
after experience had shown that pieces of paper, of
no intrinsic value, by merely bearing upon them the written
profession of being equivalent to a certain number of francs,
dollars, or pounds, could be made to circulate as such, and
to produce all the benefit to the issuers which could have
been produced by the coins which they purported to represent,
governments began to think that it would be a happy
device if they could appropriate to themselves this benefit,
free from the condition to which individuals issuing such
paper substitutes for money were subject, of giving, when
required, for the sign, the thing signified. they determined
to try whether they could not emancipate themselves
from this unpleasant obligation, and make a piece of
paper issued by them pass for a pound, by merely calling
it a pound, and consenting to receive it in payment of the
taxes.
in the case supposed, the functions of money are performed
by a thing which derives its power of performing
them solely from convention; but convention is quite sufficient
to confer the power; since nothing more is needful to
make a person accept anything as money, and even at any
arbitrary value, than the persuasion that it will be taken
from him on the same terms by others. the only question
is, what determines the value of such a currency, since it can
not be, as in the case of gold and silver (or paper exchangeable
for them at pleasure), the cost of production.
[pg ]
we have seen, however, that even in the case of metallic
currency, the immediate agency in determining its value
is its quantity. if the quantity, instead of depending on
the ordinary mercantile motives of profit and loss, could be
arbitrarily fixed by authority, the value would depend on
the fiat of that authority, not on cost of production. the
quantity of a paper currency not convertible into the metals
at the option of the holder can be arbitrarily fixed,
especially if the issuer is the sovereign power of the
state. the value, therefore, of such a currency is entirely
arbitrary.
the value of paper money is, of course, primarily and mainly
dependent on the quantity issued. the general level of
value depends on the quantity; but we also find that deviations
from this general level, in the direction of further depreciation
than could be due to quantity alone, is caused by any
event which shakes the confidence of any one that he may get
the existing value for his paper. the “convention” by which
real value (the essential idea of money) was associated with
this paper in the minds of all is thereby broken.
fiat money—that
is, a piece of paper, not containing a promise to pay a
dollar, but a simple declaration that this is a dollar—therefore,
separates the paper from any connection with value. and yet
we see that fiat money has some, although a fluctuating, value
at certain times: if the state receives it for taxes, if it is a legal
acquittal of obligations, then, to that extent, a certain quantity
of it is given a value equal to the wealth represented by the
taxes, or the debts. jevons remarks on this point that, if
“the quantity of notes issued was kept within such moderate
limits that any one wishing to realize the metallic value of the
notes could find some one wanting to pay taxes, and therefore
willing to give coin for notes,” stability of value might be secured.
if there is more in circulation than performs these functions,
it will depreciate in the proportion of the quantity to the
extent of the uses assigned to it; so that the relation of quantity
to uses is the only thing which can give value to fiat money,
but beyond a certain point in the issues other forces than mere
quantity begin to affect the value. although the paper is not
even a promise to pay value, the form of expression on its face,
or the term used as its designation, generally tends, under the
force of convention and habit, to give a popular value to paper.
[pg ]
although the state may not promise to pay a dollar, yet, wherever
such paper money carries any purchasing power with it
(which has very seldom happened, and then only for short periods),
it will be found that there is a vague popular understanding
that the state intends, at some time or other, to redeem the
notes with value in coin to some amount. in the early cases of
irredeemable money in our colonies, the income of taxes, or similar
resources, were promised as a means of redemption. to some—although
a slight—extent, the idea of value was associated
with such paper. the actual quantity issued did not measure
the depreciation. the paper did depreciate with increased issues.
but only in so far as the increased issues proved to the
community that there was less and less possibility of ever receiving
value for them did they depreciate. in other words, we come
to the familiar experience, known to many, of a paper money depending
for its value on the opinions of men in the country. this
was partially true, even of our own greenbacks, which were not
fiat money, but promises to pay (although not then redeemable),
as may be seen by the movement of the line in chart xii
(p. ), which represents
the fluctuations of our paper money during
the civil war. the upward movement of the line, which indicates
the premium on gold during our late war, of course represents
correspondingly the depreciation of the paper. every
victory or defeat of the union arms raised or lowered the premium
on gold; it was the register of the opinion of the people as to
the value to be associated with the paper. the second and third
resorts to issues of greenbacks were regarded as confessions of
financial distress; it was this which produced the effect on their
value. it was not only the quantity but also that which caused
the issue of the quantity. it is, of course, clear that the value of
a paper money like the greenbacks, which were the promises to
pay of a rich country, would bear a definite relation to the actual
quantity issued; and this is to be seen by the generally
higher level of the line on the chart, showing a steadily diminishing
purchasing power as the issues increased. but the thing
which weighed largely in people's minds was the possibility of
ultimate redemption; and the premium on gold was practically
a register of the “betting” on this possibility. in , when
secretary sherman's reserve was seen to be increasing to an
effective amount, and when it became evident that he would
have the means (i.e., the value represented by all the paper
that was likely to be presented) to resume on the day set, january
, , the premium gradually faded away. the general
shifting of the level to a lower stage in this later period was
not due to any decrease in the quantity outstanding, because
the contraction had been stopped in , and that consequent
on the resumption act in may, .
[pg ]
suppose that, in a country of which the currency is
wholly metallic, a paper currency is suddenly issued, to the
amount of half the metallic circulation; not by a banking
establishment, or in the form of loans, but by the government,
in payment of salaries and purchase of commodities.
the currency being suddenly increased by one half, all prices
will rise, and, among the rest, the prices of all things made
of gold and silver. an ounce of manufactured gold will become
more valuable than an ounce of gold coin, by more
than that customary difference which compensates for the
value of the workmanship; and it will be profitable to melt
the coin for the purpose of being manufactured, until as
much has been taken from the currency by the subtraction
of gold as had been added to it by the issue of paper. then
prices will relapse to what they were at first, and there will
be nothing changed, except that a paper currency has been
substituted for half of the metallic currency which existed
before. suppose, now, a second emission of paper; the
same series of effects will be renewed; and so on, until the
whole of the metallic money has disappeared [see chart
no. xiv,
chap. xv, for the exportation of gold from the
united states after the issue of our paper money in ]:
that is, if paper be issued of as low a denomination as
the lowest coin; if not, as much will remain as convenience
requires for the smaller payments. the addition
made to the quantity of gold and silver disposable for
ornamental purposes will somewhat reduce, for a time, the
value of the article; and as long as this is the case, even
though paper has been issued to the original amount of
the metallic circulation, as much coin will remain in circulation
along with it as will keep the value of the currency
down to the reduced value of the metallic material;
but the value having fallen below the cost of production, a
stoppage or diminution of the supply from the mines will
enable the surplus to be carried off by the ordinary agents of
destruction, after which the metals and the currency will
recover their natural value. we are here supposing, as we
[pg ]
have supposed throughout, that the country has mines of its
own, and no commercial intercourse with other countries;
for, in a country having foreign trade, the coin which is rendered
superfluous by an issue of paper is carried off by a
much prompter method.
mr. mill's statement, that, if paper be not issued of as low
a denomination as the lowest coin, “as much will remain as
convenience requires for the smaller payments,” will not hold
true. during our recent experiment of depreciated paper, the
depreciation was such as to drive out the subsidiary silver coins,
by july, , and we were forced to supply their place by a
fractional paper currency. by an amendment inserted june ,
, into the act authorizing a second issue of $,, of
greenbacks, it was ordered “that no note shall be issued for
the fractional part of a dollar, and not more than $,,
shall be of lower denominations than five dollars” (act, finally
passed july , ). although there were no fractional
notes, yet one-dollar notes drove out subsidiary silver, simply
because the paper had depreciated to a value below that of the
. grains of silver in two halves or four quarters of a dollar.
by july d the disappearance of small coin was distinctly noted.
let the value of gold be represented by ; and a dollar of
small silver coin (. grains), relatively to a gold dollar,
by . now, if paper depreciates to , relatively to gold, it
will drive out the subsidiary silver at , in accordance with
gresham's law.
up to this point the effects of a paper currency are substantially
the same, whether it is convertible into specie or
not. it is when the metals have been completely superseded
and driven from circulation that the difference between
convertible and inconvertible paper begins to be operative.
when the gold or silver has all gone from circulation,
and an equal amount of paper has taken its place,
suppose that a still further issue is superadded. the same
series of phenomena recommences: prices rise, among the
rest the prices of gold and silver articles, and it becomes an
object, as before, to procure coin, in order to convert it into
bullion. there is no longer any coin in circulation; but, if
the paper currency is convertible, coin may still be obtained
from the issuers in exchange for notes. all additional notes,
therefore, which are attempted to be forced into circulation
[pg ]
after the metals have been completely superseded, will return
upon the issuers in exchange for coin; and they will not be
able to maintain in circulation such a quantity of convertible
paper as to sink its value below the metal which it represents.
it is not so, however, with an inconvertible currency.
to the increase of that (if permitted by law) there is no
check. the issuers may add to it indefinitely, lowering its
value and raising prices in proportion; they may, in other
words, depreciate the currency without limit.
such a power, in whomsoever vested, is an intolerable
evil. all variations in the value of the circulating medium
are mischievous: they disturb existing contracts and expectations,
and the liability to such changes renders every pecuniary
engagement of long date entirely precarious. the person
who buys for himself, or gives to another, an annuity
of one [hundred dollars], does not know whether it will be
equivalent to [two hundred or to fifty dollars] a few years
hence. great as this evil would be if it depended only on
accident, it is still greater when placed at the arbitrary disposal
of an individual or a body of individuals, who may
have any kind or degree of interest to be served by an artificial
fluctuation in fortunes, and who have at any rate a
strong interest in issuing as much as possible, each issue
being in itself a source of profit—not to add, that the issuers
may have, and, in the case of a government paper, always
have, a direct interest in lowering the value of the
currency, because it is the medium in which their own debts
are computed.
the united states supreme court had decided in december,
, by the second legal-tender decision, that the issue of
greenbacks (inconvertible from  to ) was constitutional
during a time of war; but it was thought that the reissue of
these notes since the war, when no war emergency could be
pleaded, was unconstitutional. this view, however, was met by
the unfortunate decision of the supreme court, delivered by
justice gray, march, , which announced the doctrine that
the expediency of an issue of legal-tender paper money was to
be determined solely by congress; and that, if congress judged
the issue expedient, it was within the limits of those provisions
[pg ]
of the constitution (section ), which gave congress the means
to do whatever was “necessary and proper” to carry out the
powers expressly granted to it. nothing now can prevent
congress, should it choose to do so, from issuing paper money
of any description whatever, even if of absolutely no value.
the disaster that might be brought upon the country by a
rising tide of repudiation among debtors, taking its effect
through a facile and plastic congress (as in the case of the
silver coinage in ), is appalling to reflect upon.
§ . if regulated by the price of bullion, as inconvertible currency
might be safe, but not expedient.
in order that the value of the currency may be
secure from being altered by design, and may be as little as
possible liable to fluctuation from accident, the articles least
liable of all known commodities to vary in their value, the
precious metals, have been made in all civilized countries
the standard of value for the circulating medium; and no
paper currency ought to exist of which the value can not be
made to conform to theirs. nor has this fundamental maxim
ever been entirely lost sight of, even by the governments
which have most abused the power of creating inconvertible
paper. if they have not (as they generally have) professed
an intention of paying in specie at some indefinite future
time, they have at least, by giving to their paper issues the
names of their coins, made a virtual, though generally a false,
profession of intending to keep them at a value corresponding
to that of the coins. this is not impracticable, even
with an inconvertible paper. there is not, indeed, the self-acting
check which convertibility brings with it. but there
is a clear and unequivocal indication by which to judge
whether the currency is depreciated, and to what extent.
that indication is the price of the precious metals. when
holders of paper can not demand coin to be converted into
bullion, and when there is none left in circulation, bullion
rises and falls in price like other things; and if it is above
the mint price—if an ounce of gold, which would be coined
into the equivalent of [$.], is sold for [$ or $] in
paper—the value of the currency has sunk just that much
below what the value of a metallic currency would be. if,
therefore, the issue of inconvertible paper were subjected to
[pg ]
strict rules, one rule being that, whenever bullion rose above
the mint price, the issues should be contracted until the
market price of bullion and the mint price were again in
accordance, such a currency would not be subject to any
of the evils usually deemed inherent in an inconvertible
paper.
but, also, such a system of currency would have no advantages
sufficient to recommend it to adoption. an inconvertible
currency, regulated by the price of bullion, would
conform exactly, in all its variations, to a convertible one;
and the only advantage gained would be that of exemption
from the necessity of keeping any reserve of the precious
metals, which is not a very important consideration, especially
as a government, so long as its good faith is not suspected,
need not keep so large a reserve as private issuers,
being not so liable to great and sudden demands, since there
never can be any real doubt of its solvency.
the united states since  finds that a reserve of from
$,, to $,, is a sufficient reserve for outstanding
notes to the amount of $,,, and greenbacks
are now at a par with gold.
against this small advantage is to be set, in the first place,
the possibility of fraudulent tampering with the price of
bullion for the sake of acting on the currency, in the manner
of the fictitious sales of corn, to influence the averages,
so much and so justly complained of while the corn laws
were in force. but a still stronger consideration is the importance
of adhering to a simple principle, intelligible to
the most untaught capacity. everybody can understand
convertibility; every one sees that what can be at any moment
exchanged for five [dollars] is worth five [dollars].
regulation by the price of bullion is a more complex idea,
and does not recommend itself through the same familiar
associations. there would be nothing like the same confidence,
by the public generally, in an inconvertible currency
so regulated, as in a convertible one: and the most instructed
person might reasonably doubt whether such a rule would be
[pg ]
as likely to be inflexibly adhered to. the grounds of the
rule not being so well understood by the public, opinion
would probably not enforce it with as much rigidity, and,
in any circumstances of difficulty, would be likely to turn
against it; while to the government itself a suspension of
convertibility would appear a much stronger and more extreme
measure than a relaxation of what might possibly
be considered a somewhat artificial rule. there is therefore
a great preponderance of reasons in favor of a convertible,
in preference to even the best regulated inconvertible,
currency. the temptation to over-issue, in certain
financial emergencies, is so strong, that nothing is admissible
which can tend, in however slight a degree, to weaken the
barriers that restrain it.
the french government, in the franco-prussian war
(), issued inconvertible paper on this plan, as explained
by mr. mill; but, acting through the bank of france, they conducted
their issues so successfully that the notes never depreciated
more than about one half of one per cent. but this
was a very rare management of inconvertible paper, since the
issues were actually limited as the price of gold in paper rose
above par.
§ . examination of the doctrine that an inconvertible current is safe,
if representing actual property.
projectors every now and then start up, with plans
for curing all the economical evils of society by means of an
unlimited issue of inconvertible paper. there is, in truth, a
great charm in the idea. to be able to pay off the national
debt, defray the expenses of government without taxation,
and, in fine, to make the fortunes of the whole community,
is a brilliant prospect, when once a man is capable of believing
that printing a few characters on bits of paper will do it.
the philosopher's stone could not be expected to do more.
as these projects, however often slain, always resuscitate,
it is not superfluous to examine one or two of the fallacies
[pg ]
by which the schemers impose upon themselves. one of the
commonest is, that a paper currency can not be issued in excess
so long as every note issued represents property, or has
a foundation of actual property to rest on. these phrases,
of representing and resting, seldom convey any distinct or
well-defined idea; when they do, their meaning is no more
than this—that the issuers of the paper must have property,
either of their own, or intrusted to them, to the value of all
the notes they issue, though for what purpose does not very
clearly appear; for, if the property can not be claimed
in exchange for the notes, it is difficult to divine in what
manner its mere existence can serve to uphold their value.
i presume, however, it is intended as a guarantee that
the holders would be finally reimbursed, in case any untoward
event should cause the whole concern to be wound
up. on this theory there have been many schemes for
“coining the whole land of the country into money” and
the like.
in so far as this notion has any connection at all with
reason, it seems to originate in confounding two entirely distinct
evils, to which a paper currency is liable. one is, the
insolvency of the issuers; which, if the paper is grounded
on their credit—if it makes any promise of payment in cash,
either on demand or at any future time—of course deprives
the paper of any value which it derives from the promise.
to this evil paper credit is equally liable, however moderately
used; and against it, a proviso that all issues should
be “founded on property,” as for instance that notes should
only be issued on the security of some valuable thing, expressly
pledged for their redemption, would really be efficacious
as a precaution. but the theory takes no account of
another evil, which is incident to the notes of the most solvent
firm, company, or government; that of being depreciated
in value from being issued in excessive quantity. the
assignats, during the french revolution, were an example of
a currency grounded on these principles. the assignats
“represented” an immense amount of highly valuable property,
[pg ]
namely, the lands of the crown, the church, the monasteries,
and the emigrants; amounting possibly to half the
territory of france. they were, in fact, orders or assignments
on this mass of land. the revolutionary government
had the idea of “coining” these lands into money; but, to
do them justice, they did not originally contemplate the immense
multiplication of issues to which they were eventually
driven by the failure of all other financial resources. they
imagined that the assignats would come rapidly back to the
issuers in exchange for land, and that they should be able to
reissue them continually until the lands were all disposed
of, without having at any time more than a very moderate
quantity in circulation. their hope was frustrated: the land
did not sell so quickly as they expected; buyers were not
inclined to invest their money in possessions which were
likely to be resumed without compensation if the revolution
succumbed; the bits of paper which represented land, becoming
prodigiously multiplied, could no more keep up their
value than the land itself would have done if it had all been
brought to market at once; and the result was that it at last
required an assignat of five hundred francs to pay for a cup
of coffee.
the example of the assignats has been said not to be conclusive,
because an assignat only represented land in general,
but not a definite quantity of land. to have prevented their
depreciation, the proper course, it is affirmed, would have
been to have made a valuation of all the confiscated property
at its metallic value, and to have issued assignats up to, but
not beyond, that limit; giving to the holders a right to demand
any piece of land, at its registered valuation, in exchange
for assignats to the same amount. there can be no
question about the superiority of this plan over the one actually
adopted. had this course been followed, the assignats
could never have been depreciated to the inordinate degree
they were; for—as they would have retained all their purchasing
power in relation to land, however much they might
have fallen in respect to other things—before they had lost
[pg ]
very much of their market value, they would probably
have been brought in to be exchanged for land. it must
be remembered, however, that their not being depreciated
would presuppose that no greater number of them
continued in circulation than would have circulated if they
had been convertible into cash. however convenient, therefore,
in a time of revolution, this currency convertible into
land on demand might have been, as a contrivance for
selling rapidly a great quantity of land with the least possible
sacrifice, it is difficult to see what advantage it would
have, as the permanent system of a country, over a currency
convertible into coin; while it is not at all difficult to
see what would be its disadvantages, since land is far more
variable in value than gold and silver; and besides, land, to
most persons, being rather an incumbrance than a desirable
possession, except to be converted into money, people would
submit to a much greater depreciation before demanding
land, than they will before demanding gold or silver.
it has been said that the assignats circulated without legal-tender
power. they were received by the french treasury,
and a law was passed condemning a man to six years in irons
for exchanging gold or silver for assignats at a greater than
the nominal or face value of the latter. the subsequent issues,
called mandats,
did not represent land, but were directly exchangeable
for the land. even that kind of money is no more
valuable than a proportional amount of tax receipts for land.
in a very short time mandats
were worth / of their face
value, and assignats very much less. the assignats, moreover,
were not limited in quantity to the money value of the lands
they represented. by , ,,, francs of assignats
had been issued.
§ . experiments with paper money in the united states.
the experience of the colonies before our revolution
is rich in warning examples of the over-issue of inconvertible
paper money. those of rhode island and the province
[pg ]
of massachusetts
are the most conspicuous, perhaps, because
we have better knowledge of them, but other colonies
suffered in as great a degree. the experience of the latter
illustrates as well as any, perhaps, not only the general theory
of inconvertible paper, but the device of supporting the paper
by paying interest upon the notes. although the issues
since  had depreciated, in  £, more notes were
issued, because, as it was said, there was a scarcity of money.
it is always noticeable that the more issues of paper money
there are made, the more there is a cry of scarcity, much like
the thirst of a hard drinker after the first exhilaration has
passed off. on the new issues five per cent interest was paid,
and even excises and imposts were set aside as security for their
payment. the year  saw a new expedition to canada, and
saw also the broken promises of the province, when £,
more notes were put out; the collection of the taxes with which
to pay the notes was deferred in  for two years; in 
deferred for four years; in  for five years; in  for six
years. by  they had depreciated thirty per cent, when the
charm of legal tender was thrown around them, but to no purpose.
the idea of value was not associated with them in people's
minds, and they put no faith in promises. the usual result
took place. people divided politically on the money question,
and parties began to agitate for banks which should issue notes
based on real estate, or for loans from the state to private persons
at interest to be paid annually. such facts show the train
of evils following the first innocent departure from the maintenance
of a currency equivalent to coin. the people forgot, or
did not know, the nature of money, or the offices it performed.
they did not understand that creating paper money did not
create wealth. this experiment closed only in  (march
st), when the province had courage enough to resume specie
payments. the effect was to transfer the west india trade
from paper-issuing colonies to massachusetts, and to produce
a steady prosperity in her business interests.
chart xi. continental currency, issue and depreciation.
the issue of paper money as a means of making a forced
loan from the people, when there seem to be no other means of
getting funds, has been fully illustrated in our country by the
continental currency issued during our revolution. it is not,
however, considered that this is also accompanied by a process
by which every debtor takes “a forced contribution from his
creditor.” congress had no power to tax, and the separate
[pg ]
states would not do it; and this has been considered as the excuse
for making issues of that well-known paper money, which
has given rise to the familiar by-word for absence of value,
“not worth a continental.” without going into details, in one
year, , congress issued $,,, worth in coin only
$,,. they, however, bravely declared that paper had
not depreciated, but that the price of coin had gone up!
legal attempts were made to repress the premium on silver;
but resolutions do not create wealth as fast as money can be
printed. the depreciation went on more rapidly than the issues
(see chart no. xi, in which the black line represents the
amounts of issues, and the broken line the depreciation of paper,
starting at ); and, finally, march , , congress decided
to admit a depreciation, and resumed in silver at the
rate of one dollar in silver for forty in paper.
the question of government issues of paper money again
came up in the united states in , during the civil war,
and part of our present currency is the result of the policy
then adopted. the first step—the one that generally costs—however,
was taken july , , when the treasury issued
$,, of “demand notes,” not bearing interest. these
notes, however, were not made legal tender. they could be used
in payment of salaries and other dues from the united states.
it may be well to state that the treasury balanced the arguments
for and against the issues of paper at the beginning of the experiment,
and we can see how these views were realized as we
go along. in favor of paper issues it was urged that we could
borrow a large amount without interest, as in the case of
the continental currency; that there would be no expense beyond
the coin necessary for keeping the paper at par; and
that the country would gain a uniform currency. on the other
hand, it was seen that there might be temptations to issue without
provisions for redemption; that even if a fund were kept,
a disturbance of the money market would precipitate a demand
for coin, and all upon this single fund; and, lastly, that there
were all the dangers of over-issue. secretary chase then decided
[pg ]
against paper issues. government bonds, however, did
not sell, and the attempt of the banks toward the end of 
to carry $,, of bonds brought on a suspension of specie
payments, december , . without any taxation policy,
the country drifted along, until in a spasm of dread at
seeing an empty treasury, congress passed the legal-tender
act (february , ), issuing $,, of paper in the
form of promises to pay. a committee of bankers showed that
the issue could have been avoided by selling bonds at their
market price; but congress would not sell them below par.
no necessity for the issues of paper need have arrived. in
four months another issue of $,, was authorized
(july , ); and a third issue of a like amount (march ,
), in all $,,. the depreciation took place (see
chart no. xii),
for, as secretary chase anticipated, no provision
was made for redemption. they were made legal tender,
but this “essential idea” did not preserve their value; nor
did the provision that they be received for taxes (except customs),
avail for this purpose.
the effects of the depreciation were as evil as can well be
imagined. () the expenses of the government were increased
by the rise in prices, so that () our national debt became
hundreds of millions larger than it need have been; () a
vicious speculation in gold began, leading to the unsettling of
legitimate trade and to greater variations in prices; () the existence
of depreciated paper later gave rise to all the dishonest
schemes for paying the coin obligations of the united states
in cheap issues, to the ruin of its credit and honor; and () it
has practically become a settled part of our circulation, and a
possible source of danger.
of the whole $,,, $,, were set aside as a
reserve for temporary deposits; but in july, , $,,
were in circulation. at this time (june , ) congress,
retaining distinctly the feeling that the issue of paper was but
a temporary measure, forbade any further issues. secretary
mcculloch, immediately on the close of the war, began to contract,
and, by a resolution of the lower branch in congress
(december , ), a cordial concurrence in the measures for
contraction was manifested. of course, the return from the
path of inflated credit and high prices was painful, and congress
began to feel the pressure of its constituents. had they
not yielded, much of the severity of the crisis of  might
have been avoided; but (april , ) they forbade any
greater contraction than $,, a month. here was a lack
of courage not foreseen by secretary chase. this was again
shown (february , ) by a law which absolutely forbade
the secretary to further reduce the currency, which now stood
[pg ]
at $,,. this marks an important change in the attitude
of the government, as compared with . after the
panic of , the paper evil produced its usual effect in the
cry for more money, and, as in the province of massachusetts
in , parties divided on the question of inflation or contraction.
a bill to expand the government issues to $,,
(and the national-bank notes also to $,,) actually
passed both houses of congress, and we were fortunately saved
from it only by the veto of president grant (april , ).
this was another landmark in the history of our paper money.
secretary richardson, however, had already, without authority,
reissued $,, of the $,, withdrawn by secretary
mcculloch, and the amount outstanding was thus
$,,. a compromise measure was passed (june ,
), which retained this amount in the circulation.
when the resumption act was passed (january , ),
the provision that, for every $ of new national-bank notes
issued, $ of united states notes should be retired, resulted in
a contraction of the latter from $,, to $,,.
the reason of this was, that there was no provision for the increase
of united states notes when national banks withdrew
their own issues; and after the crisis many banks naturally did
so. the culmination of the policy of congress came in a law
(may , ) which absolutely forbade all further retirement
of united states notes, and we are now left at the present
time with an inelastic limit of $,,. finally, in 
and , secretary sherman, aided by a most fortunate state
of foreign trade, began to accumulate gold in order to carry
out the provisions of the resumption act, which required him
to resume specie payments on january , . he successfully
collected $,, of gold, and on december , ,
the premium on gold disappeared, and resumption was accomplished
quietly on the day appointed, without a jar to business.
but it is a significant fact that even after all the evils inflicted
on our country by over-issues, in spite of the temptation
to misuse paper money if it is in any way permitted, in spite of
all the warnings of history, there seems to be a dangerous acquiescence
in the presence of government paper money in our
currency. it is an open pitfall, tempting to evils whenever
sudden emergencies arise. it ought not to be allowed to remain
any longer.
§ . examination of the gain arising from the increase and issue of paper
currency.
another of the fallacies from which the advocates
of an inconvertible currency derive support is the notion
that an increase of the currency quickens industry. mr.
attwood maintained that a rise of prices produced by an increase
[pg ]
of paper currency stimulates every producer to his
utmost exertions, and brings all the capital and labor of the
country into complete employment; and that this has invariably
happened in all periods of rising prices, when the rise
was on a sufficiently great scale. i presume, however, that
the inducement which, according to mr. attwood, excited
this unusual ardor in all persons engaged in production
must have been the expectation of getting more of commodities
generally, more real wealth, in exchange for the produce
of their labor, and not merely more pieces of paper. this
expectation, however, must have been, by the very terms of
the supposition, disappointed, since, all prices being supposed
to rise equally, no one was really better paid for his goods
than before. it calculates on finding the whole world persisting
forever in the belief that more pieces of paper are
more riches, and never discovering that, with all their paper,
they can not buy more of anything than they could before.
at the periods which mr. attwood mistook for times of
prosperity, and which were simply (as all periods of high
prices, under a convertible currency, must be) times of speculation,
the speculators did not think they were growing rich
because the high prices would last, but because they would
not last, and because whoever contrived to realize while they
did last would find himself, after the recoil, in possession of
a greater number of [dollars], without their having become
of less value.
hume's version of the doctrine differed in a slight degree
from mr. attwood's. he thought that all commodities would
not rise in price simultaneously, and that some persons therefore
would obtain a real gain, by getting more money for
what they had to sell, while the things which they wished to
buy might not yet have risen. and those who would reap
this gain would always be (he seems to think) the first comers.
it seems obvious, however, that, for every person who
thus gains more than usual, there is necessarily some other
person who gains less. the loser, if things took place as
hume supposes, would be the seller of the commodities
[pg ]
which are slowest to rise; who, by the supposition, parts
with his goods at the old prices, to purchasers who have
already benefited by the new. this seller has obtained for
his commodity only the accustomed quantity of money, while
there are already some things of which that money will no
longer purchase as much as before. if, therefore, he knows
what is going on, he will raise his price, and then the buyer
will not have the gain, which is supposed to stimulate his
industry. but if, on the contrary, the seller does not know
the state of the case, and only discovers it when he finds, in
laying his money out, that it does not go so far, he then obtains
less than the ordinary remuneration for his labor and
capital; and, if the other dealer's industry is encouraged, it
should seem that his must, from the opposite cause, be impaired.
an issue of notes is a manifest gain to the issuers, who,
until the notes are returned for payment, obtain the use of
them as if they were a real capital; and, so long as the notes
are no permanent addition to the currency, but merely supersede
gold or silver to the same amount, the gain of the
issuer is a loss to no one; it is obtained by saving to the
community the expense of the more costly material. but, if
there is no gold or silver to be superseded—if the notes are
added to the currency, instead of being substituted for the
metallic part of it—all holders of currency lose, by the depreciation
of its value, the exact equivalent of what the issuer
gains. a tax is virtually levied on them for his benefit.
but besides the benefit reaped by the issuers, or by others
through them, at the expense of the public generally, there
is another unjust gain obtained by a larger class—namely, by
those who are under fixed pecuniary obligations. all such
persons are freed, by a depreciation of the currency, from a
portion of the burden of their debts or other engagements;
in other words, part of the property of their creditors is
gratuitously transferred to them. on a superficial view it
may be imagined that this is an advantage to industry; since
the productive classes are great borrowers, and generally owe
[pg ]
larger debts to the unproductive (if we include among the
latter all persons not actually in business) than the unproductive
classes owe to them, especially if the national debt
be included. it is only thus that a general rise of prices can
be a source of benefit to producers and dealers, by diminishing
the pressure of their fixed burdens. and this might be
accounted an advantage, if integrity and good faith were of
no importance to the world, and to industry and commerce
in particular.
§ . résumé of the subject of money.
before passing on to another branch of our subject, it
may be a gain to clearer ideas to collect in the form of the following
classification the main points discussed
(in chaps. iv
to x)
under money and credit, in continuance of a similar
classification of value:
[pg ]
money measures and transfers value.:
(.) hence best served by the precious metals, on account
of their peculiar qualities.
(.) depends for its value, in the long run, on the cost of
production at the worst mine worked (class iii); but
practically on demand and supply (class i). and (if no credit
exists) its value changes exactly with the supply, which
is expressed by v = /(q × r)
(.) under two legal standards, obeys gresham's law—e.g.,
experience of japan and the united states.
(.) substitutes for money, called credit (which is not capital,
but calls out inactive capital).
of these substitutes for money, () use of credit depends not on quality of coin
and notes, and () various kinds of credit.
of those various kinds of credit, there are () book credits, () bills of
exchange, () promissory notes, and () checks processed via clearing-house.
of the promissory notes, they are of either () individuals, () banks (coin banks
or land banks, etc.), or
() governments.
of government notes, there are () convertible or () inconvertible.
[pg ]
chapter xi. of excess of supply.
§ . the theory of a general over-supply of commodities stated.
after the elementary exposition of the theory of
money contained in the last few chapters, we shall return to
a question in the general theory of value which could not
be satisfactorily discussed until the nature and operations of
money were in some measure understood, because the errors
against which we have to contend mainly originate in a misunderstanding
of those operations.
because the phenomenon of over-supply and consequent
inconvenience or loss to the producer or dealer may exist in
the case of any one commodity whatever, many persons, including
some distinguished political economists, have thought
that it may exist with regard to all commodities; that there
may be a general over-production of wealth; a supply of
commodities in the aggregate surpassing the demand; and a
consequent depressed condition of all classes of producers.
the doctrine appears to me to involve so much inconsistency
in its very conception that i feel considerable difficulty
in giving any statement of it which shall be at once clear and
satisfactory to its supporters. they agree in maintaining
that there may be, and sometimes is, an excess of productions
in general beyond the demand for them; that when
this happens, purchasers can not be found at prices which
will repay the cost of production with a profit; that there
ensues a general depression of prices or values (they are seldom
[pg ]
accurate in discriminating between the two), so that
producers, the more they produce, find themselves the poorer
instead of richer; and dr. chalmers accordingly inculcates
on capitalists the practice of a moral restraint in reference
to the pursuit of gain, while sismondi deprecates machinery
and the various inventions which increase productive power.
they both maintain that accumulation of capital may proceed
too fast, not merely for the moral but for the material
interest of those who produce and accumulate; and they
enjoin the rich to guard against this evil by an ample unproductive
consumption.
§ . the supply of commodities in general can not exceed the power
of purchase.
when these writers speak of the supply of commodities
as outrunning the demand, it is not clear which of
the two elements of demand they have in view—the desire
to possess, or the means of purchase; whether their meaning
is that there are, in such cases, more consumable products in
existence than the public desires to consume, or merely more
than it is able to pay for. in this uncertainty, it is necessary
to examine both suppositions.
it will be here noticed that mr. mill uses demand in the
sense for which we contended it should be used
(book iii,
chap. i, § ), and not as “quantity demanded.” the present
discussion of over-production should also be connected by the
student with the former reference to it,
book i, chap. iv, § .
first, let us suppose that the quantity of commodities
produced is not greater than the community would be glad
to consume; is it, in that case, possible that there should be
a deficiency of demand for all commodities for want of the
means of payment? those who think so can not have considered
what it is which constitutes the means of payment
for commodities. it is simply commodities. each person's
means of paying for the productions of other people consists
of those which he himself possesses. all sellers are
inevitably and ex vi termini buyers. could we suddenly
double the productive powers of the country, we should
double the supply of commodities in every market; but we
should, by the same stroke, double the purchasing power.
[pg ]
everybody would bring a double demand as well as supply;
everybody would be able to buy twice as much, because
every one would have twice as much to offer in exchange.
it is probable, indeed, that there would now be a superfluity
of certain things. although the community would willingly
double its aggregate consumption, it may already have as
much as it desires of some commodities, and it may prefer
to do more than double its consumption of others, or to exercise
its increased purchasing power on some new thing.
if so, the supply will adapt itself accordingly, and the values
of things will continue to conform to their cost of production.
at any rate, it is a sheer absurdity that all things
should fall in value, and that all producers should, in consequence,
be insufficiently remunerated. if values remain the
same, what becomes of prices is immaterial, since the remuneration
of producers does not depend on how much money,
but on how much of consumable articles, they obtain for
their goods. besides, money is a commodity; and, if all
commodities are supposed to be doubled in quantity, we
must suppose money to be doubled too, and then prices
would no more fall than values would.
§ . there can never be a lack of demand arising from lack of desire to
consume.
a general over-supply, or excess of all commodities
above the demand, so far as demand consists in means of
payment, is thus shown to be an impossibility. but it may,
perhaps, be supposed that it is not the ability to purchase,
but the desire to possess, that falls short, and that the general
produce of industry may be greater than the community
desires to consume—the part, at least, of the community
which has an equivalent to give.
this is much the most plausible form of the doctrine,
and does not, like that which we first examined, involve a
contradiction. there may easily be a greater quantity of
any particular commodity than is desired by those who have
the ability to purchase, and it is abstractedly conceivable
that this might be the case with all commodities. the error
is in not perceiving that, though all who have an equivalent
to give might be fully provided with every consumable
[pg ]
article which they desire, the fact that they go on adding to
the production proves that this is not actually the case. assume
the most favorable hypothesis for the purpose, that of
a limited community, every member of which possesses as
much of necessaries and of all known luxuries as he desires,
and, since it is not conceivable that persons whose wants
were completely satisfied would labor and economize to obtain
what they did not desire, suppose that a foreigner
arrives and produces an additional quantity of something
of which there was already enough. here, it will be said, is
over-production. true, i reply; over-production of that
particular article. the community wanted no more of that,
but it wanted something. the old inhabitants, indeed,
wanted nothing; but did not the foreigner himself want
something? when he produced the superfluous article, was
he laboring without a motive? he has produced—but the
wrong thing instead of the right. he wanted, perhaps,
food, and has produced watches, with which everybody was
sufficiently supplied. the new-comer brought with him into
the country a demand for commodities equal to all that he
could produce by his industry, and it was his business to see
that the supply he brought should be suitable to that demand.
if he could not produce something capable of exciting
a new want or desire in the community, for the satisfaction
of which some one would grow more food and give
it to him in exchange, he had the alternative of growing
food for himself, either on fresh land, if there was any unoccupied,
or as a tenant, or partner, or servant of some former
occupier, willing to be partially relieved from labor. he
has produced a thing not wanted, instead of what was
wanted, and he himself, perhaps, is not the kind of producer
who is wanted—but there is no over-production; production
is not excessive, but merely ill-assorted. we saw before
that whoever brings additional commodities to the market
brings an additional power of purchase; we now see that he
brings also an additional desire to consume, since if he had
not that desire he would not have troubled himself to produce.
[pg ]
neither of the elements of demand, therefore, can
be wanting when there is an additional supply, though it is
perfectly possible that the demand may be for one thing, and
the supply may, unfortunately, consist of another.
it is not sufficiently borne in mind, also, that the whole
progress of civilization results in a differentiation of new wants
and desires. to take but a single instance, with the growth of
the artistic sense the articles of common use change their entire
form; and the advances in the arts disclose new commodities
which satisfy the world's desires, and for these new
satisfactions people are willing to work and produce in order
to attain them. with education also comes a wider horizon
and a more refined perception of taste, which creates wants for
new things for which the mind before had no desires. a little
reflection, therefore, must inevitably lead us to see that no person,
no community, ever had, or probably ever will have, all its
wants satisfied. so far as we know man, it does not seem possible
that there will ever be a falling off in demand, because of
a satiety of all material satisfactions.
§ . origin and explanation of the notion of general over-supply.
i have already described the state of the markets for
commodities which accompanies what is termed a commercial
crisis. at such times there is really an excess of all
commodities above the money demand: in other words,
there is an under-supply of money. from the sudden annihilation
of a great mass of credit, every one dislikes to part
with ready money, and many are anxious to procure it at
any sacrifice. almost everybody, therefore, is a seller, and
there are scarcely any buyers: so that there may really be,
though only while the crisis lasts, an extreme depression of
general prices, from what may be indiscriminately called a
glut of commodities or a dearth of money. but it is a great
error to suppose, with sismondi, that a commercial crisis is
the effect of a general excess of production. it is simply
the consequence of an excess of speculative purchases. it is
not a gradual advent of low prices, but a sudden recoil from
prices extravagantly high: its immediate cause is a contraction
of credit, and the remedy is, not a diminution of supply,
but the restoration of confidence. it is also evident
that this temporary derangement of markets is an evil only
[pg ]
because it is temporary. the fall being solely of money
prices, if prices did not rise again no dealer would lose,
since the smaller price would be worth as much to him as
the larger price was before. in no matter does this phenomenon
answer to the description which these celebrated
economists have given of the evil of over-production. that
permanent decline in the circumstances of producers, for
want of markets, which those writers contemplate, is a conception
to which the nature of a commercial crisis gives no
support.
the other phenomenon from which the notion of a general
excess of wealth and superfluity of accumulation seems
to derive countenance is one of a more permanent nature,
namely, the fall of profits and interest which naturally takes
place with the progress of population and production. the
cause of this decline of profit is the increased cost of maintaining
labor, which results from an increase of population
and of the demand for food, outstripping the advance of
agricultural improvement. this important feature in the
economical progress of nations will receive full consideration
and discussion in the succeeding book. it is obviously
a totally different thing from a want of market for commodities,
though often confounded with it in the complaints
of the producing and trading classes. the true interpretation
of the modern or present state of industrial economy is,
that there is hardly any amount of business which may not
be done, if people will be content to do it on small profits;
and this all active and intelligent persons in business perfectly
well know: but even those who comply with the necessities
of their time grumble at what they comply with,
and wish that there were less capital, or, as they express it,
less competition, in order that there might be greater profits.
low profits, however, are a different thing from deficiency
[pg ]
of demand, and the production and accumulation which
merely reduce profits can not be called excess of supply or
of production. what the phenomenon really is, and its
effects and necessary limits, will be seen when we treat of
that express subject.
[pg ]
chapter xii. of some peculiar cases of value.
§ . values of commodities which have a joint cost of production.
the general laws of value, in all the more important
cases of the interchange of commodities in the same
country, have now been investigated. we examined, first,
the case of monopoly, in which the value is determined by
either a natural or an artificial limitation of quantity, that
is, by demand and supply: secondly, the case of free competition,
when the article can be produced in indefinite quantity
at the same cost; in which case the permanent value is
determined by the cost of production, and only the fluctuations
by supply and demand: thirdly, a mixed case, that of
the articles which can be produced in indefinite quantity,
but not at the same cost; in which case the permanent value
is determined by the greatest cost which it is necessary to
incur in order to obtain the required supply: and, lastly,
we have found that money itself is a commodity of the third
class; that its value, in a state of freedom, is governed by
the same laws as the values of other commodities of its
class; and that prices, therefore, follow the same laws as
values.
from this it appears that demand and supply govern the
fluctuations of values and prices in all cases, and the permanent
values and prices of all things of which the supply is
determined by any agency other than that of free competition:
but that, under the régime of competition, things are,
on the average, exchanged for each other at such values, and
sold at such prices, as afford equal expectation of advantage
to all classes of producers; which can only be when things
[pg ]
exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost of production.
here, again, is a distinct recognition of the true meaning of
cost of production, and its ruling influence within a competing
group, which has been seen in its full significance by mr.
cairnes.
it sometimes happens [however] that two different commodities
have what may be termed a joint cost of production.
they are both products of the same operation, or set
of operations, and the outlay is incurred for the sake of both
together, not part for one and part for the other. the same
outlay would have to be incurred for either of the two, if the
other were not wanted or used at all. there are not a few
instances of commodities thus associated in their production.
for example, coke and coal-gas are both produced from the
same material, and by the same operation. in a more partial
sense, mutton and wool are an example; beef, hides, and tallow;
calves and dairy produce; chickens and eggs. cost of
production can have nothing to do with deciding the value
of the associated commodities relatively to each other. it
only decides their joint value. cost of production does not
determine their prices, but the sum of their prices. a principle
is wanting to apportion the expenses of production between
the two.
since cost of production here fails us, we must revert to
a law of value anterior to cost of production, and more
fundamental, the law of demand and supply. the law is,
that the demand for a commodity varies with its value, and
that the value adjusts itself so that the demand shall be
equal to the supply. this supplies the principle of repartition
which we are in quest of.
suppose that a certain quantity of gas is produced and
sold at a certain price, and that the residuum of coke is
offered at a price which, together with that of the gas, repays
the expenses with the ordinary rate of profit. suppose,
too, that, at the price put upon the gas and coke respectively,
the whole of the gas finds an easy market, without
[pg ]
either surplus or deficiency, but that purchasers can not
be found for all the coke corresponding to it. the coke will
be offered at a lower price in order to force a market. but
this lower price, together with the price of the gas, will not
be remunerating; the manufacture, as a whole, will not pay
its expenses with the ordinary profit, and will not, on these
terms, continue to be carried on. the gas, therefore, must
be sold at a higher price, to make up for the deficiency on
the coke. the demand consequently contracting, the production
will be somewhat reduced; and prices will become
stationary when, by the joint effect of the rise of gas and
the fall of coke, so much less of the first is sold, and so much
more of the second, that there is now a market for all the
coke which results from the existing extent of the gas-manufacture.
or suppose the reverse case; that more coke is wanted
at the present prices than can be supplied by the operations
required by the existing demand for gas. coke, being now
in deficiency, will rise in price. the whole operation will
yield more than the usual rate of profit, and additional capital
will be attracted to the manufacture. the unsatisfied
demand for coke will be supplied; but this can not be done
without increasing the supply of gas too; and, as the existing
demand was fully supplied already, an increased quantity can
only find a market by lowering the price. equilibrium will
be attained when the demand for each article fits so well
with the demand for the other, that the quantity required of
each is exactly as much as is generated in producing the
quantity required of the other.
when, therefore, two or more commodities have a joint
cost of production, their natural values relatively to each
other are those which will create a demand for each, in the
ratio of the quantities in which they are sent forth by the
productive process.
§ . values of the different kinds of agricultural produce.
another case of value which merits attention is
that of the different kinds of agricultural produce. the case
would present nothing peculiar, if different agricultural products
[pg ]
were either grown indiscriminately and with equal advantage
on the same soils, or wholly on different soils. the
difficulty arises from two things: first, that most soils are
fitter for one kind of produce than another, without being
absolutely unfit for any; and, secondly, the rotation of crops.
for simplicity, we will confine our supposition to two
kinds of agricultural produce; for instance, wheat and oats.
if all soils were equally adapted for wheat and for oats, both
would be grown indiscriminately on all soils, and their relative
cost of production, being the same everywhere, would
govern their relative value. if the same labor which grows
three quarters of wheat on any given soil would always
grow on that soil five quarters of oats, the three and the five
quarters would be of the same value. the fact is, that both
wheat and oats can be grown on almost any soil which is
capable of producing either.
it is evident that each grain will be cultivated in preference
on the soils which are better adapted for it than for
the other; and, if the demand is supplied from these alone,
the values of the two grains will have no reference to one
another. but when the demand for both is such as to require
that each should be grown not only on the soils peculiarly
fitted for it, but on the medium soils which, without
being specifically adapted to either, are about equally suited
for both, the cost of production on those medium soils will
determine the relative value of the two grains; while the
rent of the soils specifically adapted to each will be regulated
by their productive power, considered
with reference to that one [grain]
alone to which they are peculiarly applicable.
thus far the question presents
no difficulty, to any one to whom the
general principles of value are familiar.
this may be easily shown by a diagram,
in which a represents the grade of
land best adapted for oats; b, c, d, respectively,
lands of diminishing productiveness for oats, until
[pg ]
e is reached, which is, perhaps, equally good for oats or wheat;
a, b,
c, d,
and e likewise represent the wheat-lands, the best
beginning with a. the rent of a, or b, is determined by a
comparison with whatever grade of land planted in oats is cultivated
at the least return, as e, for example. so, if all the
wheat-lands are cultivated, land a,
or b, is compared with e,
but in regard to the capacity of e to produce wheat.
it may happen, however, that the demand for one of the
two, as for example wheat, may so outstrip the demand for
the other, as not only to occupy the soils specially suited for
wheat, but to engross entirely those equally suitable to both,
and even encroach upon those which are better adapted to
oats. to create an inducement for this unequal apportionment
of the cultivation, wheat must be relatively dearer, and
oats cheaper, than according to the cost of their production
on the medium land. their relative value must be in proportion
to the cost on that quality of land, whatever it may
be, on which the comparative demand for the two grains
requires that both of them should be grown. if, from the
state of the demand, the two cultivations meet on land more
favorable to one than to the other, that one will be cheaper
and the other dearer, in relation to each other and to things
in general, than if the proportional demand were as we at
first supposed.
as in the diagram just mentioned, if the demand for wheat
forces its cultivation downward not only on to land e, suited
to either indifferently, but, still farther on, to lands still less
adapted for wheat (although good land for oats), wheat may
be pushed down one stem of the v and up the other to d, or
even to c. then the value of wheat will be regulated by the
cost of production on c, and the rent will be determined by a
comparison between the productiveness of a,
b, etc. (running
downward through e), with c. the price of wheat will be
high relatively to oats, which are now cultivated only on lands,
a, b, better suited to growing oats, and whose cost of production
on c is much less than on d or e.
here, then, we obtain a fresh illustration, in a somewhat
different manner, of the operation of demand, not as an occasional
disturber of value, but as a permanent regulator of
it, conjoined with, or supplementary to, cost of production.
[pg ]
chapter xiii. of international trade.
§ . cost of production not a regulator of international values.
extension of the word “international.”
some things it is physically impossible to produce,
except in particular circumstances of heat, soil, water, or atmosphere.
but there are many things which, though they
could be produced at home without difficulty, and in any
quantity, are yet imported from a distance. the explanation
which would be popularly given of this would be, that it is
cheaper to import than to produce them: and this is the true
reason. but this reason itself requires that a reason be given
for it. of two things produced in the same place, if one is
cheaper than the other, the reason is that it can be produced
with less labor and capital, or, in a word, at less cost. is this
also the reason as between things produced in different
places? are things never imported but from places where
they can be produced with less labor (or less of the other
element of cost, time) than in the place to which they are
brought? does the law, that permanent value is proportioned
to cost of production, hold good between commodities
produced in distant places, as it does between those produced
in adjacent places?
we shall find that it does not. a thing may sometimes
be sold cheapest, by being produced in some other place
than that at which it can be produced with the smallest
amount of labor and abstinence.
this could not happen between adjacent places. if the
north bank of the thames possessed an advantage over the
south bank in the production of shoes, no shoes would be
produced on the south side; the shoemakers would remove
themselves and their capitals to the north bank, or would
have established themselves there originally; for, being competitors
[pg ]
in the same market with those on the north side,
they could not compensate themselves for their disadvantage
at the expense of the consumer; the amount of it would fall
entirely on their profits; and they would not long content
themselves with a smaller profit, when, by simply crossing a
river, they could increase it. but between distant places,
and especially between different countries, profits may continue
different; because persons do not usually remove themselves
or their capitals to a distant place without a very
strong motive. if capital removed to remote parts of the
world as readily, and for as small an inducement, as it moves
to another quarter of the same town—if people would transport
their manufactories to america or china whenever they
could save a small percentage in their expenses by it—profits
would be alike (or equivalent) all over the world, and all
things would be produced in the places where the same labor
and capital would produce them in greatest quantity and of
best quality. a tendency may, even now, be observed toward
such a state of things: capital is becoming more and
more cosmopolitan; there is so much greater similarity of
manners and institutions than formerly, and so much less
alienation of feeling, among the more civilized countries,
that both population and capital now move from one of
those countries to another on much less temptation than
heretofore. but there are still extraordinary differences,
both of wages and of profits, between different parts of the
world.
between all distant places, therefore, in some degree, but
especially between different countries (whether under the
same supreme government or not), there may exist great inequalities
in the return to labor and capital, without causing
them to move from one place to the other in such quantity as
to level those inequalities. the capital belonging to a country
will, to a great extent, remain in the country, even if
there be no mode of employing it in which it would not be
more productive elsewhere. yet even a country thus circumstanced
might, and probably would, carry on trade with
[pg ]
other countries. it would export articles of some sort, even
to places which could make them with less labor than itself;
because those countries, supposing them to have an advantage
over it in all productions, would have a greater advantage
in some things than in others, and would find it their
interest to import the articles in which their advantage was
smallest, that they might employ more of their labor and
capital on those in which it was greatest.
it might seem that a special theory of value is required
for international trade, as compared with domestic trade, for
the particular reason that in the former there exists no free
movement of labor and capital from one trading country to
another. but we shall see that no new theory is necessary.
as before pointed out, commodities exchange for each other
at their relative costs wherever there is that free competition
which insures perfect facility of movement for labor and capital.
it has been usually assumed that capital and labor move
freely as between different parts of the same country, but
not between different countries. this, however, is not consistent
with the facts. we saw that there were non-competing
industrial groups within the same nation. mr. mill here,
in a pointed way, suggests this, when he speaks of “distant
places.” the addition, therefore, made to mr. mill's exposition
by mr. cairnes is, that the word “international” (in
default of a better term) should be applied to those conditions
either within a country, or between two countries, which,
because of the actual immobility of labor and capital from one
occupation to another, furnishes a substantial interference with
industrial competition. the obstacles to the free movement of
labor and capital which produce the conditions called “international”
are: . “geographical distance; . difference in
political institutions; . difference in language, religion, and
social customs—in a word, in forms of civilization.” these
differences exist between maine and montana; or even between
two adjoining states, ohio and kentucky, one a free
and the other an old slave state. labor and capital have not
in the past moved freely even across mason and dixon's line.
there is, therefore, no treatment of international trade and
values separate from the laws of value already laid down concerning
non-competing groups, since there is also no free competition
between all the industrial groups within a country.
[pg ]
§ . interchange of commodities between distance places determined by
differences not in their absolute, but in the comparative, costs of
production.
as i have said elsewhere after ricardo (the thinker
who has done most toward clearing up this subject), “it is
not a difference in the absolute cost of production which
determines the interchange, but a difference in the comparative
cost. it may be to our advantage to procure iron from
sweden in exchange for cottons, even although the mines of
england as well as her manufactories should be more productive
than those of sweden; for if we have an advantage of
one half in cottons, and only an advantage of a quarter in
iron, and could sell our cottons to sweden at the price which
sweden must pay for them if she produced them herself, we
should obtain our iron with an advantage [over sweden] of
one half, as well as our cottons. we may often, by trading
with foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller expense
of labor and capital than they cost to the foreigners
themselves. the bargain is still advantageous to the foreigner,
because the commodity which he receives in exchange,
though it has cost us less, would have cost him
more.”
this may be illustrated as follows:
articles interchanged.england.sweden.cotton.
 days' labor produces x yds.
 days' labor produces x yds.iron.
 days' labor produces y cwts.
 days' labor produces y cwts.
here england has the advantage over sweden in both cotton
and iron, since she can produce x yards of cotton in ten
days' labor to fifteen days in sweden, and y cwts. of iron in
twelve days' labor to fifteen days in sweden. the ship which
takes x yards of cotton to sweden, and there exchanges it, as
may be done, for y cwts. of iron, brings back to england that
which cost sweden fifteen days' labor, while the cotton with
[pg ]
which the iron was bought cost england only ten days' labor.
so that england also got her iron at an advantage over sweden
of one half of ten days' labor; and yet england had an absolute
advantage over sweden in iron of a less amount (i.e., of
one fourth of twelve days' labor). it is to be distinctly understood
that by difference in comparative cost we mean a difference
in the comparative cost of producing two or more articles
in the same country, and not the difference of cost of the same
article in the different trading countries. in this example, for
instance, it is the difference in the comparative costs in england
of both cotton and iron (not the different costs of cotton
in england and sweden) which gives the reason for the existence
of the foreign trade.
to illustrate the cases in which interchange of commodities
will not, and those in which it will, take place between
two countries, the supposition may be made that the united
states has an advantage over england in the production both
of iron and of corn. it may first be supposed that the advantage
is of equal amount in both commodities; the iron
and the corn, each of which required  days' labor in the
united states, requiring each  days' labor in england.
it would follow that the iron of  days' labor in england,
if sent to the united states, would be equal to the iron of
 days' labor in the united states; if exchanged for corn,
therefore, it would exchange for the corn of only  days'
labor. but the corn of  days' labor in the united states
was supposed to be the same quantity with that of  days'
labor in england. with  days' labor in iron, therefore,
england would only get as much corn in the united states
as she could raise with  days' labor at home; and she
would, in importing it, have the cost of carriage besides. in
these circumstances no exchange would take place. in this
case the comparative costs of the two articles in england and
in the united states were supposed to be the same, though
the absolute costs were different; on which supposition we
see that there would be no labor saved to either country by
confining its industry to one of the two productions and importing
the other.
it is otherwise when the comparative and not merely
[pg ]
the absolute costs of the two articles are different in the two
countries. if, while the iron produced with  days' labor
in the united states was produced with  days' labor in
england, the corn which was produced in the united states
with  days' labor could not be produced in england with
less than  days' labor, an adequate motive to exchange
would immediately arise. with a quantity of iron which
england produced with  days' labor, she would be able to
purchase as much corn in the united states as was there produced
with  days' labor; but the quantity which was there
produced with  days' labor would be as great as the quantity
produced in england with  days' labor. by importing
corn, therefore, from the united states, and paying for
it with iron, england would obtain for  days' labor what
would otherwise cost her , being a saving of  days'
labor on each repetition of the transaction; and not merely a
saving to england, but a saving absolutely; for it is not obtained
at the expense of the united states, who, with corn
that cost her  days' labor, has purchased iron which, if
produced at home, would have cost her the same. the
united states, therefore, on this supposition, loses nothing;
but also she derives no advantage from the trade, the imported
iron costing her as much as if it were made at home.
to enable the united states to gain anything by the interchange,
something must be abated from the gain of england:
the corn produced in the united states by  days' labor
must be able to purchase from england more iron than the
united states could produce by that amount of labor; more,
therefore, than england could produce by  days' labor,
england thus obtaining the corn which would have cost her
 days at a cost exceeding , though short of .
england, therefore, no longer gains the whole of the labor
which is saved to the two jointly by trading with one another.
[pg ]
the case in which both england and the united states
would gain from the trade may be thus briefly shown:
articles interchanged.united states.
england.corn.
 days' labor produces x bus.
 days' labor produces x bus.iron.
 days' labor produces y tons.
 days' labor produces y tons.
the ship which carries x bushels of corn from the united
states to england can there exchange it for at least y tons of
iron (costing england  days' labor, since x bushels in england
would cost  days' labor), and bring it home, gaining for the
united states the difference between the  days' labor in
corn, paid for the y tons of iron, and the  days which the
iron would have cost here if produced at home. in this case
the united states has an advantage over england in both corn
and iron, but still an international trade will spring up, because
the united states will derive a gain owing to the less cost of
corn as compared with the cost of iron. our comparative advantage
is in corn. england, also, by sending to the united
states y tons of iron, gets
in return for it x bushels of corn.
to produce the corn herself would have cost her  days' labor,
but she bought that corn by only  days' labor spent on
iron. england's comparative advantage is in iron. then both
countries will gain.
mr. bowen gives an instance of international trade where
one country has the advantage in both of the commodities
entering into the exchange: “the inhabitants of barbadoes,
favored by their tropical climate and fertile soil, can raise
provisions cheaper than we can in the united states. and
yet barbadoes buys nearly all her provisions from this country.
why is this so? because, though barbadoes has the
advantage over us in the ability to raise provisions cheaply,
she has a still greater advantage over us in her power to produce
sugar and molasses. if she has an advantage of one
fourth in raising provisions, she has an advantage of one half
in regard to products exclusively tropical; and it is better
for her to employ all her labor and capital in that branch
of production in which her advantage is greatest. she can
thus, by trading with us, obtain our breadstuffs and meat at a
smaller expense of labor and capital than they cost ourselves.
if, for instance, a barrel of flour costs ten days' labor in the
united states and only eight days' labor in barbadoes, the
people of barbadoes can still profitably buy the flour from this
[pg ]
country, if they can pay for it with sugar which cost them only
six days' labor; and the people of this country can profitably
sell them the flour, or buy from them the sugar, provided the
sugar, if raised in the united states, would cost eleven days'
labor.... the united states receive sugar, which would have
cost them eleven days' labor, by paying for it with flour which
costs them but ten days. barbadoes receives flour, which would
have cost her eight days' labor, by paying for it with sugar
which costs her but six days. if barbadoes produced both
commodities with greater facility, but greater in precisely the
same degree, there would be no motive for interchange.”
it may be said, however, that in practice no business-man
considers the question of “comparative cost” in making shipments
of goods abroad; that all he thinks of is whether the
price here, for example, is less than it is in london. and yet
the very fact that the prices are less here implies that gold is
of high value relatively to the given commodity; while in
london, if money is to be sent back in payment, and if prices
are high there, that implies that gold is there of less comparative
value than commodities, and consequently that gold is the
cheapest article to send to the united states. the doctrine,
then, is as true of gold, or the precious metals, as it is of other
commodities.
it may be stated in the following language of
mr. cairnes: “the proximate condition determining international
exchange is the state of comparative prices in the exchanging
countries as regards the commodities which form
the subject of the trade. but comparative prices within
the limits of each country are determined by two distinct
principles—within the range of effective industrial competition,
by cost of production; outside that range, by reciprocal
demand.”
§ . the direct benefits of commerce consist in increased efficiency of
the productive powers of the world.
from this exposition we perceive in what consists
the benefit of international exchange, or, in other words,
foreign commerce. setting aside its enabling countries to
obtain commodities which they could not themselves produce
at all, its advantage consists in a more efficient employment
of the productive forces of the world. if two countries
which traded together attempted, as far as was physically
possible, to produce for themselves what they now import
from one another, the labor and capital of the two countries
[pg ]
would not be so productive, the two together would not obtain
from their industry so great a quantity of commodities,
as when each employs itself in producing, both for itself and
for the other, the things in which its labor is relatively most
efficient. the addition thus made to the produce of the two
combined constitutes the advantage of the trade. it is possible
that one of the two countries may be altogether inferior
to the other in productive capacities, and that its labor and
capital could be employed to greatest advantage by being removed
bodily to the other. the labor and capital which
have been sunk in rendering holland habitable would have
produced a much greater return if transported to america or
ireland. the produce of the whole world would be greater,
or the labor less, than it is, if everything were produced
where there is the greatest absolute facility for its production.
but nations do not, at least in modern times, emigrate
en masse; and, while the labor and capital of a country remain
in the country, they are most beneficially employed in
producing, for foreign markets as well as for its own, the
things in which it lies under the least disadvantage, if there
be none in which it possesses an advantage.
the fundamental ground on which all trade, or all exchange
of commodities, rests, is division of labor, or separation of employments.
beyond the ordinary gain from division of labor,
arising from increased dexterity, there exist gains arising from
the development of “the special capacities or resources possessed
by particular individuals or localities.” international
exchanges call out chiefly the special advantages offered by
particular localities for the prosecution of particular industries.
“the only case, indeed, in which personal aptitudes go for
much in the commerce of nations is where the nations concerned
occupy different grades in the scale of civilization....
the most striking example which the world has ever seen of a
foreign trade determined by the peculiar personal qualities of
those engaged in ministering to it is that which was furnished
by the southern states of the american union previous to the
abolition of slavery. the effect of that institution was to give
a very distinct industrial character to the laboring population
of those states which unfitted them for all but a very limited
number of occupations, but gave them a certain special fitness
for these. almost the entire industry of the country was consequently
[pg ]
turned to the production of two or three crude commodities,
in raising which the industry of slaves was found to
be effective; and these were used, through an exchange with
foreign countries, as the means of supplying the inhabitants
with all other requisites.... in the main, however, it would
seem that this cause [personal aptitudes] does not go for very
much in international commerce.”
in brief, then, international trade is but an extension of the
principle of division of labor; and the gains to increased productiveness,
arising from the latter, are exactly the same as
those from the former.
§ . —not in a vent for exports, nor in the gains of merchants.
according to the doctrine now stated, the only direct
advantage of foreign commerce consists in the imports. a
country obtains things which it either could not have produced
at all, or which it must have produced at a greater
expense of capital and labor than the cost of the things
which it exports to pay for them. it thus obtains a more
ample supply of the commodities it wants, for the same labor
and capital; or the same supply, for less labor and capital,
leaving the surplus disposable to produce other things. the
vulgar theory disregards this benefit and deems the advantage
of commerce to reside in the exports: as if not what a country
obtains, but what it parts with, by its foreign trade, was
supposed to constitute the gain to it. an extended market
for its produce—an abundant consumption for its goods—a
vent for its surplus—are the phrases by which it has been
customary to designate the uses and recommendations of
commerce with foreign countries. this notion is intelligible,
when we consider that the authors and leaders of opinion on
mercantile questions have always hitherto been the selling
class. it is in truth a surviving relic of the mercantile
theory, according to which, money being the only wealth,
selling, or, in other words, exchanging goods for money,
was (to countries without mines of their own) the only
way of growing rich—and importation of goods, that is to
say, parting with money, was so much subtracted from the
benefit.
[pg ]
the notion that money alone is wealth has been long
defunct, but it has left many of its progeny behind it. adam
smith's theory of the benefit of foreign trade was, that it
afforded an outlet for the surplus produce of a country, and
enabled a portion of the capital of the country to replace itself
with a profit. the expression, surplus produce, seems
to imply that a country is under some kind of necessity of
producing the corn or cloth which it exports; so that the
portion which it does not itself consume, if not wanted and
consumed elsewhere, would either be produced in sheer
waste, or, if it were not produced, the corresponding portion
of capital would remain idle, and the mass of productions in
the country would be diminished by so much. either of
these suppositions would be entirely erroneous. the country
produces an exportable article in excess of its own wants
from no inherent necessity, but as the cheapest mode of supplying
itself with other things. if prevented from exporting
this surplus, it would cease to produce it, and would no
longer import anything, being unable to give an equivalent;
but the labor and capital which had been employed in producing
with a view to exportation would find employment
in producing those desirable objects which were previously
brought from abroad; or, if some of them could not be produced,
in producing substitutes for them. these articles
would, of course, be produced at a greater cost than that of
the things with which they had previously been purchased
from foreign countries. but the value and price of the
articles would rise in proportion; and the capital would
just as much be replaced, with the ordinary profit, from
the returns, as it was when employed in producing for the
foreign market. the only losers (after the temporary inconvenience
of the change) would be the consumers of the
heretofore imported articles, who would be obliged either
to do without them, consuming in lieu of them something
which they did not like as well, or to pay a higher price
for them than before.
if it be said that the capital now employed in foreign
[pg ]
trade could not find employment in supplying the home
market, i might reply that this is the fallacy of general
over-production, discussed in a former chapter; but the thing
is in this particular case too evident to require an appeal to
any general theory. we not only see that the capital of the
merchant would find employment, but we see what employment.
there would be employment created, equal to that
which would be taken away. exportation ceasing, importation
to an equal value would cease also, and all that part
of the income of the country which had been expended in
imported commodities would be ready to expend itself on
the same things produced at home, or on others instead of
them. commerce is virtually a mode of cheapening production;
and in all such cases the consumer is the person
ultimately benefited; the dealer, in the end, is sure to get
his profit, whether the buyer obtains much or little for his
money.
e converso, if for any reason, such as a removal of duties,
capital should be withdrawn from the production of articles
consumed at home, and imported commodities should entirely
take their place, the very importation of the foreign commodities
would imply that an increased corresponding production
was going on in this country with which to pay for the imported
goods. the capital thus thrown out of employment in an
industry in which we had no comparative advantage (when
competition became free) would necessarily be employed in
the industries in which we had an advantage, and would supply—and
the transferred capital would be the only means of supplying—the
commodities which would be sent abroad to pay
for those, which by the supposition are now imported, but were
formerly produced at home. the result is a greater productiveness
of industry, and so a greater sum from which both labor
and capital may be rewarded. whenever capital, unrestrained
by artificial support, leaves one employment as unprofitable, it
means that that employment is naturally, and in itself, less
productive than the usual run of other industries in the country,
and so less profitable to both labor and capital than the
majority of other occupations.
§ . indirect benefits of commerce, economical and moral; still
greater than the direct.
such, then, is the direct economical advantage of
foreign trade. but there are, besides, indirect effects, which
must be counted as benefits of a high order. () one is, the
[pg ]
tendency of every extension of the market to improve the
processes of production. a country which produces for a
larger market than its own can introduce a more extended
division of labor, can make greater use of machinery, and
is more likely to make inventions and improvements in the
processes of production. whatever causes a greater quantity
of anything to be produced in the same place tends to the
general increase of the productive powers of the
world.
there is () another consideration, principally applicable to
an early stage of industrial advancement. the opening of
a foreign trade, by making them acquainted with new objects,
or tempting them by the easier acquisition of things
which they had not previously thought attainable, sometimes
works a sort of industrial revolution in a country whose resources
were previously undeveloped for want of energy and
ambition in the people; inducing those who were satisfied
with scanty comforts and little work to work harder for the
gratification of their new tastes, and even to save, and accumulate
capital, for the still more complete satisfaction of
those tastes at a future time.
but () the economical advantages of commerce are surpassed
in importance by those of its effects which are intellectual
and moral. it is hardly possible to overrate the
value, in the present low state of human improvement, of
placing human beings in contact with persons dissimilar to
themselves, and with modes of thought and action unlike
those with which they are familiar. commerce is now,
what war once was, the principal source of this contact.
such communication has always been, and is peculiarly in
the present age, one of the primary sources of progress.
finally, () commerce first taught nations to see with goodwill
the wealth and prosperity of one another. before, the
patriot, unless sufficiently advanced in culture to feel the
world his country, wished all countries weak, poor, and ill-governed
but his own: he now sees in their wealth and
[pg ]
progress a direct source of wealth and progress to his own
country. it is commerce which is rapidly rendering war
obsolete, by strengthening and multiplying the personal interests
which are in natural opposition to it. and it may
be said without exaggeration that the great extent and rapid
increase of international trade, in being the principal guarantee
of the peace of the world, is the great permanent security
for the uninterrupted progress of the ideas, the institutions,
and the character of the human race.
[pg ]
chapter xiv. of international values.
§ . the values of imported commodities depend on the terms of
international interchange.
the values of commodities produced at the same
place, or in places sufficiently adjacent for capital to move
freely between them—let us say, for simplicity, of commodities
produced in the same country—depend (temporary fluctuations
apart) upon their cost of production. but the value
of a commodity brought from a distant place, especially from
a foreign country, does not depend on its cost of production
in the place from whence it comes. on what, then, does it
depend? the value of a thing in any place depends on the
cost of its acquisition in that place; which, in the case of an
imported article, means the cost of production of the thing
which is exported to pay for it.
if, then, the united states imports wine from spain,
giving for every pipe of wine a bale of cloth, the exchange
value of a pipe of wine in the united states will not depend
upon what the production of the wine may have cost in
spain, but upon what the production of the cloth has cost in
the united states. though the wine may have cost in spain
the equivalent of only ten days' labor, yet, if the cloth costs
in the united states twenty days' labor, the wine, when
brought to the united states, will exchange for the produce
of twenty days' american labor, plus the cost of carriage,
including the usual profit on the importer's capital during
the time it is locked up and withheld from other employment.
the value, then, in any country, of a foreign commodity,
[pg ]
depends on the quantity of home produce which must be
given to the foreign country in exchange for it. in other
words, the values of foreign commodities depend on the
terms of international exchange. what, then, do these depend
upon? what is it which, in the case supposed, causes
a pipe of wine from spain to be exchanged with the united
states for exactly that quantity of cloth? we have seen
that it is not their cost of production. if the cloth and the
wine were both made in spain, they would exchange at their
cost of production in spain; if they were both made in the
united states, they would [possibly] exchange at their cost
of production in the united states: but all the cloth being
made in the united states, and all the wine in spain, they
are in circumstances to which we have already determined
that the law of cost of production is not applicable. we
must accordingly, as we have done before in a similar embarrassment,
fall back upon an antecedent law, that of supply
and demand; and in this we shall again find the solution of
our difficulty.
§ . the values of foreign commodities depend, not upon cost of production,
but upon reciprocal demand and supply.
it has been previously explained that the conditions
called. “international” are those, either within a nation, or those
existing between two separate nations, which are such as to
prevent the free movement of labor and capital from one group
of industries to another, or from one locality to another distant
one. even if woolen cloth could be made cheaper in england
than in the united states, we know that neither capital nor
labor would easily leave the united states for england, although
it might go from rhode island to massachusetts under
similar inducements. if shoes can be made with less advantage
in providence than in lynn, the shoe industry will come
to lynn; but it does not follow that the english shoe industry
would come to lynn, even if the advantages of the latter were
greater than those in england. if there be no obstacle to the
free movement of labor and capital between places or occupations,
and if some place or occupation can produce at a less
cost than another place or occupation, then there will be a
migration of the instruments of production. since there is
no free movement of labor and capital between one country
and another, then two countries stand in the same relation as
that of two “non-competing groups” within the same country,
as before explained. when this fact is once fully grasped, the
[pg ]
subject of international values becomes very simple. it does
not differ from the question of those domestic values for which
we found that the dependence on cost of production would
not hold, but that their values were governed by reciprocal demand
and supply.
attention should be drawn to the real nature of the present
inquiry. it is not here a question as to what causes international
trade between two countries: that has been treated in
the preceding chapter, and has been found to be a difference
in the comparative cost. the question now is one of exchange
value, that is, for how much of other commodities a given
commodity will exchange. the reasons for the trade are supposed
to exist; but we now want to know what the law is which
determines the proportions of the exchange. why does one
article exchange for more or less of another? not, as we have
seen, because one costs more or less to produce than the other.
in the trade between the united states and england in
iron and corn, formerly referred to (p. ),
it was seen that a
 days' labor of corn buys from england iron which would
have cost the united states  days' labor. england sends
 days' labor of iron and buys from the united states corn
which would have cost her  days' labor. but what rule
fixes the proportions between  and  for the united
states, and between  and  for england, at which the
exchanges will take place? the trade increases the productiveness
of both countries, but in what ratio will the two countries
share this gain? the answer is, briefly, in the ratio set
by reciprocal demand and supply, that is, the relative strength,
as compared with each other, of the demands of the two countries
respectively for iron and corn. this, however, may be
capable of explanation in a simple form.
a has spades, and b has oats, to dispose of; and each wishes
to get the article belonging to the other. will a give one spade
for one bushel of oats, or for two? will b give two bushels of
oats for one spade? that depends upon how strong a desire a
has for oats; the intensity of his demand may induce him to
give two spades for one bushel. but the exchange also depends
upon b. if he has no great need for spades, and a has a strong
desire for oats, b will get more spades for oats than otherwise,
possibly two spades for one bushel of oats; that is, oats will
have a larger exchange value. if, on the other hand, a cares
less for oats than b does for spades, then the exchange will result
in an increased value of spades relatively to oats. when
two commodities exchange against each other, their exchange
values will depend entirely upon the relative intensity of the demand
[pg ]
on each side for the other commodity. and this simple
form of the statement of reciprocal demand and supply is also
the law of international values.
if instead of spades and oats we substitute iron and corn,
and let the trade be between england and the united states,
the quantity of corn required to buy a given quantity of iron
will depend upon the relative demands of england for corn
and of the united states for iron. something may cut off
england's demand for our breadstuffs, and they will then
have a less exchange value relatively to iron (if we keep up our
demand), and their prices will fall. but if, on the other hand,
england has poor harvests, and consequently a great demand
for corn, and if our demand for iron is not excessive at the
same time, then our breadstuffs will rise in value. and this
was precisely what happened from  to . now, in the
above illustration of corn and iron, how can we know whether
or not x bushels of corn (the produce of  days' labor in the
united states) will exchange for exactly y tons of english
iron? that, again, will depend upon the reciprocal demands
of the two countries for corn and iron respectively. moreover,
it will have been already observed that the ratio of exchange
is not capable of being ascertained exactly, since it varies
with changing conditions, namely, the desires of the people
of the two countries, together with their means of purchase.
but yet these variations are capable of ascertainment as
regards their extreme limits. the reciprocal demand can not
carry the exchange value in either country beyond the line set
by the cost of production of the article. for instance, an urgent
need in england for corn (if the united states has a light
demand for english iron) can not carry the ratio of exchange
to a point such that england will offer so much more than 
days' labor in iron for x bushels of american corn that it will
go beyond  days' labor in iron. it will be seen at once, then,
if that were the case, that england would produce the corn
herself; and that she would then have no gain whatever from
the trade. the ratio of exchange will thus be limited by the
reciprocal demand on one side to the cost of production (
days' labor) of english corn. on the other hand, if the supposition
were reversed, and the united states had a great demand
for iron, but england had little need for our corn, then
we would not offer more than  days' labor of corn for y tons
of iron, because for that expenditure of labor we could produce
the iron ourselves.
in the above examples we have considered the case of a
trade in corn and iron only. if corn were to typify all our
goods wanted by england, and iron all english goods wanted
by the united states, the conclusions would be exactly the
[pg ]
same. the ratios of a myriad of things, each governed by its
particular reciprocal demand, exchanging against each other,
give a general result by which the goods sent out exchange
against the goods brought back at such rates as are fixed by
the reciprocal demands acting on all the goods. goods are payments
for goods; the ratio of exchange depends on reciprocal
demand and supply. if we now add more countries to the example,
we simply increase the number of persons (although in
different countries) wanting our goods, as set off against our
demands for the goods of this greater number of persons. if
france, germany, and england all want our corn, we must
have some demand for the goods of france, germany, and england
also; and the same law of reciprocal demand gives the
ratio of interchange. that this explanation is consistent with
the facts is to be seen when we notice how eagerly the exporters
of american staples watch the conditions which increase
or diminish the foreign demand for these commodities, looking
at them as the causes which directly affect their exchange value,
or price.
when cost of carriage is added, it will increase the price
of corn to england and of iron to the united states. but, as
every one knows, an increase of price affects the demand; and,
as the demand on each side is affected, a new ratio of exchange
will finally be reached consistent with the strength of desires
on each side. who, therefore, will pay the most of the cost
of carriage england or the united states? that will, again,
depend on whether england has the greatest relative demand
for american goods, as compared with the demand of the
united states for english goods.
no absolute rule, therefore, can be laid down for the
division of the cost, no more than for the division of the advantage;
and it does not follow that, in whatever ratio the
one is divided, the other will be divided in the same. it is
impossible to say, if the cost of carriage could be annihilated,
whether the producing or the importing country would be
most benefited. this would depend on the play of international
demand.
cost of carriage has one effect more. but for it, every
commodity would (if trade be supposed free) be either regularly
imported or regularly exported. a country would
make nothing for itself which it did not also make for other
countries. but in consequence of cost of carriage there are
many things, especially bulky articles, which every, or almost
[pg ]
every, country produces within itself. after exporting the
things in which it can employ itself most advantageously,
and importing those in which it is under the greatest disadvantage,
there are many lying between, of which the relative
cost of production in that and in other countries differs so
little that the cost of carriage would absorb more than the
whole saving in cost of production which would be obtained
by importing one and exporting another. this is the case
with numerous commodities of common consumption, including
the coarser qualities of many articles of food and
manufacture, of which the finer kinds are the subject of
extensive international traffic.
§ . —as illustrated by trade in cloth and linen between england
and germany.
mr. mill still further illustrates the operation of the law
of reciprocal demand by the case of a trade between england
and germany in cloth and linen, as follows:
“suppose that ten yards of broadcloth cost in england as
much labor as fifteen yards of linen, and in germany as
much as twenty.” this supposition then being made, it
would be the interest of england to import linen from germany,
and of germany to import cloth from england.
“when each country produced both commodities for itself,
ten yards of cloth exchanged for fifteen yards of linen in
england, and for twenty in germany. they will now exchange
for the same number of yards of linen in both. for
what number? if for fifteen yards, england will be just as
she was, and germany will gain all. if for twenty yards,
germany will be as before, and england will derive the
whole of the benefit. if for any number intermediate between
fifteen and twenty, the advantage will be shared between
the two countries. if, for example, ten yards of cloth
exchange for eighteen of linen, england will gain an advantage
of three yards on every fifteen, germany will save two
out of every twenty. the problem is, what are the causes
which determine the proportion in which the cloth of england
and the linen of germany will exchange for each other?
let us suppose, then, that by the effect of what adam smith
[pg ]
calls the higgling of the market, ten yards of cloth, in both
countries, exchange for seventeen yards of linen.
“the demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of
it which can find a purchaser, varies, as we have before remarked,
according to the price. in germany the price of
ten yards of cloth is now seventeen yards of linen, or whatever
quantity of money is equivalent in germany to seventeen
yards of linen. now, that being the price, there is
some particular number of yards of cloth, which will be in
demand, or will find purchasers, at that price. there is
some given quantity of cloth, more than which could not be
disposed of at that price; less than which, at that price,
would not fully satisfy the demand. let us suppose this
quantity to be , times ten yards.
“let us now turn our attention to england. there the
price of seventeen yards of linen is ten yards of cloth, or
whatever quantity of money is equivalent in england to ten
yards of cloth. there is some particular number of yards of
linen which, at that price, will exactly satisfy the demand,
and no more. let us suppose that this number is ,
times seventeen yards.
“as seventeen yards of linen are to ten yards of cloth, so
are , times seventeen yards to , times ten yards.
at the existing exchange value, the linen which england
requires will exactly pay for the quantity of cloth which, on
the same terms of interchange, germany requires. the demand
on each side is precisely sufficient to carry off the supply
on the other. the conditions required by the principle
of demand and supply are fulfilled, and the two commodities
will continue to be interchanged, as we supposed them to be,
in the ratio of seventeen yards of linen for ten yards of
cloth.
“but our suppositions might have been different. suppose
that, at the assumed rate of interchange, england had
been disposed to consume no greater quantity of linen than
 times seventeen yards; it is evident that, at the rate supposed,
this would not have sufficed to pay for the , times
[pg ]
ten yards of cloth which we have supposed germany to require
at the assumed value. germany would be able to procure
no more than  times ten yards at that price. to
procure the remaining , which she would have no means
of doing but by bidding higher for them, she would offer
more than seventeen yards of linen in exchange for ten yards
of cloth; let us suppose her to offer eighteen. at this price,
perhaps, england would be inclined to purchase a greater
quantity of linen. she would consume, possibly, at that
price,  times eighteen yards. on the other hand, cloth
having risen in price, the demand of germany for it would
probably have diminished. if, instead of , times ten
yards, she is now contented with  times ten yards, these
will exactly pay for the  times eighteen yards of linen
which england is willing to take at the altered price; the
demand on each side will again exactly suffice to take off the
corresponding supply; and ten yards for eighteen will be the
rate at which, in both countries, cloth will exchange for linen.
“the converse of all this would have happened if, instead
of  times seventeen yards, we had supposed that
england, at the rate of ten for seventeen, would have taken
, times seventeen yards of linen. in this case, it is england
whose demand is not fully supplied; it is england who,
by bidding for more linen, will alter the rate of interchange
to her own disadvantage; and ten yards of cloth will fall, in
both countries, below the value of seventeen yards of linen.
by this fall of cloth, or, what is the same thing, this rise of
linen, the demand of germany for cloth will increase, and
the demand of england for linen will diminish, till the rate
of interchange has so adjusted itself that the cloth and the
linen will exactly pay for one another; and, when once this
point is attained, values will remain without further alteration.”
§ . the conclusion states in the equation of international demand.
“it may be considered, therefore, as established, that
when two countries trade together in two commodities, the
exchange value of these commodities relatively to each other
will adjust itself to the inclinations and circumstances of the
consumers on both sides, in such manner that the quantities
[pg ]
required by each country, of the articles which it imports
from its neighbor, shall be exactly sufficient to pay for one
another. as the inclinations and circumstances of consumers
can not be reduced to any rule, so neither can the proportions
in which the two commodities will be interchanged. we
know that the limits within which the variation is confined
are the ratio between their costs of production in the one
country and the ratio between their costs of production in
the other. ten yards of cloth can not exchange for more
than twenty yards of linen, nor for less than fifteen. but
they may exchange for any intermediate number. the ratios,
therefore, in which the advantage of the trade may be divided
between the two nations are various. the circumstances on
which the proportionate share of each country more remotely
depends admit only of a very general indication.”
if, therefore, it be asked what country draws to itself the
greatest share of the advantage of any trade it carries on, the
answer is, the country for whose productions there is in other
countries the greatest demand, and a demand the most susceptible
of increase from additional cheapness. in so far as
the productions of any country possess this property, the
country obtains all foreign commodities at less cost. it gets
its imports cheaper, the greater the intensity of the demand
in foreign countries for its exports. it also gets its
imports cheaper, the less the extent and intensity of its own
demand for them. the market is cheapest to those whose
demand is small. a country which desires few foreign productions,
and only a limited quantity of them, while its own
commodities are in great request in foreign countries, will
obtain its limited imports at extremely small cost, that is, in
exchange for the produce of a very small quantity of its labor
and capital.
the law which we have now illustrated may be appropriately
named the equation of international demand. it
may be concisely stated as follows: the produce of a country
exchanges for the produce of other countries at such values
as are required in order that the whole of her exports may
[pg ]
exactly pay for the whole of her imports. this law of international
values is but an extension of the more general law
of value, which we called the equation of supply and demand.
we have seen that the value of a commodity always
so adjusts itself as to bring the demand to the exact level of
the supply. but all trade, either between nations or individuals,
is an interchange of commodities, in which the things
that they respectively have to sell constitute also their means
of purchase: the supply brought by the one constitutes his
demand for what is brought by the other. so that supply
and demand are but another expression for reciprocal demand;
and to say that value will adjust itself so as to equalize
demand with supply, is, in fact, to say that it will adjust
itself so as to equalize the demand on one side with the demand
on the other.
the tendency of imports to balance exports may be seen
from chart no. xiii, on the next page, which shows the
relation between the exports and imports solely of merchandise,
and exclusive of specie, to and from the united states. from
 to , after the discoveries of the precious metals in
this country, we sent great quantities of gold and silver out of
the country, purely as merchandise, so that, if we should include
the precious metals among the exports in those years,
the total exports would more nearly equal the total imports.
the transmission of gold at that time was effected exactly as
that of other merchandise; so that to the date of the civil
war there was a very evident equilibrium between exports and
imports. then came the war, with the period of extravagance
and speculation following, which led to great purchases abroad,
and which was closed only by the panic of . since then
more exports than imports were needed to pay for the great
purchases of the former period; and the epoch of great exports,
from  to , balanced the opposite conditions in
the period preceding. it would seem, therefore, that we had
reached a normal period about the year . a fuller statement
as to the fluctuations of exports and imports about the
equilibrium will be given when the introduction of money in
international trade is made. the full statement must also include
the financial account.
[pg ]
chart xiii. value of merchandise imported
into (dotted line) and exported
from (black line) the united states from  to .
[pg ]
§ . the cost to a country of its imports depends not only on the ratio of
exchange, but on the efficiency of its labor.
we now pass to another essential part of the theory
of the subject. there are two senses in which a country obtains
commodities cheaper by foreign trade: in the sense of
value and in the sense of cost: (.) it gets them cheaper in
the first sense, by their falling in value relatively to other
things; the same quantity of them exchanging, in the country,
for a smaller quantity than before of the other produce of
the country. to revert to our original figures [of the trade
with germany in cloth and linen]: in england, all consumers
of linen obtained, after the trade was opened, seventeen
or some greater number of yards for the same quantity
of all other things for which they before obtained only
fifteen. the degree of cheapness, in this sense of the term,
depends on the laws of international demand, so copiously
illustrated in the preceding sections. (.) but, in the other
sense, that of cost, a country gets a commodity cheaper
when it obtains a greater quantity of the commodity with
the same expenditure of labor and capital. in this sense
of the term, cheapness in a great measure depends upon a
cause of a different nature: a country gets its imports cheaper,
in proportion to the general productiveness of its domestic
industry; to the general efficiency of its labor. the labor
of one country may be, as a whole, much more efficient than
that of another: all or most of the commodities capable of
being produced in both may be produced in one at less
absolute cost than in the other; which, as we have seen, will
not necessarily prevent the two countries from exchanging
commodities. the things which the more favored country
will import from others are, of course, those in which it is
least superior; but, by importing them, it acquires, even in
those commodities, the same advantage which it possesses
in the articles it gives in exchange for them. what her
imports cost to her is a function of two variables: () the
quantity of her own commodities which she gives for them,
and () the cost of those commodities. of these, the
last alone depends on the efficiency of her labor; the first
depends on the law of international values; that is, on the
[pg ]
intensity and extensibility of the foreign demand for her
commodities, compared with her demand for foreign commodities.
the great productiveness of any industry in our country
has thus two results: () it gives a larger total out of which
labor and capital at home can receive greater rewards; and
() the commodities being cheaper in comparison than other
commodities not so easily produced, furnish the very articles
which are most likely to be sent abroad, in accordance
with the doctrine of comparative cost. in the united states,
those things in the production of which labor and capital are
most efficient, and so earn the largest rewards, are precisely the
articles entering most largely into our foreign trade. that is,
we get foreign articles cheaper precisely because these exports
cost us less in labor and capital. these, of course, since we
inhabit a country whose natural resources are not yet fully
worked, are largely the products of the extractive industries,
as may be seen by the following table of the value of goods
entering to the greatest extent into our foreign export trade in
raw cotton$,,breadstuffs,,provisions and animals,,mineral oils,,wood,,tobacco,,
these six classes of commodities are arranged in the order
in which they enter into our export trade, and are the six which
come first and highest in the list.
[pg ]
chapter xv. of money considered as an imported commodity.
§ . money imported on two modes; as a commodity, and as a medium
of exchange.
the degree of progress which we have now made
in the theory of foreign trade puts it in our power to supply
what was previously deficient in our view of the theory
of money; and this, when completed, will in its turn enable
us to conclude the subject of foreign trade.
money, or the material of which it is composed, is, in
great britain, and in most other countries, a foreign commodity.
its value and distribution must therefore be regulated,
not by the law of value which obtains in adjacent
places, but by that which is applicable to imported commodities—the
law of international values.
in the discussion into which we are now about to enter,
i shall use the terms money and the precious metals indiscriminately.
this may be done without leading to any error;
it having been shown that the value of money, when it
consists of the precious metals, or of a paper currency convertible
into them on demand, is entirely governed by the
value of the metals themselves: from which it never permanently
differs, except by the expense of coinage, when
this is paid by the individual and not by the state.
money is brought into a country in two different ways.
it is imported (chiefly in the form of bullion) like any other
merchandise, as being an advantageous article of commerce.
it is also imported in its other character of a medium of
exchange, to pay some debt due to the country, either for
goods exported or on any other account. the existence of
these two distinct modes in which money flows into a country,
[pg ]
while other commodities are habitually introduced only
in the first of these modes, occasions somewhat more of complexity
and obscurity than exists in the case of other commodities,
and for this reason only is any special and minute
exposition necessary.
§ . as a commodity, it obeys the same laws of value as other imported
commodities.
in so far as the precious metals are imported in the
ordinary way of commerce, their value must depend on the
same causes, and conform to the same laws, as the value of
any other foreign production. it is in this mode chiefly that
gold and silver diffuse themselves from the mining countries
into all other parts of the commercial world. they are the
staple commodities of those countries, or at least are among
their great articles of regular export; and are shipped on
speculation, in the same manner as other exportable commodities.
the quantity, therefore, which a country (say
england) will give of its own produce, for a certain quantity
of bullion, will depend, if we suppose only two countries and
two commodities, upon the demand in england for bullion,
compared with the demand in the mining country (which we
will call the united states) for what england has to give.
the bullion required by england must exactly pay for
the cottons or other english commodities required by the
united states. if, however, we substitute for this simplicity
the degree of complication which really exists, the equation
of international demand must be established not between the
bullion wanted in england and the cottons or broadcloth
wanted in the united states, but between the whole of the
imports of england and the whole of her exports. the demand
in foreign countries for english products must be
brought into equilibrium with the demand in england for
the products of foreign countries; and all foreign commodities,
bullion among the rest, must be exchanged against
english products in such proportions as will, by the effect
they produce on the demand, establish this equilibrium.
there is nothing in the peculiar nature or uses of the
[pg ]
precious metals which should make them an exception to the
general principles of demand. so far as they are wanted for
purposes of luxury or the arts, the demand increases with
the cheapness, in the same irregular way as the demand for
any other commodity. so far as they are required for
money, the demand increases with the cheapness in a perfectly
regular way, the quantity needed being always in inverse
proportion to the value. this is the only real difference,
in respect to demand, between money and other things.
money, then, if imported solely as a merchandise, will,
like other imported commodities, be of lowest value in the
countries for whose exports there is the greatest foreign
demand, and which have themselves the least demand for
foreign commodities. to these two circumstances it is, however,
necessary to add two others, which produce their effect
through cost of carriage. the cost of obtaining bullion is
compounded of two elements; the goods given to purchase
it and the expense of transport; of which last, the bullion
countries will bear a part (though an uncertain part) in the
adjustment of international values. the expense of transport
is partly that of carrying the goods to the bullion countries,
and partly that of bringing back the bullion; both these
items are influenced by the distance from the mines; and
the former is also much affected by the bulkiness of the
goods. countries whose exportable produce consists of the
finer manufactures obtain bullion, as well as all other foreign
articles, cæteris paribus, at less expense than countries which
export nothing but bulky raw produce.
to be quite accurate, therefore, we must say: the countries
whose exportable productions () are most in demand
abroad, and () contain greatest value in smallest bulk, ()
which are nearest to the mines, and () which have least demand
for foreign productions, are those in which money
will be of lowest value, or, in other words, in which prices
will habitually range the highest. if we are speaking not
of the value of money, but of its cost (that is, the quantity
of the country's labor which must be expended to obtain it),
[pg ]
we must add () to these four conditions of cheapness a fifth
condition, namely, “whose productive industry is the most
efficient.” this last, however, does not at all affect the value
of money, estimated in commodities; it affects the general
abundance and facility with which all things, money and
commodities together, can be obtained.
the accompanying chart, no. xiv, on the next page, gives
the excess of exports from the united states of gold and silver
coin and bullion over imports, and the excess of imports over
exports. the movement of the line above the horizontal baseline
shows distinctly how largely we have been sending the
precious metals abroad from our mines, simply as a regular
article of export, like merchandise. from  to  the
exports are clearly not in the nature of payments for trade
balances; since it indicates a steady movement out of the
country (with the exception of the first year of the war, when
gold came to this country). the phenomenal increase of specie
exports during the war, and until , was due to the fact
that we had a depreciated paper currency, which sent the
metals out of the country as merchandise. this chart should
be studied in connection with chart no. xiii.
chart xiv. chart showing the excess of exports and imports of gold
and silver coin and bullion, from and into the united states, from
 to . the line when above the base-line shows the excess of exports; when
below, the excess of imports.
from the preceding considerations, it appears that those
are greatly in error who contend that the value of money,
in countries where it is an imported commodity, must be
entirely regulated by its value in the countries which produce
it; and can not be raised or lowered in any permanent
manner unless some change has taken place in the cost of
production at the mines. on the contrary, any circumstance
which disturbs the equation of international demand with
respect to a particular country not only may, but must,
affect the value of money in that country—its value at the
mines remaining the same. the opening of a new branch
of export trade from england; an increase in the foreign
demand for english products, either by the natural course
of events or by the abrogation of duties; a check to the
demand in england for foreign commodities, by the laying
on of import duties in england or of export duties elsewhere;
these and all other events of similar tendency would
[pg ]
make the imports of england (bullion and other things taken
together) no longer an equivalent for the exports; and the
countries which take her exports would be obliged to offer
their commodities, and bullion among the rest, on cheaper
terms, in order to re-establish the equation of demand; and
thus england would obtain money cheaper, and would acquire
a generally higher range of prices. a country which,
from any of the causes mentioned, gets money cheaper, obtains
all its other imports cheaper likewise.
it is by no means necessary that the increased demand
for english commodities, which enables england to supply
herself with bullion at a cheaper rate, should be a demand
in the mining countries. england might export nothing
whatever to those countries, and yet might be the country
which obtained bullion from them on the lowest terms, provided
there were a sufficient intensity of demand in other
foreign countries for english goods, which would be paid
for circuitously, with gold and silver from the mining countries.
the whole of its exports are what a country exchanges
against the whole of its imports, and not its exports
and imports to and from any one country.
[pg ]
chapter xvi. of the foreign exchanges.
§ . money passes from country to country as a medium of exchange,
through the exchanges.
we have thus far considered the precious metals as
a commodity, imported like other commodities in the common
course of trade, and have examined what are the circumstances
which would in that case determine their value.
but those metals are also imported in another character, that
which belongs to them as a medium of exchange; not as an
article of commerce, to be sold for money, but as themselves
money, to pay a debt, or effect a transfer of property.
money is sent from one country to another for various
purposes: the most usual purpose, however, is that of payment
for goods. to show in what circumstances money
actually passes from country to country for this or any of
the other purposes mentioned, it is necessary briefly to state
the nature of the mechanism by which international trade is
carried on, when it takes place not by barter but through the
medium of money.
in practice, the exports and imports of a country not
only are not exchanged directly against each other, but often
do not even pass through the same hands. each is separately
bought and paid for with money. we have seen, however,
that, even in the same country, money does not actually pass
from hand to hand each time that purchases are made with
it, and still less does this happen between different countries.
the habitual mode of paying and receiving payment for
commodities, between country and country, is by bills of
exchange.
a merchant in the united states, a, has exported american
[pg ]
commodities, consigning them to his correspondent, b, in
england. another merchant in england, c, has exported
english commodities, suppose of equivalent value, to a merchant,
d, in the united states. it is evidently unnecessary
that b in england should send money to a in the united
states, and that d in the united states should send an equal
sum of money to c in england. the one debt may be applied
to the payment of
the other, and the double
cost and risk of carriage
be thus saved. a draws
a bill on b for the amount
which b owes to him: d,
having an equal amount to pay in england, buys this bill from
a, and sends it to c, who, at the expiration of the number of
days which the bill has to run, presents it to b for payment.
thus the debt due from england to the united states, and
the debt due from the united states to england, are both
paid without sending an ounce of gold or silver from one
country to the other.
this implies (if we exclude for the present any other
international payments than those occurring in the course
of commerce) that the exports and imports exactly pay for
one another, or, in other words, that the equation of international
demand is established. when such is the fact, the
international transactions are liquidated without the passage
of any money from one country to the other. but, if there
is a greater sum due from the united states to england
than is due from england to the united states, or vice versa,
the debts can not be simply written off against one another.
after the one has been applied, as far as it will go, toward
covering the other, the balance must be transmitted in the
precious metals. in point of fact, the merchant who has the
amount to pay will even then pay for it by a bill. when a
person has a remittance to make to a foreign country, he does
[pg ]
not himself search for some one who has money to receive
from that country, and ask him for a bill of exchange. in
this, as in other branches of business, there is a class of middle-men
or brokers, who bring buyers and sellers together,
or stand between them, buying bills from those who have
money to receive, and selling bills to those who have money
to pay. when a customer comes to a broker for a bill on
paris or amsterdam, the broker sells to him perhaps the
bill he may himself have bought that morning from a merchant,
perhaps a bill on his own correspondent in the foreign
city; and, to enable his correspondent to pay, when due, all
the bills he has granted, he remits to him all those which he
has bought and has not resold. in this manner these brokers
take upon themselves the whole settlement of the pecuniary
transactions between distant places, being remunerated by a
small commission or percentage on the amount of each bill
which they either sell or buy. now, if the brokers find that
they are asked for bills, on the one part, to a greater amount
than bills are offered to them on the other, they do not on
this account refuse to give them; but since, in that case,
they have no means of enabling the correspondents on whom
their bills are drawn to pay them when due, except by transmitting
part of the amount in gold or silver, they require
from those to whom they sell bills an additional price, sufficient
to cover the freight and insurance of the gold and
silver, with a profit sufficient to compensate them for their
trouble and for the temporary occupation of a portion of
their capital. this premium (as it is called) the buyers are
willing to pay, because they must otherwise go to the expense
of remitting the precious metals themselves, and it is
done cheaper by those who make doing it a part of their
especial business. but, though only some of those who have
a debt to pay would have actually to remit money, all will
be obliged, by each other's competition, to pay the premium;
and the brokers are for the same reason obliged to pay it to
those whose bills they buy. the reverse of all this happens,
if, on the comparison of exports and imports, the country,
[pg ]
instead of having a balance to pay, has a balance to receive.
the brokers find more bills offered to them than are sufficient
to cover those which they are required to grant. bills
on foreign countries consequently fall to a discount; and the
competition among the brokers, which is exceedingly active,
prevents them from retaining this discount as a profit for
themselves, and obliges them to give the benefit of it to
those who buy the bills for purposes of remittance.
when the united states had the same number of dollars
to pay to england which england had to pay to her, one set
of merchants in the united states would want bills, and
another set would have bills to dispose of, for the very same
number of dollars; and consequently a bill on england for
$, would sell for exactly $,, or, in the phraseology
of merchants, the exchange would be at par. as england
also, on this supposition, would have an equal number of
dollars to pay and to receive, bills on the united states would
be at par in england, whenever bills on england were at par
in the united states.
if, however, the united states had a larger sum to pay to
england than to receive from her, there would be persons
requiring bills on england for a greater number of dollars
than there were bills drawn by persons to whom money was
due. a bill on england for $, would then sell for more
than $,, and bills would be said to be at a premium.
the premium, however, could not exceed the cost and risk
of making the remittance in gold, together with a trifling
profit; because, if it did, the debtor would send the gold
itself, in preference to buying the bill.
if, on the contrary, the united states had more money
to receive from england than to pay, there would be bills
offered for a greater number of dollars than were wanted for
remittance, and the price of bills would fall below par: a
bill for $, might be bought for somewhat less than
$,, and bills would be said to be at a discount.
when the united states has more to pay than to receive,
england has more to receive than to pay, and vice versa.
[pg ]
when, therefore, in the united states, bills on england bear
a premium, then, in england, bills on the united states are
at a discount; and, when bills on england are at a discount
in the united states, bills on the united states are at a premium
in england. if they are at par in either country, they
are so, as we have already seen, in both.
thus do matters stand between countries, or places which
have the same currency. so much of barbarism, however,
still remains in the transactions of the most civilized nations,
that almost all independent countries choose to assert their
nationality by having, to their own inconvenience and that
of their neighbors, a peculiar currency of their own. to our
present purpose this makes no other difference than that,
instead of speaking of equal sums of money, we have to
speak of equivalent sums. by equivalent sums, when both
currencies are composed of the same metal, are meant sums
which contain exactly the same quantity of the metal, in
weight and fineness.
the quantity of gold in the english pound is equivalent to
$.+ of our gold coins. if the bills offered are about equal
to those wanted, a claim to a pound in england will sell for $..
if many are wanted, and but few to be had, their price will go
up, of course; but it can not go more than a small fraction beyond
$., since about -¼ cents is sufficient to cover the brokerage,
insurance, and freight per pound sterling in a shipment
of gold to london. therefore, in order to get money to a
creditor in london, no one will pay more for a pound in the
form of a bill than he will be obliged to pay for sending it across
in the form of bullion. bills of exchange, then, can not rise in
price beyond the point ($. +) since, rather than pay a higher
sum for a bill, gold will be sent. this point is called the “shipping-point”
of gold. when the exchanges are at $., it will
be found that gold is going abroad. on the other hand, when
the supply of bills is greater than the demand, their price will
fall. a man having a bill on london to sell—i.e., a claim to a
pound in london—will not sell it at a price here lower than
$., by more than the expense of bringing the gold itself
across. since this expense is about -¼ cents, bills can not fall
below about $.. when exchange is at that price, it will be
[pg ]
found that gold is coming to the united states from england.
this price is the “shipping-point” for imports of gold. this,
of course, applies to sight-bills only.
formerly, we computed exchange on a scale of percentages,
the real par being about . this was given up after the war.
when bills on foreign countries are at a premium, it is
customary to say that the exchanges are against the country,
or unfavorable to it. in order to understand these phrases,
we must take notice of what “the exchange,” in the language
of merchants, really means. it means the power which the
money of the country has of purchasing the money of other
countries. supposing $. to be the exact par of exchange,
then when it requires more than $, to buy a bill of £,
$, of american money are worth less than their real
equivalent of english money: and this is called an exchange
unfavorable to the united states. the only persons in the
united states, however, to whom it is really unfavorable are
those who have money to pay in england, for they come into
the bill market as buyers, and have to pay a premium; but
to those who have money to receive in england the same
state of things is favorable; for they come as sellers and receive
the premium. the premium, however, indicates that
a balance is due by the united states, which must be eventually
liquidated in the precious metals; and since, according
to the old theory, the benefit of a trade consisted in bringing
money into the country, this prejudice introduced the practice
of calling the exchange favorable when it indicated a
balance to receive, and unfavorable when it indicated one to
pay; and the phrases in turn tended to maintain the prejudice.
§ . distinction between variations in the exchanges which are self-adjusting
and those which can only be rectified through prices.
it might be supposed at first sight that when the
exchange is unfavorable, or, in other words, when bills are
at a premium, the premium must always amount to a full
equivalent for the cost of transmitting money. but a small
excess of imports above exports, or any other small amount
of debt to be paid to foreign countries, does not usually
affect the exchanges to the full extent of the cost and risk of
transporting bullion. the length of credit allowed generally
permits, on the part of some of the debtors, a postponement
[pg ]
of payment, and in the mean time the balance may turn the
other way, and restore the equality of debts and credits without
any actual transmission of the metals. and this is the
more likely to happen, as there is a self-adjusting power in
the variations of the exchange itself. bills are at a premium
because a greater money value has been imported than exported.
but the premium is itself an extra profit to those
who export. besides the price they obtain for their goods,
they draw for the amount and gain the premium. it is, on
the other hand, a diminution of profit to those who import.
besides the price of the goods, they have to pay a premium
for remittance. so that what is called an unfavorable exchange
is an encouragement to export, and a discouragement
to import. and if the balance due is of small amount, and
is the consequence of some merely casual disturbance in the
ordinary course of trade, it is soon liquidated in commodities,
and the account adjusted by means of bills, without the
transmission of any bullion. not so, however, when the
excess of imports above exports, which has made the exchange
unfavorable, arises from a permanent cause. in that
case, what disturbed the equilibrium must have been the
state of prices, and it can only be restored by acting on
prices. it is impossible that prices should be such as to invite
to an excess of imports, and yet that the exports should
be kept permanently up to the imports by the extra profit on
exportation derived from the premium on bills; for, if the
exports were kept up to the imports, bills would not be at a
premium, and the extra profit would not exist. it is through
the prices of commodities that the correction must be administered.
disturbances, therefore, of the equilibrium of imports
and exports, and consequent disturbances of the exchange,
may be considered as of two classes: the one casual or accidental,
which, if not on too large a scale, correct themselves
through the premium on bills, without any transmission of
the precious metals; the other arising from the general state
of prices, which can not be corrected without the subtraction
[pg ]
of actual money from the circulation of one of the countries,
or an annihilation of credit equivalent to it.
it remains to observe that the exchanges do not depend
on the balance of debts and credits with each country separately,
but with all countries taken together. the united
states may owe a balance of payments to england; but it
does not follow that the exchange with england will be
against the united states, and that bills on england will be
at a premium; because a balance may be due to the united
states from holland or hamburg, and she may pay her debts
to england with bills on those places; which is technically
called arbitration of exchange. there is some little additional
expense, partly commission and partly loss of interest
in settling debts in this circuitous manner, and to the extent
of that small difference the exchange with one country may
vary apart from that with others.
a common use of bills of exchange is that by which, when
three countries are concerned, two of them may strike a balance
through the third, if both countries
have dealings with that third
country. new york merchants may
buy of china, but china may not be
buying of new york, although both
may have dealings with london.
a, we will suppose, is a buyer of
£, worth of tea from f, in hong-kong;
b is an exporter of wheat
(£,) to c in london; d has sent
£, worth of cotton goods to e
in hong-kong. a can now pay f
through london without the transmission
of coin. a buys b's claim
on c for £,, and sends it to f.
e wishes to pay d in london for
the cotton goods he bought of him;
therefore, he buys from f for £,
the claim he now holds (i.e., a bill of exchange on london)
against c for £,. e sends it to d, and, when d collects it
from c, the whole circle of exchanges is completed without the
transmission of the precious metals.
[pg ]
chapter xvii. of the distribution of the precious metals through
the commercial world.
§ . the substitution of money for barter makes no difference in exports
and imports, nor in the law of international values.
having now examined the mechanism by which the
commercial transactions between nations are actually conducted,
we have next to inquire whether this mode of conducting
them makes any difference in the conclusions respecting international
values, which we previously arrived at on the
hypothesis of barter.
the nearest analogy would lead us to presume the negative.
we did not find that the intervention of money and
its substitutes made any difference in the law of value as applied
to adjacent places. things which would have been
equal in value if the mode of exchange had been by barter
are worth equal sums of money. the introduction of money
is a mere addition of one more commodity, of which the value
is regulated by the same laws as that of all other commodities.
we shall not be surprised, therefore, if we find that international
values also are determined by the same causes under a
money and bill system as they would be under a system of
barter, and that money has little to do in the matter, except
to furnish a convenient mode of comparing values.
all interchange is, in substance and effect, barter; whoever
sells commodities for money, and with that money buys
other goods, really buys those goods with his own commodities.
and so of nations: their trade is a mere exchange of
exports for imports; and, whether money is employed or not,
things are only in their permanent state when the exports
and imports exactly pay for each other. when this is the
[pg ]
case, equal sums of money are due from each country to the
other, the debts are settled by bills, and there is no balance
to be paid in the precious metals. the trade is in a state
like that which is called in mechanics a condition of stable
equilibrium.
but the process by which things are brought back to this
state when they happen to deviate from it is, at least outwardly,
not the same in a barter system and in a money system.
under the first, the country which wants more imports
than its exports will pay for must offer its exports at
a cheaper rate, as the sole means of creating a demand for
them sufficient to re-establish the equilibrium. when money
is used, the country seems to do a thing totally different.
she takes the additional imports at the same price as before,
and, as she exports no equivalent, the balance of payments
turns against her; the exchange becomes unfavorable, and
the difference has to be paid in money. this is, in appearance,
a very distinct operation from the former. let us see
if it differs in its essence, or only in its mechanism.
let the country which has the balance to pay be the
united states, and the country which receives it, england.
by this transmission of the precious metals, the quantity of
the currency is diminished in the united states, and increased
in england. this i am at liberty to assume. we are now
supposing that there is an excess of imports over exports,
arising from the fact that the equation of international demand
is not yet established: that there is at the ordinary
prices a permanent demand in the united states for more
english goods than the american goods required in england
at the ordinary prices will pay for. when this is the case,
if a change were not made in the prices, there would be a
perpetually renewed balance to be paid in money. the imports
require to be permanently diminished, or the exports
to be increased, which can only be accomplished through
[pg ]
prices; and hence, even if the balances are at first paid from
hoards, or by the exportation of bullion, they will reach the
circulation at last, for, until they do, nothing can stop the
drain.
when, therefore, the state of prices is such that the equation
of international demand can not establish itself, the
country requiring more imports than can be paid for by the
exports, it is a sign that the country has more of the precious
metals, or their substitutes, in circulation, than can permanently
circulate, and must necessarily part with some of them
before the balance can be restored. the currency is accordingly
contracted: prices fall, and, among the rest, the prices
of exportable articles; for which, accordingly, there arises,
in foreign countries, a greater demand: while imported commodities
have possibly risen in price, from the influx of
money into foreign countries, and at all events have not participated
in the general fall. but, until the increased cheapness
of american goods induces foreign countries to take a
greater pecuniary value, or until the increased dearness (positive
or comparative) of foreign goods makes the united
states take a less pecuniary value, the exports of the united
states will be no nearer to paying for the imports than before,
and the stream of the precious metals which had begun
to flow out of the united states will still flow on. this
efflux will continue until the fall of prices in the united
states brings within reach of the foreign market some commodity
which the united states did not previously send
thither; or, until the reduced price of the things which she
did send has forced a demand abroad for a sufficient quantity
to pay for the imports, aided perhaps by a reduction of
the american demand for foreign goods, through their enhanced
price, either positive or comparative.
now, this is the very process which took place on our
original supposition of barter. not only, therefore, does the
trade between nations tend to the same equilibrium between
exports and imports, whether money is employed or not, but
the means by which this equilibrium is established are essentially
[pg ]
the same. the country whose exports are not sufficient
to pay for her imports offers them on cheaper terms, until
she succeeds in forcing the necessary demand: in other
words, the equation of international demand, under a money
system as well as under a barter system, is the law of international
trade. every country exports and imports the very
same things, and in the very same quantity, under the one
system as under the other. in a barter system, the trade
gravitates to the point at which the sum of the imports exactly
exchanges for the sum of the exports: in a money system,
it gravitates to the point at which the sum of the imports
and the sum of the exports exchange for the same
quantity of money. and, since things which are equal to the
same thing are equal to one another, the exports and imports
which are equal in money price would, if money were not
used, precisely exchange for one another.
[pg ]
§ . the preceding theorem further illustrated.
let us proceed to [examine] to what extent the benefit
of an improvement in the production of an exportable
article is participated in by the countries importing it.
the improvement may either consist in the cheapening
of some article which was already a staple production of the
country, or in the establishment of some new branch of industry,
or of some process rendering an article exportable
which had not till then been exported at all. it will be
convenient to begin with the case of a new export, as being
somewhat the simpler of the two.
[pg ]
the first effect is that the article falls in price, and a
demand arises for it abroad. this new exportation disturbs
the balance, turns the exchanges, money flows into the country
(which we shall suppose to be the united states), and
continues to flow until prices rise. this higher range of
prices will somewhat check the demand in foreign countries
for the new article of export; and will diminish the demand
which existed abroad for the other things which the united
states was in the habit of exporting. the exports will thus
be diminished; while at the same time the american public,
[pg ]
having more money, will have a greater power of purchasing
foreign commodities. if they make use of this increased
power of purchase, there will be an increase of imports;
and by this, and the check to exportation, the equilibrium
of imports and exports will be restored. the result to foreign
countries will be, that they have to pay dearer than before
for their other imports, and obtain the new commodity
cheaper than before, but not so much cheaper as the united
states herself does. i say this, being well aware that the
article would be actually at the very same price (cost of carriage
excepted) in the united states and in other countries.
the cheapness, however, of the article is not measured solely
by the money-price, but by that price compared with the
money-incomes of the consumers. the price is the same to
the american and to the foreign consumers; but the former
pay that price from money-incomes which have been increased
by the new distribution of the precious metals;
while the latter have had their money-incomes probably diminished
by the same cause. the trade, therefore, has not
imparted to the foreign consumer the whole, but only a portion,
of the benefit which the american consumer has derived
from the improvement; while the united states has
also benefited in the prices of foreign commodities. thus,
then, any industrial improvement which leads to the opening
of a new branch of export trade benefits a country not
only by the cheapness of the article in which the improvement
has taken place, but by a general cheapening of all imported
products.
let us now change the hypothesis, and suppose that the
improvement, instead of creating a new export from the
united states, cheapens an existing one. let the commodity
in which there is an improvement be [cotton] cloth. the
first effect of the improvement is that its price falls, and
there is an increased demand for it in the foreign market.
but this demand is of uncertain amount. suppose the foreign
consumers to increase their purchases in the exact ratio
of the cheapness, or, in other words, to lay out in cloth the
[pg ]
same sum of money as before; the same aggregate payment
as before will be due from foreign countries to the united
states; the equilibrium of exports and imports will remain
undisturbed, and foreigners will obtain the full advantage of
the increased cheapness of cloth. but if the foreign demand
for cloth is of such a character as to increase in a greater
ratio than the cheapness, a larger sum than formerly will be
due to the united states for cloth, and when paid will raise
american prices, the price of cloth included; this rise, however,
will affect only the foreign purchaser, american incomes
being raised in a corresponding proportion; and the
foreign consumer will thus derive a less advantage than the
united states from the improvement. if, on the contrary,
the cheapening of cloth does not extend the foreign demand
for it in a proportional degree, a less sum of debts than before
will be due to the united states for cloth, while there
will be the usual sum of debts due from the united states
to foreign countries; the balance of trade will turn against
the united states, money will be exported, prices (that of
cloth included) will fall, and cloth will eventually be cheapened
to the foreign purchaser in a still greater ratio than the
improvement has cheapened it to the united states. these
are the very conclusions which [would be] deduced on the
hypothesis of barter.
the result of the preceding discussion can not be better
summed up than in the words of ricardo. “gold and silver
having been chosen for the general medium of circulation,
they are, by the competition of commerce, distributed
in such proportions among the different countries of the
world as to accommodate themselves to the natural traffic
which would take place if no such metals existed, and the
trade between countries were purely a trade of barter.” of
this principle, so fertile in consequences, previous to which
the theory of foreign trade was an unintelligible chaos, mr.
[pg ]
ricardo, though he did not pursue it into its ramifications,
was the real originator.
on the principles of trade which we have before explained,
the same rule will apply to the distribution of money in different
parts of the same country, especially of a large country
with various kinds of production, like the united states. the
medium of exchange will, by the competition of commerce, be
distributed in such proportions among the different parts of the
united states, by natural laws, as to accommodate itself to the
number of transactions which would take place if no such medium
existed. for this reason, we find more money in the so-called
great financial centers, because there are more exchanges
of goods there. in sparsely settled parts of the west there
will be less money precisely because there are fewer transactions
than in the older and more settled districts. so that there
could be no worse folly than the following legislation of congress
to distribute the national-bank circulation: “that $,,
of the entire amount of circulating notes authorized to
be issued shall be apportioned to associations in the states, in
the district of columbia, and in the territories, according to
representative population” (act of march , ).
§ . the precious metals, as money, are of the same value, and distribute themselves
according to the same law, with the precious metals as a commodity.
it is now necessary to inquire in what manner this
law of the distribution of the precious metals by means of
the exchanges affects the exchange value of money itself;
and how it tallies with the law by which we found that the
value of money is regulated when imported as a mere article
of merchandise.
the causes which bring money into or carry it out of a
country () through the exchanges, to restore the equilibrium
of trade, and which thereby raise its value in some countries
and lower it in others, are the very same causes on which
the local value of money would depend, if it were never imported
except () as a merchandise, and never except directly
from the mines. when the value of money in a country is
permanently lowered () [as a medium of exchange] by an
influx of it through the balance of trade, the cause, if it is
not diminished cost of production, must be one of those
causes which compel a new adjustment, more favorable to the
country, of the equation of international demand—namely,
either an increased demand abroad for her commodities, or
[pg ]
a diminished demand on her part for those of foreign countries.
now, an increased foreign demand for the commodities
of a country, or a diminished demand in the country for
imported commodities, are the very causes which, on the
general principles of trade, enable a country to purchase all
imports, and consequently () the precious metals, at a lower
value. there is, therefore, no contradiction, but the most
perfect accordance, in the results of the two different modes
[() as a medium of exchange; and () as merchandise] in
which the precious metals may be obtained. when money
[as a medium of exchange] flows from country to country
in consequence of changes in the international demand for
commodities, and by so doing alters its own local value, it
merely realizes, by a more rapid process, the effect which
would otherwise take place more slowly by an alteration in
the relative breadth of the streams by which the precious
metals [as merchandise] flow into different regions of the
earth from the mining countries. as, therefore, we before
saw that the use of money as a medium of exchange does
not in the least alter the law on which the values of other
things, either in the same country or internationally, depend,
so neither does it alter the law of the value of the precious
metals itself; and there is in the whole doctrine of international
values, as now laid down, a unity and harmony which
are a strong collateral presumption of truth.
§ . international payments entering into the “financial account.”
before closing this discussion, it is fitting to point
out in what manner and degree the preceding conclusions are
affected by the existence of international payments not originating
in commerce, and for which no equivalent in either
money or commodities is expected or received—such as a
tribute, or remittances, or interest to foreign creditors, or a
government expenditure abroad.
to begin with the case of barter. the supposed annual
remittances being made in commodities, and being exports
for which there is to be no return, it is no longer requisite
that the imports and exports should pay for one another; on
the contrary, there must be an annual excess of exports over
[pg ]
imports, equal to the value of the remittance. if, before
the country became liable to the annual payment, foreign
commerce was in its natural state of equilibrium, it will now
be necessary, for the purpose of effecting the remittances,
that foreign countries should be induced to take a greater
quantity of exports than before, which can only be done by
offering those exports on cheaper terms, or, in other words,
by paying dearer for foreign commodities. the international
values will so adjust themselves that, either by greater exports
or smaller imports, or both, the requisite excess on the
side of exports will be brought about, and this excess will
become the permanent state. the result is, that a country
which makes regular payments to foreign countries, besides
losing what it pays, loses also something more, by the less
advantageous terms on which it is forced to exchange its
productions for foreign commodities.
the same results follow on the supposition of money.
commerce being supposed to be in a state of equilibrium
when the obligatory remittances begin, the first remittance
is necessarily made in money. this lowers prices in the
remitting country, and raises them in the receiving. the
natural effect is, that more commodities are exported than
before, and fewer imported, and that, on the score of commerce
alone, a balance of money will be constantly due from
the receiving to the paying country. when the debt thus
annually due to the tributary country becomes equal to the
annual tribute or other regular payment due from it, no further
transmission of money takes place; the equilibrium of
exports and imports will no longer exist, but that of payments
will; the exchange will be at par, the two debts will
be set off against one another, and the tribute or remittance
will be virtually paid in goods. the result to the interests of
the two countries will be as already pointed out—the paying
country will give a higher price for all that it buys from the
receiving country, while the latter, besides receiving the
tribute, obtains the exportable produce of the tributary
country at a lower price.
[pg ]
it has been seen, as in chart no. xiii, that, considering
the exports and imports merely as merchandise, there is, in
fact, no actual equilibrium at any given time in accordance
with the equation of international demand. another element,
the “financial account” between the united states and foreign
countries, must be considered before we can know all the factors
necessary to bring about the equation. if we had been borrowing
largely of england, holland, and germany, we should
owe a regular annual sum as interest, and our exports must, as
a rule, be exactly that much more (under right and normal
conditions) than the imports. or, take another case, if capital
is borrowed in europe for railways in the united states, this
capital generally comes over in the form of imports of various
kinds; but, if our exports are not sufficient at once to balance
the increased imports, we go in debt for a time—or, in other
words, in order to establish the balance, we send united states
securities abroad instead of actual exports. this shipment of
securities is not seen and recorded as among the exports; and
so we find a period, like that during and after the war, from
 to , of a vast excess of imports. since  the
country has been practically paying the indebtedness incurred
in the former period; and there has been a vast excess of exports
over imports, and an apparent discrepancy in the equilibrium.
but our government bonds and other securities have
been coming back to us, producing a return current to balance
the excessive exports. in brief, the use of securities and various
forms of indebtedness permits the period of actual payment
to be deferred, so that an excess of imports at one time may be
offset by an excess of exports at another, and generally a later,
time. moreover, the large expenses of people traveling in
europe will require us to remit abroad in the form of exports
more than would ordinarily balance our imports by the amount
spent by the travelers. the financial operations, therefore,
between the united states and foreign countries, must be well
considered in striking the equation between our exports and
imports. as formulated by mr. cairnes, the equation of
international demand should be stated more broadly, as follows:
“the state of international demand which results in
commercial equilibrium is realized when the reciprocal demand
of trading countries produces such a relation of exports and
imports among them as enables each country by means of her
exports to discharge all her foreign liabilities.” if we were a
great lending instead of a great borrowing country, we should
have, as a rule, a permanent excess of imports.
[pg ]
chapter xviii. influence of the currency on the exchanges and on
foreign trade.
§ . variations in the exchange, which originate in the currency.
in our inquiry into the laws of international trade,
we commenced with the principles which determine international
exchanges and international values on the hypothesis
of barter. we next showed that the introduction of
money, as a medium of exchange, makes no difference in
the laws of exchanges and of values between country and
country, no more than between individual and individual:
since the precious metals, under the influence of those same
laws, distribute themselves in such proportions among the
different countries of the world as to allow the very same
exchanges to go on, and at the same values, as would be
the case under a system of barter. we lastly considered
how the value of money itself is affected by those alterations
in the state of trade which arise from alterations
either in the demand and supply of commodities or in their
cost of production. it remains to consider the alterations
in the state of trade which originate not in commodities but
in money.
gold and silver may vary like other things, though they
are not so likely to vary as other things in their cost of production.
the demand for them in foreign countries may
also vary. it may increase by augmented employment of
the metals for purposes of art and ornament, or because the
increase of production and of transactions has created a
greater amount of business to be done by the circulating
medium. it may diminish, for the opposite reasons; or,
[pg ]
from the extension of the economizing expedients by which
the use of metallic money is partially dispensed with.
these changes act upon the trade between other countries
and the mining countries, and upon the value of the precious
metals, according to the general laws of the value of
imported commodities: which have been set forth in the
previous chapters with sufficient fullness.
what i propose to examine in the present chapter is not
those circumstances affecting money which alter the permanent
conditions of its value, but the effects produced on international
trade by casual or temporary variations in the
value of money, which have no connection with any causes
affecting its permanent value.
§ . effect of a sudden increase of a metallic currency, or of the sudden
creation of bank-notes or other substitutes for money.
let us suppose in any country a circulating medium
purely metallic, and a sudden casual increase made to it; for
example, by bringing into circulation hoards of treasure,
which had been concealed in a previous period of foreign invasion
or internal disorder. the natural effect would be a
rise of prices. this would check exports and encourage imports;
the imports would exceed the exports, the exchanges
would become unfavorable, and a newly acquired stock of
money would diffuse itself over all countries with which the
supposed country carried on trade, and from them, progressively,
through all parts of the commercial world. the
money which thus overflowed would spread itself to an equal
depth over all commercial countries. for it would go on
flowing until the exports and imports again balanced one
another; and this (as no change is supposed in the permanent
circumstances of international demand) could only be
when the money had diffused itself so equally that prices had
risen in the same ratio in all countries, so that the alteration
of price would be for all practical purposes ineffective, and
the exports and imports, though at a higher money valuation,
would be exactly the same as they were originally.
this diminished value of money throughout the world (at
least if the diminution was considerable) would cause a suspension,
or at least a diminution, of the annual supply from
[pg ]
the mines, since the metal would no longer command a value
equivalent to its highest cost of production. the annual
waste would, therefore, not be fully made up, and the usual
causes of destruction would gradually reduce the aggregate
quantity of the precious metals to its former amount; after
which their production would recommence on its former
scale. the discovery of the treasure would thus produce
only temporary effects; namely, a brief disturbance of international
trade until the treasure had disseminated itself
through the world, and then a temporary depression in the
value of the metal below that which corresponds to the cost
of producing or of obtaining it; which depression would
gradually be corrected by a temporarily diminished production
in the producing countries and importation in the importing
countries.
the same effects which would thus arise from the discovery
of a treasure accompany the process by which bank-notes,
or any of the other substitutes for money, take the place
of the precious metals. suppose that the united states
possessed a currency, wholly metallic, of $,,, and
that suddenly $,, of bank-notes were sent into circulation.
if these were issued by bankers, they would be
employed in loans, or in the purchase of securities, and would
therefore create a sudden fall in the rate of interest, which
would probably send a great part of the $,, of gold
out of the country as capital, to seek a higher rate of interest
elsewhere, before there had been time for any action on prices.
but we will suppose that the notes are not issued by bankers,
or money-lenders of any kind, but by manufacturers, in the
payment of wages and the purchase of materials, or by the
government [as, e.g., greenbacks] in its ordinary expenses, so
that the whole amount would be rapidly carried into the markets
for commodities. the following would be the natural
order of consequences: all prices would rise greatly. exportation
would almost cease; importation would be prodigiously
[pg ]
stimulated. a great balance of payments would
become due, the exchanges would turn against the united
states, to the full extent of the cost of exporting money;
and the surplus coin would pour itself rapidly forth, over the
various countries of the world, in the order of their proximity,
geographically and commercially, to the united states.
a study of chart no. xiv will show how exactly this
description fits the case of our country, when the rise of prices
stimulated imports of merchandise (see chart no. xiii) in
, and sent gold out of the country.
the efflux would continue until the currencies of all countries
had come to a level; by which i do not mean, until
money became of the same value everywhere, but until the
differences were only those which existed before, and which
corresponded to permanent differences in the cost of obtaining
it. when the rise of prices had extended itself in an
equal degree to all countries, exports and imports would
everywhere revert to what they were at first, would balance
one another, and the exchanges would return to par. if such
a sum of money as $,,, when spread over the whole
surface of the commercial world, were sufficient to raise the
general level in a perceptible degree, the effect would be of
no long duration. no alteration having occurred in the general
conditions under which the metals were procured, either
in the world at large or in any part of it, the reduced value
would no longer be remunerating, and the supply from the
mines would cease partially or wholly, until the $,,
were absorbed.
effects of another kind, however, will have been produced:
$,,, which formerly existed in the unproductive
[pg ]
form of metallic money, have been converted into
what is, or is capable of becoming, productive capital. this
gain is at first made by the united states at the expense
of other countries, who have taken her superfluity of this
costly and unproductive article off her hands, giving for it an
equivalent value in other commodities. by degrees the loss
is made up to those countries by diminished influx from the
mines, and finally the world has gained a virtual addition
of $,, to its productive resources. adam smith's
illustration, though so well known, deserves for its extreme
aptness to be once more repeated. he compares the substitution
of paper in the room of the precious metals to the construction
of a highway through the air, by which the ground
now occupied by roads would become available for agriculture.
as in that case a portion of the soil, so in this a part
of the accumulated wealth of the country, would be relieved
from a function in which it was only employed in rendering
other soils and capitals productive, and would itself become
applicable to production; the office it previously fulfilled
being equally well discharged by a medium which costs
nothing.
the value saved to the community by thus dispensing
with metallic money is a clear gain to those who provide the
substitute. they have the use of $,, of circulating
medium which have cost them only the expense of an
engraver's plate. if they employ this accession to their fortunes
as productive capital, the produce of the country is
increased and the community benefited, as much as by any
other capital of equal amount. whether it is so employed
or not depends, in some degree, upon the mode of issuing it.
if issued by the government, and employed in paying off
debt, it would probably become productive capital. the
government, however, may prefer employing this extraordinary
resource in its ordinary expenses; may squander it uselessly,
or make it a mere temporary substitute for taxation
to an equivalent amount; in which last case the amount is
saved by the tax-payers at large, who either add it to their
[pg ]
capital or spend it as income. when [a part of the] paper
currency is supplied, as in our own country, by banking
companies, the amount is almost wholly turned into productive
capital; for the issuers, being at all times liable to be
called upon to refund the value, are under the strongest inducements
not to squander it, and the only cases in which it
is not forthcoming are cases of fraud or mismanagement. a
banker's profession being that of a money-lender, his issue
of notes is a simple extension of his ordinary occupation.
he lends the amount to farmers, manufacturers, or dealers,
who employ it in their several businesses. so employed, it
yields, like any other capital, wages of labor, and profits of
stock. the profit is shared between the banker, who receives
interest, and a succession of borrowers, mostly for
short periods, who, after paying the interest, gain a profit in
addition, or a convenience equivalent to profit. the capital
itself in the long run becomes entirely wages, and, when
replaced by the sale of the produce, becomes wages again;
thus affording a perpetual fund, of the value of $,,,
for the maintenance of productive labor, and increasing the
annual produce of the country by all that can be produced
through the means of a capital of that value. to this gain
must be added a further saving to the country, of the annual
supply of the precious metals necessary for repairing the
wear and tear, and other waste, of a metallic currency.
the substitution, therefore, of paper for the precious
metals should always be carried as far as is consistent with
safety, no greater amount of metallic currency being retained
than is necessary to maintain, both in fact and in
public belief, the convertibility of the paper.
but since gold wanted for exportation is almost invariably
drawn from the reserves of the banks, and is never likely
to be taken directly from the circulation while the banks
remain solvent, the only advantage which can be obtained
from retaining partially a metallic currency for daily purposes
is, that the banks may occasionally replenish their
reserves from it.
[pg ]
§ . effect of the increase of an inconvertible paper currency.
real and nominal exchange.
when metallic money had been entirely superseded
and expelled from circulation, by the substitution of
an equal amount of bank-notes, any attempt to keep a still
further quantity of paper in circulation must, if the notes are
convertible [into gold], be a complete failure.
this brings up the whole question at issue between the
“currency principle” and the “banking principle.” the
latter, maintained by fullerton, wilson, price, and tooke
(in his later writings), held that, if notes were convertible, the
value of notes could not differ from the value of the metal
into which they were convertible; while the former, advocated
by lord overstone, g. w. norman, colonel torrens, tooke
(in his earlier writings), and sir robert peel, implied that
even a convertible paper was liable to over-issues. this last
school brought about the bank act of .
[a] new issue would again set in motion the same train
of consequences by which the gold coin had already been expelled.
the metals would, as before, be required for exportation,
and would be for that purpose demanded from the
banks, to the full extent of the superfluous notes, which thus
could not possibly be retained in circulation. if, indeed, the
notes were inconvertible, there would be no such obstacle to
the increase in their quantity. an inconvertible paper acts in
the same way as a convertible, while there remains any coin
for it to supersede; the difference begins to manifest itself
when all the coin is driven from circulation (except what may
be retained for the convenience of small change), and the
issues still go on increasing. when the paper begins to exceed
in quantity the metallic currency which it superseded,
prices of course rise; things which were worth $ in metallic
money become worth $ in inconvertible paper, or
more, as the case may be. but this rise of price will not, as
in the cases before examined, stimulate import and discourage
export. the imports and exports are determined by the
metallic prices of things, not by the paper prices; and it is
only when the paper is exchangeable at pleasure for the
metals that paper prices and metallic prices must correspond.
[pg ]
let us suppose that the united states is the country
which has the depreciated paper. suppose that some american
production could be bought, while the currency was still
metallic, for $, and sold in england for $., the difference
covering the expense and risk, and affording a profit to
the merchant. on account of the depreciation, this commodity
will now cost in the united states $, and can not be sold
in england for more than $., and yet it will be exported
as before. why? because the $. which the exporter
can get for it in england is not depreciated paper, but gold
or silver; and since in the united states bullion has risen
in the same proportion with other things—if the merchant
brings the gold or silver to the united states, he can sell his
$. [in coin] for $ [in paper], and obtain as before 
per cent for profit and expenses.
it thus appears that a depreciation of the currency does
not affect the foreign trade of the country: this is carried
on precisely as if the currency maintained its value. but,
though the trade is not affected, the exchanges are. when
the imports and exports are in equilibrium, the exchange, in
a metallic currency, would be at par; a bill on england for
the equivalent of $ would be worth $. but $, or the
quantity of gold contained in them, having come to be
worth in the united states $, it follows that a bill on
england for $ will be worth $. when, therefore, the
real exchange is at par, there will be a nominal exchange
against the country of as much per cent as the amount of
the depreciation. if the currency is depreciated , , or
 per cent, then in whatever way the real exchange, arising
from the variations of international debts and credits, may
vary, the quoted exchange will always differ , , or 
per cent from it. however high this nominal premium may
be, it has no tendency to send gold out of the country for
the purpose of drawing a bill against it and profiting by the
premium; because the gold so sent must be procured, not
from the banks and at par, as in the case of a convertible
currency, but in the market, at an advance of price equal
[pg ]
to the premium. in such cases, instead of saying that the
exchange is unfavorable, it would be a more correct representation
to say that the par has altered, since there is now
required a larger quantity of american currency to be
equivalent to the same quantity of foreign. the exchanges,
however, continue to be computed according to the metallic
par. the quoted exchanges, therefore, when there is a depreciated
currency, are compounded of two elements or factors:
() the real exchange, which follows the variations of
international payments, and () the nominal exchange, which
varies with the depreciation of the currency, but which,
while there is any depreciation at all, must always be unfavorable.
since the amount of depreciation is exactly measured
by the degree in which the market price of bullion
exceeds the mint valuation, we have a sure criterion to determine
what portion of the quoted exchange, being referable
to depreciation, may be struck off as nominal, the result
so corrected expressing the real exchange.
the same disturbance of the exchanges and of international
trade which is produced by an increased issue of convertible
bank-notes is in like manner produced by those extensions
of credit which, as was so fully shown in a preceding
chapter, have the same effect on prices as an increase of
the currency. whenever circumstances have given such an
impulse to the spirit of speculation as to occasion a great increase
of purchases on credit, money prices rise, just as much as
they would have risen if each person who so buys on credit had
bought with money. all the effects, therefore, must be similar.
as a consequence of high prices, exportation is checked
and importation stimulated; though in fact the increase of
importation seldom waits for the rise of prices which is the
consequence of speculation, inasmuch as some of the great articles
of import are usually among the things in which speculative
overtrading first shows itself. there is, therefore, in
such periods, usually a great excess of imports over exports;
and, when the time comes at which these must be paid for,
the exchanges become unfavorable and gold flows out of the
[pg ]
country. this efflux of gold takes effect on prices [by withdrawing
gold from the reserves of the banks, and so by stopping
loans and the use of credit, or purchasing power]: its
effect is to make them recoil downward. the recoil once begun,
generally becomes a total rout, and the unusual extension
of credit is rapidly exchanged for an unusual contraction
of it. accordingly, when credit has been imprudently
stretched, and the speculative spirit carried to excess, the turn
of the exchanges and consequent pressure on the banks to
obtain gold for exportation are generally the proximate cause
of the catastrophe.
a glance at chart no. xiii will give illustration to the
situation here described. after the war, and until , while
the united states was under the influence of high prices and a
speculation which has been seldom equaled in our history, the
resulting great excess of imports became very striking. it
was an unhealthy and abnormal condition of trade. the sudden
reversal of the trade by the crisis in  is equally striking,
and, as prices fell, exports began to increase. the effect
on international trade of a collapse of credit is thus clearly
marked by the lines on the chart.
[pg ]
chapter xix. of the rate of interest.
§ . the rate of interest depends on the demand and supply of loans.
the two topics of currency and loans, though in
themselves distinct, are so intimately blended in the phenomena
of what is called the money market, that it is impossible
to understand the one without the other, and in many
minds the two subjects are mixed up in the most inextricable
confusion.
in the preceding book we defined the relation in which
interest stands to profit. we found that the gross profit of
capital might be distinguished into three parts, which are respectively
the remuneration for risk, for trouble, and for the
capital itself, and may be termed insurance, wages of superintendence,
and interest. after making compensation for
risk, that is, after covering the average losses to which capital
is exposed either by the general circumstances of society
or by the hazards of the particular employment, there remains
a surplus, which partly goes to repay the owner of the
capital for his abstinence, and partly the employer of it for
his time and trouble. how much goes to the one and how
much to the other is shown by the amount of the remuneration
which, when the two functions are separated, the owner
of capital can obtain from the employer for its use. this is
evidently a question of demand and supply. nor have demand
and supply any different meaning or effect in this case
from what they have in all others. the rate of interest will
be such as to equalize the demand for loans with the supply
[pg ]
of them. it will be such that, exactly as much as some
people are desirous to borrow at that rate, others shall be
willing to lend. if there is more offered than demanded, interest
will fall; if more is demanded than offered, it will rise;
and in both cases, to the point at which the equation of supply
and demand is re-established.
the desire to borrow and the willingness to lend are
more or less influenced by every circumstance which affects
the state or prospects of industry or commerce, either generally
or in any of their branches. the rate of interest, therefore,
on good security, which alone we have here to consider
(for interest in which considerations of risk bear a part may
swell to any amount), is seldom, in the great centers of money
transactions, precisely the same for two days together; as is
shown by the never-ceasing variations in the quoted prices
of the funds and other negotiable securities. nevertheless,
there must be, as in other cases of value, some rate which
(in the language of adam smith and ricardo) may be called
the natural rate; some rate about which the market rate oscillates,
and to which it always tends to return. this rate
partly depends on the amount of accumulation going on in
the hands of persons who can not themselves attend to the
employment of their savings, and partly on the comparative
taste existing in the community for the active pursuits of
industry, or for the leisure, ease, and independence of an
annuitant.
§ . circumstances which determine the permanent demand and supply of loans.
in [ordinary] circumstances, the more thriving producers
and traders have their capital fully employed, and many
are able to transact business to a considerably greater extent
than they have capital for. these are naturally borrowers:
and the amount which they desire to borrow, and can give
security for, constitutes the demand for loans on account of
productive employment. to these must be added the loans
required by government, and by land-owners, or other unproductive
consumers who have good security to give. this
constitutes the mass of loans for which there is an habitual
demand.
[pg ]
now, it is conceivable that there might exist, in the hands
of persons disinclined or disqualified for engaging personally
in business, () a mass of capital equal to, and even exceeding,
this demand. in that case there would be an habitual
excess of competition on the part of lenders, and the rate of
interest would bear a low proportion to the rate of profit.
interest would be forced down to the point which would
either tempt borrowers to take a greater amount of loans than
they had a reasonable expectation of being able to employ in
their business, or would so discourage a portion of the lenders
as to make them either forbear to accumulate or endeavor
to increase their income by engaging in business on their own
account, and incurring the risks, if not the labors, of industrial
employment.
the low rates of interest, rather, tempt people to take some
additional risk, and enter into investments which offer a higher
rate of dividends; so that a period of low interest is a time
when speculative enterprises find victims, and then by bad and
worthless investments much of the loanable funds is actually
lost; thereby reducing the total quantity of loans more nearly
to that demand which will give an ordinary rate of interest.
(.) on the other hand, the capital owned by persons who
prefer lending it at interest, or whose avocations prevent
them from personally superintending its employment, may
be short of the habitual demand for loans. it may be in
great part absorbed by the investments afforded by the public
debt and by mortgages, and the remainder may not be
sufficient to supply the wants of commerce. if so, the rate
of interest will be raised so high as in some way to re-establish
the equilibrium. when there is only a small difference
between interest and profit, many borrowers may no longer
be willing to increase their responsibilities and involve their
credit for so small a remuneration: or some, who would otherwise
have engaged in business, may prefer leisure, and become
lenders instead of borrowers: or others, under the
inducement of high interest and easy investment for their
capital, may retire from business earlier, and with smaller
fortunes, than they otherwise would have done.
[pg ]
or, lastly, instead of [capital] being afforded by persons
not in business, the affording it may itself become a business.
a portion of the capital employed in trade may be supplied
by a class of professional money-lenders. these money-lenders,
however, must have more than a mere interest; they
must have the ordinary rate of profit on their capital, risk
and all other circumstances being allowed for. [for] it can
never answer, to any one who borrows for the purposes of his
business, to pay a full profit for capital from which he will
only derive a full profit: and money-lending, as an employment,
for the regular supply of trade, can not, therefore, be
carried on except by persons who, in addition to their own
capital, can lend their credit, or, in other words, the capital
of other people. a bank which lends its notes lends capital
which it borrows from the community, and for which it pays
no interest.
of late years, however, banks are generally not permitted
to issue notes on their simple credit. that privilege has been
so often abused in this country that now, in the national banking
system, a separate part of the resources are set aside for
the security of the circulating notes (as is also true of the bank
of england since ). it is not generally true, then, that
banks now create the means to make loans by issuing notes
by which they borrow capital from the community without paying
interest. they do, however, depend almost entirely on deposits.
a bank of deposit lends capital which it collects from the
community in small parcels, sometimes without paying any
interest, and, if it does pay interest, it still pays much less
than it receives; for the depositors, who in any other way
could mostly obtain for such small balances no interest worth
taking any trouble for, are glad to receive even a little. having
this subsidiary resource, bankers are enabled to obtain,
by lending at interest, the ordinary rate of profit on their
own capital. the disposable capital deposited in banks, together
with the funds belonging to those who, either from
necessity or preference, live upon the interest of their property,
constitute the general loan fund of the country; and
[pg ]
the amount of this aggregate fund, when set against the habitual
demands of producers and dealers, and those of the government
and of unproductive consumers, determines the permanent
or average rate of interest, which must always be
such as to adjust these two amounts to one another. but,
while the whole of this mass of lent capital takes effect upon
the permanent rate of interest, the fluctuations depend almost
entirely upon the portion which is in the hands of
bankers; for it is that portion almost exclusively which,
being lent for short times only, is continually in the market
seeking an investment. the capital of those who live on
the interest of their own fortunes has generally sought and
found some fixed investment, such as the public funds,
mortgages, or the bonds of public companies, which investment,
except under peculiar temptations or necessities, is not
changed.
§ . circumstances which determine the fluctuations.
fluctuations in the rate of interest arise from variations
either in the demand for loans or in the supply. the
supply is liable to variation, though less so than the demand.
the willingness to lend is greater than usual at the commencement
of a period of speculation, and much less than
usual during the revulsion which follows. in speculative
times, money-lenders as well as other people are inclined to
extend their business by stretching their credit; they lend
more than usual (just as other classes of dealers and producers
employ more than usual) of capital which does not
belong to them. accordingly, these are the times when the
rate of interest is low; though for this too (as we shall immediately
see) there are other causes. during the revulsion,
on the contrary, interest always rises inordinately, because,
while there is a most pressing need on the part of many
persons to borrow, there is a general disinclination to lend.
[pg ]
this disinclination, when at its extreme point, is called a
panic. it occurs when a succession of unexpected failures
has created in the mercantile, and sometimes also in the non-mercantile
public, a general distrust in each other's solvency;
disposing every one not only to refuse fresh credit, except
on very onerous terms, but to call in, if possible, all credit
which he has already given. deposits are withdrawn from
banks; notes are returned on the issuers in exchange for specie;
bankers raise their rate of discount, and withhold their
customary advances; merchants refuse to renew mercantile
bills. at such times the most calamitous consequences were
formerly experienced from the attempt of the law to prevent
more than a certain limited rate of interest from being given
or taken. persons who could not borrow at five per cent
had to pay, not six or seven, but ten or fifteen per cent, to
compensate the lender for risking the penalties of the law;
or had to sell securities or goods for ready money at a still
greater sacrifice.
the pernicious and hurtful custom exists in various states
in this country of making any interest beyond a certain rate
illegal. when it is remembered that legitimate business is
often largely done on credit—until the proceeds of goods sold
on credit are collected—the rate of interest from day to day is
very important to trade. so, when there is a sudden demand
for loans, a rate higher than the legal one will certainly be
paid, and the law violated, if the getting of a loan is absolutely
necessary to save the borrower from commercial ruin. the effect
of a legal rate is to stop loans at the very time when loans
are most essential to the business public. it would be far better
to adopt such a sliding scale as exists at great european banks,
which allows the rate of interest to rise with the demand. no
one, then, with good security, need want loans if he is willing
to pay the high rates; and those not really in need will defer
their demand until the sudden emergency is past. already in
new york the legal penalty has been removed for loaning at
higher than the legal rates when charged upon call-loans; and
it has mitigated the extreme fluctuations of the rate in a market
when financial necessity is contending against the law.
except at such periods, the amount of capital disposable on
loan is subject to little other variation than that which arises
from the gradual process of accumulation; which process,
[pg ]
however, in the great commercial countries, is sufficiently
rapid to account for the almost periodical recurrence of these
fits of speculation; since, when a few years have elapsed
without a crisis, and no new and tempting channel for investment
has been opened in the mean time, there is always
found to have occurred in those few years so large an increase
of capital seeking investment as to have lowered considerably
the rate of interest, whether indicated by the prices of securities
or by the rate of discount on bills; and this diminution
of interest tempts the possessors to incur hazards in hopes of
a more considerable return.
the demand for loans varies much more largely than the
supply, and embraces longer cycles of years in its aberrations.
a time of war, for example, is a period of unusual draughts
on the loan market. the government, at such times, generally
incurs new loans, and, as these usually succeed each
other rapidly as long as the war lasts, the general rate of interest
is kept higher in war than in peace, without reference
to the rate of profit, and productive industry is stinted of its
usual supplies.
the united states during the late war found that it could
not borrow at even six or seven per cent. by receiving depreciated
paper at par for its bonds it really agreed to pay six
gold dollars on each loan of one hundred dollars in paper
(worth, perhaps, at the worst only forty gold dollars), which
was equivalent to fifteen per cent. this high rate was largely
due to the weakened credit of the government; but still it
remains true that the rate was higher because the united
states was in the market as a competitor for large loans. now
the government can refund its bonds at three per cent.
nor does the influence of these loans altogether cease when
the government ceases to contract others; for those already
contracted continue to afford an investment for a greatly
increased amount of the disposable capital of the country,
which, if the national debt were paid off, would be added to
the mass of capital seeking investment, and (independently
of temporary disturbance) could not but, to some extent, permanently
lower the rate of interest.
[pg ]
the rapid payment of the public debt by the united states,
$,, in -, and more than $,, in -,
has taken away the former investment for enormous sums
of loanable funds, and to the same extent increased the supply
in the market. without doubt this aids in making the present
rate of interest a very low one. whether the rate will remain
“permanently lower,” however, will depend upon whether the
field of investment in the united states is already practically
occupied. we believe it is not.
the same effect on interest which is produced by government
loans for war expenditure is produced by the sudden
opening of any new and generally attractive mode of permanent
investment. the only instance of the kind in recent
history, on a scale comparable to that of the war loans, is the
absorption of capital in the construction of railways. this
capital must have been principally drawn from the deposits
in banks, or from savings which would have gone into deposit,
and which were destined to be ultimately employed
in buying securities from persons who would have employed
the purchase-money in discounts or other loans at interest:
in either case, it was a draft on the general loan fund. it
is, in fact, evident that, unless savings were made expressly
to be employed in railway adventure, the amount thus employed
must have been derived either from the actual capital
of persons in business or from capital which would have
been lent to persons in business.
§ . the rate of interest not really connected with the value of money,
but often confounded with it.
from the preceding considerations it would be seen,
even if it were not otherwise evident, how great an error it
is to imagine that the rate of interest bears any necessary
relation to the quantity or value of the money in circulation.
an increase of the currency has in itself no effect, and is
incapable of having any effect, on the rate of interest. a
paper currency issued by government in the payment of its
ordinary expenses, in however great excess it may be issued,
affects the rate of interest in no manner whatever. it
diminishes, indeed, the power of money to buy commodities,
but not the power of money to buy money. if a hundred
dollars will buy a perpetual annuity of four dollars a year, a
[pg ]
depreciation which makes the hundred dollars worth only
half as much as before has precisely the same effect on the
four dollars, and therefore can not alter the relation between
the two. unless, indeed, it is known and reckoned upon
that the depreciation will only be temporary; for people
certainly might be willing to lend the depreciated currency
on cheaper terms if they expected to be repaid in money of
full value.
in considering the effect produced by the proceedings of
banks in encouraging the excesses of speculation, an immense
effect is usually attributed to their issues of notes, but until
of late hardly any attention was paid to the management of
their deposits, though nothing is more certain than that their
imprudent extensions of credit take place more frequently
by means of their deposits than of their issues. says mr.
tooke: “supposing all the deposits received by a banker to
be in coin, is he not, just as much as the issuing banker, exposed
to the importunity of customers, whom it may be impolitic
to refuse, for loans or discounts, or to be tempted by
a high interest; and may he not be induced to encroach so
much upon his deposits as to leave him, under not improbable
circumstances, unable to meet the demands of his depositors?”
in truth, the most difficult questions of banking center
around the functions of discount and deposit. the separation
of the issue from the banking department by the act of ,
which renewed the charter of the bank of england, makes this
perfectly clear. after entirely removing from their effect on
credit all influences due to issues, england has had the same
difficulties to encounter as before, which shows that the real
question is concerned with the two essential functions of banking—discount
and deposit. since , there have been the
commercial disturbances of , , , and . although
no expansion of notes, without a corresponding deposit
of specie, is possible.
§ . the rate of interest determines the price of land and of securities.
before quitting the general subject of this chapter,
i will make the obvious remark that the rate of interest
determines the value and price of all those salable articles
which are desired and bought, not for themselves, but for
[pg ]
the income which they are capable of yielding. the public
funds, shares in joint-stock companies, and all descriptions
of securities, are at a high price in proportion as the rate of
interest is low. they are sold at the price which will give
the market rate of interest on the purchase-money, with
allowance for all differences in the risk incurred, or in any
circumstance of convenience.
the price of land, mines, and all other fixed sources of
income, depends in like manner on the rate of interest. land
usually sells at a higher price, in proportion to the income
afforded by it, than the public funds, not only because it is
thought, even in [england], to be somewhat more secure,
but because ideas of power and dignity are associated with
its possession. but these differences are constant, or nearly
so; and, in the variations of price, land follows,
cæteris paribus,
the permanent (though, of course, not the daily) variations
of the rate of interest. when interest is low, land will
naturally be dear; when interest is high, land will be cheap.
a lot of land, which fifty years ago gave an annual return
of $, if ten per cent was then the common rate of interest,
would sell for $,. if the return from the land remains
the same ($) to-day, and if the usual rate of interest is
now five per cent, the same piece of land, therefore, would sell
for $,, since $ is five per cent of $,.
the price of a bond, it may be said, also varies with the
time it has to run. at the same rate of interest, a bond running
for a long term of years is better for an investment than
one for a short term. the lumberman, who looks at two trees
of equal diameter at the base, estimates the total value of each
according to the height of the tree. then, again, a bond running
for a short term may be worth less than one for a long
term, even though the first bears a higher rate of interest.
that is, to resume the illustration, one tree, not rising very
high, although larger at the bottom, may not contain so many
square feet as another, with perhaps a less diameter at the bottom,
but which stretches much higher up into the air.
[pg ]
chapter xx. of the competition of different countries in the same market.
§ . causes which enable one country to undersell another.
in the phraseology of the mercantile system, there
is no word of more frequent recurrence or more perilous import
than the word underselling. to undersell other countries—not
to be undersold by other countries—were spoken
of, and are still very often spoken of, almost as if they were
the sole purposes for which production and commodities
exist.
nations may, like individual dealers, be competitors, with
opposite interests, in the markets of some commodities, while
in others they are in the more fortunate relation of reciprocal
customers. the benefit of commerce does not consist, as it
was once thought to do, in the commodities sold; but, since
the commodities sold are the means of obtaining those which
are bought, a nation would be cut off from the real advantage
of commerce, the imports, if it could not induce other
nations to take any of its commodities in exchange; and in
proportion as the competition of other countries compels it
to offer its commodities on cheaper terms, on pain of not
selling them at all, the imports which it obtains by its foreign
trade are procured at greater cost.
one country (a) can only undersell another (b) in a
given market, to the extent of entirely expelling her from it,
on two conditions: () in the first place, she (a) must have
a greater advantage than the second country (b) in the production
of the article exported by both; meaning by a greater
advantage (as has been already so fully explained) not absolutely,
[pg ]
but in comparison with other commodities; and ()
in the second place, such must be her (a's) relation with the
customer-country in respect to the demand for each other's
products, and such the consequent state of international
values, as to give away to the customer-country more than
the whole advantage possessed by the rival country (b); otherwise
the rival will still be able to hold her ground in the
market.
let us suppose a trade between england and the united
states, in iron and wheat. england being capable of producing
ten cwts. of iron at the same cost as fifteen bushels of
wheat, the united states at the same cost as twenty bushels,
and the two commodities being exchanged between the two
countries (cost of carriage apart) at some intermediate rate, say
ten for seventeen. the united states could not be permanently
undersold in the english market, and expelled from it,
unless by a country (such as india) which offered not merely
more than seventeen, but more than twenty bushels of wheat
for ten cwts. of iron. short of that, the competition would
only oblige the united states to pay dearer for iron, but would
not disable her from exporting wheat. the country, therefore,
which could undersell the united states, must, in the first
place, be able to produce wheat at less cost, compared with
iron, than the united states herself; and, in the next place,
must have such a demand for iron, or other english commodities,
as would compel her, even when she became sole occupant
of the market, to give a greater advantage to england than the
united states could give by resigning the whole of hers; to
give, for example, twenty-one bushels for ten cwts. for if
not—if, for example, the equation of international demand,
after the united states was excluded, gave a ratio of eighteen
for ten—the united states would be now the underselling nation;
and there would be a point, perhaps nineteen for ten, at
which both countries would be able to maintain their ground,
and to sell in england enough wheat to pay for the iron, or
other english commodities, for which, on these newly adjusted
terms of interchange, they had a demand. in like manner,
england, as an exporter of iron, could only be driven from the
american market by some rival whose superior advantages in
the production of iron enabled her, and the intensity of whose
demand for american produce compelled her, to offer ten cwts.
of iron, not merely for less than seventeen bushels of wheat,
but for less than fifteen. in that case, england could no
longer carry on the trade without loss; but, in any case short
[pg ]
of this, she would merely be obliged to give to the united
states more iron for less wheat than she had previously given.
it thus appears that the alarm of being permanently
undersold may be taken much too easily; may be taken
when the thing really to be anticipated is not the loss of the
trade, but the minor inconvenience of carrying it on at a
diminished advantage; an inconvenience chiefly falling on
the consumers of foreign commodities, and not on the producers
or sellers of the exported article. it is no sufficient
ground of apprehension to the [american] producers, to find
that some other country can sell [wheat] in foreign markets,
at some particular time, a trifle cheaper than they can themselves
afford to do in the existing state of prices in [the
united states]. suppose them to be temporarily unsold, and
their exports diminished; the imports will exceed the exports,
there will be a new distribution of the precious metals,
prices will fall, and, as all the money expenses of the
[american] producers will be diminished, they will be able
(if the case falls short of that stated in the preceding paragraph)
again to compete with their rivals.
the loss which [the united states] will incur will not fall
upon the exporters, but upon those who consume imported
commodities; who, with money incomes reduced in amount,
will have to pay the same or even an increased price for all
things produced in foreign countries.
but the business world would regard what was going on
under economic laws as a great and dreaded disaster, if it
meant that prices were to fall, and gold leave the country.
those holding large stocks of goods would for that time suffer;
and so, at first, it might really happen that “exporters,” in the
sense of exporting agents (not the producers, perhaps, of the
exportable article), would incur a loss. in the end, of course,
the consumers of imports suffer. but, temporarily, and on the
face of it, exporters do lose.
§ . high wages do not prevent one country from underselling another.
according to the preceding doctrine, a country can
not be undersold in any commodity, unless the rival country
[pg ]
has a stronger inducement than itself for devoting its labor
and capital to the production of the commodity; arising
from the fact that by doing so it occasions a greater saving
of labor and capital, to be shared between itself and its customers—a
greater increase of the aggregate produce of the
world. the underselling, therefore, though a loss to the
undersold country, is an advantage to the world at large; the
substituted commerce being one which economizes more of
the labor and capital of mankind, and adds more to their collective
wealth, than the commerce superseded by it. the
advantage, of course, consists in being able to produce the
commodity of better quality, or with less labor (compared
with other things); or perhaps not with less labor, but in
less time; with a less prolonged detention of the capital employed.
this may arise from greater natural advantages
(such as soil, climate, richness of mines); superior capability,
either natural or acquired, in the laborers; better division of
labor, and better tools, or machinery. but there is no place
left in this theory for the case of lower wages. this, however,
in the theories commonly current, is a favorite cause
of underselling. we continually hear of the disadvantage
under which the [american] producer labors, both in foreign
markets and even in his own, through the lower wages paid
by his foreign rivals. these lower wages, we are told, enable,
or are always on the point of enabling, them to sell at
lower prices, and to dislodge the [american] manufacturer
from all markets in which he is not artificially protected.
it will be remembered that, as we have before seen, international
trade, in actual practice, depends on comparative prices
within the same country (even though the exporter may not
consciously make a comparison). we send wheat abroad, because
it is low in price relatively to certain manufactured goods;
that is, we send the wheat, but we do not send the manufactured
goods. but, so far, this is considering only the comparative
prices in the same country. yet we shall fail to realize in
actual practice the application of the above principles, when we
use the terms prices and money, if we do not admit that there
is in the matter of underselling a comparison, also, between the
absolute price of the goods in one country and the absolute
[pg ]
price of the same goods in the competing country. for example,
wheat is not shipped to england unless the price is
lower here than there. if india or morocco were to send wheat
into the english market in close competition with the united
states, and the price were to fall in london, it would mean that,
if we continued our shipments of wheat to england, we must
part with our wheat at a less advantage in the international
exchange. in the illustration already used, we must, for example,
offer more than seventeen bushels of wheat for ten cwts.
of iron. the fall in the price of wheat, without any change in
that of iron, implies the necessity of offering a greater quantity
of wheat for the same quantity of iron, perhaps nineteen or
twenty bushels for ten cwts. of iron. if the price went so low
as to require twenty-one bushels to pay for ten cwts. of iron,
then we should be entirely undersold; and the price here as
compared with the price in london would be an indication of
the fact. so that the comparison of prices here with prices
abroad is merely a register of the terms at which our international
exchanges are performed; but not the cause of the existence
of the international trade. if the price falls so low in
a foreign market that we can not sell wheat there, it simply
means that we have reached in the exchange ratios the limit of
our comparative advantages in wheat and iron; so that we are
obliged to offer twenty or more bushels of wheat for ten cwts.
of iron.
but in all this it must be noted that this price must include
the return to capital also, and that it must be equal to
the usual reward for capital in other competing industries,
that is, the ordinary rate of profit. in exporting wheat from
the united states the capital engaged will insist on getting
the rate of profit to be found in other occupations to which
the capital can go, in the united states. now, the price,
if it stands for the value (which is supposed to be governed
by cost of production in this case), is the sum out of which
wages and profits are paid. if the price were to fall in the
foreign market, then there might not be the means with which
to pay the usual rate of wages and the usual rate of profit
also. then we should probably hear of complaints by the
shippers that there is no profit in the exportation of wheat, and
of a falling off in the trade. in other words, as the capitalist
is the one who manages the operation, and is the one first affected,
the diminution of advantage in foreign trade arising
from competition, generally shows itself first in lessened profits.
the price, then, is the means by which we determine
whether a certain article gives us that comparative advantage
which will insure a gain from international trade.
an exportable article whose price in this country is low—since
[pg ]
it is for this reason selected as an export—is one whose
cost is low. if the cost be low, it means that the industry
is very productive; that the same capital and labor produce
more for their exertion in this than in other industries. and
yet it is precisely in the most productive industries that higher
wages and profits can be, and are, paid. although each article
is sold at a low price, the great quantity produced makes
the total sum, or value, out of which the industrial rewards,
profits, and wages, are paid, large. that is, the price may be
very low (lower, also, in direct comparison with prices abroad)
and yet pay the rate of wages and profits current in this country.
consequently, although wages and profits may be very
high (relatively to older countries) in those industries of the
united states whose productiveness is great, yet the very fact
of this low cost, and consequently this low price (where competition
is effective), is that which fits the commodity for exportation.
we are, therefore, inevitably led to a position in
which we see that high wages and low prices naturally go
together in an exportable commodity. in practice, certainly,
the high wages do not, by raising the price, prevent us, by comparing
our price with english prices, from sending goods
abroad—because we send goods abroad from our most productive
employments. as an illustration of this principle, it is
found that the leading exports of the united states, in ,
were cotton, breadstuffs, provisions, tobacco, mineral oils, and
wood.
but, since a direct comparison is in practice made between
prices here and prices in england (for example), in order to
determine whether the trade can be a profitable one, we constantly
hear it said that we can not send goods abroad because
our labor is so dear. it need scarcely be observed that we do
not hear this from those engaged in any of the extractive industries
just mentioned as furnishing large exports, which are
admittedly very productive; it is generally heard in regard to
certain kinds of manufactured goods. the difficulty arises
not with regard to articles in which we have the greatest advantage
in productiveness, but those in which we have a less
advantage. if the majority of occupations are so productive
as to assure a generally high reward to labor and capital
throughout the country, these less advantageously situated industries—not
being so productive as others (either from lack
of skill or good management, or high cost of machinery and
materials, or peculiarities of climate, or heavy taxation)—can
not pay the usual high reward to labor, and at the same time
get for the capitalist the same high reward he can everywhere
else receive at home. for, at a price low enough to warrant an
exportation, the quantity made by a given amount of labor and
[pg ]
capital does not yield a total value so great as is given in the
majority of other occupations to the same amount of labor and
capital, and out of which the usual high wages and profits can
be paid. the less productiveness of an industry, compared with
other industries in the same country, then, is the real cause which
prevents it from competing with foreign countries consistently
with receiving the ordinary rate of profit. it is the high rate
of profits as well as the high rate of wages common in the
country which prevents selling abroad. it is absurd to say
that it is only high wages: it is just as much high profits.
of course, if the less productive industries wish to compete
with england, and if they pay—as we know they must—the
high rate of wages due to the general productiveness of our
country's industries, they must submit to less profits for the
pleasure of having that particular desire. it is not possible that
we should produce everything equally well here; nor is it possible
that england should produce everything equally well. if
we wish to send any goods at all to england, we must receive
some goods from her. in order to get the gain arising from
our productiveness, we must earnestly wish that england should
have some commodity also in which she has a comparative advantage,
in order that any trade whatever may exist. it is not,
however, worth while, in my opinion, to go on in this discussion
to consider the position of those who would shut us off
from any and all foreign trade.
our present high wages should be a cause for congratulation,
because they are due to the generally high productiveness of our
resources, or, in other words, due to low cost; and it is to be
hoped that they may long continue high. we do not seem to
be in imminent danger of not having goods which we can export
in quantities which will buy for us all we may wish to import
from abroad. (see chart no. xiii, and note the vast
increase of exports at the same time that wages are known to be higher in
this country than abroad.) so long as wages continue high, we
may possibly be unwilling to see gratified that false and ignorant
desire which leads some people to think that we ought to
produce, equally well with any competitor in the world, everything
that is made. if, as was pointed out under the discussion
on cost of labor, we must necessarily connect with efficiency
of labor all natural advantages under which labor works,
it is easy to see that high wages are entirely consistent with
low prices; and that high wages do not prevent us to-day from
having an hitherto unequaled export trade. even if all wages
and all profits were lower, it would, however, affect all industries
alike, and some would still be more productive relatively
[pg ]
to others, and the same inequality would remain. if, however,
we learn to use our materials better, use machinery with more
effect on the quantity produced, adapt our industries to our
climate, get the raw products more cheaply, free ourselves from
excessive and unreasonable taxation, it would be difficult to
say what commodities we might not be able eventually to
manufacture in competition with the rest of the world. for
we have scarcely ever, as a country, had the advantage of such
conditions to aid us in our foreign trade.
mr. mill now goes on to consider the suggestive fact that
wages are higher in england than on the continent, and yet
that the english have no difficulty in underselling their continental
rivals.
before examining this opinion on grounds of principle,
it is worth while to bestow a moment's consideration upon
it as a question of fact. is it true that the wages of manufacturing
labor are lower in foreign countries than in england,
in any sense in which low wages are an advantage to
the capitalist? the artisan of ghent or lyons may earn less
wages in a day, but does he not do less work? degrees of
efficiency considered, does his labor cost less to his employer?
though wages may be lower on the continent, is not the
cost of labor, which is the real element in the competition,
very nearly the same? that it is so seems the opinion of
competent judges, and is confirmed by the very little difference
in the rate of profit between england and the continental
countries. but, if so, the opinion is absurd that english
producers can be undersold by their continental rivals
from this cause. it is only in america that the supposition
is prima facie
admissible. in america wages are much
higher than in england, if we mean by wages the daily earnings
of a laborer; but the productive power of american
labor is so great—its efficiency, combined with the favorable
circumstances in which it is exerted, makes it worth so much
to the purchaser—that the cost of labor is lower in america
than in england; as is proved by the fact that the general
rate of profits and of interest is very much higher.
§ . low wages enable a country to undersell another, when peculiar to certain
branches of industry.
but is it true that low wages, even in the sense of
low cost of labor, enable a country to sell cheaper in the
[pg ]
foreign market? i mean, of course, low wages which are
common to the whole productive industry of the country.
if wages, in any of the departments of industry which
supply exports, are kept, artificially or by some accidental
cause, below the general rate of wages in the country, this
is a real advantage in the foreign market. it lessens the
comparative cost of production of those articles in relation
to others, and has the same effect as if their production required
so much less labor. take, for instance, the case of
the united states in respect to certain commodities. in that
country tobacco and cotton, two great articles of export, are
produced by slave-labor, while food and manufactures generally
are produced by free laborers, who either work on
their own account or are paid by wages. in spite of the
inferior efficiency of slave-labor, there can be no reasonable
doubt that, in a country where the wages of free labor are
so high, the work executed by slaves is a better bargain to
the capitalist. to whatever extent it is so, this smaller cost
of labor, being not general, but limited to those employments,
is just as much a cause of cheapness in the products,
both in the home and in the foreign market, as if they had
been made by a less quantity of labor. if the slaves in the
southern states were emancipated, and their wages rose to
the general level of the earnings of free labor in america,
that country might be obliged to erase some of the slave-grown
articles from the catalogue of its exports, and would
certainly be unable to sell any of them in the foreign market
at the present price. their cheapness is partly an artificial
cheapness, which may be compared to that produced by a
bounty on production or on exportation; or, considering the
means by which it is obtained, an apter comparison would be
with the cheapness of stolen goods.
chart xv.
how far mr. mill was in error may be seen by chart no.
xv, which shows the enormous increase of cotton production
under the régime of free labor as compared with that
of slave-labor in the united states. the abolition of slavery
has been an economic gain to the south. moreover, the exports
of raw cotton have increased from ,, pounds in
[pg ]
, to ,,, pounds in ; while for corresponding
years the exports of tobacco increased from ,, to
,, pounds. in other words, exports of tobacco were
increased by  per cent, and those of raw cotton by no less
than  per cent. besides, the prices of cotton and tobacco
are no higher now than before .
an advantage of a similar economical, though of a very
different moral character, is that possessed by domestic manufactures;
fabrics produced in the leisure hours of families
partially occupied in other pursuits, who, not depending for
subsistence on the produce of the manufacture, can afford to
sell it at any price, however low, for which they think it
worth while to take the trouble of producing. the workman
of zürich is to-day a manufacturer, to-morrow again an
agriculturist, and changes his occupations with the seasons in
a continual round. manufacturing industry and tillage advance
hand in hand, in inseparable alliance, and in this union
of the two occupations the secret may be found why the
simple and unlearned swiss manufacturer can always go on
competing and increasing in prosperity in the face of those
extensive establishments fitted out with great economic and
(what is still more important) intellectual resources.
in the case of these domestic manufactures, the comparative
cost of production, on which the interchange between
countries depends, is much lower than in proportion to the
quantity of labor employed. the work-people, looking to
the earnings of their loom for a part only, if for any part,
of their actual maintenance, can afford to work for a less remuneration
than the lowest rate of wages which can permanently
exist in the employments by which the laborer has to
support the whole expense of a family. working, as they
do, not for an employer but for themselves, they may be
said to carry on the manufacture at no cost at all, except the
small expense of a loom and of the material; and the limit
of possible cheapness is not the necessity of living by their
trade, but that of earning enough by the work to make that
social employment of their leisure hours not disagreeable.
§ . —but not when common to all.
these two cases, of slave-labor and of domestic
[pg ]
manufactures, exemplify the conditions under which low
wages enable a country to sell its commodities cheaper in
foreign markets, and consequently to undersell its rivals, or
to avoid being undersold by them. but no such advantage
is conferred by low wages when common to all branches of
industry. general low wages never caused any country to
undersell its rivals, nor did general high wages ever hinder
it from doing so.
to demonstrate this, we must turn to an elementary
principle which was discussed in a former
chapter. general
low wages do not cause low prices, nor high wages high
prices, within the country itself. general prices are not
raised by a rise of wages, any more than they would be
raised by an increase of the quantity of labor required in
all production. expenses which affect all commodities equally
have no influence on prices. if the maker of broadcloth
or cutlery, and nobody else, had to pay higher wages, the
price of his commodity would rise, just as it would if he had
to employ more labor; because otherwise he would gain less
profit than other producers, and nobody would engage in the
employment. but if everybody has to pay higher wages,
or everybody to employ more labor, the loss must be submitted
to; as it affects everybody alike, no one can hope to get
rid of it by a change of employment; each, therefore, resigns
himself to a diminution of profits, and prices remain
as they were. in like manner, general low wages, or a general
increase in the productiveness of labor, does not make
prices low, but profits high. if wages fall (meaning here
by wages the cost of labor), why, on that account, should the
producer lower his price? he will be forced, it may be
said, by the competition of other capitalists who will crowd
into his employment. but other capitalists are also paying
lower wages, and by entering into competition with him
they would gain nothing but what they are gaining already.
the rate, then, at which labor is paid, as well as the quantity
[pg ]
of it which is employed, affects neither the value nor the
price of the commodity produced, except in so far as it is
peculiar to that commodity, and not common to commodities
generally.
however, without there being any change in the productiveness
of any industry, if the price of the article should rise,
for instance, from an increased demand, that would make the
total value arising from the products of the industry larger in
its purchasing power, and so there would be a larger sum to
be divided among labor and capital. if there be free competition,
more capital would move into this one industry under
the hope of larger profits, and so wages would rise. therefore,
it is possible that high wages and high prices may go together,
but not as cause and effect. in fact, the change in
price generally precedes the change in wages. on the other
hand, while low wages are not the cause of low prices nor
high wages of high prices, yet the two may be found together,
as both due to a common cause, viz., the small or great value
of the total product.
since low wages are not a cause of low prices in the
country itself, so neither do they cause it to offer its commodities
in foreign markets at a lower price. it is quite
true that, if the cost of labor is lower in america than in
england, america could sell her cottons to cuba at a lower
price than england, and still gain as high a profit as the
english manufacturer. but it is not with the profit of the
english manufacturer that the american cotton-spinner will
make his comparison; it is with the profits of other american
capitalists. these enjoy, in common with himself, the
benefit of a low cost of labor, and have accordingly a high
rate of profit. this high profit the cotton-spinner must also
have: he will not content himself with the english profit.
it is true he may go on for a time at that lower rate, rather
than change his employment; and a trade may be carried
on, sometimes for a long period, at a much lower profit than
that for which it would have been originally engaged in.
countries which have a low cost of labor and high profits do
not for that reason undersell others, but they do oppose a
[pg ]
more obstinate resistance to being undersold, because the producers
can often submit to a diminution of profit without
being unable to live, and even to thrive, by their business.
but this is all which their advantage does for them; and in
this resistance they will not long persevere when a change
of times which may give them equal profits with the rest of
their countrymen has become manifestly hopeless.
§ . low profits as affecting the carrying trade.
it is worth while also to notice a third class of small,
but in this case mostly independent communities, which have
supported and enriched themselves almost without any productions
of their own (except ships and marine equipments),
by a mere carrying-trade, and commerce of entrepot; by buying
the produce of one country, to sell it at a profit in another.
such were venice and the hanse towns.
when the venetians became the agents of the general
commerce of southern europe, they had scarcely any competitors:
the thing would not have been done at all without
them, and there was really no limit to their profits except
the limit to what the ignorant feudal nobility could and
would give for the unknown luxuries then first presented to
their sight. at a later period competition arose, and the
profit of this operation, like that of others, became amenable
to natural laws. the carrying-trade was taken up by holland,
a country with productions of its own and a large accumulated
capital. the other nations of europe also had
now capital to spare, and were capable of conducting their
foreign trade for themselves: but holland, having, from the
variety of circumstances, a lower rate of profit at home, could
afford to carry for other countries at a smaller advance on
the original cost of the goods than would have been required
by their own capitalists; and holland, therefore, engrossed
the greatest part of the carrying-trade of all those countries
which did not keep it to themselves by navigation laws, constructed,
like those of england, for the express purpose.
[pg ]
in the united states, early in the century, a retaliatory
policy against england gave us a body of navigation laws
copied after the mediæval statutes of england and the continent,
which still remain on the statute-book. they do not
permit an american to buy a vessel abroad and sail it under
our flag without paying enormous duties; a provision which
is intended to foster ship-building in the united states. even
with this legislation, ships, as a fact, are not built here for
the foreign trade; and our ship-builders practically supply
the coasting-trade only (which is not open to foreigners). the
ability to buy ships anywhere, and enter them to registry under
our flag free of duty, is what is meant by the demand for
“free ships.” this, however, has to do with ship-building. but
ship-owning or ship-sailing, is quite distinct from it. the
ability to get as great a return from capital and labor invested
in a ship as from other occupations open to americans is another
thing. even if we had “free ships,” the higher returns in other
industries in our country, particularly as regards profits, might
cause capitalists naturally to neglect a less for a more productive
business. in  congress has very properly taken
away many vexatious restrictions upon ships, which diminished
the returns from ship-sailing, and it remains to be seen whether
we can thereby regain any of our foreign carrying-trade. at
present we have a very small tonnage even in that part of the
shipping engaged in carrying our own goods.
[pg ]
chapter xxi. of distribution, as affected by exchange.
§ . exchange and money make no difference in the law of wages.
the division of the produce among the three classes,
laborers, capitalists, and landlords, when considered without
any reference to exchange, appeared to depend on certain
general laws. it is fit that we should now consider whether
these same laws still operate, when the distribution takes
place through the complex mechanism of exchange and
money; or whether the properties of the mechanism interfere
with and modify the presiding principles.
the primary division of the produce of human exertion
and frugality is, as we have seen, into three shares—wages,
profits, and rents; and these shares are portioned out, to the
persons entitled to them, in the form of money and by a
process of exchange; or, rather, the capitalist, with whom in
the usual arrangements of society the produce remains, pays
in money, to the other two sharers, the market value of their
labor and land. if we examine on what the pecuniary value
of labor and the pecuniary value of the use of land depend,
we shall find that it is on the very same causes by which we
found that wages and rent would be regulated if there were
no money and no exchange of commodities.
it is evident, in the first place, that the law of wages is
not affected by the existence or non-existence of exchange or
money. wages depend on the ratio between population and
capital [taking into account the nature of a country's industries];
and would do so if all the capital in the world were
the property of one association, or if the capitalists among
[pg ]
whom it is shared maintained each an establishment for the
production of every article consumed in the community, exchange
of commodities having no existence. as the ratio
between capital and population, everywhere but in new colonies,
depends on the strength of the checks by which the
too rapid increase of population is restrained, it may be said,
popularly speaking, that wages depend on the checks to population;
that, when the check is not death by starvation or
disease, wages depend on the prudence of the laboring people;
and that wages in any country are habitually at the
lowest rate to which in that country the laborer will suffer
them to be depressed rather than put a restraint upon multiplication.
what is here meant, however, by wages, is the laborer's
real scale of comfort; the quantity he obtains of the things
which nature or habit has made necessary or agreeable to
him: wages in the sense in which they are of importance to
the receiver. in the sense in which they are of importance
to the payer, they do not depend exclusively on such simple
principles. wages in the first sense, the wages on which the
laborer's comfort depends, we will call real wages, or wages
in kind. wages in the second sense we may be permitted
to call, for the present, money wages; assuming, as it is allowable
to do, that money remains for the time an invariable
standard, no alteration taking place in the conditions under
which the circulating medium itself is produced or obtained.
if money itself undergoes no variation in cost, the money
price of labor is an exact measure of the cost of labor, and
may be made use of as a convenient symbol to express it
[if the efficiency of labor also be supposed to remain the
same].
the money wages of labor are a compound result of two
elements: first, real wages, or wages in kind, or, in other
words, the quantity which the laborer obtains of the ordinary
articles of consumption; and, secondly, the money prices
of those articles. in all old countries—all countries in which
the increase of population is in any degree checked by the
[pg ]
difficulty of obtaining subsistence—the habitual money price
of labor is that which will just enable the laborers, one
with another, to purchase the commodities without which
they either can not or will not keep up the population at its
customary rate of increase. their standard of comfort being
given (and by the standard of comfort in a laboring class is
meant that rather than forego which they will abstain from
multiplication), money wages depend on the money price,
and therefore on the cost of production, of the various articles
which the laborers habitually consume: because, if their
wages can not procure them a given quantity of these, their
increase will slacken and their wages rise. of these articles,
food and other agricultural produce are so much the principal
as to leave little influence to anything else.
it is at this point that we are enabled to invoke the aid
of the principles which have been laid down in this third
part. the cost of production of food and agricultural produce
has been analyzed in a preceding chapter. it depends
on the productiveness of the least fertile land, or of the least
productively employed portion of capital, which the necessities
of society have as yet put in requisition for agricultural
purposes. the cost of production of the food grown in
these least advantageous circumstances determines, as we
have seen, the exchange value and money price of the whole.
in any given state, therefore, of the laborers' habits, their
money wages depend on the productiveness of the least fertile
land, or least productive agricultural capital: on the point
which cultivation has reached in its downward progress—in
its encroachments on the barren lands, and its gradually increased
strain upon the powers of the more fertile. now,
the force which urges cultivation in this downward course
is the increase of people; while the counter-force, which
checks the descent, is the improvement of agricultural science
and practice, enabling the same soil to yield to the same
labor more ample returns. the costliness of the most costly
part of the produce of cultivation is an exact expression of
the state, at any given moment, of the race which population
[pg ]
and agricultural skill are always running against each
other.
it will be noted, in this exposition, that mr. mill has in view
an old country, with a population so dense that numbers are
always pressing close upon subsistence; that their wages are
so low as to give the laborers little more than the necessary
wants of life. that these are not the economic conditions in
the united states goes without saying. first of all, the margin
of cultivation is high: only soils of high productiveness
are in cultivation, and the returns to labor and capital are, consequently,
very large. high wages are found together with
low prices of food. the existing population is not so numerous
as to require for the cultivation of food any but lands of a
very high grade of fertility. the ability to command a high
reward for labor (as compared with european industries), owing
to the general prevalence of high returns in the united states,
has resulted in the establishment of a higher standard for our
laborers. the standard being relatively so high, there is no
intimate connection between the increase of population here
and the price of food; for, as a rule, wages are not so low that
any change in the cost of producing food would require checks
upon population. there is a considerable margin above necessaries,
in the laborer's real wages in the united states, which
may go for comforts, decencies, and amusements.
§ . in the law of rent.
the degree of productiveness of this extreme margin
is an index to the existing state of the distribution of the
produce among the three classes, of laborers, capitalists, and
landlords. when the demand of an increasing population
for more food can not be satisfied without extending cultivation
to less fertile land, or incurring additional outlay, with
a less proportional return, on land already in cultivation, it is
a necessary condition of this increase of agricultural produce
that the value and price of that produce must first rise. the
price of food will always on the average be such that the
worst land, and the least productive installment of the capital
employed on the better lands, shall just replace the expenses
with the ordinary profit. if the least favored land and capital
just do thus much, all other land and capital will yield an
extra profit, equal to the proceeds of the extra produce due
to their superior productiveness; and this extra profit becomes,
by competition, the prize of the landlords. exchange
[pg ]
and money, therefore, make no difference in the law of rent:
it is the same as we
originally found it. rent is the extra
return made to agricultural capital when employed with peculiar
advantages; the exact equivalent of what those advantages
enable the producers to economize in the cost of production:
the value and price of the produce being regulated
by the cost of production to those producers who have no
advantages; by the return to that portion of agricultural
capital the circumstances of which are the least favorable.
§ . —nor in the law of profits.
wages and rent being thus regulated by the same
principles when paid in money, as they would be if apportioned
in kind, it follows that profits are so likewise. for
the surplus, after replacing wages and paying rent, constitutes
profits.
we found, in the last chapter of the second book, that
the advances of the capitalist, when analyzed to their ultimate
elements, consist either in the purchase or maintenance
of labor, or in the profits of former capitalists; and that,
therefore, profits in the last resort depend upon the cost of
labor, falling as that rises, and rising as it falls. let us endeavor
to trace more minutely the operation of this law.
there are two modes in which the cost of labor, which
is correctly represented (money being supposed invariable as
well as efficiency) by the money wages of the laborer, may
be increased. the laborer may obtain greater comforts;
wages in kind—real wages—may rise. or the progress of
population may force down cultivation to inferior soils and
more costly processes; thus raising the cost of production,
the value, and the price, of the chief articles of the laborer's
consumption. on either of these suppositions the rate of
profit will fall.
if the laborer obtains more abundant commodities only
by reason of their greater cheapness, if he obtains a greater
quantity, but not on the whole a greater cost, real wages
will be increased, but not money wages, and there will be
[pg ]
nothing to affect the rate of profit. but, if he obtains a
greater quantity of commodities of which the cost of production
is not lowered, he obtains a greater cost; his money
wages are higher. the expense of these increased money
wages falls wholly on the capitalist. there are no conceivable
means by which he can shake it off. it may be said—it
used formerly to be said—that he will get rid of it by raising
his price. but this opinion we have already, and more
than once, fully refuted.
the doctrine, indeed, that a rise of wages causes an
equivalent rise of prices, is, as we formerly observed, self-contradictory:
for, if it did so, it would not be a rise of
wages; the laborer would get no more of any commodity
than he had before, let his money wages rise ever so much;
a rise of real wages would be an impossibility. this being
equally contrary to reason and to fact, it is evident that a rise
of money wages does not raise prices; that high wages are
not a cause of high prices. a rise of general wages falls on
profits. there is no possible alternative.
having disposed of the case in which the increase of
money wages, and of the cost of labor, arises from the
laborer's obtaining more ample wages in kind, let us now
suppose it to arise from the increased cost of production of
the things which he consumes, owing to an increase of population
unaccompanied by an equivalent increase of agricultural
skill. the augmented supply required by the population
would not be obtained, unless the price of food rose
sufficiently to remunerate the farmer for the increased cost
of production. the farmer, however, in this case sustains a
twofold disadvantage. he has to carry on his cultivation
under less favorable conditions of productiveness than before.
for this, as it is a disadvantage belonging to him only as a
farmer, and not shared by other employers, he will, on the
general principles of value, be compensated by a rise of the
price of his commodity; indeed, until this rise has taken
[pg ]
place, he will not bring to market the required increase of
produce. but this very rise of price involves him in another
necessity, for which he is not compensated. he must pay
higher money wages to his laborers [if they retain the same
quantity of real wages]. this necessity, being common to
him with all other capitalists, forms no ground for a rise of
price. the price will rise, until it has placed him in as good
a situation, in respect of profits, as other employers of labor;
it will rise so as to indemnify him for the increased labor
which he must now employ in order to produce a given
quantity of food; but the increased wages of that labor are
a burden common to all, and for which no one can be indemnified.
it will be paid wholly from profits.
thus we see that increased wages, when common to all
descriptions of productive laborers, and when really representing
a greater cost of labor, are always and necessarily
at the expense of profits. and by reversing the cases, we
should find in like manner that diminished wages, when
representing a really diminished cost of labor, are equivalent
to a rise of profits. but the opposition of pecuniary
interest thus indicated between the class of capitalists and
that of laborers is to a great extent only apparent. real
wages are a very different thing from the cost of labor, and
are generally highest at the times and places where, from
the easy terms on which the land yields all the produce as
yet required from it, the value and price of food being low,
the cost of labor to the employer, notwithstanding its ample
remuneration, is comparatively cheap, and the rate of profit
consequently high, as at present in the united states. we
thus obtain a full confirmation of our original theorem that
profits depend on the cost of labor: or, to express the
meaning with still greater accuracy, the rate of profit and
the cost of labor vary inversely as one another, and are joint
effects of the same agencies or causes.
[pg ]
book iv. influence of the progress of society on production and
distribution.
chapter i. influence of the progress of industry and population
on values and prices.
§ . tendency of the progress of society toward increased command over the
powers of nature; increased security, and increased capacity of co-operation.
in the leading countries of the world, and in all others
as they come within the influence of those leading countries,
there is at least one progressive movement which continues
with little interruption from year to year and from generation
to generation—a progress in wealth; an advancement
in what is called material prosperity. all the nations which
we are accustomed to call civilized increase gradually in production
and in population: and there is no reason to doubt
that not only these nations will for some time continue so to
increase, but that most of the other nations of the world,
including some not yet founded, will successively enter upon
the same career. it will, therefore, be our first object to
examine the nature and consequences of this progressive
change, the elements which constitute it, and the effects it
produces on the various economical facts of which we have
been tracing the laws, and especially on wages, profits, rents,
values, and prices.
of the features which characterize this progressive economical
movement of civilized nations, that which first excites
attention, through its intimate connection with the phenomena
of production, is the perpetual, and, so far as human
foresight can extend (), the unlimited, growth of man's
[pg ]
power over nature. our knowledge of the properties and
laws of physical objects shows no sign of approaching its
ultimate boundaries: it is advancing more rapidly, and in a
greater number of directions at once, than in any previous
age or generation, and affording such frequent glimpses of
unexplored fields beyond as to justify the belief that our
acquaintance with nature is still almost in its infancy.
another change, which has always hitherto characterized,
and will assuredly continue to characterize, the progress of
civilized society, is () a continual increase of the security of
person and property. of this increased security, one of the
most unfailing effects is a great increase both of production
and of accumulation. industry and frugality can not exist
where there is not a preponderant probability that those who
labor and spare will be permitted to enjoy.
one of the changes which most infallibly attend the
progress of modern society is, () an improvement in the
business capacities of the general mass of mankind. i do
not mean that the practical sagacity of an individual human
being is greater than formerly. what is lost in the separate
efficiency of each is far more than made up by the greater
capacity of united action. works of all sorts, impracticable
to the savage or the half-civilized, are daily accomplished by
civilized nations, not by any greatness of faculties in the
actual agents, but through the fact that each is able to rely
with certainty on the others for the portion of the work
which they respectively undertake. the peculiar characteristic,
in short, of civilized beings, is the capacity of co-operation;
and this, like other faculties, tends to improve by practice,
and becomes capable of assuming a constantly wider
sphere of action.
[this progress affords] space and scope for an indefinite
increase of capital and production, and for the increase of
population which is its ordinary accompaniment. that the
growth of population will overpass the increase of production,
there is not much reason to apprehend. it is, however,
quite possible that there might be a great progress in industrial
[pg ]
improvement, and in the signs of what is commonly
called national prosperity; a great increase of aggregate
wealth, and even, in some respects, a better distribution of
it; that not only the rich might grow richer, but many of
the poor might grow rich, that the intermediate classes might
become more numerous and powerful, and the means of enjoyable
existence be more and more largely diffused, while
yet the great class at the base of the whole might increase in
numbers only, and not in comfort nor in cultivation. we
must, therefore, in considering the effects of the progress of
industry, admit as a supposition, however greatly we deprecate
as a fact, an increase of population as long-continued, as
indefinite, and possibly even as rapid, as the increase of production
and accumulation.
§ . tendency to a decline of the value and cost of production of all
commodities.
the changes which the progress of industry causes
or presupposes in the circumstances of production are necessarily
attended with changes in the values of commodities.
the permanent values of all things which are neither
under a natural nor under an artificial monopoly depend, as
we have seen, on their cost of production. (.) but the increasing
power which mankind are constantly acquiring over
nature increases more and more the efficiency of human exertion,
or, in other words, diminishes cost of production. all
inventions by which a greater quantity of any commodity
can be produced with the same labor, or the same quantity
with less labor, or which abridge the process, so that the
capital employed needs not be advanced for so long a time,
lessen the cost of production of the commodity. as, however,
value is relative, if inventions and improvements in
production were made in all commodities, and all in the same
degree, there would be no alteration in values.
as for prices, in these circumstances they would be affected
or not, according as the improvements in production
did or did not extend to the precious metals. if the materials
of money were an exception to the general diminution
of cost of production, the values of all other things would fall
in relation to money—that is, there would be a fall of general
[pg ]
prices throughout the world. but if money, like other
things, and in the same degree as other things, were obtained
in greater abundance and cheapness, prices would be no more
affected than values would.
as regards the precious metals, it is to be said that since
 there has been a vast increase in their amount, and probably
in greater proportion than the need arising from increased
transactions. this is certainly true of silver; and it is admitted
to be true of gold as late as about . it has been asserted
by mr. goschen that since then, especially since , gold has
not existed in a quantity that would permit it to keep its
former proportions to commodities, and that it had appreciated.
an appreciation, of course, would show itself in lower gold
prices. on the other hand, gold has, as i think, not appreciated.
prices, even in the collapse of credit after the panic of 
down to , were not quite so low as in -, as is seen
by the following table taken from the london “economist”—,
indicating the price of a given number of articles in -,
as the basis of the table with which the prices of other
years are compared:
year.index numbers.-,, july ,, january ,,,,,,,,,, (depression), (depression), (depression), (depression), (depression), (depression),,,,,
but the progress of society, particularly in the direction of
improved and cheapened processes of manufacturing, has vastly
lowered the cost of a great number of articles of common consumption.
the process has been already seen in the diminished
charge for railway transportation (see chart no. v).
moreover, the years of a depression are exactly those in which there
is always a forced economy, and generally form a period in
which cheapening goes on at its best. hence, if prices have had
a tendency to fall, owing to the lowered cost of production consequent
on improvements—and if they are not, as a rule, lower
than in —it shows that they are still supported by the
high tide of the great gold production of this century. and
[pg ]
even the access to more fertile land in the world has acted to
prevent an increase in the prices of agricultural products such as
would offset the fall of manufactured goods. that is, the fact
that prices have not fallen as much as might be expected, indicates
that the gold has prevented the lower costs due to the
progress of industry from being fully seen.
improvements in production are not the only circumstance
accompanying the progress of industry, which tends
to diminish the cost of producing, or at least of obtaining,
commodities. (.) another circumstance is the increase of
intercourse between different parts of the world. as commerce
extends, and the ignorant attempts to restrain it by
tariffs become obsolete, commodities tend more and more to
be produced in the places in which their production can be
carried on at the least expense of labor and capital to mankind.
(.) much will also depend on the increasing migration
of labor and capital to unoccupied parts of the earth, of
which the soil, climate, and situation are found, by the ample
means of exploration now possessed, to promise not only a
large return to industry, but great facilities of producing
commodities suited to the markets of old countries. much
as the collective industry of the earth is likely to be increased
in efficiency by the extension of science and of the industrial
arts, a still more active source of increased cheapness of production
will be found, probably, for some time to come, in
the gradually unfolding consequences of free trade, and in
the increasing scale on which emigration and colonization
will be carried on.
from the causes now enumerated, unless counteracted by
others, the progress of things enables a country to obtain, at
less and less of real cost, not only its own productions but
those of foreign countries. indeed, whatever diminishes the
cost of its own productions, when of an exportable character,
enables it, as we have already seen, to obtain its imports at
less real cost.
§ . —except the products of agriculture and mining, which have a
tendency to rise.
are no causes of an opposite character, brought into
operation by the same progress, sufficient in some cases not
only to neutralize but to overcome the former, and convert
[pg ]
the descending movement of cost of production into an
ascending movement? we are already aware that there are
such causes, and that, in the case of the most important
classes of commodities, food, and materials, there is a tendency
diametrically opposite to that of which we have been
speaking. the cost of production of these commodities
tends to increase.
this is not a property inherent in the commodities themselves.
if population were stationary, and the produce of
the earth never needed to be augmented in quantity, there
would be no cause for greater cost of production. the only
products of industry which, if population did not increase,
would be liable to a real increase of cost of production, are
those which, depending on a material which is not renewed,
are either wholly or partially exhaustible, such as coal, and
most if not all metals; for even iron, the most abundant as
well as most useful of metallic products, which forms an ingredient
of most minerals and of almost all rocks, is susceptible
of exhaustion so far as regards its richest and most tractable
ores.
when, however, population increases, as it has never yet
failed to do, then comes into effect that fundamental law
of production from the soil on which we have so frequently
had occasion to expatiate, the law that increased labor, in
any given state of agricultural skill, is attended with a less
than proportional increase of produce. the cost of production
of the fruits of the earth increases,
cæteris paribus, with
every increase of the demand.
mr. cairnes has made some essential contributions to the
discussion of changes of value arising from the progress of
society: “when a colony establishes itself in a new country,
the course of its industrial development naturally follows the
character of the opportunities offered to industrial enterprise
[pg ]
by the environment. these will, of course, vary a good deal,
according to the part of the world in which the new society
happens to be placed; but, speaking broadly, they will be such
as to draw the bulk of the industrial activity of the new people
into some one or more of those branches of industry which
have been conveniently designated ‘extractive.’ agriculture,
pastoral and mining pursuits, and the cutting of lumber, are
among the principal of such industries.” to these pursuits
apply “that law of political economy, or, more properly, of
physical nature, which mr. mill has rightly characterized as
the most important proposition in economic science—the law,
as he phrased it, of ‘diminishing productiveness.’ it may be
thus briefly stated: in any given state of the arts of production,
the returns to human industry employed upon natural
agents will, up to a certain point, be the maximum which
those natural agents, cultivated with the degree of skill
brought to bear upon them, are capable of yielding; but, after
this point has been passed, though an increased application of
labor and capital will obtain an increased return, it will not
obtain a proportionally increased return; on the contrary,
every further increase of outlay—always assuming that the
skill employed in applying it continues the same as before—will
be attended with a return constantly diminishing....
what i am now concerned to show is the manner in which,
with the progress of society, the law in question affects the
course of normal values in all commodities coming under its
influence.
“the class of commodities in the production of which the
facilities possessed by new communities, as compared with old,
attain their greatest height, are those of which timber and
meat may be taken as the type, and comprises such articles as
wool, game, furs, hides, horns, pitch, resin, etc. the circumstance
which most powerfully affects the course of values in
the products of extractive industry, and in the commodities
just referred to among the rest, is the degree in which they
admit of being transported from place to place—that is to say,
their portableness—depending, as it does, partly on their durability
and partly on their bulk.” it is found that, taking timber
and meat as a type—one possessing portableness in a vastly
greater degree than the other—in the early settlement of a
new country, the portable article, like timber, at once rises in
price “to a level lower than that prevailing in old countries only
by the cost of transport”; on the other hand, perishable articles
like meat are “confined for a market, if not to the immediate
[pg ]
locality where it is produced, at least to the bordering countries;
and, being raised in new countries at very low cost, their
value during the early stages of their growth is necessarily
low. but, as population advances, and agriculture encroaches
on the natural pasture-lands originally available for the rearing
of cattle, still more as it becomes necessary to cultivate land
for the purpose of pasture, the cost of meat constantly rises.”
as population increases there will be an increased demand for
dairy-products, eggs, small fruits, fresh vegetables, milk, etc.,
and thereby it becomes more profitable to employ land near
populous centers for such perishable products than for the
products of large farming. almost every one, who knows the
high prices of butter, eggs, and vegetables in large cities as
compared with their prices in country districts, is familiar with
the phenomena which illustrate this principle. moreover, as a
denser population settles on our western prairies, now given
over to ranches and vast pasturing-grounds for cattle—since
cattle in general require a large extent of land—the cost of
meat will rise. the prices of perishable articles, therefore,
will rise without any limit except that set by increasing numbers,
and can not be kept down by the force of competition
from other distant places, as is the case with such easily transportable
things as timber and wool. what has been said of the
transportableness of meat, however, is to be modified somewhat
by the introduction of improved processes of transporting
meat in refrigerator-cars; but there still exist commodities
of which meat was only taken as a type.
no tendency of a like kind exists with respect to manufactured
articles. the tendency is in the contrary direction.
the larger the scale on which manufacturing operations are
carried on, the more cheaply they can in general be performed.
as manufactures, however, depend for their materials
either upon agriculture, or mining, or the spontaneous
produce of the earth, manufacturing industry is subject, in
respect of one of its essentials, to the same law as agriculture.
but the crude material generally forms so small a portion of
the total cost that any tendency which may exist to a progressive
increase in that single item is much overbalanced
by the diminution continually taking place in all the other
elements; to which diminution it is impossible at present to
assign any limit.
it follows that the exchange values of manufactured articles,
[pg ]
compared with the products of agriculture and of
mines, have, as population and industry advance, a certain
and decided tendency to fall. money being a product of
mines, it may also be laid down as a rule that manufactured
articles tend, as society advances, to fall in money price.
the industrial history of modern nations, especially during
the last hundred years, fully bears out this assertion.
in regard to manufactures, as opposed to raw products, it
is to be remarked “that, as the course of price in the field of
raw products is, on the whole, upward, so in that of manufactured
goods the course is, not less strikingly, in the opposite
direction. the reasons of this are exceedingly plain. in the
first place, division of labor—the first and most powerful of
all cheapeners of production, but for which there is in extractive
industry but very limited scope—finds in manufacturing
industry an almost unbounded range for its application; and,
secondly, it is in manufacturing industry also that machinery,
the other great cheapener of production, admits of being employed
on the largest scale, and has, in fact, been employed
with the most signal success. it follows at once from these
facts, taken in connection with the further fact that industrial
invention does not take place per saltum,
but gradually—one
invention ever treading on the heels of another—and that its
advance seems to be subject to no limitation; it follows, i say,
from these considerations, that that portion of the cost of manufactured
goods which properly belongs to the manufacturing
process must, with the progress of society, undergo constant
diminution.... in all the great branches of manufacturing
industry the portion of the cost incurred in the manufacturing
process bears in general a large proportion to that represented
by the raw material, while the influence of industrial
invention, in reducing this portion of the cost, is, as every one
knows, great and unremitting in its action.”
as has been said, “the two great cheapeners of production
are division of labor and machinery, and the degree in which
these admit of being applied to manufacture is mainly dependent
upon the scale on which the manufacturing process is carried
on. those manufactures, therefore, that are produced
upon a large scale are the sort of manufactures in which we
may expect the greatest reduction in cost; in which, therefore,
the fall in price, with the progress of society, will be
most marked. but the manufactures which are produced upon
the largest scale are those for which there exists the largest
demand—that is to say, are those which enter most extensively
into the consumption of the great mass of people. they are
[pg ]
also, i may add, those in which a fall in price is apt to stimulate
a great increase of demand. all the common kinds of
clothing, furniture, and utensils fall within the scope of this
remark; and it is in these, rather than in the commodities consumed
exclusively or mainly by the richer classes, that we should,
accordingly, expect to find the greatest marvels of cheapening.”
but the articles of common consumption are those in
which “the amount of manufacture bestowed upon them bears
a smaller proportion to the raw material than is the case with
the more elaborate manufactures. such coarser manufactures,
therefore, would feel the effects of the advancing cost of the
raw material more sensibly than the refined sorts. nevertheless,
it can not be supposed to compensate the advantages due
to the causes i have pointed out which fall to the share of the
commoner sorts. it is in this class of goods that the most remarkable
reductions in price have been accomplished in the
past, and it is in them, probably, that we shall witness in the
future the greatest results of the same kind.”
§ . —that tendency from time to time counteracted by improvements in
production.
whether agricultural produce increases in absolute
as well as comparative cost of production depends on the
conflict of the two antagonist agencies—increase of population
and improvement in agricultural skill. in some, perhaps
in most, states of society (looking at the whole surface
of the earth), both agricultural skill and population are either
stationary, or increase very slowly, and the cost of production
of food, therefore, is nearly stationary. in a society
which is advancing in wealth, population generally increases
faster than agricultural skill, and food consequently tends to
become more costly; but there are times when a strong impulse
sets in toward agricultural improvement. such an impulse
has shown itself in great britain during the last fifteen
or twenty years [before ]. in england and scotland
agricultural skill has of late increased considerably faster
than population, insomuch that food and other agricultural
produce, notwithstanding the increase of people, can be
grown at less cost than they were thirty years ago; and the
abolition of the corn laws has given an additional stimulus
to the spirit of improvement. in some other countries, and
particularly in france, the improvement of agriculture gains
ground still more decidedly upon population, because though
[pg ]
agriculture, except in a few provinces, advances slowly,
population advances still more slowly, and even with increasing
slowness, its growth being kept down, not by poverty,
which is diminishing, but by prudence.
moreover, the cheapened cost of transportation has admitted
to england and the continent the wheat supplies of our
western states at a low price even after having been carried to
transatlantic markets. new methods of getting food-supplies
from foreign countries act equally with improvements at home.
§ . effect of the progress of society in moderating fluctuations of value.
thus far, of the effect of the progress of society on
the permanent or average values and prices of commodities.
it remains to be considered in what manner the same progress
affects their fluctuations. concerning the answer to this
question there can be no doubt. it tends in a very high degree
to diminish them.
in poor and backward societies, as in the east, and in
europe during the middle ages, extraordinary differences in
the price of the same commodity might exist in places not
very distant from each other, because the want of roads and
canals, the imperfection of marine navigation, and the insecurity
of communications generally, prevented things from
being transported from the places where they were cheap
to those where they were dear. the things most liable to
fluctuations in value, those directly influenced by the seasons,
and especially food, were seldom carried to any great
distances. in most years, accordingly, there was, in some
part or other of any large country, a real dearth; while a
deficiency at all considerable, extending to the whole world,
is [now] a thing almost unknown. in modern times, therefore,
there is only dearth, where there formerly would have
been famine, and sufficiency everywhere when anciently
there would have been scarcity in some places and superfluity
in others.
the same change has taken place with respect to all other
articles of commerce. the safety and cheapness of communications,
which enable a deficiency in one place to be supplied
from the surplus of another, at a moderate or even a
[pg ]
small advance on the ordinary price, render the fluctuations
of prices much less extreme than formerly. this effect is
much promoted by the existence of large capitals, belonging
to what are called speculative merchants, whose business it
is to buy goods in order to resell them at a profit. these
dealers naturally buying things when they are cheapest, and
storing them up to be brought again into the market when
the price has become unusually high, the tendency of their
operations is to equalize price, or at least to moderate its inequalities.
the prices of things are neither so much depressed
at one time, nor so much raised at another, as they would be
if speculative dealers did not exist.
mr. mill uses the term “speculative” in a different sense
from that which is customary in this country. merchants who
buy outright and store up grain are not speculators in the
sense in which the word is used with us; but those gamblers
who purchase, “for future delivery,” grain which they never
see, and which they sell in the same way, are here known as
speculators.
it appears, then, that the fluctuations of values and prices
arising from variations of supply, or from alterations in real
(as distinguished from speculative) demand, may be expected
to become more moderate as society advances. with regard
to those which arise from miscalculation, and especially from
the alternations of undue expansion and excessive contraction
of credit, which occupy so conspicuous a place among
commercial phenomena, the same thing can not be affirmed
with equal confidence. such vicissitudes, beginning with
irrational speculation and ending with a commercial crisis,
have not hitherto become either less frequent or less violent
with the growth of capital and extension of industry. rather
they may be said to have become more so, in consequence,
as is often said, of increased competition, but, as i prefer to
say, of a lower rate of profits and interest, which makes capitalists
dissatisfied with the ordinary course of safe mercantile
gains. the connection of this low rate of profit with the
advance of population and accumulation is one of the points
to be illustrated in the ensuing chapters.
[pg ]
mr. cairnes also adds some investigations as to the fluctuations
of value: “hitherto i have examined the derivative laws
of value in so far only as they are exemplified in the movements
of normal prices. it will be interesting now to consider
whether it is possible to discover in the movements of market
prices any corresponding phenomena.
“taking manufactures first, it is evident at once that, as
regards conditions of protection, the circumstances of the case
are such as to secure, in general, (.) great rapidity and great
certainty in bringing commodities to market. a deal table
may be made in a few hours, a piece of cloth in a few weeks,
and a moderate-sized house in a month or little more. tables,
cloth, and houses may be produced with certainty in any quantity
required. it results from this that it is scarcely possible
that, under ordinary circumstances, the selling price of a product
of manufacture should for any long time much exceed its
normal price. (.) the nature of manufactures is, in general,
such as to fit them admirably for distant transport. any considerable
elevation of price, therefore, is pretty certain to attract
supplies from remote sources. (.) further, considered in
their relation to human needs, i think it may be said of manufactured
goods, that either the need for them is not very urgent,
or, where it happens to be so, substitutes ... may easily be
found. from all these circumstances it results that an advance
in the price ... either attracts supplies, or deters purchasers, ...
preventing any great departure from the usual terms of
the market.
“turning now to the products of agricultural, pastoral, or,
more generally, ‘extractive’ industry, we find the circumstances
under which this class of goods is brought to market
in all respects extremely different from those which we have
just examined, and such as to permit a much wider margin of
deviation for the market from the normal price. here the
period of production is longer, the result of the process much
more uncertain, the commodity at once more perishable and
less portable, and human requirements in relation to it are mostly
of a more urgent kind: (.) the shortest period within which
additions can be made to the supply of food and raw material
of the vegetable kind is in general a year, and, if the commodity
be of animal origin, the minimum is considerably larger.
(.) again, the farmer may decide upon the breadth of ground
to be devoted to a particular crop, or upon the number of cattle
he will maintain; but the actual returns will vary according
to the season, and may prove far in excess or far in defect
of his calculations. these circumstances all present obstacles
to the adjustment of supply and demand, and consequently
tend to produce frequent and extensive deviations of the market
[pg ]
from the normal price. nor are the other conditions of the
case such as to neutralize the influence of such disturbing agencies.
(.) the nature, indeed, of some of the principal agricultural
products fits them sufficiently well for distant transport,
and so far tends to correct fluctuations of price. but, on
the other hand, (.) the relation of these products to human
wants is such as greatly to enhance that tendency to violent
fluctuation incident to the conditions of their production. more
especially is this the case with the commodity, whatever it may
be, which forms the staple food of a people. for observe the
peculiar nature of human requirements with reference to such
a commodity. they are of this kind, that, given the number of
a population, the quantity of the staple food required is nearly
a fixed quantity, and this almost irrespective of price. except
among the poorest, increased cheapness will not stimulate a
larger consumption; while, on the other hand, all, at any cost
within the range of their means, will obtain their usual supply.
the consequence is that, when even a moderate deficiency or
excess occurs in the supply of the staple food of a people, in
the one case (a), the competition of consumers for their usual
quantum of food rapidly forces up the price far out of proportion
to the diminution in the supply; in the other (b), no one
being inclined to increase his usual consumption, the competition
of sellers, in their eagerness to find a market for the superfluous
portion of the supply, is equally powerful to depress it.”
[pg ]
chapter ii. influence of the progress of industry and population on
rents, profits, and wages.
§ . characteristic features of industrial progress.
continuing the inquiry into the nature of the economical
changes taking place in a society which is in a state
of industrial progress, we shall next consider what is the
effect of that progress on the distribution of the produce
among the various classes who share in it. we may confine
our attention to the system of distribution which is the most
complex, and which virtually includes all others—that in
which the produce of manufactures is shared between two
classes, laborers and capitalists, and the produce of agriculture
among three, laborers, capitalists, and landlords.
the characteristic features of what is commonly meant
by industrial progress resolve themselves mainly into three,
increase of capital, increase of population, and improvements
in production; understanding the last expression, in its
widest sense, to include the process of procuring commodities
from a distance, as well as that of producing them. it
will be convenient to set out by considering each of the three
causes, as operating separately; after which we can suppose
them combined in any manner we think fit.
§ . first two cases, population and capital increasing, the arts of
production stationary.
for the sake of clearness we will form two general
groups of these causes:
a. the influence of population and capital
(improvements
remaining stationary).
b. the influence of improvements
(population and capital
remaining stationary).
[pg ]
we will first take up a, and under this division make for
convenience two separate suppositions:
i. the first is that, while population is advancing, capital
is stationary. by this means we can study separately the operation
of one of the factors of societary progress, population, and
see its influence on rents, profits, and wages. there being only
the same given quantity of wealth in the form of capital to
be now distributed among more laborers (), real wages must
fall; whereupon, if the same capital purchases more labor, and
obtains more produce (), profits rise. now, if the laborers
were so well off before as to suffer the reduction of wages to
take place not in their food, but in their other comforts, then,
if each laborer uses as much food as before, and if, as by the
supposition, there are more laborers, an increased quantity of
food will be required from the soil. this supply can be produced
only at a greater cost, and, as inferior soils are called
into cultivation (), rents will rise. this last action (), however,
will have an influence on the rise of profits (). for it
was only by a reduction of real wages that profits rose; but if
the cost of food, that is, the real wages, have since risen, then
one of the elements entering into cost of labor has risen, and
in so far will offset the fall of real wages; so that profits will
not gain so much as if rents had not risen. the result of this
first supposition, then, is, that the landlord is the chief gainer:
i. (.) wages fall.
(.) profits rise (less if rents rise).
(.) rents rise.
ii. we will now take up the second supposition under a,
that while capital is advancing population remains stationary.
then, of course (), wages will rise; and, as there is no improvement
to cheapen the cost of their real wages, there will
be an increase in cost of labor to the capitalist, and () profits
will fall. if, now, the laborers, being better off, demand
more food, the new food would cost more, as the margin of
cultivation was pushed down, and () rents would inevitably
rise. but not only have the laborers received more real wages,
but since that change the cost, as just described, of these real
wages has increased. therefore (), profits would fall still
more than by the rise of real wages. in this supposition, consequently,
while the laborer gains, so does the landlord:
ii. (.) wages rise.
(.) profits fall (more if rents rise).
(.) rents rise.
a. it is easy for us now to take into our view the total
effects under a, and see what the combined action of i and
[pg ]
ii would be. that is, if both capital and population (improvements
remaining stationary) increase, what will be the
effect on wages, profits, and rent? of course, we must suppose
that capital and population just keep pace with each
other; and in that case () real wages remain the same, each
laborer receiving the same quantity and same quality of commodities
as before. hence, if each laborer receives the same
quantity as before, and there are many more laborers, there
will be an increased demand put upon the soil for food, poorer
soils will be cultivated, and the cost of the products will rise.
so () rents rise. but if each laborer receives the same quantity
of real wages as before, and the cost of them has risen, as
just explained, an increased cost of labor will result which
must come out of profits. () profits will fall. so that the
results of a upon distribution, taken separately from b, are
that the owner of capital loses; but the owner of land again
gains.
a. (.) wages the same.
(.) profits fall.
(.) rents rise.
§ . the arts of production advancing, capital and population stationary.
now, let us go back to our first general group of
causes, b—an advance in the arts of production (while capital
and population remain stationary). we can now study by
themselves the effect of improvements on wages, profits, and
rent. the general effects arising from the extended introduction
of machinery into agriculture and manufactures, the
lowered cost of transportation by steam, have been to lessen
the value of articles consumed chiefly by the laboring-classes.
for the sake of clearness, imagine that the improvement comes
suddenly. the first effect will be to lower the value and price
of articles entering into the real wages of the laborers; and, if
those consist mostly of food, there will be a rise in the margin
of cultivation and a fall in rents (). it has been previously
shown that improvements retard, or put back, the law of
diminishing returns from land (or in manufactures compensate
for it), and so lower rents. the poorest soil cultivated is now of
a better grade than before, and the produce is yielded at a less
cost and value; so that the land with which the best grades are
compared, to determine the rent, is not separated from the best
grades by so wide a gap. it would at first blush seem, then,
that the interests of the landlord were antagonistic to improvements,
since they lower rents; but, in practice, it is not so, as
we shall soon see.
we have seen that improvements cheapen the price of articles
[pg ]
entering into the real wages of the laborer. having had
a given sum as money wages before the change, then, when
the sudden change of improvements came, it lowered prices to
the laborer, and the same money wages bought more () real
wages. if nothing more happened, we could see that improvements
raised real wages—without lowering () profits (because
cost of labor remains the same, since the lowered cost of the
articles consumed was exactly in proportion to the increase of
real wages). and, if the laborers chose to retain this higher
standard, this would be the situation. sadly enough, however,
in practice they are apt to be satisfied with the old standard;
and the amount of real wages to give the old standard of living
can be had now for less money wages. while only the
same number, without any increase, can live at the new (higher)
standard, a larger number can live at the old (lower) standard.
in short, the obstacles to an increase of population will be removed
by the possession of higher money wages. after a
generation, it is very probable that a larger number of laborers
will be in existence living at the same (or possibly a slightly
higher) standard of real wages, and money wages will have
fallen.
now we can understand better than before what would be
the practical result of the causes under b. (.) rent has fallen;
money wages have fallen (even if () real wages have not);
and, since real wages have not fallen in the proportion that
their cost has been reduced, () profits will have risen. the
general result of the causes under b alone, acting as just described,
will then be:
b. (.) real wages remain the same; money wages less.
(.) profits rise.
(.) rents fall.
§ . theoretical results, if all three elements progressive.
we have considered, on the one hand, under a, the
manner in which the distribution of the produce into rent,
profits, and wages is affected by the ordinary increase of population
and capital; and on the other, under b, how it is affected
by improvements in production, and more especially in agriculture,
as follows:
a. (.) wages the same. b. (.) real wages the same, money wages less.
a. (.) profits fall. b. (.) profits rise.
a. (.) rents rise. b. (.) rents fall.
the effects are clearly contrasted. under a, we see a tendency
to a rise of rents (), an increased cost of labor, and a fall
of profits (); under b, a fall of rents (), a diminished cost of
labor, and a rise of profits (). we have, therefore, analyzed
[pg ]
the forces belonging to the progress of industry, and found two
distinct and antagonistic forces, working against each other.
if, at any period, improvements (b) advance faster than population
and capital (a), rent and money wages will tend downward
and profits upward. if, on the other hand, population
advances faster than improvements (b) either the laborers will
submit to a reduction in the quantity or quality of their food,
or, if not, rent and money wages will progressively rise, and
profits will fall.
§ . practical results.
this, however, is not the final and practical result.
we have hitherto supposed that improvements, b, come suddenly.
in point of fact, agricultural skill is slowly diffused,
and inventions and discoveries are, in general, only occasional,
not continuous in their action, as is the increase of capital and
population. inasmuch as it seldom happens that improvement
has so much the start of population and capital as actually to
lower rent, or raise the rate of profits, population almost everywhere
“treads close on the heels of agricultural improvement,”
and effaces its effects as fast as they are produced.
the reason why agricultural improvement seldom lowers
rent is, that it seldom cheapens food, but only prevents it
from growing dearer; and seldom, if ever, throws land out
of cultivation, but only enables worse and worse land to be
taken in for the supply of an increasing demand. what is
sometimes called the natural state of a country which is but
half cultivated, namely, that the land is highly productive,
and food obtained in great abundance by little labor, is only
true of unoccupied countries colonized by a civilized people.
in the united states the worst land in cultivation is of a high
quality (except sometimes in the immediate vicinity of markets
or means of conveyance, where a bad quality is compensated
by a good situation); and even if no further improvements
were made in agriculture or locomotion, cultivation
would have many steps yet to descend, before the increase
of population and capital would be brought to a stand; but
in europe five hundred years ago, though so thinly peopled
in comparison to the present population, it is probable that
the worst land under the plow was, from the rude state of
agriculture, quite as unproductive as the worst land now cultivated,
and that cultivation had approached as near to the
ultimate limit of profitable tillage in those times as in the
[pg ]
present. what the agricultural improvements since made
have really done is, by increasing the capacity of production
of land in general, to enable tillage to extend downward to
a much worse natural quality of land than the worst which
at that time would have admitted of cultivation by a capitalist
for profit; thus rendering a much greater increase of capital
and population possible, and removing always a little and
a little further off the barrier which restrains them; population
meanwhile always pressing so hard against the barrier
that there is never any visible margin left for it to seize,
every inch of ground made vacant for it by improvement
being at once filled up by its advancing columns. agricultural
improvement may thus be considered to be not so much
a counter-force conflicting with increase of population as a
partial relaxation of the bonds which confine that increase.
now, since improvements enable a much poorer quality of
land to be ultimately cultivated, under the constant pressure of
the increase of population and capital, improvements enable
rent () in the end to rise gradually to a much higher limit than
it could otherwise have attained.
if a great agricultural improvement were suddenly introduced,
it might throw back rent for a considerable space, leaving it
to regain its lost ground by the progress of population and
capital, and afterward to go on further. but taking place,
as such improvement always does, very gradually, it causes no
retrograde movement of either rent or cultivation; it merely
enables the one to go on rising, and the other extending, long
after they must otherwise have stopped.
inasmuch as, in point of fact, b never gets the start of a,
but follows along with a, the general result will be that which
we found true under a—a rise of rents (), and increased cost
of labor to the capitalist, arising from an increased cost of laborers'
subsistence and a fall of profits (). the effect of a more
rapid advance of improvements, at any one time, will temporarily
better the condition of the laborers and also raise
profits; but, if it is followed immediately by an increase of
population, the land-owners will reap the benefits of the improvement
in the rise of rent. the final result, then, is as follows:
[pg ]
(.) real wages, probably higher.
(.) profits fall.
(.) rents rise.
it is possible that a different combination from the above
may sometimes occur in the causes which underlie the progress
of society: (.) there may be a period in which capital is increasing
more rapidly than population, and when there seems
to be an era of industrial improvements also. then both wages
and profits will be high, and it will be a period of general
satisfaction. (.) if capital goes on increasing, but improvements
are few, wages will rise; but profits must suffer a fall. in
this country, where population has not yet increased so as to
press seriously against subsistence, and where capital increases
with incredible swiftness, these cases are often exemplified.
the extraordinary resources of the newer states have permitted
an unlimited increase of population, and capital has found no
difficulty in finding an investment. but yet those states which
have been burdened with the disabilities of the old slave
régime
are far behind the others. the changes in the rank of the
states, in respect of population, at each decade, as seen in chart
no. xvi, are suggestive.
[pg ]
chart xvi. changes of the rank of the states in
the scale of relative population, from  to .
[pg ]
chapter iii. of the tendency of profits to a minimum.
§ . different theories as to the fall of profits.
the tendency of profits to fall as society advances,
which has been brought to notice in the preceding chapter,
was early recognized by writers on industry and commerce;
but, the laws which govern profits not being then understood,
the phenomenon was ascribed to a wrong cause. adam
smith considered profits to be determined by what he called
the competition of capital. in adam smith's opinion, the
manner in which the competition of capital lowers profits is by
lowering prices; that being usually the mode in which an
increased investment of capital in any particular trade lowers
the profits of that trade. but, if this was his meaning, he
overlooked the circumstance that the fall of price, which, if
confined to one commodity, really does lower the profits of
the producer, ceases to have that effect as soon as it extends to
all commodities; because, when all things have fallen, nothing
has really fallen, except nominally; and, even computed in
money, the expenses of every producer have diminished as
much as his returns. unless, indeed, labor be the one commodity
which has not fallen in money price, when all other
things have: if so, what has really taken place is a rise of
wages; and it is that, and not the fall of prices, which has
lowered the profits of capital. there is another thing which
escaped the notice of adam smith; that the supposed universal
fall of prices, through increased competition of capitals,
is a thing which can not take place. prices are not determined
by the competition of the sellers only, but also by that
of the buyers; by demand as well as supply. the demand
which affects money prices consists of all the money in the
[pg ]
hands of the community destined to be laid out in commodities;
and, as long as the proportion of this to the commodities
is not diminished, there is no fall of general prices. now,
howsoever capital may increase, and give rise to an increased
production of commodities, a full share of the capital will be
drawn to the business of producing or importing money, and
the quantity of money will be augmented in an equal ratio
with the quantity of commodities. for, if this were not the
case, and if money, therefore, were, as the theory supposes,
perpetually acquiring increased purchasing power, those who
produced or imported it would obtain constantly increasing
profits; and this could not happen without attracting labor
and capital to that occupation from other employments. if
a general fall of prices and increased value of money were
really to occur, it could only be as a consequence of increased
cost of production, from the gradual exhaustion of the mines.
it is not tenable, therefore, in theory, that the increase
of capital produces, or tends to produce, a general decline of
money prices. neither is it true that any general decline of
prices, as capital increased, has manifested itself in fact. the
only things observed to fall in price with the progress of society
are those in which there have been improvements in production,
greater than have taken place in the production of the
precious metals; as, for example, all spun and woven fabrics.
other things, again, instead of falling, have risen in price,
because their cost of production, compared with that of gold
and silver, has increased. among these are all kinds of food,
comparison being made with a much earlier period of history.
the doctrine, therefore, that competition of capital lowers
profits by lowering prices, is incorrect in fact, as well as
unsound in principle.
mr. wakefield, in his commentary on adam smith, and
his important writings on colonization, takes a much clearer
view of the subject, and arrives, through a substantially correct
series of deductions, at practical conclusions which appear
to me just and important. mr. wakefield's explanation
of the fall of profits is briefly this: production is limited not
[pg ]
solely by the quantity of capital and of labor, but also by the
extent of the “field of employment.” the field of employment
for capital is twofold: the land of the country, and the
capacity of foreign markets to take its manufactured commodities.
on a limited extent of land, only a limited quantity
of capital can find employment at a profit. as the quantity
of capital approaches this limit, profit falls; when the limit
is attained, profit is annihilated, and can only be restored
through an extension of the field of employment, either by
the acquisition of fertile land, or by opening new markets in
foreign countries, from which food and materials can be purchased
with the products of domestic capital.
§ . what determines the minimum rate of profit?
there is at every time and place some particular rate
of profit which is the lowest that will induce the people of
that country and time to accumulate savings, and to employ
those savings productively. this minimum rate of profit
varies according to circumstances. it depends on two elements:
one is the strength of the effective desire of accumulation;
the comparative estimate, made by the people of that
place and era, of future interests when weighed against present.
this element chiefly affects the inclination to save.
the other element, which affects not so much the willingness
to save as the disposition to employ savings productively, is
the degree of security of capital engaged in industrial operations.
in employing any funds which a person may possess
as capital on his own account, or in lending it to others to be
so employed, there is always some additional risk over and
above that incurred by keeping it idle in his own custody.
this extra risk is great in proportion as the general state of
society is insecure: it may be equivalent to twenty, thirty,
or fifty per cent, or to no more than one or two; something
however, it must always be; and for this the expectation of
profit must be sufficient to compensate.
[pg ]
there would be adequate motives for a certain amount
of saving, even if capital yielded no profit. there would be
an inducement to lay by in good times a provision for bad;
to reserve something for sickness and infirmity, or as a
means of leisure and independence in the latter part of life,
or a help to children in the outset of it. savings, however,
which have only these ends in view, have not much tendency
to increase the amount of capital permanently in existence.
the savings by which an addition is made to the national
capital usually emanate from the desire of persons to improve
what is termed their condition in life, or to make a
provision for children or others, independent of their exertions.
now, to the strength of these inclinations it makes a
very material difference how much of the desired object can
be effected by a given amount and duration of self-denial;
which again depends on the rate of profit. and there is in
every country some rate of profit below which persons in
general will not find sufficient motive to save for the mere
purpose of growing richer, or of leaving others better off
than themselves. any accumulation, therefore, by which the
general capital is increased, requires as its necessary condition
a certain rate of profit—a rate which an average person will
deem to be an equivalent for abstinence, with the addition
of a sufficient insurance against risk.
i have already observed that this minimum rate of profit,
less than which is not consistent with the further increase of
capital, is lower in some states of society than in others; and
i may add that the kind of social progress characteristic of
our present civilization tends to diminish it: (.) in the
first place, one of the acknowledged effects of that progress
is an increase of general security. destruction by wars and
spoliation by private or public violence are less and less to
be apprehended. the risks attending the investment of savings
in productive employment require, therefore, a smaller
rate of profit to compensate for them than was required a
century ago, and will hereafter require less than at present.
(.) in the second place, it is also one of the consequences of
[pg ]
civilization that mankind become less the slaves of the moment,
and more habituated to carry their desires and purposes
forward into a distant future. this increase of providence
is a natural result of the increased assurance with
which futurity can be looked forward to; and is, besides,
favored by most of the influences which an industrial life
exercises over the passions and inclinations of human nature.
in proportion as life has fewer vicissitudes, as habits become
more fixed, and great prizes are less and less to be hoped for
by any other means than long perseverance, mankind become
more willing to sacrifice present indulgence for future objects.
but, though the minimum rate of profit is liable to
vary, and though to specify exactly what it is would at any
given time be impossible, such a minimum always exists;
and, whether it be high or low, when once it is reached, no
further increase of capital can for the present take place.
the country has then attained what is known to political
economists under the name of the stationary state.
§ . in old and opulent countries, profits habitually near to the minimum.
we now arrive at the fundamental proposition
which this chapter is intended to inculcate. when a country
has long possessed a large production, and a large net
income to make savings from, and when, therefore, the
means have long existed of making a great annual addition
to capital (the country not having, like america, a large reserve
of fertile land still unused), it is one of the characteristics
of such a country that the rate of profit is habitually
within, as it were, a hand's breadth of the minimum, and
the country, therefore, on the very verge of the stationary
state. my meaning is, that it would require but a short time
to reduce profits to the minimum, if capital continued to increase
at its present rate, and no circumstances having a tendency
to raise the rate of profit occurred in the mean time.
in england, the ordinary rate of interest on government
securities, in which the risk is next to nothing, may be estimated
at a little more than three per cent: in all other investments,
therefore, the interest or profit calculated upon
(exclusively of what is properly a remuneration for talent
[pg ]
or exertion) must be as much more than this amount as is
equivalent to the degree of risk to which the capital is
thought to be exposed. let us suppose that in england
even so small a net profit as one per cent, exclusive of insurance
against risk, would constitute a sufficient inducement
to save, but that less than this would not be a sufficient inducement.
i now say that the mere continuance of the
present annual increase of capital, if no circumstance occurred
to counteract its effect, would suffice in a small
number of years to reduce the rate of net profit to one per
cent.
to fulfill the conditions of the hypothesis, we must suppose
an entire cessation of the exportation of capital for foreign
investment. we must suppose the entire savings of the
community to be annually invested in really productive employment
within the country itself, and no new channels
opened by industrial inventions, or by a more extensive substitution
of the best-known processes for inferior ones.
the difficulty in finding remunerative employment every
year for so much new capital would not consist in any want
of a market. if the new capital were duly shared among
many varieties of employment, it would raise up a demand
for its own produce, and there would be no cause why any
part of that produce should remain longer on hand than
formerly. what would really be, not merely difficult, but
impossible, would be to employ this capital without submitting
to a rapid reduction of the rate of profit.
as capital increased, population either would also increase,
or it would not. if it did not, wages would rise, and
a greater capital would be distributed in wages among the
same number of laborers. there being no more labor than
before, and no improvements to render the labor more efficient,
there would not be any increase of the produce; and,
as the capital, however largely increased, would only obtain
the same gross return, the whole savings of each year would
be exactly so much subtracted from the profits of the next
and of every following year.
[pg ]
this can be illustrated by supposing that the whole capital
is handed out to the producers in a vessel which is returned
full at the end of the period of production with the
original outlay, plus an advance called profit. b c represents
the total outlay, a c the total produce, and a b the profit on
b c. now, since the conditions of production remain
the same, the same number of laborers can produce,
as before, no more than a c; even though in the
second year some of last year's profit, represented
by d b, is saved and added to the outlay by the
capitalist. if d c is now the outlay of capital, the
profit can only be a c, minus d c, or a d; that
is, the profit of the second year is diminished by
d b, exactly the amount of savings of the year before. and
this would be repeated each successive year, each saving added
to b c being “exactly so much subtracted from the profits
of the next and of every following year.”
it is hardly necessary to say that in such circumstances
profits would very soon fall to the point at which further increase
of capital would cease. an augmentation of capital,
much more rapid than that of population, must soon reach
its extreme limit, unless accompanied by increased efficiency
of labor (through inventions and discoveries, or improved
mental and physical education), or unless some of the idle
people, or of the unproductive laborers, became productive.
if population did increase with the increase of capital
and in proportion to it, the fall of profits would still be inevitable.
increased population implies increased demand
for agricultural produce. in the absence of industrial improvements,
this demand can only be supplied at an increased
cost of production, either by cultivating worse land,
or by a more elaborate and costly cultivation of the land
already under tillage. the cost of the laborer's subsistence
is therefore increased, and, unless the laborer submits to a
deterioration of his condition, profits must fall. in an old
country like england, if, in addition to supposing all improvement
in domestic agriculture suspended, we suppose
that there is no increased production in foreign countries for
the english market, the fall of profits would be very rapid.
if both these avenues to an increased supply of food were
[pg ]
closed, and population continued to increase, as it is said to
do, at the rate of a thousand a day, all waste land which
admits of cultivation in the existing state of knowledge
would soon be cultivated, and the cost of production and
price of food would be so increased that, if the laborers received
the increased money wages necessary to compensate
for their increased expenses, profits would very soon reach
the minimum. the fall of profits would be retarded if
money wages did not rise, or rose in a less degree; but the
margin which can be gained by a deterioration of the laborers'
condition is a very narrow one: in general, they can not
bear much reduction; when they can, they have also a higher
standard of necessary requirements, and will not. on the
whole, therefore, we may assume that in such a country as
england, if the present annual amount of savings were to
continue, without any of the counteracting circumstances
which now keep in check the natural influence of those savings
in reducing profit, the rate of profit would speedily attain
the minimum, and all further accumulation of capital
would for the present cease.
mr. carey, on the other hand, asserts the existence of a law
of increasing returns from land, and that, while wages are
constantly increasing with the progress of society, there is a
diminution in the rate of profit, although the increasing returns
permit an increase of absolute, if not of proportional, profit.
that is, although wages increase more in proportion than profit,
there is still a larger gross amount to be divided among capitalists
as profit, out of a larger product.
§ . —prevented from reaching it by commercial revulsions.
what, then, are these counteracting circumstances
which, in the existing state of things, maintain a tolerably
equal struggle against the downward tendency of profits, and
prevent the great annual savings which take place in this
country from depressing the rate of profit much nearer to
that lowest point to which it is always tending, and which,
left to itself, it would so promptly attain? the resisting
agencies are of several kinds.
first among them is the waste of capital in periods of
overtrading and rash speculation, and in the commercial revulsions
[pg ]
by which such times are always followed. mines
are opened, railways or bridges made, and many other works
of uncertain profit commenced, and in these enterprises much
capital is sunk which yields either no return, or none adequate
to the outlay. factories are built and machinery
erected beyond what the market requires, or can keep in
employment. even if they are kept in employment, the
capital is no less sunk; it has been converted from circulating
into fixed capital, and has ceased to have any influence
on wages or profits. besides this, there is a great unproductive
consumption of capital during the stagnation which
follows a period of general overtrading. establishments are
shut up, or kept working without any profit. such are the
effects of a commercial revulsion; and that such revulsions
are almost periodical is a consequence of the very tendency
of profits which we are considering. by the time a few
years have passed over without a crisis, so much additional
capital has been accumulated that it is no longer possible to
invest it at the accustomed profit; all public securities rise
to a high price, the rate of interest on the best mercantile
security falls very low, and the complaint is general among
persons in business that no money is to be made. but the
diminished scale of all safe gains inclines persons to give a
ready ear to any projects which hold out, though at the risk
of loss, the hope of a higher rate of profit; and speculations
ensue, which, with the subsequent revulsions, destroy, or
transfer to foreigners, a considerable amount of capital, produce
a temporary rise of interest and profit, make room for
fresh accumulations, and the same round is recommenced.
this, doubtless, is one considerable cause which arrests
profits in their descent to the minimum, by sweeping away
from time to time a part of the accumulated mass by which
they are forced down. but this is not, as might be inferred
from the language of some writers, the principal cause. if
it were, the capital of the country would not increase; but
in england it does increase greatly and rapidly. this is
shown by the increasing productiveness of almost all taxes,
[pg ]
by the continual growth of all the signs of national wealth,
and by the rapid increase of population, while the condition
of the laborers certainly is not on the whole declining.
§ . —by improvements in production.
this brings us to the second of the counter-agencies,
namely, improvements in production. these evidently have
the effect of extending what mr. wakefield terms the field
of employment, that is, they enable a greater amount of capital
to be accumulated and employed without depressing the
rate of profit; provided always that they do not raise, to a
proportional extent, the habits and requirements of the laborer.
if the laboring-class gain the full advantage of the
increased cheapness, in other words, if money wages do not
fall, profits are not raised, nor their fall retarded. but, if the
laborers people up to the improvement in their condition,
and so relapse to their previous state, profits will rise. all
inventions which cheapen any of the things consumed by the
laborers, unless their requirements are raised in an equivalent
degree, in time lower money wages, and, by doing so, enable
a greater capital to be accumulated and employed, before
profits fall back to what they were previously.
improvements which only affect things consumed exclusively
by the richer classes do not operate precisely in the
same manner. the cheapening of lace or velvet has no
effect in diminishing the cost of labor; and no mode can be
pointed out in which it can raise the rate of profit, so as to
make room for a larger capital before the minimum is attained.
it, however, produces an effect which is virtually
equivalent; it lowers, or tends to lower, the minimum itself.
in the first place, increased cheapness of articles of consumption
promotes the inclination to save, by affording to all consumers
a surplus which they may lay by, consistently with
their accustomed manner of living. in the next place, whatever
[pg ]
enables people to live equally well on a smaller income
inclines them to lay by capital for a lower rate of profit. if
people can live on an independence of [$,] a year in the
same manner as they formerly could on one of [$,], some
persons will be induced to save in hopes of the one, who
would have been deterred by the more remote prospect of
the other. all improvements, therefore, in the production
of almost any commodity tend in some degree to widen the
interval which has to be passed before arriving at the stationary
state.
§ . —by the importation of cheap necessaries and implements.
equivalent in effect to improvements in production
is the acquisition of any new power of obtaining cheap commodities
from foreign countries. if necessaries are cheapened,
whether they are so by improvements at home or importation
from abroad, is exactly the same thing to wages
and profits. unless the laborer obtains and, by an improvement
of his habitual standard, keeps the whole benefit, the
cost of labor is lowered and the rate of profit raised. as
long as food can continue to be imported for an increasing
population without any diminution of cheapness, so long the
declension of profits through the increase of population and
capital is arrested, and accumulation may go on without making
the rate of profit draw nearer to the minimum. and on
this ground it is believed by some that the repeal of the corn
laws has opened to [england] a long era of rapid increase of
capital with an undiminished rate of profit.
before inquiring whether this expectation is reasonable,
one remark must be made, which is much at variance with
commonly received notions. foreign trade does not necessarily
increase the field of employment for capital. when
foreign trade makes room for more capital at the same
profit, it is by enabling the necessaries of life, or the habitual
articles of the laborer's consumption, to be obtained
at smaller cost. it may do this in two ways: by the importation
either of those commodities themselves, or of the means
and appliances for producing them. cheap iron has, in a
certain measure, the same effect on profits and the cost of
[pg ]
labor as cheap corn, because cheap iron makes cheap tools for
agriculture and cheap machinery for clothing. but a foreign
trade, which neither directly nor by any indirect consequence
increases the cheapness of anything consumed by the laborers,
does not, any more than an invention or discovery in the
like case, tend to raise profits or retard their fall; it merely
substitutes the production of goods for foreign markets in
the room of the home production of luxuries, leaving the employment
for capital neither greater nor less than before.
it must, of course, be supposed that, with the increase of
capital, population also increases; for, if it did not, the consequent
rise of wages would bring down profits, in spite of any
cheapness of food. suppose, then, that the population of
great britain goes on increasing at its present rate, and demands
every year a supply of imported food considerably beyond
that of the year preceding. this annual increase in the
food demanded from the exporting countries can only be
obtained either by great improvements in their agriculture, or
by the application of a great additional capital to the growth
of food. the former is likely to be a very slow process, from
the rudeness and ignorance of the agricultural classes in the
food-exporting countries of europe, while the british colonies
and the united states are already in possession of most of the
improvements yet made, so far as suitable to their circumstances.
there remains, as a resource, the extension of cultivation.
and on this it is to be remarked that the capital by
which any such extension can take place is mostly still to be
created. in poland, russia, hungary, spain, the increase of
capital is extremely slow. in america it is rapid, but not
more rapid than the population. the principal fund at present
available for supplying this country with a yearly increasing
importation of food is that portion of the annual savings
of america which has heretofore been applied to increasing
the manufacturing establishments of the united states, and
which free trade in corn may possibly divert from that purpose
to growing food for our market. this limited source of
supply, unless great improvements take place in agriculture,
[pg ]
can not be expected to keep pace with the growing demand
of so rapidly increasing a population as that of great britain;
and, if our population and capital continue to increase with
their present rapidity, the only mode in which food can continue
to be supplied cheaply to the one is by sending the
other abroad to produce it.
chart xvii.
grain-crops of the united states.
year.bushels.,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
not even americans have any adequate knowledge of the
productive capacity of the united states. the grain-fields
are not yet all occupied; and we can easily produce the total
cotton consumption of the world on that quantity of land in
texas alone by which the whole cultivable area of that state
exceeds the corresponding area of the empire of austria-hungary
(see chart no. xviii, which shows the remarkable
proportion of land possessed by the united states as compared
with european countries); and the exports of agricultural
food from the united states are now six times what they
were in , about the time when mr. mill made the above
statements. immense areas of our soil have not yet been
[pg ]
broken by the plow, and the quantities of cereals grown in the
united states seem to be steadily increasing. in fact, the
greatest grain-crop yet grown in this country was that of .
the comparison of the crops of late years with those just succeeding
the war (as seen in chart no. xvii) shows a very suggestive
increase; since it indicates where employment has
been given to vast numbers of laborers, and where investment
has been found for our rapidly growing capital.
§ . —by the emigration of capital.
this brings us to the last of the counter-forces which
check the downward tendency of profits in a country whose
capital increases faster than that of its neighbors, and whose
profits are therefore nearer to the minimum. this is, the
perpetual overflow of capital into colonies or foreign countries,
to seek higher profits than can be obtained at home. i
believe this to have been for many years one of the principal
causes by which the decline of profits in england has been
arrested. it has a twofold operation: in the first place, it
does what a fire, or an inundation, or a commercial crisis
would have done—it carries off a part of the increase of capital
from which the reduction of profits proceeds; secondly,
the capital so carried off is not lost, but is chiefly employed
either in founding colonies, which become large exporters of
cheap agricultural produce, or in extending and perhaps improving
the agriculture of older communities.
in countries which are further advanced in industry and
population, and have therefore a lower rate of profit, than
others, there is always, long before the actual minimum is
reached, a practical minimum, viz., when profits have fallen
so much below what they are elsewhere that, were they to
fall lower, all further accumulations would go abroad. as
long as there are old countries where capital increases very
rapidly, and new countries where profit is still high, profits
in the old countries will not sink to the rate which would
put a stop to accumulation: the fall is stopped at the point
which sends capital abroad.
[pg ]
chapter iv. consequences of the tendency of profits to a minimum,
and the stationary state.
§ . abstraction of capital not necessarily a national loss.
the theory of the effect of accumulation on profits
must greatly abate, or rather, altogether destroy, in countries
where profits are low, the immense importance which used
to be attached by political economists to the effects which an
event or a measure of government might have in adding to
or subtracting from the capital of the country. we have
now seen that the lowness of profits is a proof that the spirit
of accumulation is so active, and that the increase of capital
has proceeded at so rapid a rate, as to outstrip the two counter-agencies,
improvements in production and increased supply
of cheap necessaries from abroad. a sudden abstraction
of capital, unless of inordinate amount, [would not] have
any real effect in impoverishing the country. after a few
months or years, there would exist in the country just as
much capital as if none had been taken away. the abstraction,
by raising profits and interest, would give a fresh
stimulus to the accumulative principle, which would speedily
fill up the vacuum. probably, indeed, the only effect that
would ensue would be that for some time afterward less
capital would be exported, and less thrown away in hazardous
speculation.
in the first place, then, this view of things greatly weakens,
in a wealthy and industrious country, the force of the
economical argument against the expenditure of public
money for really valuable, even though industriously unproductive,
purposes. in poor countries, the capital of the
country requires the legislator's sedulous care; he is bound
[pg ]
to be most cautious of encroaching upon it, and should favor
to the utmost its accumulation at home, and its introduction
from abroad. but in rich, populous, and highly cultivated
countries, it is not capital which is the deficient element, but
fertile land; and what the legislator should desire and promote,
is not a greater aggregate saving, but a greater return
to savings, either by improved cultivation, or by access to
the produce of more fertile lands in other parts of the
globe.
the same considerations enable us to throw aside as unworthy
of regard one of the common arguments against emigration
as a means of relief for the laboring-class. emigration,
it is said, can do no good to the laborers, if, in order to
defray the cost, as much must be taken away from the capital
of the country as from its population. if one tenth of
the laboring people of england were transferred to the colonies,
and along with them one tenth of the circulating capital
of the country, either wages, or profits, or both, would be
greatly benefited, by the diminished pressure of capital and
population upon the fertility of the land. the landlords
alone would sustain some loss of income; and even they,
only if colonization went to the length of actually diminishing
capital and population, but not if it merely carried off
the annual increase.
§ . in opulent countries, the extension of machinery not detrimental but
beneficial to laborers.
from the same principles we are now able to arrive
at a final conclusion respecting the effects which machinery,
and generally the sinking of capital for a productive purpose,
produce upon the immediate and ultimate interests of
the laboring-class. the characteristic property of this class
of industrial improvements is the conversion of circulating
capital into fixed: and it was shown in the first
book that,
in a country where capital accumulates slowly, the introduction
of machinery, permanent improvements of land, and
the like, might be, for the time, extremely injurious; since
the capital so employed might be directly taken from the
[pg ]
wages fund, the subsistence of the people and the employment
for labor curtailed, and the gross annual produce of
the country actually diminished. but in a country of great
annual savings and low profits no such effects need be apprehended.
it merely draws off at one orifice what was already
flowing out at another; or, if not, the greater vacant
space left in the reservoir does but cause a greater quantity
to flow in. accordingly, in spite of the mischievous derangements
of the money market which have been occasioned
by the great sums in process of being sunk in railways, i
can not agree with those who apprehend any mischief, from
this source, to the productive resources of the country. not
on the absurd ground (which to any one acquainted with the
elements of the subject needs no confutation) that railway
expenditure is a mere transfer of capital from hand to hand,
by which nothing is lost or destroyed. this is true of what
is spent in the purchase of the land; a portion too of what is
paid to agents, counsels, engineers, and surveyors, is saved
by those who receive it, and becomes capital again: but what
is laid out in the bona fide construction of the railway itself
is lost and gone; when once expended, it is incapable of ever
being paid in wages or applied to the maintenance of laborers
again; as a matter of account, the result is, that so much
food and clothing and tools have been consumed, and the
country has got a railway instead.
it already appears, from these considerations, that the
conversion of circulating capital into fixed, whether by railways,
or manufactories, or ships, or machinery, or canals, or
mines, or works of drainage and irrigation, is not likely, in
any rich country, to diminish the gross produce or the
amount of employment for labor. there is hardly any increase
of fixed capital which does not enable the country to
contain eventually a larger circulating capital than it otherwise
could possess and employ within its own limits; for there
is hardly any creation of fixed capital which, when it proves
successful, does not cheapen the articles on which wages are
habitually expended.
[pg ]
as regards the effects upon the material condition of the
wages-receiving class, since it seems clear that capital increases
faster than improvements, and probably faster even than population,
it follows that in countries where the laboring-classes
are evidently growing in intelligence, they gain in wages with
the progress of society. such certainly seems to be the teaching
of mr. giffen's late studies (see
book iv, chap. iii, § ).
§ . stationary state of wealth and population dreaded by some writers, but
not in itself undesirable.
toward what ultimate point is society tending by its
industrial progress? when the progress ceases, in what condition
are we to expect that it will leave mankind?
it must always have been seen, more or less distinctly, by
political economists, that the increase of wealth is not boundless;
that at the end of what they term the progressive state
lies the stationary state, that all progress in wealth is but a
postponement of this, and that each step in advance is an approach
to it. we have now been led to recognize that this
ultimate goal is at all times near enough to be fully in view;
that we are always on the verge of it, and that, if we have
not reached it long ago, it is because the goal itself flies before
us. the richest and most prosperous countries would
very soon attain the stationary state, if no further improvements
were made in the productive arts, and if there were a
suspension of the overflow of capital from those countries
into the uncultivated or ill-cultivated regions of the earth.
adam smith always assumes that the condition of the mass
of the people, though it may not be positively distressed,
must be pinched and stinted in a stationary condition of
wealth, and can only be satisfactory in a progressive state.
the doctrine that, to however distant a time incessant struggling
may put off our doom, the progress of society must
“end in shallows and in miseries,” far from being, as many
people still believe, a wicked invention of mr. malthus, was
either expressly or tacitly affirmed by his most distinguished
predecessors, and can only be successfully combated on his
principles.
even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a
conscientious or prudential restraint on population is indispensable,
to prevent the increase of numbers from outstripping
[pg ]
the increase of capital, and the condition of the classes
who are at the bottom of society from being deteriorated.
where there is not, in the people, or in some very large proportion
of them, a resolute resistance to this deterioration—a
determination to preserve an established standard of comfort—the
condition of the poorest class sinks, even in a progressive
state, to the lowest point which they will consent to endure.
the same determination would be equally effectual
to keep up their condition in the stationary state, and would
be quite as likely to exist.
i can not, therefore, regard the stationary state of capital
and wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally manifested
toward it by political economists of the old school. i
am inclined to believe that it would be, on the whole, a
very considerable improvement on our present condition.
it is only in the backward countries of the world that
increased production is still an important object; in those
most advanced, what is economically needed is a better distribution,
of which one indispensable means is a stricter restraint
on population. on the other hand, we may suppose
this better distribution of property attained, by the
joint effect of the prudence and frugality of individuals,
and of a system of legislation favoring equality of fortunes,
so far as is consistent with the just claim of the individual
to the fruits, whether great or small, of his or her
own industry. we may suppose, for instance (according
to the suggestion thrown out in a former
chapter), a limitation
of the sum which any one person may acquire by
gift or inheritance, to the amount sufficient to constitute
a moderate independence. under this twofold influence,
society would exhibit these leading features: a well-paid
and affluent body of laborers; no enormous fortunes, except
what were earned and accumulated during a single
lifetime; but a much larger body of persons than at present,
not only exempt from the coarser toils, but with sufficient
[pg ]
leisure, both physical and mental, from mechanical details, to
cultivate freely the graces of life, and afford examples of
them to the classes less favorably circumstanced for their
growth. this condition of society, so greatly preferable to
the present, is not only perfectly compatible with the stationary
state, but, it would seem, more naturally allied with that
state than with any other.
there is room in the world, no doubt, and even in old
countries, for a great increase of population, supposing the
arts of life to go on improving, and capital to increase. but
even if innocuous, i confess i see very little reason for desiring
it. the density of population necessary to enable mankind
to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the advantages
both of co-operation and of social intercourse, has, in all the
most populous countries, been attained. if the earth must
lose that great portion of its pleasantness which it owes to
things that the unlimited increase of wealth and population
would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of enabling it
to support a larger but not a better or a happier population,
i sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will be
content to be stationary, long before necessity compels them
to it.
it is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition
of capital and population implies no stationary state of
human improvement. even the industrial arts might be as
earnestly and as successfully cultivated, with this sole difference,
that instead of serving no purpose but the increase of
wealth, industrial improvements would produce their legitimate
effect, that of abridging labor. hitherto it is questionable
if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened
the day's toil of any human being. they have enabled a
greater population to live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment,
and an increased number of manufacturers and
others to make fortunes. they have increased the comforts
of the middle classes.
the statement that inventions have not “lightened the day's
toil of any human being” has been persistently misquoted
[pg ]
by many persons and has been taken out of its connection.
mr. mill distinctly holds that the laborer's lot could have
been improved had there been any limitation of population;
that it is the constant growth of population as society progresses
which destroys the gains afforded to the laboring-classes
by improvements. but it is quite certain that the material
facts of mr. mill's statement are no longer true. in the
united states wages have risen, with an additional gain in
lower prices; and mr. giffen shows the same progress in england.
moreover, travelers on the continent speak of a similar
movement already noticeable there. mr. giffen's statement in
his comparison with fifty years ago, is as follows:
“while the money wages have increased as we have seen,
the hours of labor have diminished. it is difficult to estimate
what the extent of this diminution has been, but collecting one
or two scattered notices i should be inclined to say very nearly
 per cent. there has been at least this reduction in the textile,
engineering, and house-building trades. the workman
gets from  to  per cent more money for  per cent less
work; in round figures he has gained from  to  per cent
in fifty years in money return. it is just possible, of course,
that the workman may do as much, or nearly as much, in the
shorter period as he did in his longer hours. still, there is the
positive gain in his being less time at his task, which many of
the classes still tugging lengthily day by day at the oar would
appreciate.”
[pg ]
chapter v. on the possible futurity of the laboring-classes.
§ . the possibility of improvement while laborers remain merely receivers
of wages.
there has probably never been a time when more attention
has been called to the material and social conditions of
the working-classes than in the last few years. the great increase
of literature and the extension of the newspaper has
brought to every reader, even where public and private charities
have not sent eye-witnesses into direct contact with distress,
a more explicit knowledge of the working-classes than
ever before. the revelation of existing poverty and misery is,
often wrongly, taken to be a proof of the increasing degradation
of the working-men, and the cause has been ascribed to the
grasping cruelty of capitalists. instances of injustice arising
from the relations of employers and employed will occur so
long as human nature remains imperfect. but the world hopes
that some other relation than that of master and workman may
be evolved in which not only many admitted wrongs may be
avoided, but also new forces may be applied to raise the laborer
out of his dependence on other classes in the community.
we are, at present, living under a
régime of private property
and competition. but certainly the progress of the laborer
is not that which can excite enthusiastic hopes for the future,
so long as he remains a mere receiver of wages. the progress
of industrial improvements has resulted, says mr. cairnes, in “a
temporary improvement of the laborer's condition, followed
by an increase of population and an enlarged demand for the
cheapened commodity.... laborers' commodities, however,
are for the most part commodities of raw produce, or in which
the raw material constitutes the chief element of the value
(clothing is, in truth, the only important exception); and of
all such commodities it is the well-known law that an augmentation
of quantity can only be obtained, other things being
the same, at an increasing proportional cost. thus, it has happened
that the gain in productiveness obtained by improved
processes has, after a generation, to a great extent been lost—lost,
[pg ]
that is to say, for any benefit that can be derived from
it in favor of wages and profits.... the large addition to
the wealth of the country has gone neither to profits nor to
wages, nor yet to the public at large [as consumers], but to
swell a fund ever growing even while its proprietors sleep—the
rent-roll of the owners of the soil.... the aggregate return
from the land has immensely increased; but the cost of
the costliest portion of the produce, which is that which determines
the price of the whole, remains pretty nearly as it was.
profits, therefore, have not risen at all, and the real remuneration
of the laborer, taking the whole field of labor, in but a
slight degree—at all events in a degree very far from commensurate
with the general progress of industry.”
under these conditions, it seems that the only hope of an
improvement for the laboring-classes lies in the limitation of
population—or at least in an increase of numbers less than the
increase of capital and improvements. it is possible, however,
that mr. cairnes, with many others, has failed to recognize the
full extent of the improvement which is taking place in the
wages of the laborer under the existing social order. although
we hear much of the wrongs of the working-men—and they no
doubt exist—yet it is unquestionable that their condition has
vastly improved within the last fifty years; largely, in my opinion,
because improvements have outstripped population, and because
wide areas of fertile land in new and peaceful countries
have drawn off the surplus population in the older countries,
and because the available spots in the newer countries like the
united states have not yet been covered over with a population
sufficiently dense to keep real wages anything below a
relatively high standard. the facts to substantiate this opinion,
so far as regards great britain, are to be found in a recent
investigation by mr. giffen, the statistician of the english
board of trade. for a very considerable reduction in hours
of daily labor, the workman now receives wages on an average
about  per cent higher than fifty years ago, as may be seen
by the following table:
[pg ]
occupation.place.
wages fifty years ago, per week.
wages, present time, per week.
increase or decrease, amount, per cent.carpentersmanchester 
   (+) glasgow  
  (+) bricklayersmanchester
    (+) glasgow  
  (+) masonsmanchester
    (+) glasgow  
  (+) minersstaffordshire  
  (+) pattern-weavershuddersfield 
   (+) wool-scourers"  
  (+) mule-spinners"  
  (+) weavers"  
  (+) warpers and beamers" 
   (+) winders and reelers" 
   (+) weavers (men)bradford 
   (+) reeling and warping"  
  (+) spinning (children)"  
with increased wages, prices are not much higher than fifty
years ago. but the clearest evidence as to their bettered material
condition is to be found in the following table, which
shows the amount of food consumed per head by the total population
of great britain:
articles...bacon and hams, pounds...butter, pounds...cheese, pounds...currants and raisins, pounds...eggs, no...potatoes, pounds...rice, pounds...cocoa, pounds...coffee, pounds...corn, wheat, and wheat-flour, pounds..
.raw sugar, pounds...refined sugar, pounds.nil..tea, pounds...tobacco, pounds...wine, gallons...spirits, gallons...malt, bushels...
the question then at once arises, whether capital has been
shown by the statistics to have gained accordingly, or whether
there has been a proportionally less increase than in wages.
[pg ]
says mr. giffen: “if the return to capital had doubled, as the
wages of the working-classes appear to have doubled, the aggregate
income of the capitalist classes returned to the income-tax
would now be £,, instead of £,,....
the capitalist, as such, gets a low interest for his money, and
the aggregate returns to capital is not a third part of the aggregate
income of the country, which may be put at not less than
£,,,.” it is found, moreover—as a suggestion that
property is more generally diffused—that while there were
, estates entered to probate in , of an average value
of £, each, there were , estates in  of an average
value of £, each.
but yet the vast increase of wealth made possible by improvements
and the growth of capital would have bettered the
condition of all still more had population been somewhat more
limited. as it is, the material gain has been large in spite of
an increase in the population from ,, in  to nearly
,, in . in other words, the landlords have been
great gainers, while the laborers have intercepted much more
than mr. cairnes supposed.
there are at hand some very striking data relating to the
united states which point in the same direction as those of mr.
giffen. charts no. xix and
xx show vividly how far the
increased productiveness of an industry, arising from greater
skill and greater efficiency of labor in the connection of improved
machinery, has enabled manufacturers to steadily lower
the price of their goods, and yet increase the wages paid to
their operatives. what was true of these two cotton-mills
was true of others within new england; for the rate of wages
paid by these mills was the rate current in the country in 
and in . while each spindle and loom has become vastly
more effective, we see by chart no. xix
that the average production
of each operative constantly increased from , yards
per year in , to , yards in ; and this it was
which made possible the corresponding increase in the rate of
wages from $ in , to $ in . the sum of $ a
year as an average for each operative, is a stipend too small to
cause any general satisfaction; but he must be gloomy indeed
who does not see that $ is a cheerful possession as compared
with $. there is, then, abundant ground for believing that
in the past fifty years the condition of the working-classes in
the united states has been materially improved. the diminishing
proportion of the price which goes to the capital is a
significant fact, and illustrates the tendency of profits to fall
with the increase of capital.
the same truth seems to be
[pg ]
seen in the table given in a previous
chapter, where the wages
have been increased, but the hours have fallen per day from
thirteen to eleven since .
§ .—through small holdings, by which the landlord's gain is shared.
so far we have considered the chances for improvement
in an industrial order in which the present separation of
capitalists from laborers is maintained. but this does not take
into account that future time when cultivation in the united
states shall be forced down upon inferior land, and no more
remains to be occupied, and when capital may no longer increase
as fast as population. what must be the ultimate outlook
for wages-receivers? or, more practically, what is the
outlook now for those who are wages-receivers, and for whom
a more equitable distribution of the product seems desirable?
how can they escape the thralldom of dependence on the accumulations
of others?
in this connection, and of primary importance, is the avenue
opened to all holders of small properties to share in the increase
which goes to owners of land. it has been seen that
owners of the soil constantly gain from the inevitable tendencies
of industrial progress. if one large owner gains, why should
not the increment be the same if ten owners held the property
instead of one? the more the land is subdivided, the more
the vast increase arising from rent will be shared by a larger
number. this, in my opinion, is the strongest reason for the
encouragement of small holdings in every country. the greater
the extension of small properties among the working-class, the
more will they gain a share of that part of the product which goes
to the owner of land by the persistent increase of population.
if, then, the gain arising from improvements is largely passed
to the credit of land-owners, as mr. cairnes believes, it should
be absolutely necessary to spread among the working-classes
the doctrine that if they own their own homes, and buy the
land they live on, to that extent will they “grow rich while
they sleep,” independently of their other exertions. land worth
$ to-day when bought by the savings of a laborer, besides
the self-respect
it gives him, will increase in value with the
[pg ]
density of population, and become worth $ or more without
other sacrifice of his.
§ . —through co-operation, by which the manager's wages are shared.
it will be found, however, that, of the various industrial
rewards, profits tend to diminish, meaning by “profits”
only the interest and insurance given for abstinence and risk in
the use of capital; but that the manager's wages (wages of superintendence)
are larger than is commonly supposed in relation
to other industrial rewards, owing to the position of monopoly
practically held by such executive ability as is competent to
successfully manage large business interests. to the laborer
this large payment to the manager seems to be paid for the
possession of capital. this we now know to be wrong. the
manager's wages are payments of exactly the same nature as
any laborer's wages. it makes no difference whether wages are
paid for manual or mental labor. the payment to capital, purely
as such, known as interest (with insurance for risk), is unmistakably
decreasing, even in the united states. and yet we see
men gain by industrial operations enormous rewards; but these
returns are in their essence solely manager's wages. for in
many instances, as hitherto discussed, we have seen that the
manager is not the owner of the capital he employs. to what
does this lead us? inevitably to the conclusion that the laborer,
if he would become something more than a receiver of
wages, in the ordinary sense, must himself move up in the
scale of laborers until he reaches the skill and power also to
command manager's wages. the importance of this principle
to the working-man can not be exaggerated, and there flows
from it important consequences to the whole social condition
of the lower classes. it leads us directly to the means by
which the lower classes may raise themselves to a higher position—the
actual details of which, of course, are difficult, but,
as they are not included in political economy, they must be left
to sociology—and forms the essential basis of hope for any
proper extension of productive co-operation. in short, co-operation
owes its existence to the possibility of dividing the manager's
wages, to a greater or less degree, among the so-called
wages-receivers, or the “laboring-class.” and it is from this
point of view that co-operation is seen more truly and fitly
than in any other way. for it is to be said that in some of
its forms co-operation gives the most promising economic results
as regards the condition of the laborer which have yet
been reached in the long discussion upon the relations of labor
and capital.
§ . distributive co-operation.
it will be my object, then, to describe the chief forms in
which the co-operative principle has manifested itself. these
may be said, in general, to be four: () distributive co-operation,
by which goods already produced are bought and sold to
[pg ]
members without the aid of retail dealers; () productive co-operation,
by which associations are formed for producing and
manufacturing goods for the market; () partial productive
co-operation in the form of industrial partnerships between laborers
and employers, without dispensing with the latter; and
() co-operative, or people's, banks. there are, of course, many
other forms in which the principle of co-operation has been
applied; but these four are probably the most characteristic.
distributive co-operation is at once the simplest and the
most successful form, not merely because it requires less for capital
than any other for its inception, but also because it calls
for less business and executive capacity. the number of persons
capable of managing a small retail store is vastly greater
than the class fit to assume control of the very complex duties
involved in the care of wholesale houses—or, at all events, of
mills and factories. distributive co-operation has its origin in
the fact that the expenses of a middle-man between the producer
and consumer may be entirely dispensed with, and in
the fact that more capital had collected in the business of distribution
than could economically be so employed. its educating
power on the men concerned in teaching them to save,
in showing the need of business methods, and in instilling the
elements of industrial management, is of no little importance.
it is, therefore, the best gateway to any further or more difficult
co-operative experiments—such experiments as can be attempted
only after the proper capital is saved, and the necessary
executive capacity is discovered, or developed by training.
in england co-operation began its history in distributive
stores, and has finally led to such a stimulus of self-help in the
laborer, that now co-operative gymnasiums, libraries, gardens,
and other results have proved the wisdom of calling upon the
laborers for their own exertions. under the system which
separates employers and the employed, high wages are not
found to be the only boon which the receivers could wish; for
it is sometimes found that the best-paid workmen are the most
unwise and intemperate. for the most ignorant and unskilled
of the workmen in the lowest strata the object would seem to
be to give not merely more wages, but give more in such a way
as might excite new and better motives, a desire as well as a
possibility of improvement. self-help must be stimulated, not
deadened by stifling dependence on a class of superiors, or on
the state. the extraordinary growth of co-operation is one of
the most cheering signs of modern times. distributive co-operation
originated in rochdale, in england, about , with
a few laborers desirous of saving themselves from the high
prices paid for poor provisions. by uniting, they purchased
[pg ]
tea by the chest, sugar by the hogshead, which they sold to
each member at market prices. they were surprised to find
a large profit by the operation, which they divided proportionally
to the capital subscribed. others soon joined them; they
took a store-room, and in  there were , members, with
a share capital of $,,, and with realized profits in that
year of $,. they have erected expensive steam flour-mills,
and the society occupies eighteen branch establishments
in rochdale. libraries containing more than , volumes,
and classes in science, language, and the technical arts, attended
by  students, have been maintained. the extension of the
rochdale store led to the necessity of a wholesale establishment
of their own. it is now a large institution with branches
in london and newcastle. “it owns manufactories in london,
manchester, newcastle, leicester, durham, and crumpsall;
and it has depots in cork, limerick, kilmallock, waterford,
tipperary, tralee, and armagh, for the purchase of butter, potatoes,
and eggs. it has buyers in new york and copenhagen,
and it owns two steamships. it has a banking department
with a turn-over of more than £,, annually.”
the following figures for england and wales tell their own
story as to the progress of co-operation:
..number of members,,capital: share,,,capital: loan,,,sales,,,,net profit,,,
several persons each subscribe a sum to make up the share
capital of a store, and a person is selected to take charge of the
purchase and care of the goods. the advantages of the plan
are: () a division among the co-operators of all the net profits
of the retail trade; () a saving in advertisements, since members
are always purchasers without solicitation; () no loss by
bad debts, since only cash sales are permitted; and () security
against fraud as to the character of the goods, because there is
no inducement to make gains by adulterations. it is often
found that the capital is turned over ten times in the course of
a year; while the cost of management in the wholesale rochdale
stores does not amount to one per cent on the returns.
[pg ]
the arrangement of obligations in due order of their priority,
which has been recommended by mr. holyoake, is as
follows: of funds in the store, payment should be made, () of
the expenses of management; () of interest due on all loans;
() of an amount equivalent to ten per cent of the value of the
fixed stock to cover the annual depreciation from wear and
tear; () of dividends on the subscribed capital of the members;
() of such a sum as may be necessary for an extension
of the business; () of two and a half per cent of the remaining
profit, after all the above items are provided for, for educational
purposes; () of the residue, and that only, among all
the persons employed, and members of the store, in proportion
to the amount of their wages, or of their respective purchases
during the quarter. the payment of dividends to customers
on their purchases seems now to be considered an essential element
of success.
§ . productive co-operation.
productive co-operation presents many serious difficulties,
the chief of which is the need of managing ability.
some one in the association must know the wholesale markets
well, the expectation of crops connected with his materials
used, the proper time to buy; he must know the processes of
the special production thoroughly, the best machinery, the
best adaptation of labor to the given end; he must know the
whims of purchasers, and be ready to change his products accordingly—in
short, a man eminently fitted for success in his
own factory is essential to the profitable management of one
belonging to a body of co-operators. it has been already seen
how large a variation in profit is due to manager's wages; and
it is very often only his skill, prudence, and experience that
make the difference between a failure and a success in business.
unless co-operators are willing to pay as large a sum
for the services of a good manager as he could get in his own
[pg ]
establishment, they can not secure the talent which will make
their venture succeed.
in france the national workshops of louis blanc, established
in , were a failure. nowhere has it been more
clearly seen that state help has been disastrous than in france,
where the constituent assembly voted ,, francs for co-operative
experiments, all of which failed. curiously enough,
distributive co-operation has not succeeded in france, because,
owing to a wide-spread dislike of the wages system, workmen
will try nothing less than productive schemes. and their success
in this has been no greater than might be expected, when
inexperience is put to a task beyond its powers.
in great britain and the united states there have been some
successful experiments in production; and mr. holyoake holds
that, although workmen certainly do begrudge the manager's
salary, productive associations are possible when managed by
a board of elected directors. he urges, moreover, that, as in
distributive co-operation, if profits are shared with customers,
there will be insured both popularity and continuity of custom
without the cost of advertising, and such expenses as those
of travelers and commissions. the plan of actual operations
upon which successes have been reached in england seems to
be briefly this: () to save capital, chiefly through co-operative
associations; () to purchase or lease premises; () to
engage managers, accountants, and officers at the ordinary
salaries which such men can command in the market according
to their ability; () to borrow capital on the credit of
the association; () to pay upon capital subscribed by members
the same rate of interest as that upon borrowed capital;
() to regard as profit only that which remains after making
payment for rent, materials, wages, all business outlays, and
interest on capital; and () to divide the profits according to
the salaries of all officers, wages of workmen, and purchases of
customers. those mills and factories which have sprung out
of the extension of distributive associations, as at rochdale,
seem, and naturally so, to have been most successful. they
have gradually trained themselves somewhat for the work, and
their customers were beforehand secured. that is, where the
difficulties of the manager's function have been lessened, they
have a better chance of success. and yet it must be said that
productive associations will gain largely from the efficiency of
the labor when working for its own interest; and this is an important
consideration to be urged in favor of such associations.
[pg ]
the sun mill, at oldham, england, was established for
spinning cotton in  by the exertions of some co-operative
bodies. beginning with a share capital of $,, and a loan
capital of a like amount, it set , spindles in operation. in
 they had a share capital of $, (all subscribed except
$,), and an equal amount of loan capital, while the
whole plant was estimated as worth $,. two and a half
per cent per annum has been set apart for the depreciation in
the value of the mill, and seven and a half per cent for the machinery;
so that in the first ten years a total sum of $,
was set aside for depreciation of the property. the profits
have varied from two to forty per cent; and, while only five
per cent interest was paid on the loan capital, large dividends
were made on the share capital. during the last few years the
sun mill has on an average realized a profit of -½ per cent,
although it is known that the cotton trade has suffered during
this time from a serious depression.
many experiments, however, have proved failures; and sometimes,
when they are successful (as in the case of the hatters'
association in newark, new jersey), the workmen have no desire
to share their benefits with others, and practically form a
corporation by themselves. the mere fact that they do sometimes
succeed is an important thing. then, too, they have an
opportunity of securing by salaries that executive ability in the
community which exists separate from the possession of capital.
and in these days, in large corporations, the manager is
not necessarily (although he often is) a large owner of capital.
the last annual report of the co-operative congress ()
shows the existence in england and scotland of productive
associations for the manufacture of cloth, flannel, fustian,
hosiery, quilts, worsted, nails, watches, linen, and silk, as well
as those for engineering, printing, and quarrying; and these
were but a few of them.
in the united states there have been some successes as well
as failures. in january, , a number of machinists and
other working-men organized in the town of beaver falls, pennsylvania,
a co-operative foundry association for the manufacture
of stoves, hollow-ware, and fine castings. on a small capital
of only $, they have steadily prospered, paid the market
rate of wages, and also paid annual dividends, over and above
all expenses and interest on the plant, of from twelve to fifteen
per cent. in  thirty workmen started a co-operative foundry
in somerset, massachusetts, with a capital of about $,.
[pg ]
in the years - the company spent $, for new
flasks and patterns, and yet showed a net gain of $,. in
 it had a capital of $,, and a surplus fund of
§ . industrial partnership.
the difficulties of productive co-operation arising from
the need of skilled management, together with the existing unsatisfactory
relation between employers and laborers when
wholly separate from each other, have led to a most promising
plan of industrial partnership by which the manager retains
the control of the business operations, but shares his profits
with the workmen. the gain through increased efficiency,
greater economy, and superior workmanship, recoups the manager
for the voluntary subtraction from his share, and yet
the laborers receive an additional share; but more than this,
it educates the laborer in industrial methods, discloses the difficulties
of management, and stimulates him to saving habits
and greater regularity of work. this system is particularly
adapted to reaching those laborers who would not themselves
rise to the demands of productive co-operation.
the principle was tried on one of the belgian railways.
“ninety-five kilogrammes of coke were consumed for every
league of distance run, but this was known to be more than
necessary; but how to remedy the evil was the problem. a
bonus of -½d. on every hectolitre of coke saved on this average
of ninety-five to the league was offered to the men concerned,
and this trifling bonus worked the miracle. the work was
done equally well, or better, with forty-eight kilogrammes of
coke instead of ninety-five; just one half, or nearly, saved by
careful work, at an expense of probably less than one tenth of
the saving.”
the experiment which has attracted most attention in the
past has been that of the messrs. briggs, at their collieries in
yorkshire, england. the relations between the owners and
the laborers were as bad as they could well be. “all coal-masters
is devils, and briggs is the prince of devils,” ran the
talk of the miners, when they did not choose to send letters
threatening to shoot the owners. in  messrs. briggs tried
the plan of an industrial partnership with their men, purely
from business considerations. seventy per cent of the cost of
raising coal consisted of wages, and fully fifteen per cent of
materials which were habitually wasted. the whole property
[pg ]
was valued, and divided into shares of $ each, of which the
owners retained two thirds, together with the control of the business.
the remaining one third of the shares was offered to
the employés. if any subscriber was too poor to pay $ for a
share, the subsequent dividends and payments were to be applied
to purchasing the share. after reserving a fair allowance
for expenses, like the redemption of capital, whenever the remaining
profits exceeded ten per cent on the capital, that excess
was to be divided into two equal parts, one of which was
to be distributed among all persons employed by the company
in proportion to their wages, and the other was to be retained
by the capital. in previous years but once had they made ten
per cent profit on their capital, and twice only five per cent.
in the first year after the new system came into operation, the
total profits were fourteen per cent, and the four per cent of
excess was divided, two to the laborers' bonus, and two to the
capital, so that capital received twelve per cent. in the second
year the profits were sixteen per cent, in the third year seventeen
per cent; the first year the work-people received in addition
to their wages $,, in the second $,, in the third
$,. the moral effect was striking. work was done
regularly, forbearance was exercised, habits improved, and the
faces of the men were set toward improvement in life. the
scheme worked successfully for years, but was finally ended
by the pressure of the outside trades-unions, who compelled the
workmen to give up the arrangement.
a similar experiment was tried by the messrs. brewster,
carriage-manufacturers, of new york. they offered to their
workmen ten per cent of their profits, before any allowance
was made for interest on the capital invested, or before any
payment was made for the services of the firm as managers.
in one year as much as $, was divided among the laborers.
again, as in the case of the briggs colliery, the experiment
was brought to an end by an unreasoning submission to
the pressure of outside workmen during a strike.
but, all in all, industrial partnership offers a great field for
[pg ]
that kind of improvement which is worth more than a mere
increase of wages, and seems to make it possible to reach the
heavy weight of sluggishness among the lower and more hopeless
strata of society. and it is possible that it will stir in
them the powers which may afterward find employment in
the harder problems of productive co-operation.
[pg ]
§ . people's banks.
in germany the struggle between the two theories—self-help
and state-help—was fought out by schultze-delitsch—that
is, schultze of delitsch, a town in saxony—and lasalle, and
the victory given to the former. schultze-delitsch, as a consequence,
was successful in directing the co-operative principle in
germany to giving workmen credit in purchasing tools, etc.,
when he had no security but his character. this form of co-operation
works to give the energetic and industrious workmen
a lever by which, through the possession of credit, they can
raise themselves to the position of small capitalists, and thus
widen the field of possible improvement. while the former
schemes of co-operation described above have given the wages-receivers
a share of the unearned increment from land, and
tend to give them a share of the manager's wages, the plan of
schultze was to assist them to gain a share in the advantages
belonging to the possession of capital. the capital was to be
accumulated by their own exertions, and, in his scheme depended
on the principle of self-help. the following is the plan of
banks adopted:
“every member is obliged to make a certain weekly payment
into the common stock. as soon as it reaches a certain
sum he is allowed to raise a loan exceeding his share in the inverse
ratio of the amount of his deposit. for instance, after
he has deposited one dollar, he is allowed to borrow five or six;
but, if he had deposited twenty dollars, he is allowed only to
borrow thirty. the security he is compelled to offer is his own
and that of two other members of the association, who become
jointly and severally liable. he may have no assets whatever
beyond the amount of his deposits, nor may his guarantors;
the bank relies simply on the character of the three, and the
two securities rely on the character of their principal; and the
remarkable fact is, that the security has been found sufficient,
that the interest of the men in the institutions and the fear of
the opinion of their fellows has produced a display of honesty
and punctuality such as perhaps is not to be found in the history
of any other banking institutions. such is the confidence
inspired by these institutions that they hold on deposit, or as
loans from third parties, an amount exceeding by more than
three fourths the total amount of their own capital. the
[pg ]
monthly contributions of the members may be as low as ten
cents, but the amount which each member is allowed to have
in some banks is not more than seven or eight dollars, in none
more than three hundred dollars. he has a right to borrow to
the full amount of his deposit without giving security; if he
desires to borrow a larger sum, he must furnish security in the
manner we have described. the liability of the members is
unlimited. the plan of limiting the liability to the amount
of the capital deposited was tried at first, but it inspired no
confidence, and the enterprise did not succeed till every member
was made generally liable. each member, on entering, is
obliged to pay a small fee, which goes toward forming or
maintaining a reserve fund, apart from the active capital. the
profits are derived from the interest paid by borrowers, which
amounts to from eight to ten per cent, which may not sound
very large in our ears, but in germany is very high. not over
five per cent is paid on capital borrowed from outsiders. all
profits are distributed in dividends among the members of the
association, in the proportion of the amount of their deposits—after
the payment of the expenses of management, of course—and
the apportionment of a certain percentage to the reserve-fund.
every member, as we have said, has a right to borrow
to the extent of his deposit without security; but then, if he
seeks to borrow more, whether he shall obtain any loan, and, if
so, how large a one, is decided by the board of management,
who are guided in making their decision just as all bank officers
are—by a consideration of the circumstances of the bank
as well as those of the borrower. all the affairs of the association
are discussed and decided in the last resort by a general
assembly composed of all the members.”
the main part of
the capital loaned by the banks is obtained from outside sources
on the credit of the associations. in  there were 
of these institutions in germany; in  there were ,,
with over ,, members, owning $,, of capital,
with $,, more on loan, and doing a business of
[pg ]
book v. on the influence of government.
chapter i. on the general principles of taxation.
§ . four fundamental rules of taxation.
one of the most disputed questions, both in political
science and in practical statesmanship at this particular period,
relates to the proper limits of the functions and agency
of governments.
we shall first consider the economical effects arising from
the manner in which governments perform their necessary
and acknowledged functions.
we shall then pass to certain governmental interferences
of what i have termed the optional kind (i.e., overstepping
the boundaries of the universally acknowledged functions)
which have heretofore taken place, and in some cases still
take place, under the influence of false general theories.
the first of these divisions is of an extremely miscellaneous
character: since the necessary functions of government,
and those which are so manifestly expedient that they have
never or very rarely been objected to, are too various to be
brought under any very simple classification. we commence,
[under] the first head, with the theory of taxation.
the qualities desirable, economically speaking, in a
system of taxation, have been embodied by adam smith in
four maxims or principles, which, having been generally concurred
in by subsequent writers, may be said to have become
[pg ]
classical, and this chapter can not be better commenced than
by quoting them:
“. the subjects of every state ought to contribute to the
support of the government, as nearly as possible in proportion
to their respective abilities: that is, in proportion to the
revenue which they respectively enjoy under the protection of
the state. in the observation or neglect of this maxim consists
what is called the equality or inequality of taxation.
“. the tax which each individual is bound to pay ought
to be certain, and not arbitrary. the time of payment, the
manner of payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be
clear and plain to the contributor, and to every other person.
the certainty of what each individual ought to pay is, in taxation,
a matter of so great importance, that a very considerable
degree of inequality, it appears, i believe, from the experience
of all nations, is not near so great an evil as a very
small degree of uncertainty.
“. every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the
manner, in which it is most likely to be convenient for the
contributor to pay it. taxes upon such consumable goods as
are articles of luxury are all finally paid by the consumer,
and generally in a manner that is very convenient to him.
he pays them little by little, as he has occasion to buy the
goods. as he is at liberty, too, either to buy or not to buy,
as he pleases, it must be his own fault if he ever suffers any
considerable inconvenience from such taxes.
“. every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take
out and to keep out of the pockets of the people as little as
possible over and above what it brings into the public treasury
of the state. a tax may either take out or keep out of the
pockets of the people a great deal more than it brings into
the public treasury in the four following ways: first, the
levying of it may require a great number of officers, whose
salaries may eat up the greater part of the produce of the tax,
and whose perquisites may impose another additional tax upon
[pg ]
the people.” secondly, it may divert a portion of the labor
and capital of the community from a more to a less productive
employment. “thirdly, by the forfeitures and other
penalties which those unfortunate individuals incur who
attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax it may frequently
ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which the
community might have derived from the employment of their
capitals. an injudicious tax offers a great temptation to
smuggling. fourthly, by subjecting the people to the frequent
visits and the odious examination of the tax-gatherers it
may expose them to much unnecessary trouble, vexation, and
oppression”: to which may be added that the restrictive
regulations to which trades and manufactures are often subjected,
to prevent evasion of a tax, are not only in themselves
troublesome and expensive, but often oppose insuperable obstacles
to making improvements in the processes.
§ . grounds of the principle of equality of taxation.
the first of the four points, equality of taxation,
requires to be more fully examined, being a thing often imperfectly
understood, and on which many false notions have
become to a certain degree accredited, through the absence of
any definite principles of judgment in the popular mind.
for what reason ought equality to be the rule in matters
of taxation? for the reason that it ought to be so in
all affairs of government. a government ought to make no
distinction of persons or classes in the strength of their claims
on it. if any one bears less than his fair share of the burden,
some other person must suffer more than his share.
equality of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics, means
equality of sacrifice. it means apportioning the contribution
of each person toward the expenses of government, so that
he shall feel neither more nor less inconvenience from his
share of the payment than every other person experiences
from his. there are persons, however, who regard the taxes
paid by each member of the community as an equivalent
for value received, in the shape of service to himself; and
they prefer to rest the justice of making each contribute in
proportion to his means upon the ground that he who has
[pg ]
twice as much property to be protected receives, on an accurate
calculation, twice as much protection, and ought, on the
principles of bargain and sale, to pay twice as much for it.
since, however, the assumption that government exists solely
for the protection of property is not one to be deliberately
adhered to, some consistent adherents of the quid pro quo
principle go on to observe that protection being required for
persons as well as property, and everybody's person receiving
the same amount of protection, a poll-tax of a fixed sum per
head is a proper equivalent for this part of the benefits of
government, while the remaining part, protection to property,
should be paid for in proportion to property. but, in the
first place, it is not admissible that the protection of persons
and that of property are the sole purposes of government. in
the second place, the practice of setting definite values on
things essentially indefinite, and making them a ground of
practical conclusions, is peculiarly fertile in the false views
of social questions. it can not be admitted that to be protected
in the ownership of ten times as much property is to
be ten times as much protected. if we wanted to estimate
the degrees of benefit which different persons derive from
the protection of government, we should have to consider
who would suffer most if that protection were withdrawn: to
which question, if any answer could be made, it must be, that
those would suffer most who were weakest in mind or body,
either by nature or by position.
§ . should the same percentage be levied on all amounts of income?
setting out, then, from the maxim that equal sacrifices
ought to be demanded from all, we have next to inquire
whether this is in fact done, by making each contribute the
same percentage on his pecuniary means. many persons
maintain the negative, saying that a tenth part taken from a
small income is a heavier burden than the same fraction deducted
from one much larger; and on this is grounded the
very popular scheme of what is called a graduated property-tax,
viz., an income-tax in which the percentage rises with
the amount of the income.
on the best consideration i am able to give to this question,
[pg ]
it appears to me that the portion of truth which the
doctrine contains arises principally from the difference between
a tax which can be saved from luxuries and one which
trenches, in ever so small a degree, upon the necessaries of
life. to take a thousand a year from the possessor of ten
thousand would not deprive him of anything really conducive
either to the support or to the comfort of existence; and,
if such would be the effect of taking five pounds from one
whose income is fifty, the sacrifice required from the last is
not only greater than, but entirely incommensurable with,
that imposed upon the first. the mode of adjusting these
inequalities of pressure which seems to be the most equitable
is that recommended by bentham, of leaving a certain minimum
of income, sufficient to provide the necessaries of life,
untaxed. suppose [$] a year to be sufficient to provide
the number of persons ordinarily supported from a single income
with the requisites of life and health, and with protection
against habitual bodily suffering, but not with any indulgence.
this then should be made the minimum, and incomes
exceeding it should pay taxes not upon their whole amount,
but upon the surplus. if the tax be ten per cent, an income
of [$] should be considered as a net income of [$], and
charged with [$] a year, while an income of [$,] should
be charged as one of [$,]. an income not exceeding
[$] should not be taxed at all, either directly or by taxes
on necessaries; for, as by supposition this is the smallest
income which labor ought to be able to command, the government
ought not to be a party to making it smaller.
both in england and on the continent a graduated property-tax
(l'impôt progressif) has been advocated, on the
avowed ground that the state should use the instrument of
taxation as a means of mitigating the inequalities of wealth.
i am as desirous as any one that means should be taken to
diminish those inequalities, but not so as to relieve the prodigal
at the expense of the prudent. to tax the larger incomes
at a higher percentage than the smaller is to lay a tax on
industry and economy; to impose a penalty on people for
[pg ]
having worked harder and saved more than their neighbors.
it is not the fortunes which are earned, but those which are
unearned, that it is for the public good to place under limitation.
with respect to the large fortunes acquired by gift or
inheritance, the power of bequeathing is one of those privileges
of property which are fit subjects for regulation on
grounds of general expediency; and i have already
suggested,
as the most eligible mode of restraining the accumulation
of large fortunes in the hands of those who have
not earned them by exertion, a limitation of the amount
which any one person should be permitted to acquire by gift,
bequest, or inheritance. i conceive that inheritances and
legacies, exceeding a certain amount, are highly proper subjects
for taxation; and that the revenue from them should
be as great as it can be made without giving rise to evasions,
by donation inter vivos or concealment of property,
such as it would be impossible adequately to check. the principle
of graduation (as it is called), that is, of levying a larger percentage
on a larger sum, though its application to general
taxation would be in my opinion objectionable, seems to me
both just and expedient as applied to legacy and inheritance
duties.
the objection to a graduated property-tax applies in an
aggravated degree to the proposition of an exclusive tax on
what is called “realized property,” that is, property not
forming a part of any capital engaged in business, or rather
in business under the superintendence of the owner; as land,
the public funds, money lent on mortgage, and shares in
stock companies. except the proposal of applying a sponge
to the national debt, no such palpable violation of common
honesty has found sufficient support in this country, during
the present generation, to be regarded as within the domain
of discussion. it has not the palliation of a graduated property-tax,
that of laying the burden on those best able to bear
it; for “realized property” includes the far larger portion of
[pg ]
the provision made for those who are unable to work, and
consists, in great part, of extremely small fractions. i can
hardly conceive a more shameless pretension than that the
major part of the property of the country, that of merchants,
manufacturers, farmers, and shopkeepers, should be exempted
from its share of taxation; that these classes should only
begin to pay their proportion after retiring from business,
and if they never retire should be excused from it altogether.
but even this does not give an adequate idea of the injustice
of the proposition. the burden thus exclusively thrown on
the owners of the smaller portion of the wealth of the community
would not even be a burden on that class of persons
in perpetual succession, but would fall exclusively on those
who happened to compose it when the tax was laid on. as
land and those particular securities would thenceforth yield
a smaller net income, relatively to the general interest of
capital and to the profits of trade, the balance would rectify
itself by a permanent depreciation of those kinds of property.
future buyers would acquire land and securities at a reduction
of price, equivalent to the peculiar tax, which tax they
would, therefore, escape from paying; while the original
possessors would remain burdened with it even after parting
with the property, since they would have sold their land or
securities at a loss of value equivalent to the fee-simple of
the tax. its imposition would thus be tantamount to the
confiscation for public uses of a percentage of their property
equal to the percentage laid on their income by the tax.
the above proposition has been extended, by those in the
united states who appeal to class prejudice, to a proposal to
tax the incomes of those who hold government bonds. it so
happened that, for example, the six dollars income on a one-hundred-dollar
bond of the united states was not, in the war
period, deemed a sufficient equivalent for the risk of loaning
one hundred dollars to the state; and congress, therefore,
agreed to relieve them of taxation. it is the same thing to a
lender if he receive six per cent directly from the government,
or if he receive seven per cent, and is obliged to pay back
one per cent to the treasury in the form of taxation; but to the
government it is another thing, because if it sell a taxed bond
[pg ]
at seven per cent interest, it does not receive back the whole of
the one per cent tax, but the one per cent tax less the expense
of levying it. in other words the government, in the latter
case, pays six per cent interest plus the cost of levying the tax;
and consequently borrowed more cheaply in the form of an untaxed
bond, as was the hope when the provision was made. if,
then, a tax were now to be put upon the bonds, it would fall
exclusively on the present holders of them; for, since it diminishes
the net income from the bond, it lowers the selling price
of the bond itself, as before
explained.
§ . should the same percentage be levied on perpetual and on terminable
incomes?
whether the profits of trade may not rightfully be
taxed at a lower rate than incomes derived from interest or
rent is part of the more comprehensive question whether life-incomes
should be subjected to the same rate of taxation as
perpetual incomes; whether salaries, for example, or annuities,
or the gains of professions, should pay the same percentage
as the income from inheritable property.
the existing tax [in england] treats all kinds of incomes
exactly alike, taking its [fivepence] in the pound as well
from the person whose income dies with him as from the
landholder, stockholder, or mortgagee, who can transmit his
fortune undiminished to his descendants. this is a visible
injustice; yet it does not arithmetically violate the rule that
taxation ought to be in proportion to means. when it is said
that a temporary income ought to be taxed less than a permanent
one, the reply is irresistible that it is taxed less: for
the income which lasts only ten years pays the tax only ten
years, while that which lasts forever pays forever. the
claim in favor of terminable incomes does not rest on grounds
of arithmetic, but of human wants and feelings. it is not
because the temporary annuitant has smaller means, but because
he has greater necessities, that he ought to be assessed
at a lower rate.
in spite of the nominal equality of income, a, an annuitant
of £, a year, can not so well afford to pay £ out
of it as b, who derives the same annual sum from heritable
property; a having usually a demand on his income which
[pg ]
b has not, namely, to provide by saving for children or
others; to which, in the case of salaries or professional gains,
must generally be added a provision for his own later years;
while b may expend his whole income without injury to his
old age, and still have it all to bestow on others after his
death. if a, in order to meet these exigencies, must lay by
£ of his income, to take £ from him as income-tax is
to take £ from £, since it must be retrenched from
that part only of his means which he can afford to spend
on his own consumption. were he to throw it ratably on
what he spends and on what he saves, abating £ from his
consumption and £ from his annual saving, then indeed
his immediate sacrifice would be proportionally the same as
b's; but then his children or his old age would be worse provided
for in consequence of the tax. the capital sum which
would be accumulated for them would be one tenth less, and
on the reduced income afforded by this reduced capital they
would be a second time charged with income-tax; while b's
heirs would only be charged once.
the principle, therefore, of equality of taxation, interpreted
in its only just sense, equality of sacrifice, requires
that a person who has no means of providing for old age, or
for those in whom he is interested, except by saving from
income, should have the tax remitted on all that part of
his income which is really and bona fide applied to that
purpose.
if, indeed, reliance could be placed on the conscience of
the contributors, or sufficient security taken for the correctness
of their statements by collateral precautions, the proper
mode of assessing an income-tax would be to tax only the
part of income devoted to expenditure, exempting that
which is saved. for when saved and invested (and all savings,
speaking generally, are invested) it thenceforth pays
income-tax on the interest or profit which it brings, notwithstanding
that it has already been taxed on the principal.
unless, therefore, savings are exempted from income-tax,
the contributors are twice taxed on what they save, and only
[pg ]
once on what they spend. to tax the sum invested, and
afterward tax also the proceeds of the investment, is to tax
the same portion of the contributor's means twice over.
no income-tax is really just from which savings are not
exempted; and no income-tax ought to be voted without
that provision, if the form of the returns and the nature of
the evidence required could be so arranged as to prevent
the exemption from being taken fraudulent advantage of,
by saving with one hand and getting into debt with the other,
or by spending in the following year what had been passed
tax-free as saving in the year preceding. but, if no plan can
be devised for the exemption of actual savings, sufficiently
free from liability to fraud, it is necessary, as the next thing
in point of justice, to take into account, in assessing the tax,
what the different classes of contributors ought to save. in
fixing the proportion between the two rates, there must inevitably
be something arbitrary; perhaps a deduction of one
fourth in favor of life-incomes would be as little objectionable
as any which could be made.
of the net profits of persons in business, a part, as before
observed, may be considered as interest on capital, and of a
perpetual character, and the remaining part as remuneration
for the skill and labor of superintendence. the surplus beyond
interest depends on the life of the individual, and even
on his continuance in business, and is entitled to the full
amount of exemption allowed to terminable incomes.
§ . the increase of the rent of land from natural causes a fit subject of
peculiar taxation.
suppose that there is a kind of income which constantly
tends to increase, without any exertion or sacrifice on
the part of the owners: those owners constituting a class in
the community, whom the natural course of things progressively
enriches, consistently with complete passiveness on their
own part. in such a case it would be no violation of the
principles on which private property is grounded, if the state
should appropriate this increase of wealth, or part of it, as it
arises. this would not properly be taking anything from
anybody; it would merely be applying an accession of wealth,
created by circumstances, to the benefit of society, instead of
[pg ]
allowing it to become an unearned appendage to the riches
of a particular class.
now, this is actually the case with rent. the ordinary
progress of a society which increases in wealth is at all times
tending to augment the incomes of landlords; to give them
both a greater amount and a greater proportion of the wealth
of the community, independently of any trouble or outlay
incurred by themselves. they grow richer, as it were, in
their sleep, without working, risking, or economizing. what
claim have they, on the general principle of social justice,
to this accession of riches? in what would they have been
wronged if society had, from the beginning, reserved the
right of taxing the spontaneous increase of rent, to the highest
amount required by financial exigencies? the only admissible
mode of proceeding would be by a general measure.
the first step should be a valuation of all the land in the
country. the present value of all land should be exempt
from the tax; but after an interval had elapsed, during
which society had increased in population and capital, a
rough estimate might be made of the spontaneous increase
which had accrued to rent since the valuation was made.
of this the average price of produce would be some criterion:
if that had risen, it would be certain that rent had increased,
and (as already shown) even in a greater ratio than the rise
of price. on this and other data, an approximate estimate
might be made how much value had been added to the land
of the country by natural causes; and in laying on a general
land-tax, which for fear of miscalculation should be considerably
within the amount thus indicated, there would be an
assurance of not touching any increase of income which might
be the result of capital expended or industry exerted by the
proprietor.
with reference to such a tax, perhaps a safer criterion
than either a rise of rents or a rise of the price of corn,
would be a general rise in the price of land. it would be
easy to keep the tax within the amount which would reduce
the market value of land below the original valuation; and
[pg ]
up to that point, whatever the amount of the tax might be,
no injustice would be done to the proprietors.
in  mr. mill became president of the land tenure association,
one of whose objects was: “to claim for the benefit
of the state the interception by taxation of the future unearned
increase of the rent of land (so far as the same can be
ascertained), or a great part of that increase, which is continually
taking place, without any effort or outlay by the proprietors,
merely through the growth of population and wealth;
reserving to owners the option of relinquishing their property
to the state at the market value which it may have acquired at
the time when this principle may be adopted by the legislature.”
it is urged against this plan that, if the government
take for itself the increase from rent, it should also make compensation
for loss arising from declining rents, whenever there
happens to be any readjustment of values in land.
§ . taxes falling on capital not necessarily objectionable.
in addition to the preceding rules, another general
rule of taxation is sometimes laid down—namely, that it
should fall on income and not on capital.
to provide that taxation shall fall entirely on income,
and not at all on capital, is beyond the power of any system
of fiscal arrangements. there is no tax which is not partly
paid from what would otherwise have been saved; no tax,
the amount of which, if remitted, would be wholly employed
in increased expenditure, and no part whatever laid by as an
addition to capital. all taxes, therefore, are in some sense
partly paid out of capital; and in a poor country it is impossible
to impose any tax which will not impede the increase of
the national wealth. but, in a country where capital abounds
and the spirit of accumulation is strong, this effect of taxation
is scarcely felt. to take from capital by taxation what
emigration would remove, or a commercial crisis destroy, is
only to do what either of those causes would have done—namely,
to make a clear space for further saving.
i can not, therefore, attach any importance, in a wealthy
country, to the objection made against taxes on legacies and
inheritances, that they are taxes on capital. it is perfectly
true that they are so. as ricardo observes, if £ are taken
[pg ]
from any one in a tax on houses or on wine, he will probably
save it, or a part of it, by living in a cheaper house, consuming
less wine, or retrenching from some other of his expenses;
but, if the same sum be taken from him because he
has received a legacy of £,, he considers the legacy as
only £, and feels no more inducement than at any other
time (probably feels rather less inducement) to economize in
his expenditure. the tax, therefore, is wholly paid out of
capital; and there are countries in which this would be a
serious objection. but, in the first place, the argument can
not apply to any country which has a national debt and devotes
any portion of revenue to paying it off, since the produce
of the tax, thus applied, still remains capital, and is
merely transferred from the tax-payer to the fund-holder.
but the objection is never applicable in a country which
increases rapidly in wealth.
[pg ]
chapter ii. of direct taxes.
§ . direct taxes either on income or expenditure.
taxes are either direct or indirect. a direct tax is
one which is demanded from the very persons who, it is intended
or desired, should pay it. indirect taxes are those
which are demanded from one person in the expectation and
intention that he shall indemnify himself at the expense of
another: such as the excise or customs. the producer or
importer of a commodity is called upon to pay tax on it, not
with the intention to levy a peculiar contribution upon him,
but to tax through him the consumers of the commodity,
from whom it is supposed that he will recover the amount
by means of an advance in price.
direct taxes are either on income or on expenditure.
most taxes on expenditure are indirect, but some are direct,
being imposed, not on the producer or seller of an article,
but immediately on the consumer. a house-tax, for example,
is a direct tax on expenditure, if levied, as it usually is,
on the occupier of the house. if levied on the builder or
owner, it would be an indirect tax. a window-tax is a
direct tax on expenditure; so are the taxes on horses and
carriages.
the sources of income are rent, profits, and wages. this
includes every sort of income, except gift or plunder. taxes
may be laid on any one of the three kinds of income, or a
uniform tax on all of them. we will consider these in their
order.
§ . taxes on rent.
a tax on rent falls wholly on the landlord. there
[pg ]
are no means by which he can shift the burden upon any
one else. it does not affect the value or price of agricultural
produce, for this is determined by the cost of production in
the most unfavorable circumstances, and in those circumstances,
as we have so often demonstrated, no rent is paid.
this, however, is, in strict exactness, only true of the
rent which is the result either of natural causes, or of improvements
made by tenants. when the landlord makes
improvements which increase the productive power of his
land, he is remunerated for them by an extra payment from
the tenant; and this payment, which to the landlord is properly
a profit on capital, is blended and confounded with rent.
a tax on rent, if extending to this portion of it, would discourage
landlords from making improvements; but whatever
hinders improvements from being made in the manner
in which people prefer to make them, will often prevent
them from being made at all; and on this account a tax on
rent would be inexpedient unless some means could be devised
of excluding from its operation that portion of the
nominal rent which may be regarded as landlord's profit.
§ . —on profits.
a tax on profits, like a tax on rent, must, at least in
its immediate operation, fall wholly on the payer. all profits
being alike affected, no relief can be obtained by a change
of employment. if a tax were laid on the profits of any
one branch of productive employment, the tax would be
virtually an increase of the cost of production, and the value
and price of the article would rise accordingly; by which
the tax would be thrown upon the consumers of the commodity,
and would not affect profits. but a general and
equal tax on all profits would not affect general prices, and
would fall, at least in the first instance, on capitalists alone.
there is, however, an ulterior effect, which, in a rich and
prosperous country, requires to be taken into account. it
may operate in two different ways: (.) the curtailment of
profit, and the consequent increased difficulty in making a
fortune or obtaining a subsistence by the employment of
capital, may act as a stimulus to inventions, and to the use
[pg ]
of them when made. if improvements in production are
much accelerated, and if these improvements cheapen, directly
or indirectly, any of the things habitually consumed
by the laborer, profits may rise, and rise sufficiently to make
up for all that is taken from them by the tax. in that case
the tax will have been realized without loss to any one, the
produce of the country being increased by an equal, or what
would in that case be a far greater, amount. the tax, however,
must even in this case be considered as paid from profits,
because the receivers of profits are those who would be
benefited if it were taken off.
but (.) though the artificial abstraction of a portion of
profits would have a real tendency to accelerate improvements
in production, no considerable improvements might
actually result, or only of such a kind as not to raise general
profits at all, or not to raise them so much as the tax had
diminished them. if so, the rate of profit would be brought
closer to that practical minimum to which it is constantly approaching.
at its first imposition the tax falls wholly on
profits; but the amount of increase of capital, which the tax
prevents, would, if it had been allowed to continue, have
tended to reduce profits to the same level; and at every
period of ten or twenty years there will be found less difference
between profits as they are and profits as they would
in that case have been, until at last there is no difference,
and the tax is thrown either upon the laborer or upon the
landlord. the real effect of a tax on profits is to make the
country possess at any given period a smaller capital and a
smaller aggregate production, and to make the stationary
state be attained earlier, and with a smaller sum of national
wealth.
even in countries which do not accumulate so fast as to
be always within a short interval of the stationary state, it
seems impossible that, if capital is accumulating at all, its
accumulation should not be in some degree retarded by the
abstraction of a portion of its profit; and, unless the effect
in stimulating improvements be a full counterbalance, it is
[pg ]
inevitable that a part of the burden will be thrown off the
capitalist, upon the laborer or the landlord. one or other
of these is always the loser by a diminished rate of accumulation.
if population continues to increase as before, the
laborer suffers; if not, cultivation is checked in its advance,
and the landlords lose the accession of rent which would
have accrued to them. the only countries in which a tax on
profits seems likely to be permanently a burden on capitalists
exclusively are those in which capital is stationary, because
there is no new accumulation. in such countries the
tax might not prevent the old capital from being kept up
through habit, or from unwillingness to submit to impoverishment,
and so the capitalists might continue to bear the
whole of the tax.
§ . —on wages.
we now turn to taxes on wages. the incidence of
these is very different, according as the wages taxed as those
of ordinary unskilled labor, or are the remuneration of such
skilled or privileged employments, whether manual or intellectual,
as are taken out of the sphere of competition by a
natural or conferred monopoly.
i have already remarked that, in the present low state of
popular education, all the higher grades of mental or educated
labor are at a monopoly price, exceeding the wages of
common workmen in a degree very far beyond that which is
due to the expense, trouble, and loss of time required in
qualifying for the employment. any tax levied on these
gains, which still leaves them above (or not below) their just
proportion, falls on those who pay it; they have no means of
relieving themselves at the expense of any other class. the
same thing is true of ordinary wages, in cases like that of the
united states, or of a new colony, where, capital increasing
as rapidly as population can increase, wages are kept up by
the increase of capital, and not by the adherence of the laborers
to a fixed standard of comforts. in such a case, some
deterioration of their condition, whether by a tax or otherwise,
might possibly take place without checking the increase
of population. the tax would in that case fall on the laborers
[pg ]
themselves, and would reduce them prematurely to that
lower state to which, on the same supposition with regard to
their habits, they would in any case have been reduced ultimately,
by the inevitable diminution in the rate of increase
of capital, through the occupation of all the fertile land.
some will object that, even in this case, a tax on wages
can not be detrimental to the laborers, since the money raised
by it, being expended in the country, comes back to the laborers
again through the demand for labor. without, however,
reverting to general principles, we may rely on an obvious
reductio ad absurdum.
if to take money from the laborers
and spend it in commodities is giving it back to the laborers,
then, to take money from other classes, and spend it in the
same manner, must be giving it to the laborers; consequently,
the more a government takes in taxes, the greater will be the
demand for labor, and the more opulent the condition of the
laborers—a proposition the absurdity of which no one can
fail to see.
in the condition of most communities, wages are regulated
by the habitual standard of living to which the laborers adhere,
and on less than which they will not multiply.
where there exists such a standard, a tax on wages will indeed
for a time be borne by the laborers themselves; but, unless
this temporary depression has the effect of lowering the standard
itself, the increase of population will receive a check,
which will raise wages, and restore the laborers to their previous
condition. on whom, in this case, will the tax fall?
a rise of wages occasioned by a tax must, like any other increase
of the cost of labor, be defrayed from profits. to
attempt to tax day-laborers, in an old country, is merely to
impose an extra tax upon all employers of common labor;
unless the tax has the much worse effect of permanently lowering
the standard of comfortable subsistence in the minds
of the poorest class.
we find in the preceding considerations an additional
argument for the opinion, already expressed, that direct taxation
should stop short of the class of incomes which do not
[pg ]
exceed what is necessary for healthful existence. these
very small incomes are mostly derived from manual labor;
and, as we now see, any tax imposed on these, either permanently
degrades the habits of the laboring-class, or falls
on profits, and burdens capitalists with an indirect tax, in
addition to their share of the direct taxes; which is doubly
objectionable, both as a violation of the fundamental rule of
equality, and for the reasons which, as already shown, render
a peculiar tax on profits detrimental to the public wealth,
and consequently to the means which society possesses of
paying any taxes whatever.
§ . —on income.
we now pass, from taxes on the separate kinds of
income, to a tax attempted to be assessed fairly upon all
kinds; in other words, an income-tax. the discussion of
the conditions necessary for making this tax consistent with
justice has been anticipated in the last chapter. we shall
suppose, therefore, that these conditions are complied with.
they are, first, that incomes below a certain amount should
be altogether untaxed. this minimum should not be higher
than the amount which suffices for the necessaries of the existing
population. the second condition is, that incomes
above the limit should be taxed only in proportion to the
surplus by which they exceed the limit. thirdly, that all
sums saved from income and invested should be exempt
from the tax; or, if this be found impracticable, that life-incomes
and incomes from business and professions should be
less heavily taxed than inheritable incomes.
an income-tax, fairly assessed on these principles, would
be, in point of justice, the least exceptionable of all taxes.
the objection to it, in the present state of public morality,
is the impossibility of ascertaining the real incomes of
the contributors. notwithstanding, too, what is called the
inquisitorial nature of the tax, no amount of inquisitorial
power which would be tolerated by a people the most disposed
to submit to it could enable the revenue officers to
assess the tax from actual knowledge of the circumstances
of contributors. rents, salaries, annuities, and all fixed incomes,
[pg ]
can be exactly ascertained. but the variable gains
of professions, and still more the profits of business, which
the person interested can not always himself exactly ascertain,
can still less be estimated with any approach to fairness by a
tax-collector. the main reliance must be placed, and always
has been placed, on the returns made by the person
himself. the tax, therefore, on whatever principles of equality
it may be imposed, is in practice unequal in one of the
worst ways, falling heaviest on the most conscientious.
it is to be feared, therefore, that the fairness which belongs
to the principle of an income-tax can not be made to
attach to it in practice. this consideration would lead us to
concur in the opinion which, until of late, has usually prevailed—that
direct taxes on income should be reserved as
an extraordinary resource for great national emergencies, in
which the necessity of a large additional revenue overrules
all objections.
the difficulties of a fair income-tax have elicited a proposition
for a direct tax of so much per cent, not on income
but on expenditure; the aggregate amount of each person's
expenditure being ascertained as the amount of income now
is, from statements furnished by the contributors themselves.
the only security would still be the veracity of individuals,
and there is no reason for supposing that their
statements would be more trustworthy on the subject of their
expenses than on that of their revenues. the taxes on expenditure
at present in force, either in this or in other countries,
fall only on particular kinds of expenditure, and differ
no otherwise from taxes on commodities than in being paid
directly by the person who consumes or uses the article,
instead of being advanced by the producer or seller, and
reimbursed in the price. the taxes on horses and carriages,
on dogs, on servants, are of this nature. they evidently fall
on the persons from whom they are levied—those who use
the commodity taxed. a tax of a similar description, and
more important, is a house-tax, which must be considered at
somewhat greater length.
[pg ]
§ . a house-tax.
the rent of a house consists of two parts, the ground-rent,
and what adam smith calls the building-rent. the
first is determined by the ordinary principles of rent. it is
the remuneration given for the use of the portion of land
occupied by the house and its appurtenances; and varies
from a mere equivalent for the rent which the ground would
afford in agriculture to the monopoly rents paid for advantageous
situations in populous thoroughfares. the rent of
the house itself, as distinguished from the ground, is the
equivalent given for the labor and capital expended on the
building. the fact of its being received in quarterly or
half-yearly payments makes no difference in the principles
by which it is regulated. it comprises the ordinary profit
on the builder's capital, and an annuity, sufficient at the current
rate of interest, after paying for all repairs chargeable
on the proprietor, to replace the original capital by the time
the house is worn out, or by the expiration of the usual term
of a building-lease.
a tax of so much per cent on the gross rent falls on both
those portions alike. the more highly a house is rented, the
more it pays to the tax, whether the quality of the situation
or that of the house itself is the cause. the incidence, however,
of these two portions of the tax must be considered
separately.
as much of it as is a tax on building-rent must ultimately
fall on the consumer, in other words, the occupier.
for, as the profits of building are already not above the ordinary
rate, they would, if the tax fell on the owner and not
on the occupier, become lower than the profits of untaxed
employments, and houses would not be built. it is probable,
however, that for some time after the tax was first imposed,
a great part of it would fall, not on the renter, but
on the owner of the house. a large proportion of the consumers
either could not afford, or would not choose, to pay
their former rent with the tax in addition, but would content
themselves with a lower scale of accommodation. houses,
therefore, would be for a time in excess of the demand. the
[pg ]
consequence of such excess, in the case of most other articles,
would be an almost immediate diminution of the supply;
but so durable a commodity as houses does not rapidly diminish
in amount. new buildings, indeed, of the class for
which the demand had decreased, would cease to be erected,
except for special reasons; but in the mean time the temporary
superfluity would lower rents, and the consumers would
obtain, perhaps, nearly the same accommodation as formerly,
for the same aggregate payment, rent and tax together. by
degrees, however, as the existing houses wore out, or as increase
of population demanded a greater supply, rents would
again rise; until it became profitable to recommence building,
which would not be until the tax was wholly transferred
to the occupier. in the end, therefore, the occupier bears
that portion of a tax on rent which falls on the payment
made for the house itself, exclusively of the ground it stands
on.
the case is partly different with the portion which is a
tax on ground-rent. as taxes on rent, properly so called,
fall on the landlord, a tax on ground-rent, one would suppose,
must fall on the ground-landlord, at least after the expiration
of the building-lease. it will not, however, fall
wholly on the landlord, unless with the tax on ground-rent
there is combined an equivalent tax on agricultural rent.
the lowest rent of land let for building is very little above
the rent which the same ground would yield in agriculture:
since it is reasonable to suppose that land, unless in case of
exceptional circumstances, is let or sold for building as soon
as it is decidedly worth more for that purpose than for cultivation.
if, therefore, a tax were laid on ground-rents without
being also laid on agricultural rents, it would, unless of
trifling amount, reduce the return from the lowest ground-rents
below the ordinary return from land, and would check
further building quite as effectually as if it were a tax on
building-rents, until either the increased demand of a growing
population, or a diminution of supply by the ordinary
causes of destruction, had raised the rent by a full equivalent
[pg ]
for the tax. but whatever raises the lowest ground-rents
raises all others, since each exceeds the lowest by the market
value of its peculiar advantages. if, therefore, the tax on
ground-rents were a fixed sum per square foot, the more
valuable situations paying no more than those least in request,
this fixed payment would ultimately fall on the occupier.
suppose the lowest ground-rent to be $ per acre,
and the highest $,, a tax of $ per acre on ground-rents
would ultimately raise the former to $, and the latter consequently
to $,, since the difference of value between
the two situations would be exactly what it was before: the
annual $, therefore, would be paid by the occupier. but a
tax on ground-rent is supposed to be a portion of a house-tax
which is not a fixed payment, but a percentage on the rent.
the cheapest site, therefore, being supposed as before to pay
$, the dearest would pay $, of which only the $ could
be thrown upon the occupier, since the rent would still be
only raised to $,. consequently, $ of the $ levied
from the expensive site would fall on the ground-landlord.
a house-tax thus requires to be considered in a double aspect,
as a tax on all occupiers of houses, and a tax on ground-rents.
in the vast majority of houses the ground-rent forms
but a small proportion of the annual payment made for the
house, and nearly all the tax falls on the occupier. it is
only in exceptional cases, like that of the favorite situations
in large towns, that the predominant element in the rent of
the house is the ground-rent; and, among the very few kinds
of income which are fit subjects for peculiar taxation, these
ground-rents hold the principal place, being the most gigantic
example extant of enormous accessions of riches acquired
rapidly, and in many cases unexpectedly, by a few families,
from the mere accident of their possessing certain tracts of
land without their having themselves aided in the acquisition
by the smallest exertion, outlay, or risk. so far, therefore,
as a house-tax falls on the ground-landlord, it is liable
to no valid objection.
[pg ]
in so far as it falls on the occupier, if justly proportioned
to the value of the house, it is one of the fairest and most
unobjectionable of all taxes. no part of a person's expenditure
is a better criterion of his means, or bears, on the whole,
more nearly the same proportion to them. the equality of
this tax can only be seriously questioned on two grounds.
the first is, that a miser may escape it. this objection applies
to all taxes on expenditure; nothing but a direct tax
on income can reach a miser. the second objection is, that
a person may require a larger and more expensive house, not
from having greater means, but from having a larger family.
of this, however, he is not entitled to complain, since having
a large family is at a person's own choice; and, so far as
concerns the public interest, is a thing rather to be discouraged
than promoted.
a valuation should be made of the house, not at what it
would sell for, but at what would be the cost of rebuilding
it, and this valuation might be periodically corrected by an
allowance for what it had lost in value by time, or gained by
repairs and improvements. the amount of the amended
valuation would form a principal sum, the interest of which,
at the current price of the public funds, would form the annual
value at which the building should be assessed to the tax.
[pg ]
as incomes below a certain amount ought to be exempt
from income-tax, so ought houses below a certain value from
house-tax, on the universal principle of sparing from all
taxation the absolute necessaries of healthful existence. in
order that the occupiers of lodgings, as well as of houses,
might benefit, as in justice they ought, by this exemption, it
might be optional with the owners to have every portion of
a house which is occupied by a separate tenant valued and
assessed separately.
[pg ]
chapter iii. of taxes on commodities, or indirect taxes.
§ . a tax on all commodities would fall on profits.
by taxes on commodities are commonly meant those
which are levied either on the producers, or on the carriers
or dealers who intervene between them and the final purchasers
for consumption; the phrase being, by custom, confined
to indirect taxes—those which are advanced by one
person, to be, as is expected and intended, reimbursed by
another.
taxes on commodities are either on production within
the country, or on importation into it, or on conveyance or
sale within it, and are classed respectively as excise, customs,
or tolls and transit duties. to whichever class they belong,
and at whatever stage in the progress of the community
they may be imposed, they are equivalent to an increase of
the cost of production; using that term in its most enlarged
sense, which includes the cost of transport and distribution,
or, in common phrase, of bringing the commodity to market.
when the cost of production is increased artificially by a
tax, the effect is the same as when it is increased by natural
causes. if only one or a few commodities are affected, their
value and price rise, so as to compensate the producer or
dealer for the peculiar burden; but if there were a tax on all
commodities, exactly proportioned to their value, no such
compensation would be obtained; there would neither be a
general rise of values, which is an absurdity, nor of prices,
which depend on causes entirely different. there would,
however, as mr. mcculloch has pointed out, be a disturbance
[pg ]
of values, some falling, others rising, owing to a circumstance,
the effect of which on values and prices we formerly
discussed—the different durability of the capital employed
in different occupations. the gross produce of industry consists
of two parts; one portion serving to replace the capital
consumed, while the other portion is profit. now, equal
capital in two branches of production must have equal expectations
of profit; but if a greater portion of the one than
of the other is fixed capital, or if that fixed capital is more
durable, there will be a less consumption of capital in the
year, and less will be required to replace it, so that the profit,
if absolutely the same, will form a greater proportion of the
annual returns. to derive from a capital of $, a profit
of $, the one producer may have to sell produce to the
value of $,, the other only to the value of $. if on
these two branches of industry a tax be imposed of five per
cent ad valorem,
the last will be charged only with $, the
first with $; leaving to the one $ profit, to the other
only $. to equalize, therefore, their expectation of profit,
the one commodity must rise in price, or the other must fall,
or both. commodities made chiefly by immediate labor
must rise in value, as compared with those which are chiefly
made by machinery. it is unnecessary to prosecute this
branch of the inquiry any further.
§ . taxes on particular commodities fall on the consumer.
a tax on any one commodity, whether laid on its
production, its importation, its carriage from place to place,
or its sale, and whether the tax be a fixed sum of money for
a given quantity of the commodity, or an
ad valorem duty,
will, as a general rule, raise the value and price of the commodity
by at least the amount of the tax. there are few
cases in which it does not raise them by more than that
amount. in the first place, there are few taxes on production
on account of which it is not found or deemed necessary
to impose restrictive regulations on the manufacturers
or dealers, in order to check evasions of the tax. these
[pg ]
regulations are always sources of trouble and annoyance, and
generally of expense, for all of which, being peculiar disadvantages,
the producers or dealers must have compensation
in the price of their commodity. these restrictions also frequently
interfere with the processes of manufacture, requiring
the producer to carry on his operations in the way most
convenient to the revenue, though not the cheapest or most
efficient for purposes of production. any regulations whatever,
enforced by law, make it difficult for the producer to
adopt new and improved processes. further, the necessity
of advancing the tax obliges producers and dealers to carry
on their business with larger capitals than would otherwise
be necessary, on the whole of which they must receive the
ordinary rate of profit, though a part only is employed in
defraying the real expenses of production or importation.
the price of the article must be such as to afford a profit on
more than its natural value, instead of a profit on only its
natural value. neither ought it to be forgotten that whatever
renders a larger capital necessary in any trade or business
limits the competition in that business, and, by giving
something like a monopoly to a few dealers, may enable
them either to keep up the price beyond what would afford
the ordinary rate of profit, or to obtain the ordinary rate of
profit with a less degree of exertion for improving and cheapening
their commodity. in these several modes, taxes on
commodities often cost to the consumer, through the increased
price of the article, much more than they bring into
the treasury of the state. there is still another consideration:
the higher price necessitated by the tax almost always
checks the demand for the commodity; and, since
there are many improvements in production which, to make
them practicable, require a certain extent of demand, such
improvements are obstructed, and many of them prevented
altogether. it is a well-known fact that the branches of
production in which fewest improvements are made are
those with which the revenue-officer interferes; and that
nothing, in general, gives a greater impulse to improvements
[pg ]
in the production of a commodity than taking off a tax which
narrowed the market for it.
§ . peculiar effects of taxes on necessaries.
such are the effects of taxes on commodities, considered
generally; but, as there are some commodities (those
composing the necessaries of the laborer) of which the values
have an influence on the distribution of wealth among different
classes of the community, it is requisite to trace the
effects of taxes on those particular articles somewhat further.
if a tax be laid, say on corn, and the price rises in proportion
to the tax, the rise of price may operate in two ways: first,
it may lower the condition of the laboring-classes; temporarily,
indeed, it can scarcely fail to do so. if it diminishes
their consumption of the produce of the earth, or makes
them resort to a food which the soil produces more abundantly,
and therefore more cheaply, it to that extent contributes
to throw back agriculture upon more fertile lands or less
costly processes, and to lower the value and price of corn;
which therefore ultimately settles at a price, increased not
by the whole amount of the tax, but by only a part of its
amount. secondly, however, it may happen that the dearness
of the taxed food does not lower the habitual standard
of the laborer's requirements, but that wages, on the contrary,
through an action on population, rise, in shorter or longer
periods, so as to compensate the laborers for their portion of
the tax, the compensation being of course at the expense of
profits. taxes on necessaries must thus have one of two
effects: either they lower the condition of the laboring-classes,
or they exact from the owners of capital, in addition to the
amount due to the state on their own necessaries, the amount
due on those consumed by the laborers. in the last case, the
tax on necessaries, like a tax on wages, is equivalent to a peculiar
tax on profits; which is, like all other partial taxation, unjust,
and is specially prejudicial to the increase of the national
wealth.
it remains to speak of the effect on rent. assuming
(what is usually the fact) that the consumption of food is not
diminished, the same cultivation as before will be necessary
[pg ]
to supply the wants of the community; the margin of cultivation,
to use dr. chalmers's expression, remains where it
was; and the same land or capital, which, as the least productive,
already regulated the value and price of the whole
produce, will continue to regulate them. the effect which a
tax on agricultural produce will have on rent depends on its
affecting or not affecting the difference between the return
to this least productive land or capital and the returns to
other lands and capitals. now, this depends on the manner
in which the tax is imposed. if it is an
ad valorem tax, or,
what is the same thing, a fixed proportion of the produce,
such as tithe for example, it evidently lowers corn-rents. for
it takes more corn from the better lands than from the worse,
and exactly in the degree in which they are better, land of
twice the productiveness paying twice as much to the tithe.
whatever takes more from the greater of two quantities than
from the less, diminishes the difference between them. the
imposition of a tithe on corn would take a tithe also from
corn-rent: for, if we reduce a series of numbers by a tenth
each, the differences between them are reduced one tenth.
for example, let there be five qualities of land, which
severally yield, on the same extent of ground and with the
same expenditure, , , , , and  bushels of wheat,
the last of these being the lowest quality which the demand
for food renders it necessary to cultivate. the rent of these
lands will be as follows:
the land producing  bushels will yield a rent of -, or  bushels.
that producing  bushels, a rent of -, or  bushels.
that producing  bushels, a rent of -, or  bushels.
that producing  bushels, a rent of -, or  bushels.
that producing  bushels, will yield no rent.
now let a tithe be imposed, which takes from these five
pieces of land , , , , and  bushels respectively, the fifth
quality still being the one which regulates the price, but returning
to the farmer, after payment of tithe, no more than
 bushels:
[pg ]
the land producing  bushels reduced to  will yield a rent of -, or 
bushels.
that producing  bushels reduced to , a rent of -, or  bushels.
that producing  bushels reduced to , a rent of -, or  bushels.
that producing  bushels reduced to , a rent of -, or  bushels.
and that producing  bushels, reduced to , will yield, as
before, no rent. so that the rent of the first quality of land
has lost four bushels; of the second, three; of the third,
two; and of the fourth, one: that is, each has lost exactly
one tenth. a tax, therefore, of a fixed proportion of the
produce lowers, in the same proportion, corn-rent.
but it is only corn-rent that is lowered, and not rent estimated
in money, or in any other commodity. for, in the
same proportion as corn-rent is reduced in quantity, the corn
composing it is raised in value. under the tithe,  bushels
will be worth in the market what  were before; and nine
tenths will in all cases sell for as much as the whole ten tenths
previously sold for. the landlords will therefore be compensated
in value and price for what they lose in quantity, and
will suffer only so far as they consume their rent in kind, or,
after receiving it in money, expend it in agricultural produce;
that is, they only suffer as consumers of agricultural produce,
and in common with all the other consumers. considered as
landlords, they have the same income as before; the tithe,
therefore, falls on the consumer, and not on the landlord.
the same effect would be produced on rent if the tax,
instead of being a fixed proportion of the produce, were a
fixed sum per quarter or per bushel. a tax which takes a
shilling for every bushel takes more shillings from one field
than from another, just in proportion as it produces more
bushels; and operates exactly like tithe, except that tithe is
not only the same proportion on all lands, but is also the same
proportion at all times, while a fixed sum of money per
bushel will amount to a greater or less proportion, according
as corn is cheap or dear.
there are other modes of taxing agriculture, which would
affect rent differently. a tax proportioned to the rent would
[pg ]
fall wholly on the rent, and would not at all raise the price
of corn, which is regulated by the portion of the produce
that pays no rent. a fixed tax of so much per cultivated
acre, without distinction of value, would have effects directly
the reverse. taking no more from the best qualities of land
than from the worst, it would leave the differences the same
as before, and consequently the same corn-rents, and the
landlords would profit to the full extent of the rise of price.
to put the thing in another manner: the price must rise
sufficiently to enable the worst land to pay the tax, thus enabling
all lands which produce more than the worst to pay
not only the tax, but also an increased rent to the landlords.
these, however, are not so much taxes on the produce of
land as taxes on the land itself. taxes on the produce,
properly so called, whether fixed or
ad valorem, do not affect
rent, but fall on the consumer, profits, however, generally
bearing either the whole or the greatest part of the portion
which is levied on the consumption of the laboring-classes.
§ . —how modified by the tendency of profits to a minimum.
the preceding is, i apprehend, a correct statement of
the manner in which taxes on agricultural produce operate
when first laid on. when, however, they are of old standing,
their effect may be different. now, the effect of accumulation,
when attended by its usual accompaniment, an increase
of population, is to increase the value and price of
food, to raise rent, and to lower profits; that is, to do precisely
what is done by a tax on agricultural produce, except
that this does not raise rent. the tax, therefore, merely
anticipates the rise of price and fall of profits which would
have taken place ultimately through the mere progress of
accumulation, while it at the same time prevents, or at least
retards, that progress. if the rate of profit was such that
the effect of the tithe reduces it to the practical minimum,
after a lapse of time which would have admitted of a rise of
one tenth from the natural progress of wealth, the consumer
will be paying no more than he would have paid if the tithe
had never existed; he will have ceased to pay any portion
of it, and the person who will really pay it is the landlord,
[pg ]
whom it deprives of the increase of rent which would by that
time have accrued to him. at every successive point in this
interval of time, less of the burden will rest on the consumer,
and more of it on the landlord; and, in the ultimate result,
the minimum of profits will be reached with a smaller capital
and population and a lower rental than if the course of
things had not been disturbed by the imposition of the tax.
if, on the other hand, the tithe or other tax on agricultural
produce does not reduce profits to the minimum, but to
something above the minimum, accumulation will not be
stopped, but only slackened; and, if population also increases,
the twofold increase will continue to produce its effects—a
rise of the price of corn and an increase of rent. these consequences,
however, will not take place with the same rapidity
as if the higher rate of profit had continued. at the end
of twenty years the country will have a smaller population
and capital than, but for the tax, it would by that time have
had; the landlords will have a smaller rent, and the price of
corn, having increased less rapidly than it would otherwise
have done, will not be so much as a tenth higher than what,
if there had been no tax, it would by that time have become.
a part of the tax, therefore, will already have ceased to fall
on the consumer and devolved upon the landlord, and the
proportion will become greater and greater by lapse of time.
but though tithes and other taxes on agricultural produce,
when of long standing, either do not raise the price of food
and lower profits at all, or, if at all, not in proportion to the
tax, yet the abrogation of such taxes, when they exist, does
not the less diminish price, and, in general, raise the rate of
profit. the abolition of a tithe takes one tenth from the
cost of production, and consequently from the price, of all
agricultural produce; and, unless it permanently raises the
laborer's requirements, it lowers the cost of labor and raises
profits. rent, estimated in money or in commodities, generally
remains as before; estimated in agricultural produce, it
is raised. the country adds as much, by the repeal of a tithe,
to the margin which intervenes between it and the stationary
[pg ]
state as was cut off from that margin by the tithe when first
imposed. accumulation is greatly accelerated, and, if population
also increases, the price of corn immediately begins to
recover itself and rent to rise, thus gradually transferring
the benefit of the remission from the consumer to the landlord.
§ . effects of discriminating duties.
we have hitherto inquired into the effects of taxes
on commodities, on the assumption that they are levied impartially
on every mode in which the commodity can be produced
or brought to market. another class of considerations
is opened, if we suppose that this impartiality is not maintained,
and that the tax is imposed, not on the commodity,
but on some particular mode of obtaining it.
suppose that a commodity is capable of being made by
two different processes—as a manufactured commodity may
be produced either by hand or by steam-power—sugar may
be made either from the sugar-cane or from beet-root, cattle
fattened either on hay and green crops or on oil-cake and
the refuse of breweries. it is the interest of the community
that, of the two methods, producers should adopt that which
produces the best article at the lowest price. this being also
the interest of the producers, unless protected against competition,
and shielded from the penalties of indolence, the
process most advantageous to the community is that which,
if not interfered with by government, they ultimately find it
to their advantage to adopt. suppose, however, that a tax is
laid on one of the processes, and no tax at all, or one of
smaller amount, on the other. if the taxed process is the
one which the producers would not have adopted, the measure
is simply nugatory. but if the tax falls, as it is of
course intended to do, upon the one which they would have
adopted, it creates an artificial motive for preferring the untaxed
process, though the inferior of the two. if, therefore,
it has any effect at all, it causes the commodity to be produced
of worse quality, or at a greater expense of labor; it
causes so much of the labor of the community to be wasted,
and the capital employed in supporting and remunerating
[pg ]
that labor to be expended as uselessly as if it were spent in
hiring men to dig holes and fill them up again. this waste
of labor and capital constitutes an addition to the cost of
production of the commodity, which raises its value and price
in a corresponding ratio, and thus the owners of the capital
are indemnified. the loss falls on the consumers; though
the capital of the country is also eventually diminished, by
the diminution of their means of saving, and, in some degree,
of their inducements to save.
the kind of tax, therefore, which comes under the general
denomination of a discriminating duty, transgresses the
rule that taxes should take as little as possible from the taxpayer
beyond what they bring into the treasury of the state.
a discriminating duty makes the consumer pay two distinct
taxes, only one of which is paid to the government, and that
frequently the less onerous of the two. if a tax were laid
on sugar produced from the cane, leaving the sugar from
beet-root untaxed, then in so far as cane-sugar continued to
be used, the tax on it would be paid to the treasury, and
might be as unobjectionable as most other taxes; but if cane-sugar,
having previously been cheaper than beet-root sugar,
was now dearer, and beet-root sugar was to any considerable
amount substituted for it, and fields laid out and manufactories
established in consequence, the government would gain
no revenue from the beet-root sugar, while the consumers of
it would pay a real tax. they would pay for beet-root sugar
more than they had previously paid for cane-sugar, and the
difference would go to indemnify producers for a portion of
the labor of the country actually thrown away, in producing
by the labor of (say) three hundred men what could be obtained
by the other process with the labor of two hundred.
an interesting illustration, in late years, of the operation of
a discriminating duty is to be found in the case of different
grades of sugar imported into the united states. our tariff
levied certain duties on different grades of sugar classified by
color, on the theory that color was a test of saccharine strength.
cargoes were examined and compared with graded sugars hermetically
sealed in glass bottles and distributed by the dutch
[pg ]
authorities, whence came the name of “dutch standard.”
grades from no.  (melado) to no.  must go to the refiner
before consumption; but the grades to no. , although
some might have gone into immediate consumption, were usually
sent to be manufactured into the highest grades of soft
and hard sugars. so long as the sugar was secured by evaporation
in open coppers, or by passing the molasses through a
layer of clay, saccharine strength and color went fairly well
together. but with the invention of the vacuum-pan and
the centrifugal wheel, by which the sugar is reduced through a
shorter and more effective process, sugar of a certain grade of
color by the dutch standard contained a much greater degree
of sweetness than that produced by the old methods. cuban
planters, therefore, were permitted to send sugar into this country
at a duty which was really levied on grades much inferior,
and so paid a less duty than other sugars. the products of
one country were discriminated against in favor of another.
the difficulty was settled by using the polariscope, which gave
an absolute chemical test of the sweetness, irrespective of color.
one of the commonest cases of discriminating duties is
that of a tax on the importation of a commodity capable of
being produced at home, unaccompanied by an equivalent
tax on the home production. a commodity is never permanently
imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad at a
smaller cost of labor and capital, on the whole, than is necessary
for producing it. if, therefore, by a duty on the importation,
it is rendered cheaper to produce the article than to
import it, an extra quantity of labor and capital is expended,
without any extra result. the labor is useless, and the capital
is spent in paying people for laboriously doing nothing.
all custom duties which operate as an encouragement to the
home production of the taxed article are thus an eminently
wasteful mode of raising a revenue.
this character belongs in a peculiar degree to custom
duties on the produce of land, unless countervailed by excise
duties on the home production. such taxes bring less into
the public treasury, compared with what they take from the
consumers, than any other imposts to which civilized nations
are usually subject. if the wheat produced in a country is
twenty millions of quarters, and the consumption twenty-one
millions, a million being annually imported, and if on this
[pg ]
million a duty is laid which raises the price ten shillings per
quarter, the price which is raised is not that of the million
only, but of the whole twenty-one millions. taking the
most favorable but extremely improbable supposition, that
the importation is not at all checked, nor the home production
enlarged, the state gains a revenue of only half a million,
while the consumers are taxed ten millions and a half,
the ten millions being a contribution to the home growers,
who are forced by competition to resign it all to the landlords.
the consumer thus pays to the owners of land an additional
tax, equal to twenty times that which he pays to the
state. let us now suppose that the tax really checks importation.
suppose importation stopped altogether in ordinary
years; it being found that the million of quarters can be obtained,
by a more elaborate cultivation, or by breaking up
inferior land, at a less advance than ten shillings upon the previous
price—say, for instance, five shillings a quarter. the
revenue now obtains nothing, except from the extraordinary
imports which may happen to take place in a season of scarcity.
but the consumers pay every year a tax of five shillings
on the whole twenty-one millions of quarters, amounting to
£,, sterling. of this the odd £, goes to compensate
the growers of the last million of quarters for the labor
and capital wasted under the compulsion of the law. the
remaining £,, go to enrich the landlords as before.
such is the operation of what are technically termed
corn laws, when first laid on; and such continues to be their
operation so long as they have any effect at all in raising the
price of corn. the difference between a country without
corn laws and a country which has long had corn laws is not
so much that the last has a higher price or a larger rental,
but that it has the same price and the same rental with a
smaller aggregate capital and a smaller population. the imposition
of corn laws raises rents, but retards that progress
of accumulation which would in no long period have raised
them fully as much. the repeal of corn laws tends to lower
rents, but it unchains a force which, in a progressive state of
[pg ]
capital and population, restores and even increases the former
amount.
what we have said of duties on importation generally is
equally applicable to discriminating duties which favor importation
from one place, or in one particular manner, in
contradistinction to others; such as the preference given to
the produce of a colony, or of a country with which there is
a commercial treaty; or the higher duties formerly imposed
by our navigation laws on goods imported in other than
british shipping. whatever else may be alleged in favor
of such distinctions, whenever they are not nugatory, they
are economically wasteful. they induce a resort to a more
costly mode of obtaining a commodity in lieu of one less
costly, and thus cause a portion of the labor which the country
employs in providing itself with foreign commodities to
be sacrificed without return.
§ . effects produced on international exchange by duties on exports
and on imports.
there is one more point, relating to the operation
of taxes on commodities conveyed from one country to
another, which requires notice: the influences which they
exert on international exchanges. every tax on a commodity
tends to raise its price, and consequently to lessen the
demand for it in the market in which it is sold. all taxes
on international trade tend, therefore, to produce a disturbance,
and a readjustment of what we have termed the
equation of international demand.
taxes on foreign trade are of two kinds—taxes on imports
and on exports. on the first aspect of the matter it
would seem that both these taxes are paid by the consumers
of the commodity; that taxes on exports consequently fall
entirely on foreigners, taxes on imports wholly on the home
consumer. the true state of the case, however, is much
more complicated.
“by taxing exports we may, in certain circumstances,
produce a division of the advantage of the trade more favorable
to ourselves. in some cases we may draw into our coffers,
at the expense of foreigners, not only the whole tax,
but more than the tax; in other cases we should gain exactly
[pg ]
the tax; in others, less than the tax. in this last case a part
of the tax is borne by ourselves; possibly the whole, possibly
even, as we shall show, more than the whole.”
reverting to the supposititious case employed of a trade
between england and the united states in iron and corn,
suppose that the united states taxes her export of corn, the
tax not being supposed high enough to induce england to
produce corn for herself. the price at which corn can be
sold in england is augmented by the tax. this will probably
diminish the quantity consumed. it may diminish it
so much that, even at the increased price, there will not be
required so great a money value as before. or it may not
diminish it at all, or so little that, in consequence of the
higher price, a greater money value will be purchased than
before. in this last case, the united states will gain, at the
expense of england, not only the whole amount of the duty,
but more; for, the money value of her exports to england
being increased, while her imports remain the same, money
will flow into the united states from england. the price
of corn will rise in the united states, and consequently in
england; but the price of iron will fall in england, and consequently
in the united states. we shall export less corn
and import more iron, till the equilibrium is restored. it
thus appears (what is at first sight somewhat remarkable)
that, by taxing her exports, the united states would, in
some conceivable circumstances, not only gain from her
foreign customers the whole amount of the tax, but would
also get her imports cheaper. she would get them cheaper
in two ways, for she would obtain them for less money, and
would have more money to purchase them with. england,
on the other hand, would suffer doubly: she would have to
pay for her corn a price increased not only by the duty, but
by the influx of money into the united states, while the
same change in the distribution of the circulating medium
would leave her less money to purchase it with.
[pg ]
this, however, is only one of three possible cases. if,
after the imposition of the duty, england requires so diminished
a quantity of corn that its total value is exactly the
same as before, the balance of trade would be undisturbed;
the united states will gain the duty, england will lose
it, and nothing more. if, again, the imposition of the duty
occasions such a falling off in the demand that england requires
a less pecuniary value than before, our exports will
no longer pay for our imports; money must pass from the
united states into england; and england's share of the
advantage of the trade will be increased. by the change in
the distribution of money, corn will fall in the united states,
and therefore it will, of course, fall in england. thus england
will not pay the whole of the tax. from the same
cause, iron will rise in england, and consequently in the
united states. when this alteration of prices has so adjusted
the demand that the corn and the iron again pay for
one another, the result is that england has paid only a part
of the tax, and the remainder of what has been received
into our treasury has come indirectly out of the pockets of
our own consumers of iron, who pay a higher price for that
imported commodity in consequence of the tax on our exports,
while at the same time they, in consequence of the
efflux of money and the fall of prices, have smaller money
incomes wherewith to pay for the iron at that advanced price.
it is not an impossible supposition that by taxing our exports
we might not only gain nothing from the foreigner,
the tax being paid out of our own pockets, but might even
compel our own people to pay a second tax to the foreigner.
suppose, as before, that the demand of england for corn
falls off so much on the imposition of the duty that she requires
a smaller money value than before, but that the case
is so different with iron in the united states that when the
price rises the demand either does not fall off at all, or so
little that the money value required is greater than before.
the first effect of laying on the duty is, as before, that the
corn exported will no longer pay for the iron imported.
[pg ]
money will therefore flow out of the united states into england.
one effect is to raise the price of iron in england, and
consequently in the united states. but this, by the supposition,
instead of stopping the efflux of money, only makes
it greater; because, the higher the price, the greater the
money value of the iron consumed. the balance, therefore,
can only be restored by the other effect, which is going on
at the same time, namely, the fall of corn in the american
and consequently in the english market. even when corn
has fallen so low that its price with the duty is only equal to
what its price without the duty was at first, it is not a
necessary consequence that the fall will stop; for the same
amount of exportation as before will not now suffice to pay
the increased money value of the imports; and although
the english consumers have now not only corn at the old
price, but likewise increased money incomes, it is not certain
that they will be inclined to employ the increase of their incomes
in increasing their purchases of corn. the price of
corn, therefore, must perhaps fall, to restore the equilibrium,
more than the whole amount of the duty; england may be
enabled to import corn at a lower price when it is taxed
than when it was untaxed; and this gain she will acquire at
the expense of the american consumers of iron, who, in
addition, will be the real payers of the whole of what is received
at their own custom-house under the name of duties
on the export of corn.
in general, however, there could be little doubt that a
country which imposed such taxes would succeed in making
foreign countries contribute something to its revenue; but,
unless the taxed article be one for which their demand is
extremely urgent, they will seldom pay the whole of the
amount which the tax brings in.
[pg ]
the result of this investigation may, then, be generally formulated
as follows: that country which has the strongest demand
for the commodities of other countries as compared with
the demand of other countries for its own commodities will
pay the burden of the export duty.
thus far of duties on exports. we now proceed to the
more ordinary case of duties on imports: “we have had
an example of a tax on exports, that is, on foreigners, falling
in part on ourselves. we shall therefore not be surprised
if we find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly
falling upon foreigners.
“instead of taxing the corn which we export, suppose
that we tax the iron which we import. the duty which we
are now supposing must not be what is termed a protecting
duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to induce us to produce
the article at home. if it had this effect, it would destroy
entirely the trade both in corn and in iron, and both countries
would lose the whole of the advantage which they previously
gained by exchanging those commodities with one
another. we suppose a duty which might diminish the
consumption of the article, but which would not prevent us
from continuing to import, as before, whatever iron we did
consume.
“the equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the imposition
of the tax diminished, in the slightest degree, the
quantity of iron consumed. for, as the tax is levied at our
own custom-house, the english exporter only receives the
same price as formerly, though the american consumer pays
a higher one. if, therefore, there be any diminution of the
quantity bought, although a larger sum of money may be
actually laid out in the article, a smaller one will be due from
the united states to england: this sum will no longer be an
equivalent for the sum due from england to the united
states for corn, the balance therefore must be paid in money.
prices will fall in england and rise in the united states;
iron will fall in the english market; corn will rise in the
american. the english will pay a higher price for corn,
[pg ]
and will have smaller money incomes to buy it with; while
the americans will obtain iron cheaper, that is, its price will
exceed what it previously was by less than the amount of the
duty, while their means of purchasing it will be increased by
the increase of their money incomes.
“if the imposition of the tax does not diminish the demand,
it will leave the trade exactly as it was before. we
shall import as much, and export as much; the whole of the
tax will be paid out of our own pockets.
“but the imposition of a tax on a commodity almost
always diminishes the demand more or less; and it can never,
or scarcely ever, increase the demand. it may, therefore, be
laid down as a principle that a tax on imported commodities,
when it really operates as a tax, and not as a prohibition
either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon the
foreigners who consume our goods; and that this is a mode
in which a nation may appropriate to itself, at the expense
of foreigners, a larger share than would otherwise belong to
it of the increase in the general productiveness of the labor
and capital of the world, which results from the interchange
of commodities among nations.”
those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that
taxes on imports are partly paid by foreigners; but they are
mistaken when they say that it is by the foreign producer.
it is not on the person from whom we buy, but on all those
who buy from us, that a portion of our custom duties spontaneously
falls. it is the foreign consumer of our exported
commodities who is obliged to pay a higher price for them
because we maintain revenue duties on foreign goods.
there are but two cases in which duties on commodities
can in any degree, or in any manner, fall on the producer.
one is, when the article is a strict monopoly, and at a scarcity
price. the price in this case being only limited by the desires
of the buyer—the sum obtained for the restricted supply being
the utmost which the buyers would consent to give rather
than go without it—if the treasury intercepts a part of this,
the price can not be further raised to compensate for the tax,
[pg ]
and it must be paid from the monopoly profits. a tax on
rare and high-priced wines will fall wholly on the growers, or
rather, on the owners of the vineyards. the second case, in
which the producer sometimes bears a portion of the tax, is
more important: the case of duties on the produce of land
or of mines. these might be so high as to diminish materially
the demand for the produce, and compel the abandonment
of some of the inferior qualities of land or mines. supposing
this to be the effect, the consumers, both in the country
itself and in those which dealt with it, would obtain the produce
at smaller cost; and a part only, instead of the whole,
of the duty would fall on the purchaser, who would be indemnified
chiefly at the expense of the land-owners or mine-owners
in the producing country.
duties on importation may, then, be divided “into two
classes: () those which have the effect of encouraging some
particular branch of domestic industry [protective duties],
() and those which have not [revenue duties]. the former
are purely mischievous, both to the country imposing them
and to those with whom it trades. they prevent a saving of
labor and capital, which, if permitted to be made, would be
divided in some proportion or other between the importing
country and the countries which buy what that country does
or might export.
“the other class of duties are those which do not encourage
one mode of procuring an article at the expense of
another, but allow interchange to take place just as if the
duty did not exist, and to produce the saving of labor which
constitutes the motive to international as to all other commerce.
of this kind are duties on the importation of any
commodity which could not by any possibility be produced
at home, and duties not sufficiently high to counterbalance
the difference of expense between the production of the article
at home and its importation. of the money which is
brought into the treasury of any country by taxes of this last
description, a part only is paid by the people of that country;
the remainder by the foreign consumers of their goods.
[pg ]
“nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle
as ineligible as the former, though not precisely on the same
ground. a protecting duty can never be a cause of gain,
but always and necessarily of loss, to the country imposing
it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end. a non-protecting
duty, on the contrary, would in most cases be a source of
gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throwing part
of the weight of its taxes upon other people is a gain; but
it would be a means which it could seldom be advisable to
adopt, being so easily counteracted by a precisely similar
proceeding on the other side.
“if the united states, in the case already supposed,
sought to obtain for herself more than her natural share of
the advantage of the trade with england, by imposing a
duty upon iron, england would only have to impose a duty
upon corn sufficient to diminish the demand for that article
about as much as the demand for iron had been diminished
in the united states by the tax. things would then be as
before, and each country would pay its own tax—unless,
indeed, the sum of the two duties exceeded the entire advantage
of the trade, for in that case the trade and its
advantage would cease entirely.
“there would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing
duties of this kind with a view to gain by them in the manner
which has been pointed out. but, when any part of the
revenue is derived from taxes on commodities, these may
often be as little objectionable as the rest. it is evident,
too, that considerations of reciprocity, which are quite unessential
when the matter in debate is a protecting duty, are
of material importance when the repeal of duties of this
other description is discussed. a country can not be expected
to renounce the power of taxing foreigners unless
foreigners will in return practice toward itself the same forbearance.
the only mode in which a country can save
itself from being a loser by the revenue duties imposed by
other countries on its commodities is, to impose corresponding
revenue duties on theirs. only it must take care that
[pg ]
those duties be not so high as to exceed all that remains of
the advantage of the trade, and put an end to importation
altogether, causing the article to be either produced at home,
or imported from another and a dearer market.”
by “reciprocity” is meant that, when one country admits
goods free of duty from a second country, this latter country
will also admit the commodities of the former free of duty;
or, as is often the case, if not free of duty, at a less than the
usual rate. until the last few years we have had a reciprocity
treaty with canada, but it is not now in force; and an arrangement
for closer commercial relations with mexico is now under
consideration.
[pg ]
chapter iv. comparison between direct and indirect taxation.
§ . arguments for and against direct taxation.
are direct or indirect taxes the most eligible? a
man dislikes not so much the payment as the act of paying.
he dislikes seeing the face of the tax-collector, and being
subjected to his peremptory demand. perhaps, too, the
money which he is required to pay directly out of his pocket
is the only taxation which he is quite sure that he pays at
all. that a tax of two shillings per pound on tea, or of
three shillings per bottle on wine, raises the price of each
pound of tea and bottle of wine which he consumes, by that
and more than that amount, can not, indeed, be denied; it is
the fact, and is intended to be so, and he himself, at times, is
perfectly aware of it; but it makes hardly any impression on
his practical feelings and associations, serving to illustrate
the distinction between what is merely known to be true and
what is felt to be so. the unpopularity of direct taxation,
contrasted with the easy manner in which the public consent
to let themselves be fleeced in the prices of commodities, has
generated in many friends of improvement a directly opposite
mode of thinking to the foregoing. they contend that
the very reason which makes direct taxation disagreeable
makes it preferable. under it every one knows how much
he really pays; and, if he votes for a war, or any other expensive
national luxury, he does so with his eyes open to
what it costs him. if all taxes were direct, taxation would
be much more perceived than at present, and there would be
a security, which now there is not, for economy in the public
expenditure.
[pg ]
although this argument is not without force, its weight
is likely to be constantly diminishing. the real incidence
of indirect taxation is every day more generally understood
and more familiarly recognized. the mere distinction between
paying money directly to the tax-collector and contributing
the same sum through the intervention of the tea-dealer
or the wine-merchant no longer makes the whole
difference between dislike or opposition and passive acquiescence.
if our present revenue [of $,, in ] were all
raised by direct taxes, an extreme dissatisfaction would certainly
arise at having to pay so much; but while men's
minds are so little guided by reason, as such a change of
feeling from so irrelevant a cause would imply, so great an
aversion to taxation might not be an unqualified good. of
the [$,,] in question, nearly [$,,] are
pledged, under the most binding obligations, to those whose
property has been borrowed and spent by the state; and,
while this debt remains unredeemed, a greatly increased impatience
of taxation would involve no little danger of a
breach of faith. that part, indeed, of the public expenditure
which is devoted to the maintenance of civil and military
establishments [$,,] (that is, all except the interest
of the national debt), affords, in many of its details, ample
scope for retrenchment. if so great an addition were made
to the public dislike of taxation as might be the consequence
of confining it to the direct form, the classes who profit by
the misapplication of public money might probably succeed
in saving that by which they profit, at the expense of that
which would only be useful to the public.
there is, however, a frequent plea in support of indirect
taxation, which must be altogether rejected as grounded on
a fallacy. we are often told that taxes on commodities are
less burdensome than other taxes, because the contributor
can escape from them by ceasing to use the taxed commodity.
he certainly can, if that be his object, deprive the government
of the money; but he does so by a sacrifice of his own
[pg ]
indulgences, which (if he chose to undergo it) would equally
make up to him for the same amount taken from him by
direct taxation. suppose a tax laid on wine, sufficient to add
[$] to the price of the quantity of wine which he consumes
in a year. he has only (we are told) to diminish his consumption
of wine by [$], and he escapes the burden. true, but
if the [$], instead of being laid on wine, had been taken
from him by an income-tax, he could, by expending [$]
less in wine, equally save the amount of the tax, so that the
difference between the two cases is really illusory. if the
government takes from the contributor [$] a year, whether
in one way or another, exactly that amount must be retrenched
from his consumption to leave him as well off as before; and
in either way the same amount of sacrifice, neither more nor
less, is imposed on him.
on the other hand, it is some advantage on the side of
indirect taxes that what they exact from the contributor is
taken at a time and in a manner likely to be convenient to
him. it is paid at a time when he has at any rate a payment
to make; it causes, therefore, no additional trouble, nor (unless
the tax be on necessaries) any inconvenience but what is
inseparable from the payment of the amount. he can also,
except in the case of very perishable articles, select his own
time for laying in a stock of the commodity, and consequently
for payment of the tax. the producer or dealer who advances
these taxes is, indeed, sometimes subjected to inconvenience;
but, in the case of imported goods, this inconvenience
is reduced to a minimum by what is called the warehousing
system, under which, instead of paying the duty at
the time of importation, he is only required to do so when
he takes out the goods for consumption, which is seldom
done until he has either actually found, or has the prospect
of immediately finding, a purchaser.
the strongest objection, however, to raising the whole or
the greater part of a large revenue by direct taxes, is the impossibility
of assessing them fairly without a conscientious
co-operation on the part of the contributors, not to be hoped
[pg ]
for in the present low state of public morality. in the case
of an income-tax, we have already seen that, unless it be found
practicable to exempt savings altogether from the tax, the
burden can not be apportioned with any tolerable approach
to fairness upon those whose incomes are derived from business
or professions; and this is in fact admitted by most of
the advocates of direct taxation who, i am afraid, generally
get over the difficulty by leaving those classes untaxed, and
confining their projected income-tax to “realized property,”
in which form it certainly has the merit of being a very easy
form of plunder. but enough has been said in condemnation
of this expedient. we have seen, however, that a house-tax
is a form of direct taxation not liable to the same objections
as an income-tax, and indeed liable to as few objections
of any kind as perhaps any of our indirect taxes. but it
would be impossible to raise, by a house-tax alone, the greatest
part of the revenue, without producing a very objectionable
overcrowding of the population, through the strong
motive which all persons would have to avoid the tax by restricting
their house accommodation.
a certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be
obtained without injustice by a peculiar tax on rent. besides
() the land-tax, and () an equivalent for the revenue
derived from stamp duties on the conveyance of land, some
further taxation might, i have contended, at some future
period be imposed, () to enable the state to participate in
the progressive increase of the incomes of landlords from
natural causes. () legacies and inheritances, we have also
seen, ought to be subjected to taxation sufficient to yield a
considerable revenue. with these taxes, and () a house-tax
of suitable amount, we should, i think, have reached the
prudent limits of direct taxation. the remainder of the
revenue would have to be provided by taxes on consumption,
[pg ]
and the question is, which of these are the least objectionable.
§ . what forms of indirect taxation are most eligible?
there are some forms of indirect taxation which
must be peremptorily excluded. (.) taxes on commodities,
for revenue purposes, must not operate as protecting duties,
but must be levied impartially on every mode in which the
articles can be obtained, whether produced in the country
itself, or imported. (.) an exclusion must also be put upon
all taxes on the necessaries of life, or on the materials or instruments
employed in producing those necessaries. such
taxes are always liable to encroach on what should be left
untaxed, the incomes barely sufficient for healthful existence;
and on the most favorable supposition, namely, that
wages rise to compensate the laborers for the tax, it operates
as a peculiar tax on profits, which is at once unjust and
detrimental to national wealth. what remain are taxes on
luxuries. and these have some properties which strongly
recommend them. in the first place, they can never, by
any possibility, touch those whose whole income is expended
on necessaries; while they do reach those by whom what
is required for necessaries is expended on indulgences. in
the next place, they operate in some cases as a useful, and
the only useful, kind of sumptuary law. a great portion of
the expense of the higher and middle classes in most countries
is not incurred for the sake of the pleasure afforded by
the things on which the money is spent, but from regard to
opinion, and an idea that certain expenses are expected from
them, as an appendage of station; and i can not but think
that expenditure of this sort is a most desirable subject of
[pg ]
taxation. when a thing is bought, not for its use but for
its costliness, cheapness is no recommendation.
§ . practical rules for indirect taxation.
in order to reduce as much as possible the inconveniences,
and increase the advantages, incident to taxes
on commodities, the following are the practical rules which
suggest themselves: . to raise as large a revenue as conveniently
may be, from those classes of luxuries which have
most connection with vanity, and least with positive enjoyment;
such as the more costly qualities of all kinds of personal
equipment and ornament. but with regard to horses
and carriages, as there are many persons to whom, from health
or constitution, these are not so much luxuries as necessaries,
the tax paid by those who have but one riding-horse, or but
one carriage, especially of the cheaper descriptions, should
be low; while taxation should rise very rapidly with the
number of horses and carriages, and with their costliness.
. whenever possible, to demand the tax, not from the producer,
but directly from the consumer, since, when levied on
the producer, it raises the price always by more, and often
by much more, than the mere amount of the tax. . but
as the only indirect taxes which yield a large revenue are
those which fall on articles of universal or very general consumption,
and as it is therefore necessary to have some taxes
on real luxuries, that is, on things which afford pleasure in
themselves, and are valued on that account rather than for
their cost, these taxes should, if possible, be so adjusted as
to fall with the same proportional weight on small, on moderate,
and on large incomes. this is not an easy matter; since
the things which are the subjects of the more productive
taxes are in proportion more largely consumed by the poorer
members of the community than by the rich. tea, coffee,
sugar, tobacco, fermented drinks, can hardly be so taxed
that the poor shall not bear more than their due share of the
burden. something might be done by making the duty on
the superior qualities, which are used by the richer consumers,
much higher in proportion to the value; but in some
cases the difficulty of at all adjusting the duty to the value,
[pg ]
so as to prevent evasion, is said, with what truth i know not,
to be insuperable; so that it is thought necessary to levy the
same fixed duty on all the qualities alike. . as far as is
consistent with the preceding rules, taxation should rather
be concentrated on a few articles than diffused over many,
in order that the expenses of collection may be smaller, and
that as few employments as possible may be burdensomely
and vexatiously interfered with. . among luxuries of general
consumption, taxation should by preference attach itself
to stimulants, because these, though in themselves as legitimate
indulgences as any others, are more liable than most
others to be used in excess, so that the check to consumption,
naturally arising from taxation, is on the whole better
applied to them than to other things. . as far as other
considerations permit, taxation should be confined to imported
articles, since these can be taxed with a less degree of
vexatious interference, and with fewer incidental bad effects,
than when a tax is levied on the field or on the workshop.
custom duties are, cæteris paribus,
much less objectionable
than excise: but they must be laid only on things which
either can not, or at least will not, be produced in the country
itself; or else their production there must be prohibited
(as in england is the case with tobacco), or subjected to an
excise duty of equivalent amount. . no tax ought to be
kept so high as to furnish a motive to its evasion, too strong
to be counteracted by ordinary means of prevention; and
especially no commodity should be taxed so highly as to raise
up a class of lawless characters—smugglers, illicit distillers,
and the like.
the experience of the united states is pregnant with lessons
in this direction. during the war we imposed an internal-revenue
tax on distilled spirits of so large an amount that it not
only produced less revenue than a smaller tax would have done,
but it created gigantic frauds, public corruption, and infinite
devices to escape the payment. the following table will show
how the production, as indicated by the tax, fell off when the
tax was excessive. it forced evasions by distillers. it has been
found by various experiences that with a less rate the revenue
is largely increased.
[pg ]
year.revenue.
production indicated by the tax (gallons).
amount of tax.-$,,,,
july, ,  c. per gallon.-,,,,
jan., , $ per gallon.-,,,,
july, ,  c. per gallon.-,,,,
the actual amount reached by taxation is very much less
than that known to be actually used by from ten to fifteen
millions of gallons, or nearly one half the product. the openness
of the frauds can be judged by the fact that proof spirits
were “openly sold in the market, and even quoted in price-currents,
at from five to fifteen cents less per gallon than the
rate of tax and the average cost of manufacture.”
in what manner the finer articles of manufacture, consumed
by the rich, might most advantageously be taxed, i
must leave to be decided by those who have the requisite
practical knowledge. the difficulty would be, to effect it
without an inadmissible degree of interference with production.
in countries which, like the united states, import
the principal part of the finer manufactures which they consume,
there is little difficulty in the matter; and, even where
nothing is imported but the raw material, that may be taxed,
especially the qualities of it which are exclusively employed
for the fabrics used by the richer class of consumers. thus,
in england a high custom duty on raw silk would be consistent
with principle; and it might perhaps be practicable
to tax the finer qualities of cotton or linen yarn, whether
spun in the country itself or imported.
§ . taxation systems of the united states and other countries.
it will now well repay study to examine chart no.
xxi, which shows in what manner the united states have
raised their revenues, and to consider how far the right rules
of taxation have been followed.
i. for means of comparison, i shall give the last annual
budget of the united states in order to make clear from what
sources the country derives its revenues:
[pg ]
chart xxi.
united states budget, year ending june , .
[in millions and tenths of millions.]
receipts:customs$.internal revenue.direct tax.sale of public lands.miscellaneous.net ordinary receipts$.
expenditures:war department$.navy department.indians.pensions.miscellaneous.net ordinary expenditures$.interest on public debt.total$.
this leaves a surplus of $,, above all expenditures,
and our problem is now where to reduce taxation. the annual
interest charge is lessening with the payment of the public
debt, having fallen from its highest figure of $,, in
, to $,, in .
our national taxation is practically
all indirect, that of internal taxation being chiefly levied
on tobacco and distilled spirits, and our customs falling on
almost all articles which can be imported, materials as well as
manufactures.
in the united states direct taxation on real and personal
property is very generally levied for state, county, and municipal
purposes. in fact, nearly all the perceptible taxation is
the property tax, and, inasmuch as the state and county tax is
very light, the burden is almost always owing to municipal and
town expenditures. people do not seem to be aware of the
enormous national burden, because the taxes are indirect, and
only increase the prices of commodities. other countries, it
will be seen, make a greater use of direct taxation than the
united states. in fact, the comparison of the ways by which
different countries collect their revenues may naturally show
us where we may gain by their experience.
ii. the english system is especially interesting, because,
after having had an extended scheme of customs duties, they
abandoned it, and raised their revenue, some on imported articles,
[pg ]
it is true (generally on those which could not be produced
in england), but by the income-tax, and other forms.
in  sir robert peel found , articles subject to customs-duties.
he began () by removing all prohibitions; ()
by reducing duties on raw materials to  per cent or less; ()
by limiting the rates on partially manufactured goods to 
per cent; and () those on wholly manufactured goods to 
per cent. now customs-duties are levied only on beer, cards,
chiccory, chocolate, cocoa, coffee, dried fruit, plate, spirits, tea,
tobacco, and wine. the following budget gives the sources of
revenue for great britain:
budget of great britain, .
[in millions and tenths of millions.]
receipts:customs$.excise (such as on tobacco and spirits).stamps.land tax.house duty.income tax.post-office.telegraph.crown lands.interest (on loans, suez canal, etc.).miscellaneous.total$.
[pg ]
expenditures:interest on national debt$.army, navy, etc..cost of revenue departments.public works.public departments, salaries, etc..law and justice.education, science, and art.colonial and consular.civil list.pensions.miscellaneous.total expenditures$.
from this it will be seen that in the land, income, and
house taxes, great britain raises by direct taxation about
$,,, and in customs and excise, by indirect taxation,
about $,,.
iii. the following is the system adopted by germany
(prussia):
german budget, -.
[in millions and tenths of millions.]
receipts:(.) property income from domains and forests$.from mines and salt-works.from railways.miscellaneous.$.(.) royal lottery.(.) bureau of justice$.harbors and bridges..(.) direct taxes$.(.) indirect taxes (for prussia).total receipts$.
expenditures:(.) civil list.(.) debt.(.) various ministries, schools, etc..(.) pensions.(.) miscellaneous.total expenditures
the prussian direct taxes include () a land-tax, () a house-tax,
() an income-tax, () a class-tax, () a trade-tax, and ()
miscellaneous taxes.
[pg ]
iv. how the french supply themselves may be seen by the
following statement:
french budget, .
[in millions and tenths of millions.]
receipts:direct taxes$.similar taxes.registry, stamps, etc.forests.customs (and salt duty $.).indirect taxes (including tobacco).post-office and telegraph.miscellaneous.total receipts$.
expenditures:public debt, etc.$.general functions of the ministries.administrative expenses, cost of revenue collections, etc.
.miscellaneous.total expenditures$.
the direct taxes are () on property; () one nearly like
our poll-tax together with a species of income-tax; () a tax
on doors and windows; and () one on licenses.
§ . a résumé of the general principles of taxation.
after the manner of our classification and
résumé of
the subject of value and money, it may be convenient to here
insert a recapitulation of the various principles under the treatment
of taxation.
[pg ]
comparison between direct and indirect taxation.
adam smith's “canons of taxation.”—a tax should be: i. equal
(in amount of sacrifice entailed). ii. certain.
iii. timely. iv. all for the state.
a tax is either:
direct.
indirect (on commodities.)
direct taxes are:
on income.
on expenditure.
taxes on income are:
general.
special.
general income taxes.
the best of taxes, if people were all honest. as it is, it falls
most heavily on the conscientious. should be reserved for emergency. all
savings and a fixed amount in all incomes should
be exempt.
special taxes are on:
rent.
wages.
profits.
taxes on rent. agricultural rent is meant. it falls entirely on the landlord, and, if not
balanced by taxes on other classes, is unjust. may be blended with a tax on profits, if
on rent due to landlord's improvements.
taxes on wages are:
on skilled.
on unskilled.
skilled wages are at a monopoly price, and taxes on them are paid by the laborers, so
long as wages are not reduced below their just proportion.
unskilled wages. () population diminished by it. paid by profits.
() population left stationary. shared between profits and
wages. () population increasing in spite of it. falls
entirely on wages.
taxes on profits. may possible stimulate production, and is then a good all round,
contributing to the state, and leaving no one any poorer. if not, if profits are
really diminished by the tax, capital may be diminished also.
this (a) may, or (b) may not diminish population. if (a), then the margin of
cultivation ceases to be extended, and part of the tax,
pro tanto, falls on the landlords. if (b),
then wages fall, and part of the tax falls on the laborer. total result is a nearer
approach to the stationary state.
taxes on expenditure are open to the same objections as the general income-tax.
they may be:
assessed taxes.
house-tax.
assessed taxes, such as on servants, dogs, etc. these are rigidly direct.
house-taxes are:
on building-rent.
on ground-rent.
house-taxes on building-rent are paid by occupier. this tax is indirect.
house-taxes on ground-rent are (.) with, or (.) without an equivalent tax
on agricultural rent. (.) are paid by ground landlord wholly, and
therefore direct. (.) are part by occupier, and therefore
indirect.
indirect taxes are:
excise,
customs, or
tolls.
indirect taxes may be on (.) long or (.) short investments of capital.
indirect taxes on long investments are always unadvisable, in view of canon iv.
indirect taxes on short investments are subject to the laws of indirect taxation.
. tax vanities rather than positive enjoyments (e.g., liveries rather than
servants). . the consumer and not the producer should pay the tax collector (canon
iv). that is, collect the tax as near the actual consumer as possible. . taxes on
real enjoyments to be kept as equal as possible for large and small means. . tax as
few articles as possible. england taxes only a very small number of imports.
the united states taxes nearly everything imported. . tax stimulants freely.
the united states collect $,, from spirits and liquors, and $,, from
tobacco (). . tax imports of commodities not made at home, or whose home production
is under an excise (internal revenue) duty equal to the customs tax. . keep the
rate of tax low, in order to get most revenue.
[pg ]
chapter v. of a national debt.
§ . is it desirable to defray extraordinary public expenses by loans?
the question must now be considered, how far it is
right or expedient to raise money for the purposes of government,
not by laying on taxes to the amount required, but
by taking a portion of the capital of the country in the form
of a loan, and charging the public revenue with only the
interest.
this question has already been touched upon in the first
book. we remarked, that if the capital taken in loans is
abstracted from funds either engaged in production, or destined
to be employed in it, their diversion from that purpose
is equivalent to taking the amount from the wages of the
laboring-classes. borrowing, in this case, is not a substitute
for raising the supplies within the year. a government
which borrows does actually take the amount within the
year, and that too by a tax exclusively on the laboring-classes,
than which it could have done nothing worse, if it
had supplied its wants by avowed taxation; and in that case
the transaction, and its evils, would have ended with the
emergency; while, by the circuitous mode adopted, the value
exacted from the laborers is gained, not by the state, but by
the employers of labor, the state remaining charged with the
debt besides, and with its interest in perpetuity. the system
of public loans, in such circumstances, may be pronounced
the very worst which, in the present state of civilization,
[pg ]
is still included in the catalogue of financial expedients.
we, however, remarked that there are other circumstances
in which loans are not chargeable with these pernicious
consequences: namely, first, when what is borrowed is
foreign capital, the overflowings of the general accumulation
of the world; or, secondly, when it is capital which either
would not have been saved at all, unless this mode of investment
had been open to it, or, after being saved, would have
been wasted in unproductive enterprises, or sent to seek employment
in foreign countries. when the progress of accumulation
has reduced profits either to the ultimate or to the
practical minimum—to the rate less than which would either
put a stop to the increase of capital, or send the whole of
the new accumulations abroad—government may annually
intercept these new accumulations, without trenching on the
employment or wages of the laboring-classes in the country
itself, or perhaps in any other country. to this extent,
therefore, the loan system may be carried, without being liable
to the utter and peremptory condemnation which is due
to it when it overpasses this limit. what is wanted is an
index to determine whether, in any given series of years, as
during the last great war, for example, the limit has been
exceeded or not.
such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious
one. did the government, by its loan operations, augment
the rate of interest? if it only opened a channel for capital
which would not otherwise have been accumulated, or which,
if accumulated, would not have been employed within the
country, this implies that the capital, which the government
took and expended, could not have found employment
at the existing rate of interest. so long as the loans do no
more than absorb this surplus, they prevent any tendency
to a fall of the rate of interest, but they can not occasion
any rise. [but] to the full extent to which the loans of
government, during the war, caused the rate of interest to
exceed what it was before, and what it has been since, those
[pg ]
loans are chargeable with all the evils which have been described.
if it be objected that interest only rose because
profits rose, i reply that this does not weaken, but strengthens,
the argument. if the government loans produced the
rise of profits by the great amount of capital which they absorbed,
by what means can they have had this effect, unless
by lowering the wages of labor? it will, perhaps, be said
that what kept profits high during the war was not the drafts
made on the national capital by the loans, but the rapid progress
of industrial improvements. this, in a great measure,
was the fact; and it, no doubt, alleviated the hardship to the
laboring-classes, and made the financial system which was
pursued less actively mischievous, but not less contrary to
principle. these very improvements in industry made room
for a larger amount of capital; and the government, by
draining away a great part of the annual accumulations, did
not indeed prevent that capital from existing ultimately (for
it started into existence with great rapidity after the peace),
but prevented it from existing at the time, and subtracted
just so much, while the war lasted, from distribution among
productive laborers. if the government had abstained from
taking this capital by loan, and had allowed it to reach the
laborers, but had raised the supplies which it required by a
direct tax on the laboring-classes, it would have produced (in
every respect but the expense and inconvenience of collecting
the tax) the very same economical effects which it did
produce, except that we should not now have had the debt.
the course it actually took was therefore worse than the
very worst mode which it could possibly have adopted of
raising the supplies within the year; and the only excuse, or
justification, which it admits of (so far as that excuse could be
truly pleaded) was hard necessity; the impossibility of raising
so enormous an annual sum by taxation, without resorting
to taxes which from their odiousness, or from the facility of
evasion, it would have been found impracticable to enforce.
[pg ]
when government loans are limited to the overflowings
of the national capital, or to those accumulations which would
not take place at all unless suffered to overflow, they are at
least not liable to this grave condemnation. in this case,
therefore, the question really is, what it is commonly supposed
to be in all cases—namely, a choice between a great
sacrifice at once, and a small one indefinitely prolonged. on
this matter it seems rational to think that the prudence of a
nation will dictate the same conduct as the prudence of an
individual; to submit to as much of the privation immediately
as can easily be borne, and, only when any further burden
would distress or cripple them too much, to provide for
the remainder by mortgaging their future income. it is an
excellent maxim to make present resources suffice for present
wants; the future will have its own wants to provide for.
on the other hand, it may reasonably be taken into consideration
that, in a country increasing in wealth, the necessary
expenses of government do not increase in the same ratio as
capital or population; any burden, therefore, is always less
and less felt; and, since those extraordinary expenses of government
which are fit to be incurred at all are mostly beneficial
beyond the existing generation, there is no injustice in
making posterity pay a part of the price, if the inconvenience
would be extreme of defraying the whole of it by
the exertions and sacrifices of the generation which first
incurred it.
§ . not desirable to redeem a national debt by a general contribution.
when a country, wisely or unwisely, has burdened
itself with a debt, is it expedient to take steps for redeeming
that debt? in principle it is impossible not to maintain
the affirmative.
two modes have been contemplated of paying off a national
debt: either at once by a general contribution, or
gradually by a surplus revenue. the first would be incomparably
the best, if it were practicable; and it would be
practicable if it could justly be done by assessment on property
alone. if property bore the whole interest of the debt,
property might, with great advantage to itself, pay it off;
[pg ]
since this would be merely surrendering to a creditor the
principal sum, the whole annual proceeds of which were
already his by law, and would be equivalent to what a
land-owner does when he sells part of his estate, to free the
remainder from a mortgage. but property, it need hardly
be said, does not pay, and can not justly be required to pay,
the whole interest of the debt. whatever is the fitting contribution
from property to the general expenses of the state,
in the same, and in no greater proportion, should it contribute
toward either the interest or the repayment of the
national debt. this, however, if admitted, is fatal to any
scheme for the extinction of the debt by a general assessment
on the community. persons of property could pay
their share of the amount by a sacrifice of property, and
have the same net income as before.
if a person owns a property, a b, which returns him
$, income, and if he pays $ a year in taxes as his share
of interest on the public debt, suppose that part of his estate
represented by x, which returns him
annually $ (and which return he
has annually handed over to the state),
to be carved out of it, and that he is
to be hereafter relieved of his share
of taxes. he would then, after having
paid the capitalized value (x) of that which was his share
of the annual tax to the state on account of the public debt,
have the same net income as before; for he was never able to
enjoy the income of x.
if those who have no accumulations, but only incomes,
were required to make up by a single payment the equivalent
of the annual charge laid on them by the taxes maintained
to pay the interest of the debt, they could only do so
by incurring a private debt equal to their share of the public
debt; while, from the insufficiency, in most cases, of the
security which they could give, the interest would amount
to a much larger annual sum than their share of that now
paid by the state. besides, a collective debt defrayed by
taxes has, over the same debt parceled out among individuals,
the immense advantage that it is virtually a mutual insurance
[pg ]
among the contributors. if the fortune of a contributor
diminishes, his taxes diminish; if he is ruined, they
cease altogether, and his portion of the debt is wholly transferred
to the solvent members of the community. if it
were laid on him as a private obligation, he would still be
liable to it, even when penniless.
when the state possesses property, in land or otherwise,
which there are not strong reasons of public utility for its
retaining at its disposal, this should be employed, as far as
it will go, in extinguishing debt. any casual gain, or god-send,
is naturally devoted to the same purpose. beyond this,
the only mode which is both just and feasible, of extinguishing
or reducing a national debt, is by means of a surplus
revenue.
§ . in what cases desirable to maintain a surplus revenue for the redemption
of debt.
the desirableness, per se, of maintaining a surplus
for this purpose does not, i think, admit of a doubt.
it is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a
surplus revenue for the extinction of debt. the advantage
of paying off the national debt is, that it would enable us
to get rid of the worst half of our taxation. but of this
worst half some portions must be worse than others, and to
get rid of those would be a greater benefit proportionally
than to get rid of the rest. if renouncing a surplus revenue
would enable us to dispense with a tax, we ought to consider
the very worst of all our taxes as precisely the one
which we are keeping up for the sake of ultimately abolishing
taxes not so bad as itself. in a country advancing in
wealth, whose increasing revenue gives it the power of ridding
itself from time to time of the most inconvenient portions
of its taxation, i conceive that the increase of revenue
should rather be disposed of by taking off taxes, than by
liquidating debt, as long as any very objectionable imposts
remain. in the present state of england, therefore, i hold
it to be good policy in the government, when it has a surplus
of an apparently permanent character, to take off taxes,
provided these are rightly selected. even when no taxes
remain but such as are not unfit to form part of a permanent
[pg ]
system, it is wise to continue the same policy by experimental
reductions of those taxes, until the point is discovered
at which a given amount of revenue can be raised
with the smallest pressure on the contributors. after this,
such surplus revenue as might arise from any further increase
of the produce of the taxes should not, i conceive,
be remitted, but applied to the redemption of debt. eventually,
it might be expedient to appropriate the entire produce
of particular taxes to this purpose; since there would be
more assurance that the liquidation would be persisted in, if
the fund destined to it were kept apart, and not blended
with the general revenues of the state. the succession duties
would be peculiarly suited to such a purpose, since taxes
paid as they are, out of capital, would be better employed in
reimbursing capital than in defraying current expenditure.
if this separate appropriation were made, any surplus afterward
arising from the increasing produce of the other taxes,
and from the saving of interest on the successive portions
of debt paid off, might form a ground for a remission of
taxation.
the relative amount of the united states public debt may
be seen, by chart no. xxii,
from an early date down to .
since the war, the surplus revenue of the united states has
been constantly appropriated for the payment of the public
debt incurred during the late war, until, what with the reduction
of debt and the fall in the interest charge, our income is
now so much greater than expenditure that we are () actually
in difficulties owing to the surplus. to the present time
the treasury has been able to use its excess of receipts in redeeming
matured debt; but the rapidity of the payment has
been such that in two years or more no matured debt will exist
to be redeemed: $,, of -½ per cent bonds remain, but
they do not fall due until ; and the  per cent bonds to
the amount of $,, do not mature until . having
once raised a large revenue under war pressure, it seems very
difficult for people to understand now why heavy duties were
originally levied, and the extraordinary suggestion is often
made that the surplus should remain, and new channels of expenditure
should be made (such as enormous pensions), simply
in order to keep up the heavy taxation. the difficulty is, however,
that the unnecessary surplus exists because of customs
[pg ]
duties levied for war purposes. but the heavy burden of war
taxation ought not to be continued, adding to the cost of production
in all industries, without doing a greater wrong than
would be done by the passing—and only possible—trouble of a
redistribution of capital in a few cases; especially since that
distribution of capital will be one from less productive to more
productive industries; otherwise, no change would be made.
the condition of foreign debts, and the progress made in
their reduction, may be studied in chart no. xxiii.
that of the united states is exceptional. the interest-bearing debt,
as given by the last report of the secretary of the treasury,
, has been reduced to $,,,, and the reduction is
more striking than is indicated in the chart for the year .
[pg ]
chart xxiii. reduction of national debts in various countries.
[pg ]
chapter vi. of an interference of government grounded on erroneous theories.
§ . the doctrine of protection to native industry.
we proceed to the functions of government which
belong to what i have termed, for want of a better designation,
the optional class; those which are sometimes assumed
by governments and sometimes not, and which it is not
unanimously admitted that they ought to exercise. we will
begin by passing in review false theories which have from
time to time formed the ground of acts of government more
or less economically injurious.
of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine
of protection to native industry—a phrase meaning the
prohibition, or the discouragement by heavy duties, of such
foreign commodities as are capable of being produced at
home. if the theory involved in this system had been correct,
the practical conclusions grounded on it would not
have been unreasonable. the theory was that, to buy things
produced at home was a national benefit, and the introduction
of foreign commodities generally a national loss. it
being at the same time evident that the interest of the consumer
is to buy foreign commodities in preference to domestic
whenever they are either cheaper or better, the interest
of the consumer appeared in this respect to be contrary to
the public interest; he was certain, if left to his own inclinations,
to do what according to the theory was injurious to
the public.
it was shown, however, in our analysis of the effects of
international trade, as it had been often shown by former
[pg ]
writers, that the importation of foreign commodities, in the
common course of traffic, never takes place except when it
is, economically speaking, a national good, by causing the
same amount of commodities to be obtained at a smaller
cost of labor and capital to the country. to prohibit, therefore,
this importation, or impose duties which prevent it, is
to render the labor and capital of the country less efficient
in production than they would otherwise be, and compel a
waste of the difference between the labor and capital necessary
for the home production of the commodity and that
which is required for producing the things with which it
can be purchased from abroad. the amount of national
loss thus occasioned is measured by the excess of the price
at which the commodity is produced over that at which it
could be imported. in the case of manufactured goods the
whole difference between the two prices is absorbed in indemnifying
the producers for waste of labor, or of the capital
which supports that labor. those who are supposed to
be benefited, namely, the makers of the protected articles
(unless they form an exclusive company, and have a monopoly
against their own countrymen as well as against foreigners),
do not obtain higher profits than other people. all is
sheer loss to the country as well as to the consumer.
of the industries in a country some are said to “need protection”
and others not—that is, those industries which are
carried on at a relative disadvantage are the only ones which
need protection in order that they may continue in operation.
by relative disadvantage is meant a greater relative cost, or
sacrifice, to the same amount of labor and capital. those industries
which can not yield so great a value for the labor and
capital engaged in them as other more profitable industries are
those which are said to “need protection.” wherever protective
duties exist it is implied by those who lay them on that
there production is carried on under more onerous conditions
than in other competing places or occupations. after duties
are thus supposed to have protected the less advantageously
situated occupations, it may be said that all industries will then
have an equal chance. “no doubt,” as mr. cairnes says, “they
would be equalized just as by compelling every one to move
about with a weight attached to his leg. the weight would,
[pg ]
indeed, be an impediment to locomotion, but, provided it were
in each case exactly proportioned to the strength of the limb
which drew it, no one ... would have any reason to complain.
no one would walk as fast as if his limbs were free,
but then his neighbor would be equally fettered, and, if it took
him twice as long to reach his destination as before, he would
at least have company on his journey.”
§ . —had its origin in the mercantile system.
the restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally
grounded on what is called the mercantile system, which,
representing the advantage of foreign trade to consist solely
in bringing money into the country, gave artificial encouragement
to exportation of goods, and discountenanced their
importation. the only exceptions to the system were those
required by the system itself. the materials and instruments
of production were the subject of a contrary policy,
directed, however, to the same end; they were freely imported,
and not permitted to be exported, in order that manufacturers,
being more cheaply supplied with the requisites
of manufacture, might be able to sell cheaper, and therefore
to export more largely. for a similar reason importation
was allowed and even favored, when confined to the productions
of countries which were supposed to take from the
country still more than it took from them, thus enriching it
by a favorable balance of trade. as part of the same system
colonies were founded, for the supposed advantage of
compelling them to buy our commodities, or at all events
not to buy those of any other country: in return for which
restriction we were generally willing to come under an
equivalent obligation with respect to the staple productions
of the colonists. the consequences of the theory were
pushed so far that it was not unusual even to give bounties
on exportation, and induce foreigners to buy from [england]
rather than from other countries by a cheapness which [england]
artificially produced, by paying part of the price for
them out of [their] own taxes. this is a stretch beyond the
point yet reached by any private tradesman in his competition
[pg ]
for business. no shopkeeper, i should think, ever
made a practice of bribing customers by selling goods to
them at a permanent loss, making it up to himself from
other funds in his possession.
the principle of the mercantile theory is now given up
even by writers and governments who still cling to the
restrictive system. whatever hold that system has over
men's minds, independently of the private interests exposed
to real or apprehended loss by its abandonment, is derived
from fallacies other than the old notion of the benefits of
heaping up money in the country. the most effective of
these is the specious plea of employing our own countrymen
and our national industry, instead of feeding and supporting
the industry of foreigners. the answer to this, from the
principles laid down in former chapters, is evident. without
reverting to the fundamental theorem discussed in an
early part of the present
treatise, respecting the nature and
sources of employment for labor, it is sufficient to say, what
has usually been said by the advocates of free trade, that the
alternative is not between employing our own people and
foreigners, but between employing one class and another of
our own people. the imported commodity is always paid
for, directly or indirectly, with the produce of our own industry:
that industry being, at the same time, rendered more
productive, since, with the same labor and outlay, we are
enabled to possess ourselves of a greater quantity of the article.
those who have not well considered the subject are apt
to suppose that our exporting an equivalent in our own produce,
for the foreign articles we consume, depends on contingencies—on
the consent of foreign countries to make some
corresponding relaxation of their own restrictions, or on the
question whether those from whom we buy are induced by
that circumstance to buy more from us; and that, if these
things, or things equivalent to them, do not happen, the payment
must be made in money. now, in the first place, there
[pg ]
is nothing more objectionable in a money payment than in
payment by any other medium, if the state of the market
makes it the most advantageous remittance; and the money
itself was first acquired, and would again be replenished, by
the export of an equivalent value of our own products.
but, in the next place, a very short interval of paying in
money would so lower prices as either to stop a part of the
importation, or raise up a foreign demand for our produce,
sufficient to pay for the imports. i grant that this disturbance
of the equation of international demand would be in
some degree to our disadvantage, in the purchase of other
imported articles; and that a country which prohibits some
foreign commodities, does, cæteris paribus, obtain those which
it does not prohibit at a less price than it would otherwise
have to pay. to express the same thing in other words:
a country which destroys or prevents altogether certain
branches of foreign trade, thereby annihilating a general
gain to the world, which would be shared in some proportion
between itself and other countries, does, in some circumstances,
draw to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger
share than would else belong to it of the gain arising from
that portion of its foreign trade which it suffers to subsist.
but even this it can only be enabled to do, if foreigners do
not maintain equivalent prohibitions or restrictions against its
commodities. in any case, the justice or expediency of destroying
one of two gains, in order to engross a rather larger share
of the other, does not require much discussion; the gain,
too, which is destroyed, being, in proportion to the magnitude
of the transactions, the larger of the two, since it is the one
which capital, left to itself, is supposed to seek by preference.
§ . —supported by pleas of national subsistence and national
defense.
defeated as a general theory, the protectionist doctrine
finds support in some particular cases from considerations
which, when really in point, involve greater interests
than mere saving of labor—the interests of national subsistence
and of national defense. the discussions on the
corn [pg ]
laws have familiarized everybody with the plea that we
ought to be independent of foreigners for the food of the
people; and the navigation laws were grounded, in theory
and profession, on the necessity of keeping up a “nursery of
seamen” for the navy. on this last subject i at once admit
that the object is worth the sacrifice; and that a country exposed
to invasion by sea, if it can not otherwise have sufficient
ships and sailors of its own to secure the means of
manning on an emergency an adequate fleet, is quite right in
obtaining those means, even at an economical sacrifice in point
of cheapness of transport. when the english navigation
laws were enacted, the dutch, from their maritime skill and
their low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other
nations, england included, at cheaper rates than those nations
could carry for themselves: which placed all other countries
at a great comparative disadvantage in obtaining experienced
seamen for their ships of war. the navigation laws, by
which this deficiency was remedied, and at the same time a
blow struck against the maritime power of a nation with
which england was then frequently engaged in hostilities,
were probably, though economically disadvantageous, politically
expedient. but english ships and sailors can now
navigate as cheaply as those of any other country, maintaining
at least an equal competition with the other maritime
nations even in their own trade. the ends which may once
have justified navigation laws require them no longer, and
afford no reason for maintaining this invidious exception
to the general rule of free trade.
since the introduction of steamships and the advance of invention
in naval contrivances, the plea for navigation laws on
the ground that they keep up a “nursery of seamen” for the
navy is practically obsolete. the “seaman” employed on the
modern naval ships more nearly resembles the artisan in a
manufacturing establishment; he need have but comparatively
little knowledge of the sea, since the days of sailing-vessels
have passed by, so far as naval warfare is concerned. steam
and mechanical appliances now do what was before done by
wind and sail.
while mr. mill thinks navigation laws were economically—that
[pg ]
is, so far as increase of wealth is concerned—disadvantageous,
yet he believes that they may have been “politically
expedient.” it is possible, for example, that retaliation by the
united states and other countries against england early in this
century brought about the remission of the english restrictions
on foreign shipping. but it is quite another thing to say that
such laws produced an ability to sail ships more cheaply.
that the english navigation acts of  built up english shipping
is not supported by many proofs; whereas it is very
distinctly shown that english shipping languished and suffered
under them. moreover, under the
régime of steam and iron
(which drew out england's peculiar advantages in iron and
coal), in all its history english shipping never prospered more
than it has since the abolition in  of the navigation laws—events
which have taken place since mr. mill wrote.
the united states is still weighed down by navigation laws
adapted to mediæval conditions, and the relics of a time when
retaliation was the cause of their enactment. so long as
wooden vessels did the carrying-trade, the natural advantages of
the united states gave us a proud position on the ocean. now,
however, when it is a question of cheaper iron, steel, and coal for
vessels of iron and steel, we are at a possible disadvantage, and
the bulk of navigation laws proposed in these days are intended
to draw capital either by raising prices through duties on
ships and materials, or by outright bounties and subsidies from
industries in which we have advantages, to building ships.
and until of late no distinction has been made between ship-building
and ship-owning (or ship-sailing). within the last
year () many burdens on ship-sailing have been removed;
but even when we are permitted to sail ships on equal terms
with foreigners, we can not yet build them with as small a
cost as england (which is proved by the very demand of the
builders of iron vessels for the retention of protective duties),
and our laws do not as yet allow us to buy ships abroad and
sail them under our own flag.
with regard to subsistence, the plea of the protectionists
has been so often and so triumphantly met, that it requires
little notice here. that country is the most steadily as well
as the most abundantly supplied with food which draws its
supplies from the largest surface. it is ridiculous to found a
general system of policy on so improbable a danger as that of
being at war with all the nations of the world at once; or to
[pg ]
suppose that, even if inferior at sea, a whole country could
be blockaded like a town, or that the growers of food in
other countries would not be as anxious not to lose an advantageous
market as we should be not to be deprived of their
corn.
in countries in which the system of protection is declining,
but not yet wholly given up, such as the united states,
a doctrine has come into notice which is a sort of compromise
between free trade and restriction, namely, that protection
for protection's sake is improper, but that there is nothing
objectionable in having as much protection as may incidentally
result from a tariff framed solely for revenue. even
in england regret is sometimes expressed that a “moderate
fixed duty” was not preserved on corn, on account of the
revenue it would yield. independently, however, of the
general impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, this doctrine
overlooks the fact that revenue is received only on the
quantity imported, but that the tax is paid on the entire
quantity consumed. to make the public pay much, that the
treasury may receive a little, is no eligible mode of obtaining
a revenue. in the case of manufactured articles the doctrine
involves a palpable inconsistency. the object of the duty
as a means of revenue is inconsistent with its affording, even
incidentally, any protection. it can only operate as protection
in so far as it prevents importation, and to whatever
degree it prevents importation it affords no revenue.
§ . —on the ground of encouraging young industries; colonial policy.
the only case in which, on mere principles of political
economy, protecting duties can be defensible, is when
they are imposed temporarily (especially in a young and
rising nation) in hopes of naturalizing a foreign industry, in
itself perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the country.
the superiority of one country over another in a branch of
production often arises only from having begun it sooner.
there may be no inherent advantage on one part, or disadvantage
on the other, but only a present superiority of acquired
skill and experience. a country which has this skill
and experience yet to acquire may in other respects be better
[pg ]
adapted to the production than those which were earlier in
the field; and, besides, it is a just remark of mr. rae that
nothing has a greater tendency to promote improvements in
any branch of production than its trial under a new set of
conditions. but it can not be expected that individuals
should, at their own risk, or rather to their certain loss, introduce
a new manufacture, and bear the burden of carrying
it on, until the producers have been educated up to the level
of those with whom the processes are traditional. a protecting
duty, continued for a reasonable time, will sometimes be
the least inconvenient mode in which the nation can tax itself
for the support of such an experiment. but the protection
should be confined to cases in which there is good ground of
assurance that the industry which it fosters will after a time
be able to dispense with it; nor should the domestic producers
ever be allowed to expect that it will be continued to
them beyond the time necessary for a fair trial of what they
are capable of accomplishing.
the great difficulty with this proposal is that it introduces
(what is inconsistent with mr. mill's general system) the socialistic
basis of state-help, instead of self-help. if industries
will never support themselves, then, of course, it is a misappropriation
of the property of its citizens whenever a government
takes a slice by taxation from productive industries and
gives it to a less productive one to make up its deficiencies. the
only possible theory of protection to young industries is that,
if protected for a season, the industries may soon grow strong
and stand alone. mr. mill never contemplated anything else.
but the difficulty is constantly met with, in putting this theory
into practice, that the industry, once that it has learned to depend
on the help of the state, never reaches a stage when it is
willing to give up the assistance of the duties. dependence on
legislation begets a want of self-reliance, and destroys the stimulus
to progress and good management. it is said: “there
has never been an instance in the history of the country where
the representatives of such industries, who have enjoyed protection
for a long series of years, have been willing to submit
to a reduction of the tariff, or have proposed it. but, on the
contrary, their demands for still higher and higher duties are
insatiable, and never intermitted.” the question of fact, as
[pg ]
to whether or not the united states is indebted for its present
manufacturing position to protection when our industries were
young, seems to be capable of answer, and an answer which
shows that protection was imposed generally after the industries
got a foothold, and that very little assistance was derived
from the duties on imports.
the following explanation by mr. mill of the meaning put
upon his argument of protection to young industries by those
who have applied it to the united states will be of no slight
interest:
“the passage has been made use of to show the inapplicability
of free trade to the united states, and for similar
purpose in the australian colonies, erroneously in my opinion,
but certainly with more plausibility than can be the case
in the united states, for australia really is a new country
whose capabilities for carrying on manufactures can not yet
be said to have been tested; but the manufacturing parts of
the united states—new england and pennsylvania—are no
longer new countries; they have carried on manufactures on
a large scale, and with the benefit of high protecting duties,
for at least two generations; their operatives have had full
time to acquire the manufacturing skill in which those of
england had preceded them; there has been ample experience
to prove that the alleged inability of their manufactures
to compete in the american market with those of great
britain does not arise merely from the more recent date of
their establishment, but from the fact that american labor
and capital can, in the present circumstances of america, be
employed with greater return, and greater advantage to the
national wealth, in the production of other articles. i have
never for a moment recommended or countenanced any protecting
industry except for the purpose of enabling the protected
branch of industry, in a very moderate time, to become
independent of protection. that moderate time in the
[pg ]
united states has been exceeded, and if the cotton and iron
of america still need protection against those of the other
hemisphere, it is in my eyes a complete proof that they aught
not to have it, and that the longer it is continued the greater
the injustice and the waste of national resources will be.”
there is only one part of the protectionist scheme which
requires any further notice: its policy toward colonies and
foreign dependencies; that of compelling them to trade exclusively
with the dominant country. a country which thus
secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its commodities,
undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distribution
of the general gains of the commercial world. since, however,
it causes the industry and capital of the colony to be
diverted from channels which are proved to be the most productive,
inasmuch as they are those into which industry and
capital spontaneously tend to flow, there is a loss, on the
whole, to the productive powers of the world, and the mother-country
does not gain so much as she makes the colony lose.
if, therefore, the mother-country refuses to acknowledge any
reciprocity of obligations, she imposes a tribute on the colony
in an indirect mode, greatly more oppressive and injurious
than the direct.
§ . —on the ground of high wages.
the discussion by mr. cairnes on the question of wages
as affected by the tariff is such that i have quoted it as fully as
possible: “the position taken in the united states is that protection
is only needed and only asked for where american industry
is placed under a disadvantage, as compared with the
industry of foreign countries.... the rates of wages measured
in money are higher in the united states than in europe,
and, therefore, it is argued, the cost of producing commodities
is higher.... the high rates of wages in the united states
are not peculiar to any branch of industry, but are universal
throughout its whole range. if, therefore, a high rate of
wages proves a high cost of production, and a high cost of production
proves a need of protection, it follows that the farmers
of illinois and the cotton-planters of the southern states stand
in as much need of fostering legislation as the cotton-spinners
of new england or the iron-masters of pennsylvania! a criterion
which leads to such results must, i think, be regarded as
sufficiently condemned. the fallacy is, in truth, ... that all
[pg ]
industries are not in each country equally favored or disfavored
by nature, and have not, therefore, equal need of this protecting
care. if american protectionists are not prepared to demand
protective duties in favor of the illinois farmer against
the competition of his english rival, they are bound to admit
either that a high cost of production is not incompatible with
effective competition, or else that a high rate of wages does not
prove a high cost of production; and if this is not so in illinois,
then i wish to know why the case should be different in
pennsylvania or in new england. if a high rate of wages in
the first of these states be consistent with a low cost of production,
why may not a high rate of wages in pennsylvania be
consistent with a low cost of producing coal and iron?
“the rate of wages, whether measured in money or in the
real remuneration of the laborer, affords an approximate criterion
of the cost of production, either of money, or of the commodities
that enter into the laborer's real remuneration, but in
a sense the inverse of that in which it is understood in the
argument under consideration: in other words, a high rate of
wages indicates not a high but a low cost of production. ...
thus in the united states the rate of wages is high, whether
measured in gold or in the most important articles of the laborer's
consumption—a fact which proves that the cost of producing
gold, as well as that of producing those other commodities,
is low in the united states.... i would ask [objectors] to
consider what are the true causes of the high remuneration of
american industry. it will surely be admitted that, in the last
resort, these resolve themselves into the one great fact of its
high productive power.... i must, therefore, contend that
the high scale of industrial remuneration in america, instead
of being evidence of a high cost of production in that country,
is distinctly evidence of a low cost of production—of a low
cost of production, that is to say, in the first place, of gold, and,
in the next, of the commodities which mainly constitute the
real wages of labor—a description which embraces at once the
most important raw materials of industry and the most important
articles of general consumption. as regards commodities
not included in this description, the criterion of wages stands
in no constant relation of any kind to their cost, and is, therefore,
[pg ]
simply irrelevant to the point at issue. and now we
may see what this claim for protection to american industry,
founded on the high scale of american remuneration, really
comes to: it is a demand for special legislative aid in consideration
of the possession of special industrial facilities—a complaint,
in short, against the exceptional bounty of nature.
“perhaps i shall here be asked, how, if the case be so—if
the high rate of industrial remuneration in america be only
evidence of a low cost of production—the fact is to be explained,
since fact it undoubtedly is, that the people of the
united states are unable to compete in neutral markets, in the
sale of certain important wares, with england and other european
countries? no one will say that the people of new england,
new york, and pennsylvania, are deficient in any industrial
qualities possessed by the workmen of any country in the
world. how happens it, then, that, enjoying industrial advantages
superior to other countries, they are yet unable to hold
their own against them in the general markets of commerce? i
shall endeavor to meet this objection fairly, and, in the first
place, let me state what my contention is with regard to the cost
of production in america. i do not contend that it is low in the
case of all commodities capable of being produced in the country,
but only in that of a large, very important, but still limited
group. with regard to commodities lying outside this group,
i hold that the rate of wages is simply no evidence as to the
cost of their production, one way or the other. but, secondly,
i beg the reader to consider what is meant by the alleged ‘inability’
of new england and pennsylvania to compete, let us
say, with manchester and sheffield, in the manufacture of calico
and cutlery. what it means, and what it only can mean, is
that they are unable to do so consistently with obtaining that
rate of remuneration on their industry which is current in the
united states. if only american laborers and capitalists would
be content with the wages and profits current in great britain,
there is nothing that i know of to prevent them from holding
their own in any markets to which manchester and sheffield
can send their wares. and this brings us to the heart of the
question. over a large portion of the great field of industry
the people of the united states enjoy, as compared with those
of europe, () advantages of a very exceptional kind; over
the rest () the advantage is less decided, or () they stand on
a par with europeans, or () possibly they are, in some instances,
[pg ]
at a disadvantage. engaging in the branches of industry
in which their advantage over europe is great, they reap
industrial returns proportionally great; and, so long as they
confine themselves to these occupations, they can compete in
neutral markets against all the world, and still secure the high
rewards accruing from their exceptionally rich resources. but
the people of the union decline to confine themselves within
these liberal bounds. they would cover the whole domain of
industrial activity, and think it hard that they should not reap
the same rich harvests from every part of the field. they
must descend into the arena with sheffield and manchester,
and yet secure the rewards of chicago and st. louis. they
must employ european conditions of production, and obtain
american results. what is this but to quarrel with the laws
of nature? these laws have assigned to an extensive range
of industries carried on in the united states a high scale of
return, far in excess of what europe can command, to a few
others a return on a scale not exceeding the european proportion.
american enterprise would engage in all departments
alike, and obtain upon all the high rewards which nature has
assigned only to some. here we find the real meaning of the
‘inability’ of americans to compete with the ‘pauper labor’
of europe. they can not do so, and at the same time secure
the american rate of return on their work. the inability no
doubt exists, but it is one created, not by the drawbacks, but
by the exceptional advantages of their position. it is as if a
skilled artisan should complain that he could not compete with
the hedger and ditcher. let him only be content with the
hedger and ditcher's rate of pay, and there will be nothing to prevent
him from entering the lists even against this rival.”
it is often said that wages are kept at a high rate in the
united states by the existence of protected industries. on the
other hand, the truth is that the protected industries must pay
the current high rate of wages fixed by the general productiveness
of all industries in the country. when the facts are investigated,
it is surprising how small a portion of the laborers
of the united states are employed in occupations which owe
their existence to the tariff. a general view of the relative
numbers engaged in different occupations may be seen by
reference to chart no. xxiv,
based on the returns for the census of .
the data are well worth examination:
(.) agriculture,,(.) manufacturing, mechanical, and mining,,(.) trade and transportation,,(.) professional and personal services,,all occupations,,
[pg ]
chart xxiv. chart showing for the united states, in ,
the ratio between the total population
over ten years of age and the number of persons reported as engaged
in each principal class of gainful occupations. compiled from the returns
of the tenth census, by the editor.
note.—the interior square represents the proportion
of the population which
is accounted for as engaged in gainful occupations. the unshaded space between
the inner and outer squares represents the proportion of the population not so
accounted for.
[pg ]
of the second class, less than , work-people are engaged
in the chief protected industries—cotton, woolen, and
iron and steel, combined. this class, it is to be noted, in the
census returns, includes bakers, blacksmiths, brick-makers, builders,
butchers, cabinet-makers, carpenters, carriage-makers, and
so on through the whole list of similar occupations practically
unaffected by the tariff (so far as protection to them is concerned).
so that, at the most, there are less than a million
laborers engaged in industries directly dependent on the tariff,
and the number is undoubtedly very much less than a million.
when some writers assert, therefore, that the existence of customs-duties
allows industries (even including all those employed
in producing cotton, wool, iron, and steel) to employ less than a
million laborers in such a way that the remuneration is fixed
for the remaining ,, laborers in the united states,
keeping wages high for ,, by paying current wages
for less than a million, the extravagance and ignorance of
the statement are at once apparent; while, on the other hand,
it is distinctly seen that the causes fixing the generally high
rates of wages for the ,, are those governing the majority
of occupations, and that the less than one million must
be paid the wages which can be obtained elsewhere in the more
productive industries. the facts thus strikingly bear out the
principles as stated above.
confirmation—if confirmation now seems necessary—may
be found in a study by our ablest statistician, francis a.
walker, upon the causes which have operated on the growth
of american manufactures. this growth has not been commensurate,
he finds, with the remarkable inventive and industrial
capacity of our people, and with the richness of our
national resources: “i answer that the cause of that comparative
failure is found, primarily and principally, in the extraordinary
success of our agriculture, as already intimated in what
has been said of the investment of capital. the enormous
profits of cultivating a virgin soil without the need of artificial
fertilization; the advantages which a sparse population derives
from the privilege of selecting for tillage only the choicest
spots,
those most accessible, most fertile, most easily brought
under the plow; and the consequent abundance of food and
other necessaries enjoyed by the agricultural class, have tended
continually to disparage mechanical industries, in the eyes
alike of the capitalist, looking to the most remunerative investment
[pg ]
of his savings, and of the laborer, seeking that avocation
which should promise the most liberal and constant support.
“it has been the competition of the farm with the shop
which, throughout the entire century of our national independence,
has most effectually hindered the growth of manufactures.
a people who are privileged to cultivate a reasonably
fertile soil, under the conditions indicated above, can secure for
themselves subsistence up to the highest limit of physical well-being.
if that people possess the added advantage of great
skill in the use of tools, and great adroitness in meeting the
large and the little exigencies of the occupation and cultivation
of the soil, the fruits of their labor will include not only everything
which is essential to health and comfort, but much that
is of the nature of luxury.”
it remains to be said in this connection that workmen are
already discerning the practical and real causes at work affecting
their wages—affecting them more directly than any tariff system
possibly could—by showing no small alarm at the immigration
of foreigners, such as the hungarian miners and italian laborers,
who willingly underbid them. in other words, they are
beginning to realize, in a practical way, the truth that increasing
numbers are far more potent than anything else in reducing
wages. so long as immigration is free to any race or
nationality, there is no such thing as “protection to home
laborers”; the only protection to them—not that i am urging
the desirability of such measures—can come solely from forces
which limit the number of workmen who enter into competition
with them. any other protection to laboring-men than
the prohibition of immigration—which no one thinks of (except
for the chinese)—is an economic delusion. instead of
“protecting” them to the extent of affording higher wages,
the tariff increases the cost of woolen clothing and other articles
of their consumption, in addition to forcing capital into
employments which yield a less return, and so insure lower
wages.
§ . —on the ground of creating a diversity of industries.
it must be kept in mind that political economy deals
only with the phenomena of material wealth; it does not supply
ethical or political grounds of action. it is quite conceivable
that a legislator, in coming to a decision, may have to balance
economic gains against moral or political losses, and may
choose to give up the former to prevent the latter. but the
economic truth remains unchanged. political economy, for instance,
to the question, is there any gain in international trade?
answers, unequivocally, yes. would it be a loss of wealth to
the community to have the goods formerly bought abroad now
produced at home? the answer is, certainly it would. but
here it has been ably urged by intelligent writers that a state
[pg ]
has other ends to gain than the accumulation of mere riches; that
it must aim to secure the greatest moral, social, and elevating
influences possible for the working-classes; and that while free
exchange of goods may add to wealth, it may injure the social
and political well-being of a nation. so far as these are social
and political questions they do not belong to political economy.
but the commonest form of argument is that, under free exchange,
the united states would become purely an “agricultural”
country, its social horizon would become narrowed, and
a lower standard of industrial activity would then ensue; instead
of which, it is said, we should, by protection, keep in
existence diversified industries by which the national mind may
be better stimulated, and greater enterprise may be encouraged
in all branches of industry. this argument for “diversity of
industries,” however, is not merely a sociological question; it
can only be fully discussed from an economic stand-point, and
deserves even more than the brief attention we can give it here.
in the first place, as soon as any purely agricultural country
gains even a slight density of population—a density only such
as to warrant the introduction of the principle of division of
labor—there comes an inevitable differentiation of pursuits,
wholly outside of legislation, and through the operation of natural
causes. not all of any population is required in agriculture
to provide the whole with food. by a division of labor, one
man in agriculture can produce the sustenance of himself and
many others. “the united states have at the present time
but five persons engaged in agriculture for each square mile of
settled area.” by the side of the farm must early spring up a
wide circle of industries—the shoemaker, the carpenter, the
blacksmith, the wagon-maker, the painter, the builder, the
mason, and all the ordinary employments which arise in any
small community from the earliest division of labor. moreover,
“agriculture” is often used in a too limited sense as confined
to producing food alone (although even in that limited
sense employing nearly one half of the total number of our laborers).
in a new country the natural field of employment is
found in the “extractive industries,” which include the preparation
for the market not only of food, but also of all ores, coal,
minerals, oils, hides, leather, wool, lumber, and the industries
intimately connected with them; all the employments which
transport these from one part of the country to another (employing
at present over one ninth of all our laborers); and professional
and personal services of an extended variety. even,
therefore, if we were obliged to forego manufactures entirely,
the “extractive industries” would necessarily involve a very
extensive diversity of employments.
the real question, however, for most persons, centers in the
[pg ]
next stage of the industrial evolution—that of the manufactures
of these above-mentioned products of the “extractive industries.”
it will be remembered, here, that a country does not
possess an equal ability in producing each of these or any commodities:
the timber formerly near great rivers may vanish
into the interior; the oil-sources may be more or less fertile; or
the ore-deposits may be more or less rich, more or less accessible,
than those of other countries. this being understood, then,
as soon as the demand in the country calls for an increased
quantity of a particular article, the cost may increase under
the law of diminishing returns until a foreign country—having
inferior agents of production as compared with our best—may
be able to send supplies into our markets. it all depends
on whether the united states wants more articles than can be
produced on grades of natural agents superior to those possessed
by foreigners, taking cost of carriage to this country
into consideration. even though foreign competition appears
when we reach poorer grades of natural agents, it does not
follow that some of the particular articles will not be produced.
what ought to be clear is, that untrammeled exchange
between countries will not prevent the existence of various
industries, but only limit production to those grades of agents
which are its best. this may be better seen by a simple diagram:
iron and coal: england
iron and coal: united states
wheat: england
wheat: united states
england may have seven different grades of productiveness
in her iron and coal supplies, of which her grades , , and
 are superior to the best grade of the united states, while
grades , , , and  in the united states may compare only
with grades , , ,  of england. so long as england can
supply herself and the united states also with coal and iron
from the three superior grades, the united states can not work
grade  at home. but if the supply for england and the world
requires grade  to be worked, then the united states can begin
the industry on her best grade, although that is far inferior to
the best grade in england. likewise, if the united states has
three grades of wheat-land superior to england's best grade,
the ability of england to grow wheat depends on whether the
united states can, or can not, supply both herself and england
from grades , , and . if we must resort to grade , then
england can begin to grow wheat as well as we. in short,
[pg ]
under a system of free exchange, as great a diversity as under
protection is probably possible, but only in such a way that the
best possible advantages in each particular industry are employed.
smaller amounts in some branches, and greater amounts
in others, may be produced under a free than under a restrictive
system, but with all the greater gain which arises from a
proper and healthy adjustment of trade. the most poorly endowed
enterprises in each occupation would be given up, but
not the whole industry itself. no class of persons feel the
competition of rivals more than english farmers since american
wheat has come into english markets, and yet it does not follow
that england can not grow a bushel of wheat. the fact
is, merely, that some kinds of lands were thrown out of cultivation,
and a readjustment made, to the benefit of those wanting
cheaper food. so with us: we should not, by the free exchange,
be forced to give up the iron and coal industries entirely;
for the best mines would still keep that occupation in
existence to “diversify” the others.
so far the explanation covers the “extractive industries”
only, or those industries affected by the law of diminishing
returns when a larger quantity is demanded. the real question
arises as to the manufactures of these materials. but we
count upon larger industrial rewards, in the form of wages, and
profits, here than in england; we must get more from an industry
than england in order to satisfy us. our grades of
occupations, therefore, must be more productive to a certain
extent, grade for grade, than english grades, in order to allow
of their remaining free from competition. but we have this
superiority, as regards our home market, owing to natural
causes: () cheap raw materials (if we except wool and other
commodities whose price is raised by the tariff); () advantage
over england in cost of transportation of raw products; and
() in the cost of transportation, again, of the finished goods
in reaching our markets. now, the processes of manufacture
which do not put much labor upon the materials, especially
where the articles are bulky, are conducted in this country
without fear of foreign competition. and the range of this
class of manufactures is surprisingly large. it includes the
manufactures of iron, such as stoves, and the common utensils
of every-day life; of hides, such as leather, harnesses, etc.;
and of wood, such as all the furniture of common use. the
list is too long to be fully stated here. these industries are
not kept in existence by the tariff; and a diversity as wide as
this would arise under a system of free exchange, as well as
of restriction. indeed, if duties were removed from so-called
“raw materials,” it is altogether probable that a wider diversity
would exist than ever before.
[pg ]
and yet, it will be said, there are some things we can not
produce in free competition with england. of course there
are; and it is to be hoped it will long continue so. if there
are not some kinds of commodities which foreigners can produce
to better advantage than we, then there will be no possibility
of any foreign trade whatever; since, if they can send
us nothing, they can take nothing from us. to deny this position,
is to say that the export and import trade of the united
states (amounting in  to more than $,,,) is of
no profit, and had best be entirely destroyed, in order that a
few industries in which we have no natural advantages (and
which employ less than one seventeenth of the laborers in the
united states) should be continued at a loss to the general productiveness
of our labor and capital, and so to a general diminution
of wages and profits.
§ . —on the ground that it lowers prices.
the argument—heard less frequently now than formerly—has
been advanced, drawn inductively from statistics,
that protection does not raise prices; because, after duties are
put on, a larger quantity is produced, the advantages of large
production are reaped, and then the price of the manufactured
commodity falls lower here than it was before the duty was
imposed. the position is then held that protection does not
raise prices. it is, of course, understood to mean the prices of
protected commodities—a necessary precaution, because we find
our own agricultural (unprotected) commodities cited to show
that prices are lower here than in england.
no one, however, will deny that there has been a fall in the
prices of textile fabrics and manufactured goods. that is the
result of a general law of value, and of the tendencies of a
progressive state of industry.
the causes of this
acknowledged fall would be at work, no matter whether tariffs existed
or not. it is the result of the general forward march of improvements,
as evidenced in the application of new inventions
and the display of skill and ingenuity in new processes. to
say that it comes because of a tariff, is
a complete non sequitur.
how true this is may be seen by observing that a country like
england, without tariffs, shares in the general fall of prices of
manufactured goods equally with the country which has heavy
customs-duties. the causes must be wider than tariffs, if they
are seen working alike in tariff and non-tariff countries.
but the fact itself can not be gainsaid that protection does
raise the prices of the protected goods in the home market. the
comparison is not to be made between prices as they now are in
this country and as they were twenty or forty years ago also in
this country, for this would show only the general march of
[pg ]
improvements in this country; but a comparison is to be made
between prices in this country to-day and present prices in
foreign countries. does, for instance, the tariff increase the
price of woolen goods and clothing to every consumer far beyond
what the price would be if the duty on imported woolens
were removed? the very existence of a protecting duty is
the answer to this. if the duty does not raise the price, then
why does the woolen industry wish a continuance of the duties?
if goods can be sold as cheaply here as the foreign goods, why
do protectionists want any duties? the duties are intended
to keep foreign goods out of our markets; and they would be
unnecessary if our goods could be sold as cheaply as the foreign
wares.
the facts, however, are at hand to show that the statement
of principle as made above is corroborated by the statistics. in
, although average weekly wages in massachusetts were
over  per cent higher than in england, the american laborer
had to pay more for the articles entering into his real wages;
and to that extent lost the advantage of his higher reward in
this country. this is to be seen in the following figures, which
show, in percentages, whether prices are higher or lower here
than in england:
classes of articles.higher percent.
lower percent.groceriesprovisions, including meat, eggs, butter, and potatoes
dry goods (all grades)boots, shoes, and slippersclothing
and yet, in spite of the high prices,  per cent of the
massachusetts workman's expenditure represents more comfort
and better home surroundings than is enjoyed by the english
workman. if the american could purchase at english prices,
he would have no less than  per cent of a surplus for additional
enjoyments (after making due allowance for the higher
rents paid here than in england). in other words, higher
prices cut off the american laborer from reaping all the superiority
in comfort which might be expected from knowing that
he had an advantage over the english laborer of  per cent
in the money wages received.
[pg ]
in order that the reader may easily find the arguments of the protectionists,
he is referred to the following books:
carey's “principles of social science” ( vols.). the form of argument
is, briefly, that all industries should be kept going within the
bounds of a country so as to avoid foreign trade. the change of form
into the finished commodity should, he holds, take place near the spot
where the raw materials are produced, so that not so great a share
should go to the mere middle-men, or transporters.
bowen's “political economy,” chap. xx, advocates protection on
the ground that it is needed to secure diversity of industries, and that
it lowers the prices of imported goods.
sir j. b. byles's “sophisms of free trade” is an answer to bastiat's
“sophisms of protection,” the latter having been translated into
english by horace white.
erastus b. bigelow's “the tariff question.” this is one of the
ablest discussions, from the protectionist point of view, based on statistical
tables and comparisons of the policy of england and the united
states.
stebbins's “protectionists' manual” is a brief and handy statement.
ellis h. roberts's “government revenue” is the form into which
he has thrown his lectures at cornell university () on protection,
and is the latest statement emanating from that side of the discussion.
he goes at length into the history of taxes in various countries; holds
that wages are higher here than in england because of protection; that
our manufactures are more flourishing than our agriculture, etc.
frederick list's “national economy” is the german statement of
protection, much on carey's own grounds.
“the congressional globe” contains numerous speeches of members
of congress on the tariff; and the iron and steel association of
philadelphia send out pamphlets explaining the protectionist position.
the free-trade arguments may be found also in w. m. grosvenor's
“does protection protect?” he studies the results of the various
tariffs of the united states, and gives many very valuable tables and
collections of statistics bearing upon this question.
w. g. sumner's “history of protection in the united states” is a
very vigorous account of the evils of the various tariffs and the protective
system.
d. a. wells's “reports” as special commissioner of the revenue,
and his numerous pamphlets (see putnams' publisher's catalogue), are
[pg ]
full of facts, and give the results of special study of the subject as affecting
the united states.
a. l. perry's “political economy” gives a radical free-trade view.
henry fawcett's “free trade and protection” explains the causes
which have retarded the more general adoption of free trade.
j. e. cairnes's “leading principles of political economy” gives the
ablest discussion of the economic principles involved in the question
which has yet been offered to the reader. moreover, almost all our
systematic writers on political economy (excepting, perhaps, bowen
and r. e. thompson) give the system of free exchange their support on
economic grounds.
[pg ]
appendix i. bibliographies.
a brief bibliography of the tariffs of the united states.
i. general works.—young's
“special report on the customs-tariff
legislation of the united states” contains useful extracts from debates
of congress, and also valuable tables of duties; in the index, p. cciii,
under “tariff act,” will be found references to, and dates of, all acts
to . see, also, sumner's “history of american currency,” and his
“lectures on protection in the united states”; a. l. perry's “political
economy,” chap. xiii; grosvenor's “does protection protect?”
a valuable study is e. j. james's “studien über den amerikanischen
zoll tariff.” for different views, see carey's “social science”; bolles's
“financial history of the united states,” vol. ii, bk. i, chap. v, bk. iii,
chaps. iii to x; and stebbins's “american protectionists' manual.”
ii. earlier periods.—h. c. adams's
“taxation in the united states,
-”; f. w. taussig's “protection to young industries”; the
works of hamilton, madison, jefferson, webster, and clay; “the
statesman's manual”; and of course the debates in congress, etc.
see, also, bristed's “resources of the united states”; pitkin's “statistical
view of the commerce of the united states”; seybert's “statistical
annals” (); and the “american almanac.”
iii. noteworthy documents.—hamilton's reports:
“report on
manufactures,” works, ii, pp. -, or american state papers, finance,
i, -. dallas, treasury report of , american state
papers, finance, iii, -.
a report which is of the greatest importance and weight is albert
gallatin's “memorial in favor of tariff reform” (). printed separately.
unfortunately, not in his collected works.
walker's report, see finance report, december , .
j. q. adams's report of , congressional documents, -,
h. r. no. .
d. a. wells's “reports as special commissioner of the revenue,”
, senate documents, second session, thirty-ninth congress, vol. i,
no. ; , house executive documents, second session, fortieth congress,
[pg ]
vol. ix, no. ; , house executive documents, third session,
fortieth congress, vol. vii, no. ; , house executive documents,
second session, forty-first congress, vol. v, no. ; and his paper in
the cobden club essays (second series).
w. d. kelley's “speeches, addresses, and letters.”
“report of the tariff commission,”  (two vols). h. r. miscellaneous
documents, no. , part i, forty-seventh congress, second session.
iv. pauper-labor argument.—see
taussig, “protection to young
industries,” p. , note ; calhoun's speech, works, iv, pp. -;
greeley's speech of ; cooper's “politics,” pp. -; webster's
works, v, pp. -; cairnes, “leading principles,” pp. -.
fifteenth annual report of the massachusetts bureau of statistics
(), by carroll d. wright. d. a. wells, “princeton review,” november,
, p. ; schoenhof, “wages and trade.”
v. view of early manufactures.—bishop,
“history of american
manufactures”; batchelder's “introduction and early progress of the
cotton manufacture in the united states”; n. appleton, “origin of
lowell”; g. s. white, “memoir of samuel slater”; b. f. french,
“history of the rise and progress of the iron trade of the united
states for -”; h. scrivenor, “history of the iron trade”;
“bulletin of the national association of woolen manufactures,” ii, pp.
-. tench coxe, “statement of the arts and manufactures of
the united states for ” ().
vi. later view of manufactures:
(.) the iron manufacture.—see
swank's “reports of iron and
steel association,” ; ibid., “census report,” ; ibid., “iron
trade,” ; j. s. newberry, for an excellent article in “international
review,” i, pp. -.
for bessemer steel, swank, “census report,” , pp. -;
and schoenhof, “destructive influences of the tariff,” chap. vii. a.
s. hewett, speech in congress, may , . separately printed.
(.) wool, woolens, and cottons.—production
and importation
of wool, see “united states statistical abstract”; “tariff commission
report,” i, pp. -; ii, p. .
production and importation of woolens, see “bulletin of woolen
manufacturers,” vii, p. ; “commerce and navigation reports.”
prosperity of woolen manufacturers after , see wells, “wool
and the tariff” (a letter to the “new york tribune,” march , );
r. w. robinson, article of december, , in “bulletin of woolen
manufacturers,” iii, p. . edward harris, “memorial of the manufacturers
of woolen goods to the committee of ways and means,”
washington, . john l. hayes, “the fleece and the loom.”
production and importation of cottons, see “commerce and navigation
reports”; census report of .
[pg ]
(.) silk.—manufacture since
, see “silk association reports”;
wyckoff, “silk manufacture in the united states” () for recent
history, pp. -. wyckoff, “the silk goods of america” (),
on methods of manufacture, chaps. ii, iv, vi.
(.) sugar duties.—d.
a. wells, “princeton review,” vi (november,
), pp. -; and “the sugar industry of the united states
and the tariff” ().
vii. present tariff.—heyl's
“united states duties on imports”
() contains all acts in force to date of publication, and gives all acts
since the year  in full. it is used by the united states officials.
“imports duties from  to  inclusive” (house of representatives,
miscellaneous documents, no. , forty-eighth congress, first
session) gives duties on each article by years, and reduces specific to
ad valorem rates.
“the existing tariff on imports into the united states,” 
(senate document, report, no. , forty-eighth congress, first session).
a brief bibliography of bimetallism.
“the report of the international monetary conference, ” (p.
), contains an extended bibliography on money, by s. dana horton.
chevalier's third volume of his “cours d'économie politique,” entitled
“monnaie,” also gives a bibliography.
i. standard of value.—see
jevons, “money and the mechanism of
exchange,” chaps iii, xxv; s. dana horton, “gold and silver,” chap.
iv, p. ; f. a. walker, “political economy,” pp. -, “money,
trade, and industry,” pp. -; wolowski, “l'or et l'argent,” pp. ,
, ; mill, “principles of political economy,” book iii, chap. xv;
walras, “journal des économistes,” october, , pp. -.
ii. bimetallic theory.—horton,
“gold and silver,” p. ; f. a.
walker, “money, trade, and industry,” p. , “political economy,” p.
; giffen, “fortnightly review,” vol. xxxii (), p. ; wolowski,
“l'or et l'argent,” p. ; jevons, ibid., chap, xii; a. j. wilson, “reciprocity,
bimetallism, and land reform,” p. ; s. bourne, “trade,
population, and food,” p. ; seyd, “the decline of prosperity,” and
the various pamphlets of cernuschi.
iii. operation of gresham's law.—macaulay,
chap. xxi for clipped
coin of ; jevons, ibid., pp. -, also gives an example taken
from the japanese currency; for the case of france, see “report of the
select committee of the house of commons on the depreciation of silver,
,” p. xlii, and appendix, pp. , ; for the united states,
see supra, book
iii, chap. vii, § . see, also, lord liverpool's “treatise
on the coins of the realm,” chap. xii, for changes in the coin of england.
[pg ]
iv. compensatory effect of two standards.—jevons,
ibid., pp. ,
; f. a. walker, “political economy,” pp. -; wolowski,
“l'or et l'argent,” p. ; mannequin, “journal des économistes,”
august, , p. .
v. effect of a league of states,
or law, on the relative value of gold
and silver.—giffen, “fortnightly review,” vol. xxxii (), pp. -;
wolowski, “l'or et l'argent,” pp. , , ; f. a. walker, “political
economy,” p. , “report of the international monetary conference,
,” p. ; sumner, “princeton review,” vol. iv, p. ; s. dana
horton, “report of the international monetary conference, ,”
p. ; bourne, “trade, population, and food,” pp. , ; jevons,
“contemporary review,” vol. xxxix (), p. ; s. newcomb, “international
review” (), p. .
vi. production of gold and silver; relative value of the two
metals.—ad. soetbeer, petermann's “mittheilungen,” no. ; “house
of commons report on depreciation of silver,” , appendix, pp.
, , ; bourne, “statistical journal,” vol. xlii, p. , gives sir h.
hay's figures corrected by him to ; spofford's “american almanac,”
, gives tables from the “journal des économistes”; the
figures of seyd, hay, jacob, and tooke and newmarch are in the
“house of commons report,” above. also see, supra,
book iii, chap.
vi, for references.
the relative values of gold and silver since , as given in pixley
and abell's (london) tables, are trustworthy. previous to  there
is much uncertainty. soetbeer, ibid., gives hamburg quotations since
. another table, probably incorrect in places, is that of white, see
“report of the international monetary conference,” , p. .
vii. demonetization of silver by germany.—for
copy of laws of
 and , see “report of directors of the united states mint, ,”
p. ; “house of commons report on depreciation of silver,” ,
p. ; “conférence monétaire internationale,” , index, p.  for
“allemagne.”
viii. latin union.—for
treaty, see “journal des économistes,”
may, ; “house of commons report,” ibid, xxxviii, appendix, pp.
, , -, ; “report of monetary conference,” , pp.
ix. flow of silver to the east.—the
figures of sir hector hay
after , “house of commons report,” ibid., app., p. , are fullest,
and should be combined with pixley and abell's figures for years before
, ibid., appendix, p. . see also bourne, “statistical journal,”
, p. ; waterfield, “house of commons report,” ibid., appendix,
pp. , , ; quetteville, ibid., p. ; “conférence monétaire
internationale,” , p. ; london “economist,” february
, , supplement, p. ; “parliamentary documents,” , vol.
[pg ]
xciii; “report of the director of the united states mint,”  (in
the finance report, , p. ); j. b. robertson, “westminster review,”
vol. cxv, p. .
x. depreciation of silver,
.—causes, bourne, ibid., pp. ,
, , ; wilson, ibid., p. ; “house of commons report,”
ibid.; sumner, “princeton review,” vol. iv., p. ; s. newcomb,
“international review,” vol. vi (), p. ; cochut, “revue des deux
mondes,” i, december, , p. ; cairnes, “essays”; f. bowen,
“minority report of the united states silver commission,” .
supposed cause of panic of , see williamson, “contemporary
review,” april ; seyd, “decline of prosperity”; bourne, ibid.,
pp. , .
xi. appreciation of gold.—giffen,
“statistical journal,” vol. xlii,
p. , started the theory for the period -. also see bourne,
“statistical journal,” vol. xlii, p. ; s. newcomb, “international review,”
, p. ; wolowski, ibid., pp. , ; goschen, “journal of
the institute of bankers” (london), vol. iv, part vi, may, ; patterson,
“statistical journal,” vol. xliii, p. ; for table of prices see london
“economist” (e.g., december , ).
xii. bimetallism in the united states.—see
supra, book iii, chap.
vii; for a vast array of materials, see “report of the international monetary
conference,” ; linderman's “money and legal tender”; the
finance reports of the united states; and congressional documents.
for the coinage laws of , , , , , see pamphlet,
“extracts from the laws of the united states relating to currency
and finance,” by c. f. dunbar. for detailed account of passage of
act of , see “report of the comptroller of the currency,” , p.
. present situation, “atlantic monthly,” may, , “the silver
danger.”
a brief bibliography of american shipping.
i. english navigation acts.—macpherson's
“annals,” ii, pp. ,
; scobell, “collection of acts,” p. ; ruffhead, “statutes at
large,” iii, p. ; roger coke, “treatise on trade” (), p. ; sir
josiah child, “new discourse on trade” (); sir matthew decker,
“essay on the causes of the decline of foreign trade” (); joshua
gee, “trade and navigation of great britain” (); lindsay, “history
of merchant shipping and ancient commerce”; mcculloch,
“dictionary of commerce” (new edition), articles “navigation” and
“colonial trade”; ibid., edition of adam smith, note xii, p. ; huskisson,
speeches, iii, , ; levi, “history of british commerce,” p.
[pg ]
ii. navigation laws of the united states.—“united
states statutes
at large,” i, , , ; act of , statutes, iii, ; revised statutes
(), “commerce and navigation,” p. ; lord sheffield, “observations
on the commerce of the united states”; pitkin, “statistical
view of the commerce of the united states,” chap, i; d. a.
wells, “our merchant marine,” chap. v; seybert's “statistical annals”;
macgregor, “commercial statistics of america.”
iii. growth of american shipping.—rapid growth, -.
levi, “history of british commerce,” p. ; bigelow, “tariff question,”
appendix no. ; “harper's magazine,” january, , p. ;
lindsay, “history of merchant shipping,” iii, p. ; for ship-building,
see report of the united states bureau of statistics, “commerce and
navigation,” , p. ; for tonnage, ibid., pp. -; also, see
“united states statistical abstract”; dingley's report to house of
representatives, december , , no. ,, forty-seventh congress,
second session, pp. , , .
iv. steam and iron ships.—preble,
“history of steam navigation”;
colden, “life of fulton”; porter, “progress of the nation,” section
, chap. iv; nimmo, “report to the secretary of the treasury in
relation to the foreign commerce of the united states and the decadence
of american shipping” (); dingley's report, pp. , ; kelley,
“the question of ships,” appendix ii, p. .
v. decline of american shipping.—“report on commerce and
navigation” (), pp. , ; lindsay, ibid., iii, pp. , , ,
; ibid., iv, pp. -, , , ; “north american review,”
october, , p. ; “report on commerce and navigation,” ,
lxv, pp. , , , ; lynch, report to house of representatives
on “causes of the reduction of american tonnage,” february ,
, pp. ix, , , -; remission of duties, revised statutes of
the united states (edition of ), section ,; report on “commerce
and navigation,” xi, , ; dingley's report; nimmo, “decadence
of american shipping” (which gives several charts), p. , “the
practical workings of our relations of maritime reciprocity” ();
kelley, ibid.; reports of the new york chamber of commerce; sumner,
“shall americans own ships?” in “north american review,”
june, ; codman, “free ships”; for high-rate profit in the united
states, dingley's report, p. .
vi. burdens on ship-owners.—tonnage
duties, wells, p. ; sailors'
wages, revised statutes, sections ,, ,, ,-,, ,;
consular fees, dingley's report, p. ; pilotage, taxation, wells, p. ,
et seq.; see also act of , abolishing many of these burdens.
[pg ]
appendix ii. examination questions.
the following problems and questions have been arranged to indicate
to the reader the character of examinations set by english and
american universities. they have been taken in each case from papers
actually given. it is hardly necessary to state, perhaps, that these questions
do not exhaust the subject, and are only some of a kind of which
many more might be added:
definitions.
. define briefly, fixed capital; unproductive consumption; law of
diminishing returns; effective desire of accumulation; law of increase
of labor; communism; wages fund; wages of superintendence; real
wages; value; price; demand; medium of exchange; gresham's law.
. explain carefully the following terms: productive consumption,
effectual demand, margin of cultivation, cost of production, value of
money, cost of labor, wealth, and abstinence.
. explain the following terms: real wages, fixed capital, allowance
system, margin of cultivation, price, demand, medium of exchange,
seignorage, value of money, and bill of exchange.
. define supply, value of money, productive consumption, cost
of production, cost of labor, exchange value, law of production from
land, rate of profit, capital, and gresham's law.
. define political economy: state the parts into which it may be
divided, and show how they are mutually related.
labor.
. distinguish between direct and indirect labor, and give an illustration
of the distinction.
. apply the distinction between productive and unproductive labor,
and productive and unproductive consumption, respectively, to each of
[pg ]
the following persons: a tailor, an architect, an annuitant, a sailor, and
a brick-layer.
. is an actor to be classed as a productive laborer? the inventor
of a machine? a confectioner?
. in which of the two classes of laborers, productive and unproductive,
would you place the following?
(.) the officers of our government.(.) the maker of an organ.(.) an organist.(.) a schoolmaster.(.) an artist.(.) he who makes an article for which there is no use.
. classify as productive or unproductive the following laborers:
a clergyman, musical-instrument maker, actor, soldier, and lace-maker.
capital.
. explain fully what you understand by capital, and what function
it discharges in production. consider whether or not the following
ought to be included in capital: () the original and acquired powers
of the laborer, () the original properties of the soil, () improvements
on land, () credit, () unsold stock in the hands of a merchant, ()
articles purchased but still in the consumer's hands.
. does a national loan add to the capital of a country?
. inquire how far, or in what cases, or in what sense, it may be
said that a common dwelling-house, an hotel, a school-house, a police-station,
a theatre, and a fortification, constitute part of the capital of
the country.
. discuss carefully the question whether money lying in a bank (or
corn lying in a granary) is always capital, or whether its economic
nature depends upon the intentions of the owner.
. are railway-shares, stocks of wine, wheat, munitions of war, and
land, to be considered capital, or not?
. explain fully whether you consider that united states bonds are
capital or not.
. is an investment in government funds capital, or not? give
your reasons.
. in what manner does a large expenditure for military purposes
affect the operations of capital and labor?
. distinguish between wealth and capital. show that there is no
assignable limit to the employment of capital in bettering the condition
of the members of a community.
. “if there are human beings capable of work, and food to feed
them, they may always be employed in producing something.” explain
the meaning of this fully.
[pg ]
. what is meant by saying wealth can only perform the functions
of capital by being wholly or partially consumed?
. explain and illustrate the statement that demand for commodities
is not demand for labor.
. show that expenditure of money does not necessarily increase
the demand for labor.
. in what way would a general demand for luxuries affect productive
laborers and the wealth of the community?
. in a community where capital is all employed, what would be
the effect if one employer gradually withdrew some of his capital, and
spent this for personal luxuries?
. it is contended that “the demand for commodities, which can
only be got by labor, is as much a demand for labor as a demand for
beef is a demand for bullocks.” criticise this position.
. “it is often said that, though employment is withdrawn from
labor in one department, an exactly equivalent employment is opened
for it in others, because what the consumers save in the increased cheapness
of one particular article enables them to augment their consumption
of others, thereby increasing the demand for other kinds of labor.”
point out the fallacy.
. a college undergraduate, with the applause of shopkeepers,
bought twenty waistcoats, under the plea that he was doing good to
trade. examine the economical soundness of his act.
. a man invested a portion of his capital in a loan to a state which
subsequently repudiated its debts. the man thereupon gave up his
carriage, discharged superfluous gardeners, and reduced the number of
his domestic servants. examine the effect of these changes on the
employment of labor in the district where he resides.
. in the sixteenth century a great change in the mode of expenditure
took place. retainers were dismissed, households were reduced
and a demand for commodities was substituted for a demand for labor.
how would this change affect wages, and why?
. it is supposed by some persons that expenditure by the rich in
costly entertainments is good for trade. what is your opinion on the
subject?
. a is an absentee who spends his income abroad. b spends his
income chiefly on american pictures and other works of art. c spends
most of his income on american servants. d saves and buys united
states bonds. e employs most of his income in the production of
manufactures. explain the various effects of these different modes of
expenditure on the amount of wealth in the united states, and on
the working-classes of the country.
. compare the economic effects of defraying war expenditure ()
by loans, () by increased taxation.
[pg ]
. define the term capital, and distinguish between fixed and circulating
capital, giving instances of each.
. distinguish between fixed and circulating capital, and point out
how far, or in what manner, each of the following articles belongs to
one kind or the other: a dwelling-house, a crop of corn, a wagon, a
load of coal, an ingot of gold, a railway-engine, a bale of cotton goods.
. of the following, which would you class under fixed and which
under circulating capital: cash in the hands of a merchant, a cotton-mill,
a plow, diamonds in a jeweler's shop, a locomotive, a nursery-gardener's
seeds, greenhouses, manures; a carpenter's tools, woods,
nails?
. if in a country like this a large amount of capital becomes fixed
in the building of railroads, what effect will this change taken by itself
have upon the laboring-class, supposing the capital to be () domestic,
or () borrowed wholly or in part from abroad?
. what conclusion is reached by mr. mill respecting the objections
to the use of labor-saving machinery?
. is the extension of machinery beneficial to laborers?
. what is “the conclusive answer to the objections against machinery”?
efficiency of production.
. explain briefly the chief causes on which the productiveness of
labor depends.
. what are the principal ways in which advantage arises from the
division of labor?
. what are the principal advantages of division of labor? in
what cases and why is it better to carry on a productive enterprise on a
large scale?
. under what circumstances, and in what callings, can the division
of employment be carried out to the fullest extent?
. show how the amount of available capital and the extent of the
market for products limit division of labor.
population.
. give a brief statement of malthus's theory of population, explaining
the different checks on population in different stages of civilization.
. enunciate malthus's law of population, and give an outline of the
reasoning by which he established it. give an account of any objections
that have been brought against malthus's position, and criticise
those objections.
. when the growth of population outstrips the progress of improvements,
