brick or stone, and the fire of wood was built in it, and allowed to
remain until it
had
burned out. the coals and ashes were removed, and
when the brick had cooled somewhat cakes and pies were put in to bake.
this oven retained its heat for twenty-four hours, and beans put in
saturday afternoon were taken out hot for the sunday morning breakfast.
the method was clumsy, but a good heat saver.
fig. .—a colonial fireplace. courtesy of
the historical society, ipswich, mass.
figure  is an american stove, early nineteenth century, wood the fuel;
and from this form, modified for using coal, has developed the modern
american coal range (fig. ). even the latest types are very wasteful of
heat. stoves like that shown in fig.  have been devised for use with
gas. even with these only a small percentage of the heat generated is
available for cooking.
fig. .—an early american stove, .
courtesy of the bryson library.
the ideal system is that which gives the largest possible percentage of
its heat for cooking, and puts the degree
of
heat under quick control
with the greatest saving of fuel, and of labor in operating. this does not
mean that the stove which gives the most intense heat is the best,
although some stoves seem to be constructed with that as the aim.
let us consider some of the methods of saving heat, and study different
kinds of apparatus with this knowledge in mind.
we recall the fact, first, that some substances are good conductors of
heat, and others
poor.[]
if you hold a metal poker in your hand, and
place the other end in red hot coals, you will realize that metal is a
rapid conductor of heat. if the poker has a wooden handle, the heat of the
coals does not readily reach your hand, for the wood is a poor conductor.
moreover, this good conductor is a poor holder of heat, the heat radiating
rapidly from it into the surrounding air, but the poor conductor, once
thoroughly heated, cools off slowly.
you can think of many illustrations from your daily life. why do
you prefer a woolen blanket on a cool night, rather than a linen
sheet, merely? why do you use a cloth holder in ironing? what is
the principle of a hot water bottle? air is a poor conductor.
can you think of an illustration of this? what is the principle
of a thermos bottle?
it is not difficult to see how these facts apply in our cooking apparatus.
from an oven with metal sides heat is lost by radiation. in a double oven,
with an air space between the inner and outer part, some heat is saved. if
the outer cover is of some non-conducting material, even less radiation
takes place. this is the principle of the oven devised by mr. edward
atkinson. here the inner oven is of sheet iron, and the outer covering of
a non-conducting material, some composition with wood pulp or paper as the
basis. if in this way heat can be trapped, as it were, in an oven, it will
follow that less heat will have to be supplied, and we can use a smaller
amount of fuel. this is the case in the atkinson oven (fig. ), where the
source of heat is either a kerosene lamp, or a small bunsen burner of the
rose type, which uses only a small amount of gas.
fig. .—the atkinson cooker.
another illustration of the conserving of heat by the prevention of
radiation is in the fireless cooker. this is a method used in sweden in
simple form, and adapted and improved to suit modern needs. heat is
supplied in the first place by gas or kerosene, and the water in the
vessel containing the food is raised to the boiling point, and held there
in some cases for a few minutes. the vessel is then placed in the
“cooker,” which is a box with thick walls of some non-conducting material,
and the heat already present is sufficient to finish the cooking process,
since the radiation is very slow. in some cookers a heated stone is
introduced to raise the temperature slightly. both of these devices are
excellent for the long, slow cooking that seems to mellow the food
material and develop the flavors that do not result from rapid cooking.
at the same time, we need rapid processes, such as broiling and toasting,
which give characteristic flavors. to meet this double need, a new type of
gas stove has been made. see fig. .
fig. .—construction of the duplex gas range.
courtesy of domestic equipment co.
this is a gas stove, where the oven has thick walls of a non-conducting
material. the oven is heated, for a short time only, the gas flame being
cut off when the oven has reached the desired temperature. at the left is
an attachment where rapid cooking may be accomplished when desired, and
there is a device at () with the same principle as the fireless cooker,
or the tea “cosey.” this cover is dropped over the kettle when the boiling
point is reached, the flame is turned out, and the heat in the water
finishes the process. there is no good reason why stoves
embodying
this
same principle should not be used with kerosene, and with the electric
current. improved stoves of this type will be constructed, and certainly
will tend toward great economy of fuel.
one method of saving fuel is by the use of a steam cooker, which
consists of a series of compartments, one above another, containing
several kinds of food, all to be cooked over the same burner, either gas
or kerosene, or on one section of the top of the coal range when space is
being used for the wash boiler or irons.
it requires intelligence to use such devices, and those who lack it cling
obstinately to hot fires and violent cooking.
the coal range.—progress is slow, and the coal range will not be
abolished at present. figure  is an example of a good range as easy to
manage as possible. the coal box at () has a lining that prevents the
iron from burning out. the air enters at () and passes out at (), when
the fire is first made. when it is necessary to heat the oven, a damper is
closed at (), and the heated air then passes around the oven in the
direction of the arrows. the coal is put in at () and the ashes shaken
down at (). larger ranges, resting upon the floor, have a “dump” for the
ashes directly into the ash box in the cellar, and some makes have a
device for operating this with the foot. the coal stove involves
the
labor of bringing in coal and taking out ashes, and space must be given
to the coal bin and ash pit. a range of this size would serve for a family
of five or six. it requires from  to  hods per day. a hood should be
placed above a large range, whether coal or gas.
fig. .—a modern coal range. courtesy of
detroit stove works.
to make a coal fire.—see that the grate is clean and that the
ashes have been removed. you know that a current of air
containing oxygen is needed to make the fire burn. how will you
arrange the damper at () and () when you are starting the
fire?
coal does not begin to burn easily. therefore we kindle it by
materials that have a low kindling temperature, light wood,
paper, and matches.
in the bottom of the grate, lay twisted pieces of paper, or very
finely split pieces of wood, or shavings, next in order larger
pieces of wood laid “crisscross,” yet close enough not to let
the coal fall through, and on the top a shovelful or two of
coal. why do you not put in flat newspapers, and lay the
kindling lengthwise and solid? put on the stove lids, arrange
the dampers properly, and touch the match. why do you use the
match? why does the match light? perhaps your nature study
lessons will help you to explain this whole kindling process.
what should be the next step in the fire making? how should you
finally arrange the dampers?
a coal fire will keep well for a considerable length of time, if
the coal is put on and the ash removed regularly, provided the
stove is well constructed, and the coal of good quality. add
fresh coal before the fire becomes a dull red, and shows ashes.
if it gets too low, wood kindling will be needed, and this is
poor management. be careful not to put in so much coal that you
cannot put the lid on firmly. it ruins the top of a stove if the
hot coals touch it.
soot must be removed once in a while from the top and bottom of
the oven, and from the stove pipe.
the gas stove.—figure  shows a well-constructed stove of the usual
type. notice the air space, and asbestos lining around the oven. the
burner for heating the oven is at (). holes in the sides allow the heated
air to pass outside of
the
oven at () and into the oven as indicated by
the arrows. the heated current passes out of the oven at the back of the
top, and passes out of the stove at (), where it should be carried away
by a pipe into a flue. the heat of the oven burner is also used for
toasting and roasting underneath, on the movable rack at (). the oven
burner is lighted by a leader burner at (). the top burners, five in
number, are at (). below those is a removable pan at (). the top of the
stove is removable in sections, and the burners are easily removed when
cleaning is necessary.
fig. .—a modern gas range. courtesy of
detroit stove works.
the gas burner (fig. ) is constructed on the principle of the bunsen
burner, which you may have used in the laboratory. there is an opening in
the pipe, near the stopcock, which admits the air, that it may mix with
the gas, and give the blue flame. if there is not enough air, the flame
burns with a yellow color, and smokes. if there is too much air, there is
a roaring sound, and the flame “pulls back” and burns with a smoky yellow
flame, and disagreeable odor. there is a valve always to regulate the air
supply for each burner. figure  shows a burner removed from the range.
() is the hollow, star-shaped chamber which gives space for the thorough
mixing of the gas with the air. the gas enters from the connecting pipe at
(), the air at (), and () is the valve for regulating the air supply.
fig. .—a gas stove burner. courtesy of
detroit stove works.
gas ranges of this type are built in different sizes, and with varying
arrangements of ovens and hot-closets. an oven above the stove is
convenient. ranges are built also for using either gas or coal. a range of
the size pictured, with four large burners on the top, will serve for a
family of five or six, if the work is well planned. the oven burner
consumes  to  cubic feet per hour, the top burners  cubic feet each,
and the simmering burner somewhat less. this is estimated for a burner
turned on full.
to manage a gas stove.—before lighting the top or oven burners
see that the stopcocks are all tight, with no escaping gas. to
light the top burners, strike the match, turn on the stopcock,
and touch the match to the gas when it is flowing well. a
disagreeable
“popping” follows if the match is applied to the
burner before the gas flows. for lighting the oven, a “leader”
burner at the side of the stove acts as a taper. open the oven
doors, and the door below, strike the match, turn on the leader,
and light it, turn on the back burner, and then the front
burner, and turn out the leader. the so-called explosion of a
gas stove is due to the sudden lighting of a quantity of gas
under the oven that has collected without being lighted.
the important point in managing a gas stove is to keep the
stopcock turned so that the flame is low. the full flame is
needed only when water is being brought to the boiling point,
and for the first heating of the oven. the low flame should be
protected from draft. many gas stoves now have a small simmering
burner that is more useful than the large burner. another point
in the use of the stove is the prevention of the “boiling over”
from some kettle. the low flame helps here, and it is also
necessary that the kettles should not be too full. “boiling
over” clogs the burners, and makes necessary the frequent
cleaning of the pan underneath the burners.
the oven burner should be lighted from five to ten minutes
before the oven is wanted, depending upon the intensity of the
flames. after the food has been put in the oven, allow a few
minutes, not more than five, for the food to heat through, and
then turn the flame as low as possible. often, one burner can be
turned out. this you have to learn by experience. when toasting
or broiling is the process, light the oven burner before using,
because the work is performed by the heated iron as well as by
the gas flame. leave the lower door open, as bread toasts or
meat broils, to hasten the browning process, for it is the
oxygen of the air that causes the browning. some coal ovens have
a damper for admitting air for this same purpose and though some
flavor is lost in this way by evaporation, the amount is
negligible in a quick cooking process. the atkinson oven is so
tightly closed, that food does not acquire a rich brown in it.
an opening at the top is available when a delicate brown is
wanted. it is true, however, that the slow process with a
minimum of evaporation gives a flavor that compensates for the
brown color and flavor. all burners should be removed if the
holes seem clogged and be boiled out in a solution of washing
soda, two tablespoonfuls to a gallon of water. do not blacken
the burners.
kerosene stoves.—the best type is a blue-flame stove with a wick.
kerosene stoves are made with no wick, the kerosene being vaporized just
before it reaches the burner, but such a stove requires occasional pumping
to force the kerosene into the vaporizing chamber, and on the whole is
less satisfactory than the stove with the wick. the heat is intense from
this blue flame, and the burner is economical of the fuel. the small
kerosene stoves, burning with a yellow flame are always inclined to smoke,
and difficult to keep clean. a three- or four-burner oil stove with a
portable oven will do the cooking in summer for a family of five or six.
one burner consumes a gallon of oil in  hours. portable double ovens are
furnished with such stoves.
the kerosene stove is cheaper to operate than a gas range, even with
kerosene at fourteen cents a gallon, but the heat is not under such
perfect control, and the stove requires more work to keep it clean.
the one important point in the management of this blue-flame
wick stove is to keep the flame down by having the wick low, and
where it belongs. the cylinder around the burner prevents the
escape of heat and carries it to the utensil above. a careless
person, by raising the wick too high, and producing a yellow
smoky flame, makes much trouble for herself. it is important to
fill the tank without spilling a drop of kerosene, and to keep
every part of the stove well washed off with soap and water. the
wick should be rubbed off occasionally, never cut, and if an
odor becomes perceptible, the burner should be taken apart and
boiled in a solution of washing soda and water. the wick will
need to be renewed at intervals, depending upon the amount of
use that it has. with care a stove of this kind is clean and
odorless.
electric apparatus.—figure  shows a table arranged for cooking by
electricity, each piece of apparatus having its own connection. compare
this with the frontispiece, the method of cooking in the eighteenth
century, and you
will
realize how far we have progressed in the way of
convenience, comfort, and heat economy. figure  shows a disk stove four
and a half inches in diameter, upon which a saucepan may stand, and which
is therefore available for more than one purpose.
fig. .—an electric cooking outfit. courtesy
of department of household science, university of illinois.
the advantages of electric cooking are obvious. the heat is directly
conducted to each utensil, and a minimum amount is lost in radiation. the
degree of heat is perfectly under control, and the manipulation is nothing
more than the turning of a knob. when the apparatus is installed, it is
adjusted to the voltage, so that no further regulation
is
necessary.
there are no waste products, and no matches to light or throw away. if the
wiring is properly done, there is no danger from fire. the one present
disadvantage is the cost. each piece of apparatus is expensive. the cost
of running must depend upon the cost of electricity in the neighborhood,
and the number of watts per hour used by each piece of apparatus. the
larger the utensil, the more watts consumed. the disk stove in fig. 
uses  watts; a disk of  inches diameter,  watts; of  inches, 
watts. some pieces of apparatus are arranged for three different heats,
with a different number of watts for each heat. with one disk stove 
inches in diameter,  heats are possible, with , , and  watts
respectively.
fig. .—a disk electric stove. courtesy of
landers, frary and clark.
oven thermometers.—a thermometer is furnished set in the door of many
ranges. while these are guides after one has learned to use the oven, they
are not really accurate by scale. for exact work in testing oven
temperature, a hole must be bored in the side of the oven, and a chemical
thermometer inserted, protected by asbestos and metal.
simple tests for oven temperature will be found in chapter xi.
. why is the question of the cost and kind of fuel important?
. what is the difference between hard and soft coal? between red and
white ash?
. why are certain fuels in more common use than others?
. explain the advantage of gas over coal. over kerosene.
. what are the advantages of electricity as a source of heat?
. explain the way in which electricity is measured.
. read the gas meter at home and estimate the amount and cost per day.
(the ordinary burner consumes about two cubic feet per hour.)
. obtain the prices of the fuels used in the neighborhood and work out a
comparison of the cost of fuel for preparing a
meal.[]
. what are the methods of conserving heat in cooking apparatus?
. explain the structure and management of a coal stove.
. explain the principles involved in making a fire.
. the structure and management of a gas stove.
. why does gas in a burner sometimes “pull back”?
. state the requirements in a perfect example of cooking apparatus.
the principles of cooking.—in science the word “principle” ordinarily
means a formulation of some general or constant mode of behavior—a
generalization based on many observations of fact. in cookery the word is
used in the same sense; for example, one may say that an important
principle to bear in mind when cooking with any fat is that the fats may
be melted without decomposition, but when too strongly heated they begin
to decompose with the production of acrid and irritating products.
sometimes, however, we speak of “principles of cookery” in a broader and
somewhat less exact sense to indicate the general purposes of cooking
operations, as when we say that the most important principle of vegetable
cookery is to soften the fiber without destroying the flavor or dissolving
away the ash constituents of the vegetable.
that is, the change either chemical or physical that takes place in a
certain foodstuff by the application of heat or cold or by the use of a
fermentation process may be referred to as the underlying, working
principle. we shall study in detail these changes as we experiment with
and prepare each food material, but a general statement of the effect of
heat on various foodstuffs will be helpful here.
protein.—there are several forms of protein, with differences that we
can understand only after a thorough study of chemistry. the most
important proteins in meat,
fish,
eggs, milk, old beans and peas
coagulate, or become slightly harder or firmer at a temperature below the
boiling point of water. we shall perform an experiment to show this while
studying the egg. there is no marked chemical change; that is, the protein
is not changed to another substance.
fats.—solid fats are liquefied by heat, and freed from the tissue that
contains them in animal fats like suet.
when a fat begins to smoke with heat, a chemical change is taking place.
if intense heat is continued, all the hydrogen and oxygen are driven off
and pure carbon remains. when the fat is “brown,” giving the flavor we
like, a part of the oxygen and hydrogen have been driven off. the
“boiling” of fat in a kettle is ordinarily due to the boiling of the water
contained in the fat.
starch.—starch occurs in the form of granules. see fig. . in boiling
water, the granule expands and finally bursts, and frees the content, the
pure starch, and the whole mass thickens.
boiled with an acid the starch is changed to dextrin, a substance
resembling a gum, and the mixture becomes thin; and this process continued
changes the dextrin to dextrose.
with intense “dry” heat, as in toasting, the granule expands and opens,
and the contents change to dextrin. continued heat reduces the starch to
pure carbon. the brown color and pleasant flavor in toast are a stage on
the road to carbon.
sugar.—sugar first melts with heat, then begins to decompose, giving
off water. this is also a stage on the road to pure carbon. caramel, a
familiar flavor, is sugar in the brown stage, with the water partly driven
off.
the art in applying intense heat to fat, starch, and sugar is to know the
stopping point,—to reach the “brown taste” and stop short of the “burnt
taste.”
mineral matter.—the “ash” remains for the most part unchanged by heat,
but may be lost in the water in which vegetables and meat are cooked if
the water is thrown away.
vegetable fiber is softened by heat and moisture, and the protein,
starch, fat, and sugar are freed, making them available for our digestion
and nutrition.
meat fiber softens at a low temperature, that is, below the boiling
point of water, with moisture; continued intense heat shrinks and hardens
it. a tender steak fried with fat in a hot pan will soon resemble sole
leather.
the technique of food preparation.—from the moment the food materials
enter the kitchen until the unusable portions are destroyed or carried
away, there is a best way of working with them at each step, and the sum
of these may be said to make a good technique. this technique will include
cleanliness first and foremost, then skill in the use of tools, judgment
in managing cooking apparatus and in applying heat in cooking processes,
and accuracy and rapidity of execution. it will also include or add to
itself the æsthetic element, the fine art of flavoring, the dainty
garnishing of a dish. moreover, this technique is the method of putting
into practice some basic, scientific principle. to illustrate:
the principle that underlies toast-making is threefold,—
heat evaporates moisture throughout the slice of bread.
intense heat changes the content of the starch granules on the
surface of the slice of bread to dextrin.
intense heat, long continued, will change first the surface
starch, and then all, to carbon (charcoal).
a good technique will secure the first two, and avoid the
third and includes,—
the selection of bread already partially dry.
the cutting of bread into slices of uniform thickness.
regulating the source of heat.
placing the slices firmly in a toaster, or on a fork, or evenly
on a rack when toasting by gas.
keeping the toast at a distance from the source of heat that
insures a steady but not too rapid change.
turning the toaster or the slices to cook each surface in turn
and thus to make the process slower.
stopping the process before carbon is formed and the toast
“burned.” (a good technique does not include scraping the
toast!)
the æsthetic element in toast-making might be a pretty shape
of the slices, say triangular pieces, and a dainty arrangement.
in this case and in others it is true that the result of a good
technique is æsthetic, in that correct manipulation while
securing the desired chemical change also develops the pleasing
golden brown that makes the toast so attractive.
the care of food materials.—when food materials are delivered, have
receptacles ready for each kind of food. (see kitchen furnishing.) attend
first to perishable foods. wash and dry milk and cream bottles before
putting them in the refrigerator. treat eggs in the same way. this is also
a good plan with lemons and other skin fruit, unless the quantity is too
large, in which case they should not be put into the refrigerator. remove
wrappings from meat, poultry, and fish; wipe them with a soft cloth,
dipped in salt and water, dry them, and place them in the ice box. wash
the cloth thoroughly and dry it. fish should be covered that its odor may
not affect other food. vegetables like lettuce, celery, and spinach should
be washed and picked over immediately, and the poor portions thrown away.
all semi-perishable foods should be put in a cool, dry place, and the
non-perishables in their separate receptacles. (see page .) do not keep
anything in brown paper bags, but save these bags for other uses.
have a regular time for inspecting and for cleaning all the places and
receptacles where food is kept. do not allow any spilled food material to
remain anywhere, and do not
tolerate
the presence of any material, cooked
or uncooked, that shows the least taint. a keen sense of smell is a good
servant here.
the processes of food preparation.—with kitchen in order, tools ready,
and food materials at hand, we are ready for the actual food preparation.
a distinction is to be made between cookery and cooking. cookery includes
all the steps necessary to produce the finished product, while cooking is
the actual application of heat, only one step of the whole process,
though, indeed, one of the most important and difficult. the order of
procedure in food preparation is as follows:
see first that the stove is ready (chapter iv). then comes the choice and
study of the recipe or the method of cooking. the word “recipe” is from a
latin word meaning “take.” follow this advice and “take” or bring together
on the work table whatever materials are needed. decide upon the necessary
utensils, and place them conveniently near. as you gather the materials
together you will measure and weigh the exact amounts. do this before you
begin the putting together or mixing. sometimes instead of mixing, the
necessary process is paring, or scraping, or cutting, each with its own
best way. then follows the application of heat. some foods are then served
at once, others must be carefully put away after cooling. or again, there
is no application of heat, for instance, when the freezing temperature is
used in ice cream; or in a salad, or fruit preparation where cooling in
the refrigerator is the next step. the technique of preparing a meal and
serving will be found in chapter xvi.
how to study a recipe.—remember that a recipe is a bit of experience
handed down for us to make useful. some one experimented at some time long
ago, perhaps failed at first, tried again, finally succeeded, and passed
on the result by word of mouth to others. there were doubtless
good
cooks
long before there were printed or written recipes. some recipes, however,
have been handed down from roman times, and recipes were printed as early
as the sixteenth century. modern recipes are much more accurate than the
old, as you may see if you have opportunity to read some old cook book.
at first in using a recipe follow its directions exactly. notice the
proportions, and read carefully the directions for combining the
ingredients, noting those points that are most important. have the whole
process well in mind before you begin work. do not let it be necessary to
refer to the printed page at every move you make. this is poor technique.
when the use of a recipe is preceded by some simple experiment that makes
the basic principle clear, it is much easier to use the recipe with
intelligence.
when you are no longer a novice you may take liberties with a recipe, even
a new one, scanning it with a critical eye, and perhaps giving it a cool
welcome. it may not be new at all! for this is the secret of
recipes,—there are really only a few, and the key to their use is the
recognition of the old in the new garb, and the having of a few type
recipes clearly in mind. each kind of prepared dish has one, or two, or
three basic forms or mixtures. learn these, and then with experience you
will become inventive, and make your own variations. for example, there
are but two kinds of cake,—those made with butter (or other fat) and
those without butter (the sponge cake). you will not attempt to memorize
many recipes, but you will find that in studying these type recipes you
have learned a few proportions so well that you cannot forget them. when
you have reached this stage of freedom you will still do exact work, but
your ingenuity and taste will have free play and you will not
be
tied to
other people’s recipes. but you cannot well begin at this end.
make some plan for recording new recipes that you test and find good. it
may be a printed recipe, or one that a friend gives you. the most
convenient plan is a recipe box or card file. the guide cards are arranged
alphabetically, and each recipe is either pasted upon a card or written
upon it. this plan makes it easy to discard an old recipe, or one that has
proved unsatisfactory, and to keep new recipes in alphabetical order,
which cannot be done in a book. a loose-leaf book is made for recipes,
alphabetized at the side, with envelopes for holding cuttings that may be
fastened in between the pages. this is a little less easy to use than the
card file.
weighing and measuring.—the system is “avoirdupois,” sixteen ounces to
the pound. learn to read the scales exactly, and when weighing, always
allow for the weight of the utensil or paper holding the food. weighing is
more accurate than measuring, but it is slower, and the measuring can be
made sufficiently accurate for most daily work. weighing is necessary in
the cookery of large pieces of meat and with poultry in order to estimate
correctly the time for cooking; and it is more convenient to weigh than
measure when preserving fruit if the quantities are large. also in
studying food values it is usually necessary to weigh the articles of
food.
the measures in common use are the saltspoon, teaspoon, and tablespoon,
the half-pint measuring cup, the pint, quart, and gallon of liquid
measure. the saltspoon is not accurate, and it is better to use some
fraction of a teaspoonful. teaspoons and tablespoons of a standard volume
may be found at some furnishing shops. the spoons in common use vary in
size, and the only way to approximate accuracy is to use the level
spoonful.
this is now the common practice. tin and glass half-pint cups
are made gauged in quarters and thirds. those commonly on sale sometimes
measure more than one fourth of the standard quart. inquire when you buy
if the cup measure is standard,—that is, exactly one half standard pint.
a quart measure, with four divisions, is necessary for careful work. a
pint measure is convenient, but not necessary if you have the quart and
half-pint measuring cup.
it is necessary to know the relation of these different weights and
measures to each other. while you may find tables of relative weight and
measures in many cookbooks, it is much better for you to work out a few of
the most useful for yourself, making careful record in your notebooks.
the following abbreviations are short cuts in reading and writing.
oz. = ounce
lb. = pound
ssp. = saltspoonful
tsp. = teaspoonful
tbsp. = tablespoonful
cp. = cup
pt. = pint
qt. = quart
gall. = gallon
if you wish something quicker even than this for notebook work, you can
use,
t = teaspoonful
t = tablespoonful
c = cup
p = pint
q = quart
g = gallon
experiments in weighing and
measuring.[]
answer these questions by performing the experiments. record in
notebook in orderly form.
apparatus. standard scales, a quart measure, and for each
pupil a measuring cup, table knife, teaspoon, and tablespoon.
materials. those mentioned below.
. how many eggs (medium size) to  lb.?
. what is the weight of one egg?
. of one pint of flour?
. of one cup of flour?
. of one cup of granulated sugar?
. of one cup of powdered sugar?
. of one pint of milk?
. average the weight of six potatoes.
. how many level teaspoonfuls of flour to a level
tablespoonful?
. how many teaspoonfuls of water to a tablespoonful?
. how many tablespoonfuls of flour to a cup?
. how many tablespoonfuls of water to a cup?
(these relative measures are convenient for dividing recipes.)
. measure a level tablespoonful of flour, by filling the
spoon, holding it level, and leveling the flour by running the
back of the knife quickly from the base of the bowl of the spoon
to the tip.
how can you most accurately divide this in halves? in quarters?
. how much does a cup of flaked cereal weigh?
. how much does a cup of granular cereal weigh?
. butter is hard to measure in a cup. if a recipe calls for
⁄ cup butter, it is easier to measure it by tablespoonfuls.
find out how many make ⁄ cup.
. how much does a cup of butter weigh? if you know this, you
can weigh it, instead of measuring, or if your butter is in
pound “pats,” you will be able to cut off a cupful, instead of
weighing it.
. an old-fashioned recipe for sponge cake reads thus: take the
weight of the eggs in sugar and half their weight in flour.
translate this into measures.
preparing and mixing.—food materials that are not to be mixed with others
still need special preparation before heat is applied.
for fruits and vegetables, washing is the first stage,
followed by scraping, paring, peeling, cutting, or
slicing. meats, poultry,
and
fish must be cleaned by wiping,
and cut and trimmed with a sharp knife.
cooked meats and fish and vegetables may be chopped or
sliced.
cooked vegetables are also mashed and beaten.
cream is whipped or beaten, and eggs served raw likewise.
these seem simple processes, but each one needs a good tool and
a knack in the muscles. each method will be taken up in detail,
with each food material.
methods of mixing are important, where several ingredients are combined.
we seek for a way that will give the most complete mingling of all the
substances with smoothness and lightness, at the same time saving time and
strength. we must look always for the “short cut.” it is necessary to have
the texture of the food such that it can be well masticated and mixed with
the digestive fluids, but time is too precious to spend hours on a
dessert, or in beating biscuits.
sifting, or putting materials through a fine mesh, is used to
lighten flour that has been packed down, to remove coarse
portions, or to mix thoroughly several dry ingredients.
stirring is done with a spoon, and is a round and round
motion, used for mixing a liquid and a dry ingredient.
rubbing is used for combining a dry ingredient with a
semi-solid substance like butter. creaming is a term used for
the rubbing of butter until it becomes soft and creamy. a spoon
should be used, not the hand.
“cutting in” with a knife is used for combining butter with
flour in biscuit and pastry where the butter should not be
softened.
beating with a spoon, or beater of the spoon type, is a free
over and over motion, the spoon being lifted from the mixture
for the backward stroke. this is used for increasing the
smoothness of the mixture after the first stirring, and for
beating in air. it needs a strong free motion of the forearm.
beating is also accomplished by the rotary motion of a
mechanical beater like the dover.
cutting and folding is the delicate process of mixing lightly
beaten egg with a liquid or semi-liquid without losing out the
air.
the
spoon is cut in, sidewise, a rotary motion carries it
down and up again, and it folds in the beaten egg as it goes.
kneading is a motion used with dough, and is a combination of
a rocking and pressing motion, accomplished by the hands. a good
result can be obtained by some bread machines, and this is the
cleaner method.
rolling out is just what the term denotes, a rolling of a
thick piece of dough by means of a cylindrical wooden “pin” to
the thickness proper for cookies and crusts. dry bread is also
rolled to break it into fine crumbs.
pounding and grinding are usually accomplished for us now in
factories in breaking of spices and coffee. it is better to have
a coffee mill at home.
the order of mixing is important in its effect in batters and
doughs and is discussed in that chapter.
cooking processes.—for the beginnings of cooking we should need to go
back to the days when game was roasted by the open fire, built for warmth,
or corn parched on hot stones. perhaps some root was cooked in the hot
ashes. this primitive method of roasting we still use in camp fires, and
in modified form wherever food is directly exposed to the heat of coal or
gas. water could not be a cooking medium until man advanced at least to
the first stage of pottery making, when some rude basket daubed with clay
was water-tight and sufficiently heat proof.
application of heat is the most difficult stage of the whole process of
cookery. it is so easy to have the heat too intense, or too low, to expose
the food for too long or too short a time to its action. most of our
apparatus fails to give us a uniform heat, the tendency being to an
increase or decrease of temperature. since the boiling temperature of
water remains at ° f., boiling is an easy process to manage, provided
the water does not boil out. the presence of water insures a low or
moderate temperature always.
it requires patience and time to learn how to bring
this
natural force of
heat under control. one novice who had allowed a flour paste to boil over
and burn while she was looking out of the window remarked: “we may forget,
but they never do!”—a pretty way of stating the steady working of
nature’s forces which we can harness for our use only by the exercise of
reason and will and constant watchfulness. the unintelligent cook is
impatient of slow processes, and cannot believe that food will finally be
“done” unless the water is at a “galloping” boil, and a red-hot fire is
keeping the oven at burning temperature.
look upon the application of heat as a continuation of nature’s slow
ripening process, a softening of tough fibers and a development of
pleasing flavors. for why do we cook at all except for these reasons?
primitive man thought only that the food had a better taste. he may have
decided, too, that it was easier to masticate; but we have learned that in
some cases we may, with right methods of cooking, make it easier to digest
farther on in the alimentary canal. modern science carries us a step
farther and teaches us that cooking destroys lower organisms, such as
harmful bacteria that may be present, and even animal parasites in meats.
we cook, therefore, to improve the appearance of food, to develop
flavors, to render some foodstuffs more digestible and to destroy
microörganisms.
we have at our command the following processes:
heat direct from coal, charcoal, wood, or gas.
toasting.—surfaces of food exposed and turned for browning.
broiling.—thin portions of meat or fish exposed and turned
for searing, browning, and short cooking of the interior.
roasting.—thicker cuts of meat exposed and turned frequently
for searing, browning, and gradual cooking of the interior. this
is an ancient method. it survives in the french “rôtisserie”;
and we use it in the modern gas stove when we cook directly
under the gas.
heat through an intervening medium.
water, the medium.
boiling.—cooking in boiling water, temperature, ° f., or
simmering, stewing, or “coddling.”—cooking in water below
the boiling temperature, ° f. up to ° f.
steaming.—cooking in a receptacle into which steam
penetrates, ° f.—or in a closed receptacle surrounded by
steam or boiling water as in a double boiler, or a “steamer,”
temperature from ° f. to ° f.
fat, the medium.
deep fat frying, temperature °-° f.
heated surfaces, the medium.
pan broiling.—cooking of chops or steaks in a heated pan,
without additional fat.
sauté.—to cook in a heated pan with a small amount of fat,
enough merely to prevent the food from sticking to the pan and
to hasten the browning process. “baking” cakes on a griddle is a
modification of this method.
baking.—cooking in a heated oven, temperature from ° f. to
° f., or higher for rapid browning. meat and poultry cooked
in an oven are baked and not roasted, although we use the word
“roast” for this method.
braising.—cooking meat in a heated oven in a closed vessel,
with a supply of water to keep down the temperature. this might
be called an “oven stew.”
these methods are sometimes combined in one process. in a brown
stew, the meat is first cooked in a pan with a little fat to
brown it, and to sear the outside for retaining the juices,
before the actual stewing begins. a “pot-roast,” is an
old-fashioned method of cooking a solid piece of meat with a
little water in a pot on top of the stove. the water simmers
out, and the meat is browned. what methods does this process
unite?
the american indians in their squantum, or clam bake, heated a
layer of stones by means of a fire on top, removing the ashes
when the fire died down. a layer of wet seaweed was placed on
the stones, and upon this clams, fish, and corn were laid, and
covered with another layer of seaweed. we have inherited this
method from the indians, and use it at the shore. what is the
cooking process?
care of food after cooking.—bread, cake, cookies, and pastry should be
cooled on a rack, or spread out in such a way that they do not steam. they
should then be placed in a tin box or stone jar, which has been cleaned by
washing and scalding with boiling water, and thoroughly dried. this
process destroys any mold that might be lurking about. keep paraffin paper
on hand to cover this class of food in its box or jar. this will prevent
too rapid drying out. do not use cloth. it flavors the bread or cake, no
matter how clean it may be.
all food that is to be served cold or reheated should be cooled before
placing in the ice box. for what reason? cool by placing in a draught, or
set the vessel containing the food in running cold water from the faucet.
it is particularly important to cool soups and broths rapidly. which of
these methods will you use, as being the more rapid?
all meat that is to be served cold should be cooled, especially if it is
rare, or underdone. how will you accomplish this?
care of left overs.—this is one of the tests of food management. it is so
easy at the end of a meal either to throw food away, or set it into the
refrigerator on the dish in which it has been served. have a good supply
of cheap bowls, plates, and saucers to hold left overs in the
refrigerator, thus avoiding one possibility for breakage of the table
china.
keep slices of bread for toasting, pieces of bread, to dry
for crumbs, with special receptacles for each. return pieces of
cake to the cake box. muffins may be reheated. toast may
be kept to serve under eggs or meat.
all butter should be saved. pieces left on butter plates if
clean should be scraped into a wide-mouthed jar and kept for
cooking.
pieces of meat should be kept for reheating or “made” dishes,
stews or soups or for salads. in hot weather, let your first
order of meat be small, and dispose of left overs as rapidly as
possible.
vegetables may be reheated, or used for flavoring soups and
stews, or used cold in salads.
desserts and fruits may be used for a “pick up” luncheon.
salads do not keep their freshness and flavor well, and should
be used very soon.
milk and cream should be returned to proper receptacles in
the refrigerator as soon as possible.
disposal of waste food.—this is the final test of good housekeeping, and
many otherwise good housekeepers fail just here. even at its best the
garbage pail is not altogether a pleasing object, and at its worst it is
unspeakable. it must not be ignored.
have a system adapted to your own kitchen, and the municipal method of
disposal, if there is such.
use a covered pail of enamel ware, rather than one of galvanized
iron. the surface of the enamel is smooth, and therefore easier
to wash, and there is no excuse for putting off the cleansing of
the pail. wash, rinse, and dry the pail and the cover
immediately after it is emptied. do not put a piece of paper in
the bottom of the pail. this request is made by the department
in new york city, and it is always better not to mix food waste
and paper waste. if you live in an apartment house, your name
should be painted on the pail.
never put liquid into the garbage pail with solid refuse. strain
out whatever liquid may be left in coffee or tea, and pour it
into the sink drain. if there is a greasy liquid to throw away,
add to it a teaspoonful or more of washing powder, and let it
stand a time. if you have used enough of the powder, you will
find that you have a soapy liquid to pour down the sink.
coffee, tea, cocoa, or lemonade left in cups should be diluted
and poured down the sink and never into the garbage pail.
empty garbage at evening when possible, to prevent the long
standing through the night. keep the pail closely covered both
day and night, to keep out flies, and water bugs, if they are
about. allow the pail to stand outside the kitchen unless the
fire escape is the only accessible out-of-doors. remember that
the fire escape is not a back porch, and that you would be fined
for using it as such if the inspectors were efficient.
there are two classes of waste: uncooked refuse, like potato skins, egg
shells, pea pods, meat trimmings and bones; and table scraps from plates.
pieces of fat may be “tried out,” but do not accumulate more
than you use. a few egg shells may be kept for settling
coffee, but again do not keep too many.
the country dweller has a simple problem. what the farm
animals do not eat will serve as fertilizer for plant life.
after the bones have been picked, keep them together, in some
receptacle, and finally bury or burn them. have a compost heap
properly covered where the uneaten fragments will decompose and
make fertilizer, or bury them at once if preferred.
the city dweller who uses a coal stove is able to burn some
refuse. strain out whatever liquid is present, dry the refuse
under the grate, and put it into a hot fire. do not crowd
damp refuse into the fire box when the fire is low, for it will
smoulder, and this heavy smoke will eventually clog the flues.
the odor of this smoke, too, is disagreeable in the
neighborhood. a garbage drier, set into the stove pipe, has been
devised, but the simpler plan of drying the refuse under the
grate is quite as satisfactory.
where gas or kerosene is the fuel, or where electricity is used,
the garbage pail is the only resort, unless one lives in a
building equipped with a special stove or “garbage burner” for
the disposal of waste.
. what is a principle in cooking?
. what are the effects of heat upon the foodstuffs?
. what is meant by technique in cookery?
. what are the essentials in caring for food in the house?
. what are the steps in the preparation of food?
. explain the origin and usefulness of a recipe.
. what are the standard weights and measures?
. what is the purpose of stirring ingredients? of beating?
. what is the difference between boiling and steaming?
. the difference between baking and roasting? roasting and broiling?
broiling and toasting?
. what is the difference between frying and the sauté?
. describe the care of “left overs” and waste.
although water does not supply energy to the body, it plays an important
part in nutrition. as building material, it constitutes about two thirds
of the body weight, and as a regulator of body processes it serves as a
solvent and carrier of nutritive material and waste, keeps the blood and
digestive fluids of proper concentration, and helps to regulate the
temperature of the body. it is contained in nearly all food materials and
is the basis of all beverages.
water as a beverage.—water is being given off all the time from the body
through the lungs, skin, and kidneys. the exact amount depends partly upon
atmospheric conditions and the amount of exercise, which affect the loss
through the lungs and skin, and partly on the amount taken in, for water
passes through the body rather quickly. we can endure lack of food for
weeks, but can exist only a few days without water.
a drink of water taken the first thing in the morning tends to clean out
the digestive tract and put one in good condition for breakfast. water
with meals aids digestion, provided it is not used to wash down food but
is taken when the mouth is empty. it should not be extremely cold nor hot.
two glasses at a single meal are usually all that are desirable. when
there is much water in the food, as in soups, milk, fruits, and some
vegetables, or when other beverages are taken, less will be taken as plain
water. when one
feels
hungry and uncomfortable between meals a drink of
water will often relieve the sensation.
water is either soft or hard. rain water is perfectly soft, but as it
passes through the earth after falling, it sometimes becomes laden with
mineral substances, that affect its cleansing properties, and that may
affect its physiological action. such water is called hard.
temporary hardness is caused by a soluble lime compound which is
precipitated by boiling. if the teakettle is incrusted inside by a layer
of lime, the hardness is of this character. such water should be boiled
and cooled for drinking. permanent hardness is due to other compounds of
lime and magnesia which are not precipitated by boiling, but which can be
counteracted for cleansing purposes by the addition of some substance like
ammonia, borax, or soda. if the excess of salts has some undesirable
physiological effect, this water should be distilled, or bottled water for
drinking brought from elsewhere.
of much greater importance is the question of the freedom of the water
supply from harmful bacteria and organic matter. never use a well without
having the water tested by an expert. this will sometimes be done by the
local or state board of health or experiment station. all water sources
should be guarded from contamination. (see “shelter and clothing,” chapter
v.) filters may be used, and are effective in straining out sediment, but
the home filter is seldom to be relied upon to remove actual bacterial
contamination. if used at all, the filter should be frequently cleaned and
sterilized in boiling water. in case the supply is suspected, the water
for drinking should be boiled for at least ten minutes, allowed to settle,
if necessary, and poured off into bottles for cooling. this is a practice
to be commended after a heavy rainfall, and especially in the autumn.
these bottles may be placed on the ice.
ice must be used with caution always in drinking water, and it is the
safer way to cool the water beside the ice. the freezing of water in pond
and river does not purify or sterilize it. natural ice is usually
questionable. artificial ice, if properly manufactured, is much safer.
always have a supply of water in covered pitcher or water bottle, with
clean glasses at hand, where it may be taken freely when wanted. remember
that the individual cup or glass is an absolute necessity. the dipper or
glass in common must not be countenanced. in a large family of many
children it would save labor to use paper cups between meals.
water should be swallowed slowly, and ice-cold water should not be taken
when one is overheated. when one is overthirsty, control must be exercised
in regard to quantity and rapidity of drinking.
water in cooking.—water is necessary to the softening of fiber, and the
cooking of starch. it acts as a solvent for sugar and salt and for
gelatin, and is the basis of meat soups, certain substances in the meat
dissolving in the water. the flavors of tea and coffee are extracted by
water.
as a medium in cooking it supplies heat in the steaming, boiling, and
stewing processes, and in the form of melting ice with salt it acts as a
freezing medium.
it is not necessary to lift the cover of a kettle to see if the water
boils, if one is familiar with the action of water nearing and at the
boiling point. a simple experiment with the boiling of water in a florence
flask is always interesting, and from it one gains practical knowledge.
experiments with the boiling temperature of water.
a. apparatus: a ring stand, a florence flask, a square of
wire net, a chemical thermometer, a bunsen burner.
method: place the florence flask, half full of water, on the
square of wire net upon the large ring of the ring
stand
over
the bunsen burner. put the chemical thermometer in the florence
flask, clamping it in such a way that the bulb is covered by the
water and yet does not touch the bottom of the flask.
make record in the notebook as follows:
() the temperature when the first small bubbles appear on the
side of the flask.
() temperature when the first large bubbles appear on the
bottom.
() temperature when many bubbles rise rapidly to the top.
() point at which temperature ceases to rise.
() temperature when vapor first appears at the mouth of the
flask.
() what differences are apparent in the amount and motion of
the vapor before and after boiling?
() lift the thermometer above the water and note the
temperature just above the surface, when the water is rapidly
boiling.
the small bubbles are bubbles of air. the large are bubbles of
steam. a complete study of the boiling process should be made in
the physics class. the boiling point is the point at which water
becomes steam, and also the point at which steam condenses again
to water. the temperature of boiling water and steam are the
same. under pressure steam may be heated to a higher
temperature.
b. boil water in a small saucepan closely covered.
() note the sounds of the water just before boiling, and the
change in sound as the boiling begins.
() note the difference between the vapor escaping, before
boiling, and after. this experiment is best performed in a
teakettle.
c. test the temperature of the inner part of the double
boiler, when the water boils rapidly below. to be exact, a hole
should be bored in the cover of the boiler, a cork with a hole
inserted, the thermometer run through the cork. an approximate
result is obtained by putting in the thermometer, setting on the
cover tilted, and covering the opening with a cloth.
d. stir salt into rapidly boiling water in the lower part of
the
double boiler until no more salt will dissolve (a saturated
solution). test the temperature.
e. put the inner part of the double boiler containing water
into this boiling solution of saturated salt, being sure that
the inner part is sufficiently deep in the salt solution. note
the temperature of the water in the inner boiler when it becomes
heated.
boiling at high altitudes.—when the air pressure upon the surface of the
water is lessened, the water boils at a lower temperature. as the altitude
increases, the air pressure decreases, as many a mountain traveler knows
to his cost. the boiling temperature of water is so much lowered that the
dwellers in high regions of several thousand feet find it difficult to
cook starchy vegetables well. a heavy iron pot is made with clamps for
fastening down a tight cover, which increases the temperature somewhat.
experiments d and e indicate a method that can be used to a small
extent. the baking process should be largely used, and boiling avoided.
for meat, eggs, and fish the lower temperature is not undesirable. (see
the chapters relating to these foods.)
the uses of ice.—water freezes and ice melts at the same point, ° f.,
or ° c. if ice is mixed with salt, the temperature is reduced far below
the freezing point, nearly to ° f. this process reduces any watery
substance which it surrounds to its freezing point, the heat being used in
the melting of the ice. this is an interesting topic to discuss in the
physics class.
ice at its ordinary temperature of ° f. is used for cooling food
agreeably. its most important function in the refrigerator is as preserver
of food for a short time at least. for this it is invaluable, and cheap
ice is really necessary in summer to the health of a great city.
ice substitutes.—where the supply fails or the price is exorbitant, one
property of water makes it a partial
aid.
the rapid evaporation of water
will absorb heat so rapidly as to reduce the temperature of adjacent
bodies. in the tropics when ice is lacking, water is hung in porous jars
in the breeze, and the temperature of the water in the jar is reduced.
to keep milk and butter cool wrap a wet cloth about the containing jar,
and set the jar upon the window sill, keeping one end of the towel in a
vessel of water; or the cloth may be wrapped directly around the butter.
this method is surprisingly effective.
fruit beverages.—fruit juices with water and sugar make refreshing
beverages and have nutritive value as well. (see the next chapter.)
cocoa and chocolate, coffee, and tea.—these are the three most important
non-alcoholic beverages used by man. they are used because of the
agreeable flavor given them by volatile oils, and also because they have a
stimulating effect. the stimulating property is due to an alkaloid, a
crystallizable substance known in cocoa as theobromine, in coffee as
caffeine, and in tea as theine. chemical investigation indicates that
caffeine and theine are the same and theobromine is a closely related
substance. these substances have a recognized stimulating effect upon the
nervous system, and the beverages containing them should therefore be used
with caution by all. in the opinion of the writers, tea and coffee should
not be taken by young people under twenty-five years of age. tea and
coffee also contain tannin, an astringent substance giving a disagreeable
flavor to coffee and tea when these are improperly made, and having an
undesirable effect upon digestion. chocolate contains a non-volatile fat
(cocoa butter) in large amount, and should be classed as a food as well as
a beverage.
the plants from which cocoa, coffee, and tea are derived are natives of
semi-tropical or tropical africa, asia,
and
america, having been
introduced to europe by early travelers in these lands.
the introduction of these beverages is an interesting bit of
history. the spaniards found cocoa in tropical america, and
carried it back to spain, and it was not used in england until
. it was sold in danvers, massachusetts, in , the raw
material having been brought by gloucester fishermen from the
west indies. coffee is said to have originated in abyssinia,
reaching europe by way of arabia, and being sold in england in
. coffee-houses were licensed in america in . a chinese
tradition places the discovery of the use of tea at  b.c. it
was first used in england in , and was imported into america
in . an amusing story is told of the first tea party in a
town of western connecticut, where the tea was boiled violently
in a large iron kettle and served on a platter with the leaves,
as a form of soup, the leaves themselves being eaten.
cocoa and chocolate.—cocoa and chocolate are manufactured from the seed
of a tree, theobroma cacao, grown in tropical america. the seeds, when
removed from the containing pod, are fermented to improve the flavor,
dried, cleaned, roasted, and finally ground. the outer husk is loosened in
the roasting, and is then removed, and sold as “cocoa shells.” it is the
basis of a cheap beverage with an agreeable flavor. the first crushing of
the seeds gives cocoa “nibs,” and these are further ground in a mill, and
finally molded into the cake of plain chocolate. the addition of sugar,
vanilla, cinnamon, and sometimes other spices gives a variety of sweet
chocolates. powdered cocoa is prepared by the removal of the fat, which is
a valuable product in itself, sugar and flavorings are added and sometimes
a starch. the dutch manufacturers use alkalies for removing the crude
fiber and improving the color, and the consequent loss of flavor is
balanced by the use of other flavoring matter. the adulterations of cocoa
are
largely
starch in excess. the french and american cocoas are flavored
with vanilla, the dutch manufacturers using cinnamon as well.
the so-called soluble cocoas are very finely ground, and therefore mix
readily with water, remaining in suspension for some time, but the cocoa
itself is not dissolved. powdered cocoa is bought in tin cans, is cheap,
and is even more economical if bought in large cans than in small.
chocolate is more expensive always than the cocoa, and may be bought in
cakes in pound packages, or in powdered form for immediate use.
coffee is the inner seed of a berry from a tree, coffea arabica, the
process of manufacture consisting of the removal of the outer pulp,
fermentation, washing, drying, and roasting. the first stages of the
process are carried on at the coffee plantation, the raw berries being
imported, and roasted shortly before using. the roasting in cocoa, coffee,
and tea is necessary for desirable flavors, the heat developing volatile,
aromatic principles, caramelizing the sugar, and causing other chemical
changes. the differences in the flavor of coffees are due to the variety,
the soil and climate, and methods of production and manufacture. no coffee
grown in the western hemisphere has excelled, and scarcely has any
equaled, the original mocha and java coffees, and these have long been
trade names for coffee from other places, because of the popular liking
for these brands. brazil is now the great coffee producing country of the
world, and from south and central america and the west indies we obtain
coffee of excellent flavor.
the adulterations of coffee should be noted, although these are of the
kind that gives the buyer something cheaper in place of coffee, rather
than a substance that is injurious. ground chicory root is sometimes mixed
with coffee,
but
cannot be classed strictly as an adulterant, because
many people, notably the french, add it openly, preferring its flavor.
among adulterants are rye meal, bran, beans and peas, cocoa shells, and
even sawdust. artificial beans have been made of bran, molasses, and
water, sometimes with the addition of chicory and coloring matter. if
ground coffee is put into a glass of cold water, it floats on the top and
remains hard, while several of the adulterants named soften and sink to
the bottom of the glass. highly roasted coffee, however, will sometimes
sink. coffee beans from which coffee extract has been made are sometimes
mixed with other coffee.
coffee extracts and crystallized coffee are manufactured to simplify the
coffee-making process, but the flavor is not equal to that of coffee
infusion made directly from the bean. a preparation of coffee is also
offered with the caffeine removed by some chemical process, but it is
expensive in this country.
buy coffee in the bean, and see that it is freshly roasted. coffee, whole
or ground, is sold extensively by the pound in tin cans, with a fancy
label and name, and in this form it is usually expensive. good coffee may
be bought for twenty-five cents a pound of many reliable dealers, and may
be purchased in five or ten pound packages, or bought in bulk to be kept
in a tightly closed can.
tea is the dried leaf of a shrub, camellia thea, growing in the
comparatively high lands of japan, china, india, and ceylon. a tea
plantation exists in south carolina, u.s.a., and furnishes a very pleasing
grade of tea, somewhat resembling japan tea in flavor. we are familiar
with the fact that there are many kinds and grades of tea, the tea shrub
varying as does the coffee tree, and the methods of curing affecting both
color and flavor. the teas from the countries named have characteristic
flavors, and
each
country has different varieties and grades. russian tea
is not grown in russia, but is chinese tea carried across the continent of
asia.
in general, tea may be classed as green or black, this difference in color
depending upon the age of the leaf, and largely upon differences in the
curing process. green tea is made from the young leaf, and after picking
is dried immediately by artificial heat, being constantly stirred for
about an hour, in which time the leaves twist and curl. for black tea the
leaves are allowed to wilt and ferment, before they are rolled and heated;
and sometimes the heating is repeated. these details of the process vary
in different localities. the leaves are finally sorted and graded for
packing.
both black and green teas are made in china. “bohea” is one of the famous
black chinese teas. “english breakfast tea” is known as such only in
america, and is a blend of black teas. black tea is not so successfully
made in japan as in china. “oolong,” from the island of formosa, has the
appearance of a black tea, with the flavor of a green. in japan and china
old-time methods prevail, with much handling of the tea leaves, but in
ceylon and india modern machinery makes the process a much more cleanly
one.
another classification of tea is that depending upon the age and size of
the leaf, the young leaf making the finer grade tea. for example, in the
black teas of india “flowery pekoe” is made from the youngest leaf,
“orange pekoe” from the second, “pekoe” from the third, and “souchong” and
“congou” come from the larger leaves.
the adulterations of tea are usually the leaves of other plants, but as a
matter of fact very little adulterated tea is imported. the first grades
of teas, however, and those most highly prized by the chinese and
japanese, seldom find their way to america.
other beverages.—several very acceptable coffee substitutes are on the
market, made from roasted and ground grain, and they give an agreeable hot
drink for breakfast when served with cream or milk. in some cases they
seem to have a laxative effect, which is well for some people and not for
others. a pleasant hot drink of the same nature may be made from the
browned crusts of bread.
the substitutes for tea are not usually satisfactory. the indians of the
western coast of the united states make a tea from a plant which they call
“buona yerba,” but for us it has a strong resemblance to the medicinal
herb teas formerly used for curative purposes, such as sage, catnip,
motherwort, and the like.
. lemonade and fruit drinks.
utensils.—silver knife for paring and slicing, glass lemon
squeezer, a grater, a strainer, and a saucepan. avoid the use of
tin and iron utensils.
materials.—lemon or other fruits, sugar water.
proportions.—one half lemon to a glass, or  or  to a quart
of water. other fruits “according to taste.” experiment here,
using the juice and pulp of any fruit, combining those that are
very acid with those that lack acidity,—lemon and raspberry,
for example. one third to ⁄ cup sugar to a quart. the
proportion cannot be stated with exactness, for fruit varies in
acidity, and the final result must always be tested by the
taste.
method.
plain lemonade.—after deciding upon the proper amounts to be
used, dissolve the sugar in a part of the water, brought to the
boiling point. when cool, add the lemon juice and remaining
water, ice and serve. a small portion of grated rind may be
added to the boiling water.
another method is to use lump sugar, rubbing the peel of the
lemon upon each lump before dissolving.
the general method is the same with other fruits, pulpy fruit
and berries being mashed, the water added, and strained.
cherries, strawberries, and pieces of pulp are sometimes
added before serving, when the fruit drink is ladled from a bowl
as fruit punch. be sure to cut the berries if they are large. a
brightness is imparted to the fruit punch by the addition of
carbonated water just before serving. a quart of fruit punch, if
served in small cups, will suffice for eight people.
. cocoa shells.
principle.—to extract the flavor from the shells, by boiling
in water.
utensil.—a saucepan or coffee boiler.
proportions.—one half cup shells to  quart boiling water. as
much as  cup of the shells may be used.
method.
wash the shells in a strainer under the faucet. put the shells
in the pot, pour on boiling water, and simmer gently for ⁄
hour. strain off, and serve with cream, or milk, or evaporated
milk and sugar.
. cocoa.
principle.—to mix the particles smoothly and evenly with the
liquid by stirring and by heating.
utensils.—a measuring cup, a saucepan, spoon, and beater. a
double boiler, if milk only is used.
ingredients.—powdered cocoa, sugar, water, or milk, or milk
and water. cocoa made with milk does not agree with some people,
in which case it may be made with water only, and served with
cream, milk, or evaporated milk.
proportions.—one teaspoonful of cocoa to ⁄ measuring cup.
more or less as preferred. one teaspoonful of sugar, ditto.
method.
heat the liquid. stir a portion of the liquid cold, with the
cocoa, add this to the hot liquid, add the sugar, and beat
vigorously for a minute before removing from the fire.
. chocolate.
principle.—to mix the chocolate smoothly with the liquid that
the fat may not float on the top. this is accomplished by having
all the ingredients either hot or cold. if after the chocolate
is dissolved in a hot liquid, cold liquid is added, the oil
separates and floats.
utensils.—a grater, or sharp knife, a saucepan, mixing spoon,
and beater.
a french chocolate maker claims that any metal utensil affects
the flavor of the chocolate, and always uses an earthen pot and
wooden spoon and heater. an earthenware chocolate pot for this
purpose is on the market.
ingredients.—chocolate, sugar, milk, or milk and water.
proportions.—the amount of chocolate may be varied, depending
upon the richness desired. three or  ounce squares to  quart
liquid,  teaspoonfuls sugar to  quart. the liquid is better
half milk and half water, rather than milk only.
method
the cold method.
put the liquid and sugar into the saucepan. break or cut the
chocolate into small pieces, add to the liquid, and heat the
liquid slowly, stirring occasionally but not constantly. when
the liquid is hot, just before it reaches the boiling point,
beat vigorously with a wooden spoon, or beater. the dover beater
is convenient. this beating makes a velvety smooth and a foamy
mixture.
method .
the hot method.
heat the liquid with the sugar. grate the chocolate or shave it
with a knife. protect the chocolate from the warmth of the
fingers by a piece of paper. the process is less “sticky” if the
chocolate and grater are chilled in the refrigerator. just as
the liquid is reaching the boiling point, pour in the grated
chocolate, and beat vigorously.
beaten chocolate does not need any additional cream when served.
beaten whipped cream is attractive on the top of each cup. but
remember that chocolate is already rich in fat, and that
additional fat may be indigestible. such a cup of chocolate
taken for luncheon with a roll is sufficient for the meal, and
is certainly too rich in fat for serving at an afternoon tea.
. coffee.
principle.—to extract the flavoring oils at the boiling point
of water, and to avoid the extraction of the tannin.
the
tannin
is extracted by prolonged boiling, and when the liquid coffee
stands upon the grounds.
utensils.—coffee grinder, measuring cup, pot. the kind of pot
depends upon the method used. one house furnishing firm displays
some seventy different coffee pots, but they may be divided into
three classes, the pot for boiling, the drip coffee pot, and
the percolator (see figs.  and ). the coffee boiler should
have a lip, and not a spout. a word of warning is needed in
regard to the care of the pot. coffee grounds should be removed
from any pot immediately, and the pot washed at once in scalding
hot soapsuds, rinsed, dried, and aired. let the pot stand with
cover off. if this is not done, a coat is soon formed on the
inside of the pot, which spoils the flavor of the coffee. where
the pot has been neglected, boiling it out with a solution of
caustic soda is sometimes a remedy.
fig. .—a pot for boiling coffee
and a pot for drip coffee. courtesy of the brambhall dean co.
fig. .—a coffee percolator.
courtesy of landers, frary and clark.
ingredients.—ground coffee, water, cold or boiling, white of
egg or egg shell for boiled coffee. the coffee should be ground
to medium fineness for boiled coffee, to a finer powder for the
percolated and drip coffee.
proportions.—one part of coffee to  or  of water, depending
upon the strength desired. one egg shell, or half the white of
an egg to  cup of ground coffee.
method .
boiling.—measure the coffee and water. stir the white or the
shell of an egg with the coffee, adding a little of the water,
put this into the pot, add the remaining water cold, stir
thoroughly, allow the water to rise slowly to the boiling point,
and to boil one minute, remove the pot from the fire, pour in a
small amount of cold water, and let the coffee stand for five
minutes or until the grounds settle. during the cooking close
the lip with clean soft paper if it has no lid. the actual
boiling is continued for a brief period only, and coffee made by
this method is considered by some people to have a flavor
lacking in drip or percolator coffee. the egg is added to
clarify the coffee. pour off the liquid coffee from the grounds,
and keep hot until it is time to serve it.
a second method differs from this in that the water is poured on
at the boiling temperature, allowed to reach the boiling point
in two or three minutes, and boiled for five minutes. the first
gives uniformly better results. it is true, however, that
different kinds of coffee need different treatment, and there is
room here for much experimenting.
method .
drip coffee.—in this method the coffee is put in a receptacle
above, the water passes slowly through, collecting in the pot
below, from which it is served. stand the lower part of the pot
in a pan of hot water, or where it will keep hot. measure the
water, and bring it to the boiling point. heat the ground coffee
slightly, put it in the upper section of the pot, and pour on
the water very slowly. of course, the water is not actually
boiling when it touches the coffee. if the liquid coffee is not
strong enough, pour it from the lower part and pass it through
the grounds again. this is the french method, and is an
excellent way to prepare after-dinner coffee.
method .
percolator coffee.—in the percolator the water boils within the
pot, and passes through the coffee at the boiling temperature.
the exact method depends upon the pattern of the pot, and
directions always accompany a given pot. for those who can use
electricity, the electric percolator certainly gives an
excellent coffee.
coffee is served “black,” or with cream, milk, or evaporated
milk and sugar. if milk is used for breakfast coffee, serve it
hot.
. tea.
principle.—to extract flavor by allowing the leaves to remain
for a few minutes, in water which has been poured on at the
boiling temperature, and to avoid the extraction of tannin by
making the period of steeping short. tea must never be boiled.
utensils.—an earthen pot, measuring cup, teaspoon, strainer.
sometimes a tea ball or piece of cheesecloth.
proportion.—one teaspoonful of tea to about  cup of water,
the amount depending upon the kind of tea.
method.—measure the water and bring it to the boiling point.
heat the tea slightly in the pot, pour on the water rapidly,
allow to stand three to five minutes, strain into a heated pot
for serving. the length of the steeping depends also upon the
kind of tea. if there is an astringent flavor, the tea has stood
too long.
the following method was recommended by an expert in india teas.
bring the water to a boil in a saucepan, throw in the tea
leaves, lift the saucepan instantly to stop the boiling, steep
for  or  minutes, strain off and keep hot. this expert claimed
that by actually having the tea leaves at the boiling
temperature for an instant the flavor is improved. serve with
cream or milk, or sliced lemon and sugar.
where tea is to be served in very large quantities, this last
method is very convenient. the water can be brought to the boil
in a large kettle, and the tea thrown in, but care must be
exercised to see that the steeping does not last too long. the
tea, once decanted, can be kept hot for several hours, without
losing flavor. or again, a small amount of extra strong tea may
be prepared, to be diluted with boiling water as it is served.
the tea ball, or the plan of tying the tea in small pieces of
cheesecloth, is convenient for serving at an afternoon tea.
. iced cocoa, coffee, and tea.
cocoa and coffee are agreeable in hot weather served in a glass
with ice, and cream and powdered sugar. make
both
slightly
stronger than for hot drinks, as the ice in melting dilutes the
liquid.
iced tea.—prepare a small amount of strong tea, using 
teaspoonfuls to  cup boiling water, strain off and cool. dilute
with iced water to the proper strength, sweeten with powdered
sugar, and serve in glasses with one or two slices of lemon to
each glass. for those who do not like the lemon, iced tea may be
served with cream.
. what are the functions of water in the body?
. what cautions should be exercised when drinking water?
. explain the likenesses and differences of cocoa and chocolate, coffee
and tea.
. why is it better to serve whipped cream with cocoa, rather than with
chocolate?
. explain the principles in making each beverage.
teacher’s note.—the beverages are treated in one chapter for convenience,
but need not of necessity come at the beginning of the course.
a fruit beverage, or cocoa, may make a convenient first lesson, when the
pupils are becoming acquainted with the school kitchen. coffee and tea
may be made during the baking lessons.
the united states is fortunate in the native fruit supply, including as it
does so many degrees of latitude and longitude with the differences in
altitude, climate, and soil needed by different varieties. now that we
count porto rico among our possessions, a list of our fruits would include
most of the varieties known in the temperate and semi-tropical zones. the
united states department of agriculture experiments with new varieties
from foreign lands that may make themselves at home in our soil, and work
like that of luther burbank produces new species. scientific methods of
fruit growing are becoming more common, and the quality of fruit will
doubtless improve in spite of fungous diseases and injurious insects. our
wild fruits are not yet entirely rooted out. the maine blueberry, for
example, is found on hundreds of acres and needs no cultivation beyond
burning over every third year.
fruit is necessary in our diet, and is not an extravagance unless we buy
fancy varieties brought from a distance, or native fruits out of season.
composition and nutritive value.—the chief foodstuffs in fruits are
carbohydrates and mineral matter. fresh fruit contains from  to  per
cent of water, and its presence is apparent in such juicy fruits as the
melon and the orange. figure  shows that seemingly dry fruits like the
banana and the apple also contain much water. even fruits which have been
artificially dried, like prunes and raisins,
contain
some water. (fig.
.) although the carbohydrates of fruits are largely in the form of
sugars easily digested and valuable as fuel, this kind of food is
especially valuable for its rich supply of ash, including the compounds of
calcium, magnesium, potassium, phosphorus, and iron. the iron is of great
importance, being in a form much more useful to the normal processes of
the body than that prescribed medicinally. the bulk given by cellulose,
and the laxative property of fruit acids also are safeguards against
constipation, especially in a meat diet. fruit is the best possible
dessert after a hearty meat dinner.
fig. .—composition of fruit.
fig. .—composition of fruit.
fig. .—-calorie portions of fresh and
dried fruit. a. fowler, photographer.
apple.
banana.
grapes.
orange.
peaches.
pears.
apricots.
dates.
prunes.
raisins.
the digestibility of fruit is increased for some people by cooking. this
is probably due to the softening of the fiber, to the destruction of any
bacteria present, and in the case of the banana, to the cooking of the
starch. fruit juice
can
be taken by little children and invalids who
might find the fiber troublesome. some people cannot eat berries on
account of irritation caused by the seeds. in this case, juice may be
squeezed from cooked berries and used for beverages and jelly.
how to buy.—since we should eat fruit daily, and not merely as a “treat,”
it is important to practice economy in buying it. fresh fruits in season,
and dried fruits are the cheapest. canned fruit is economical when it is a
product of one’s own garden, or put up when some fruit has a low market
price. prices are so variable, even with one variety, that no definite sum
can be given as a fixed price. apples vary from fifty cents a bushel near
the orchard and in season, to ten cents apiece for a fancy table variety
in the winter. when you buy fresh fruit, inquire the prices of the many
kinds offered, note which is cheapest, and then observe whether the
cheaper kind is such because it is abundant, or because it is of inferior
quality. if you chance to want apples for cooking, and the only cheap
apples are spotted and bruised, then buy dried apples, or even canned. it
is best to decide upon the fruit after you have studied market conditions
rather than before.
fresh fruits
principles of preparation.
thorough cleansing in clear water.
cleanliness, in avoiding use of the fingers.
making convenient for eating, sometimes by paring or cutting or
expressing the juices.
adjuncts.—sugar.
the juice of an acid fruit with an insipid fruit.
tools.—a sharp steel knife for paring and peeling.
a silver-plated knife for cutting.
a glass lemon squeezer.
methods.
berries.—pick over.
wash in colander with a gentle stream of water, and shake
carefully to avoid bruising and breaking.
chill in the refrigerator.
sprinkle with sugar when served.
oranges.—scrub the peel with a brush.
() cut in two crosswise and serve.
() peel with a sharp knife and remove the pith.
cut crosswise, remove seeds, and break up the slices.
sprinkle with sugar.
chill in the refrigerator.
grapefruit.—the same method as with the orange, but in
method () the pulp only should be served.
bananas.—wash thoroughly.
() cut in two lengthwise, and serve, or
pour a teaspoonful of lemon juice on each half, and
sprinkle with sugar.
chill in the refrigerator.
() pull off the skin, lengthwise.
cut in slices crosswise.
chill, and serve with sugar and cream, or
pour on lemon or orange juice, add sugar, and chill.
peaches.—wash gently.
hold the peach on a fork at one end.
peel with a plated knife, and slice.
chill in the refrigerator for a short time only before serving,
as peaches discolor quickly.
sprinkle with sugar when served.
pears and apples.—when very mellow, these are delicious
sliced and served with sugar and cream.
fruit juice.—cut the fruit in two, and press on the glass squeezer
over a cup.
cooked fruits
principles of cooking.
the fiber, and skin when retained, are softened.
flavors are developed at a low temperature long continued. a
high temperature at the end of process, browns, and adds
flavor.
flavors retained by prevention of evaporation through covering
tightly.
bacteria and molds are destroyed.
adjuncts.—sugar. sometimes a bit of butter.
acid fruit juices, or
an acid jelly.
seeded raisins, with acid fruit, as sour apples.
nutmeg or cinnamon with some fruits.
cooking processes.—stewing and baking.
utensils.—knife and corer.
stew pan, enamel ware, close cover.
round or square baking pans, enamel ware, covered.
earthenware pot, covered.
methods.—if you can cook one fruit, you can cook all. two
common fruits are selected for your experiments, the apple
and the prune; both are delicious, and both contain iron,
the prune more than the apple.
the apple.—a tart variety is best for cooking. the greening
and the baldwin are excellent.
apples are cooked whole, or as a sauce.
whole, cooked with or without the skin, either stewed or
baked.
for cooking whole, select those of uniform size.
for cooking whole, with the skin, select those with fair skins.
for cooking whole without skin, select firm texture, not mellow.
an apple sauce may consist of slices, or may be mashed or strained,
and may be either stewed or baked. less perfect apples
may be used than for baking.
first step for all.—wash, and examine carefully for blemishes,
bruises, and insects in the interior.
. whole apple baked, with skin.
() remove core.
() place in pan, with enough water to barely cover the
bottom of the pan.
() pour sugar into the holes.
() a bit of butter may be put on the top of the sugar.
() nutmeg or cinnamon may be mixed with the sugar if
the apples are flat in
taste.
() cover the pan, and bake in a moderate oven, until the
apples are tender. the length of time depends upon
the quality of the apple. (see class experiment.)
half apples.—this is a modification of ().
cut the apples in two crosswise, and proceed as with the
whole apple.
. whole apples baked, without skin.—a good method when skins
are tough.
() remove core and pare.
() place in earthen baking dish. the remainder of the
process is the same.
() serve in the dish in which they are baked.
() currant jelly, or seeded raisins may be placed in the core
holes instead of sugar.
class experiment.—bake side by side two apples of uniform
size, one with, one without, the skin. note carefully the length
of time for baking each. what difference? why is this? it may be
necessary in the school kitchen to bake in a quick oven, on
account of the shortness of the class period. it does not spoil
the apple to do this; but the longer process that you can use at
home gives a richer color and flavor.
for this experiment, one pupil may bake the apple without the
skin, and the next pupil one with the skin in case there is but
one apple apiece; or it may be made a class experiment with two
apples.
. whole, stewed. (compote.)—this is a more difficult method
than method , and really no better.
() core and pare five or six apples.
() dissolve ⁄ cup sugar in ⁄ pint water in a saucepan.
() place apples in the sirup. they should be barely
covered.
() cover closely and keep just below the boiling point,
until the apples are tender.
() cool slightly, remove the apples with care and place in
the serving dish. put a spoonful of jelly in each apple.
() boil down the sirup and pour it over the apples.
() chill, before serving with plain or whipped cream.
. apple sauces.—in the cooking of the whole apple you have
all the principles and processes of apple cooking. you
can now make apple sauce of your own invention, and
need
no printed directions. answer these questions before you
begin work. after you have made the sauce, record the
work exactly in your notebook.
if you want the slices of apple to remain whole, will the method
be like , , or ?
if you wish a smooth sauce, what utensil will you need?
how will you determine the amount of sugar required? if you are
very fond of sugar, your taste may not be the safest guide.
practical home work.—if you can secure a very slow oven, say
a coal oven at night, or a gas oven with a low flame, make an
apple sauce in an earthenware pot, as heavy as a bean pot,
closely covered, leaving the pot in the oven from six to eight
hours. this process is satisfactory in a fireless cooker where a
hot stone or iron is used. remember that water keeps down
temperature, and also that it evaporates steadily even in a slow
oven. how much water will you put over the apples when the
process begins?
if you have never cooked apples in this way you will be
surprised at the color and flavor.
some other fruits.—pears and quinces develop pleasing
flavors when baked.
cook the quinces sliced, as suggested for the apples, in the
bean pot, using a little molasses for sweetening and you will
have the delicious old-time “molasses quince.”
prunes.—we are dealing now with a dried fruit. if you compare
the raisins with the grapes in fig. , you will see how much
water is lost in the drying process. the same difference would
be evident if you had pictures of a fresh plum and a prune, side
by side. this water must be supplied in the process of
preparation. the best way to accomplish this is by soaking the
prunes many hours, say over night. prunes have a most undeserved
reputation, because they are not well cooked, and at some tables
are served too often.
with this one new step introduced you may plan the cooking of
the prunes, from what you know of apple sauce. the slower and
longer the process, the better. the cheaper kinds of prunes will
be very satisfactory, with the soaking and slow cooking. what is
the sensible thing to do in regard to sugar?
if on some occasion you would like prunes to be unusually nice,
remove the stones carefully, and in their places slip in seeded
raisins which have also been soaked and gently stewed.
other dried fruits may be treated in the same way.
apricots and peaches yield delightful flavors when carefully
prepared; and dried apples are also excellent.
preservation of fruit and other foods
the preservation of fruit and other foods has been a household industry
for generations, and it is now an important commercial industry. the
old-time farm had its smokehouse where hams and beef were “cured,” the
barrel of brine stood in the cellar for pork and corned beef, apples and
corn were dried for winter use, and rows of preserve jars stood upon the
shelves. food was preserved by simple processes long before the reason for
the decay and spoiling of food was fully understood, but with larger
knowledge and better appliances, we now preserve food more effectively and
in quantities larger than were possible in former days.
fruit is the food material now most commonly preserved in the home
kitchen. vegetables need to be subjected to heat for a much longer time
than fruit, and many people prefer to buy canned vegetables rather than to
go to the trouble and expense of canning them at home. where there is an
oversupply of vegetables in the home garden, it is sometimes economy to
can them, and this may be done if care is exercised. the cost of fuel and
labor must be counted in, when studying the question of home preserving
versus buying the canned product.
whatever the food material, and the process, the principles of
preservation are the same for all.
why does food spoil?—the decay and moldiness of fresh fruit are matters
of common observation; and the housekeeper knows that mold is liable to
cover the top of a jelly glass, and that a can of fruit will ferment at
times, even to the point of bursting the can.
we recognize another kind of deterioration in meat and fish that have
become tainted, even when no mold is visible, and there is no opportunity
for ordinary fermentation. the microscope has given us eyes to see, and as
a result of the patient work of the scientist with this instrument we now
know that the difficulties in keeping food are caused by the presence of
minute vegetable organisms known as molds, yeasts, and bacteria. it is
impossible in some cases to draw a sharp line between these different
forms of lower life, yet we are able to distinguish them sufficiently for
practical purposes.
fig. .—three species of mold. buchanan’s
household bacteriology.
masses of mold that can be seen with the naked eye are distinguished by
a feathery appearance and bright color. figure  shows three species of
the green mold that affects jam and jellies. other species are found in
roquefort and camembert cheese, and give the flavors characteristic in
these cheeses.
the presence of yeast can be detected by its action, but it cannot
itself be seen without the microscope. when canned fruit or homemade fruit
juice “works,” yeasts cells
are
present in great number. figure  shows
one form of yeast, highly magnified, and fig.  shows a single yeast
cell. the yeast cake is a mixture of thousands of such cells with some
flour or flour and meal, and the cells lie dormant in the cake, until we
are ready to use them in bread. (see chapter xii.) the actual yeast,
however, is what fig.  shows it to be, a tiny, one-celled plant,
increasing in number by the division of the single cell, or by the budding
out of one cell from another. when conditions are favorable the yeast
cells increase in number with great rapidity, and some of the sugar that
is present is broken down into carbon dioxide gas and alcohol. it is this
gas that causes the familiar bubbling when fermentation is taking place.
we put yeast cells into bread and cultivate it for this gas. but how does
it occur in canned fruits, when its presence is not desired? wild yeast
floats in the air, and lies upon the surface of fruit. all cultivated
yeast has been derived from wild yeast. in old-fashioned ways of
bread-making no yeast was
introduced,
a soft dough being left in a warm
place to ferment naturally, the yeast cells probably being present in the
flour. the yeast that spoils the canned fruit is present in the fruit, in
the utensils, or can, and has not been killed as it should be in the
canning process.
fig. .—one form of yeast. buchanan’s
household bacteriology
fig. .—a yeast cell. a, cell wall. b,
vacuole. c, granules. d, nucleus. e and e, buds. buchanan’s
household bacteriology.
fig. .—the four types of bacterial cells.
a, cocci. b, bacilli. c, spirilía. d, branched filamentous
organism. buchanan’s household bacteriology.
the bacteria are also one-celled microörganisms, smaller than the yeast.
figure  shows the four types of bacterial cells. their size is measured
by the unit used in the microscope, called the micron, which is about
⁄ of one inch. bacteria may measure from one to three or four of
these microns in length. some bacteria are reproduced by means of spores
which form within the cell. bacteria, as they develop in some material,
produce substances from the material that may or may not be injurious to
us. one important truth about the bacteria is this: that many of them are
harmless, and may even be made useful, as in the manufacture of fruit
vinegar. the pleasant acid of buttermilk and of sour milk is due also to
bacteria which are not harmful to us. however, there may be disease
producing bacteria present in milk that is not clean, and their presence
must not be tolerated. other bacteria,
developing
in meat and fish,
produce substances known as ptomaines, which are dangerous poisons; or,
more often, the kinds of bacteria which thrive in meats and fish may
themselves be directly injurious to man.
it is evident, therefore, that the problem before us is the control of
these lower organisms, that we may increase or destroy them as we will.
the control of microörganisms.—with warmth, water, and food all living
things flourish and grow; most organisms require air, but some of the
microörganisms do not. where these conditions are best met, the organism
is most active and multiplies most rapidly. to retard growth or to destroy
life, the conditions must be the reverse of favorable. while warmth, say a
temperature from ° to ° f., promotes the life of most microörganisms,
intense heat destroys it. the boiling temperature, ° f., will kill
these lower organisms, although this heat has to be continued for some
length of time, particularly in the case of spores. the spores of certain
bacteria are quite resistant. a temperature of ° f. and lower retards
growth, but it requires extreme cold to destroy bacteria. since moisture
is necessary to all the lower organisms, they do not develop in a dry
material or dry place.
we cannot destroy these lower forms of life by removing food from them,
since they are ever present, but we can make the food unavailable to them
through the introduction in the material of certain substances called
preservatives which prevent their growth. the preservatives long familiar
are salt, sugar, wood-smoke, spices, vinegar, and alcohol. while a small
amount of sugar is necessary in the fermentation process, a large amount
acts as a preservative, as in candied fruit. it is an interesting fact
that alcohol and vinegar, products of fermentation processes, tend
(when
sufficiently concentrated) to stop the growth of the fermentation
organisms.
to the reader who desires a fuller account of the bacteria, yeast, and
molds, especially as related to household affairs, buchanan’s “household
bacteriology” is recommended as the most recent and satisfactory book in
this field.
a word about buying canned goods.—when canned goods are put up in large
quantities at the factory, abuses are likely to exist. poor, even decayed,
fruit may be used, the whole process may be unclean from beginning to end,
and undesirable preservatives or an excess of sugar or spice may be
introduced to cover the use of poor materials or methods. the condition of
the worker in the cannery is one of the important industrial problems at
the present time. unhappily, poor conditions do often exist in canneries
that turn out a cheap product. on the other hand, there are firms that may
well take pride in their system from beginning to end.
serving canned food.—all canned food should be exposed to the air for a
short time before serving, and stirred that the material may be aerated.
this partially removes a certain flatness of taste. canned fruit is
improved by reheating, even.
when possible, vegetables bought in a tin can should be washed in the
colander before they are heated. this greatly improves the flavor.
principles of preservation.
sterilization of food and all apparatus by the boiling temperature,
the removal of moisture by some drying process.
the addition of a preservative.
sealing, to prevent the entrance of air.
practical methods.
canning.—fruit or vegetables sterilized at ° f. and tightly
sealed in jars or
cans.
preserving.—whole fruit, sterilized, large amount of sugar
added, and sealed or covered in jars.
jam making.—fruit broken up, sterilized, sugar added, and
covered.
jelly making.—fruit juices, sterilized, sugar added, covered.
pickling.—fruit and vegetables sterilized, vinegar, spices, and
sugar the preservatives used.
drying.—fruits and vegetables protected from dust and insects,
and slowly dried by the sun’s heat or artificial heat.
fig. .—preserving kettles in a
large factory. courtesy of h. j. heinz co.
apparatus.—scales. quart measure. a preserving kettle of good
enamel ware. plated knives. large spoon of enamel or wood.
tablespoon and table fork. pint and quart cans with glass tops
fastened by springs. new rubber rings. jelly glasses
with
covers. cloth jelly bag. stick on which to hang the bag. large
bowl. boiler, in which to stand the cans. a funnel. a dipper.
old towels, or cheap cloths. saucer and spoon for testing.
general directions.—thoroughly wash all the utensils, just
before using. sterilize the cans and glasses by placing them in
a large kettle or boiler on the stove, covering them with cold
water, and allowing the water to reach the boiling point and to
boil for half an hour. covers and rubber rings should be treated
in the same way.
fig. .—picking over strawberries.
courtesy of h. j. heinz co.
prepare the fruit by careful washing, picking over, paring and
cutting.
the skins may be loosened on peaches and tomatoes by pouring hot
water over them.
weigh both fruit and sugar, or measure if no scales are
available.
see that the cooking apparatus is in good order, that the proper
heat may be continued.
avoid rapid boiling of the fruit.
place the cans when they are to be filled with hot fruit upon a
towel wet in very hot water, or in a pan holding an inch or so
of hot water. never hold the can or glass in the hand.
use a dipper for putting cooked fruit into the can. a funnel is
useful placed in the mouth of the jar.
put whole fruit and halves compactly in the jar, using
tablespoon and fork, or two tablespoons. it requires practice to
do this well.
see that all air bubbles are removed, and fill the cans to
overflowing, before putting on the glass tops and fastening on
the spring. wipe off the jars, carefully, and stand them on
their tops for a day in order to test the tightness of the
rubbers and the fastening.
after filling jelly glasses, set them at one side, and cover
them all with a piece of cheesecloth, until the jelly becomes
firm. then pour melted paraffin upon the jelly in each glass,
and when the paraffin is cooled, put the covers on firmly.
label the jars with the name of the fruit and the date of the
preserving before putting them away.
canning.
method .—material cooked before it is put into the can. this
is a good method for berries, and for fruit that will be served
as a sauce. proceed in the preparation and finishing according
to the general directions. cook the fruit gently for half an
hour. use as little water as possible. no sugar is required in
the canning process, but the flavor is better if a small amount
is used in the beginning, a half cup of sugar to a pound of
fruit.
method .—material cooked in the can. this is the better
method for whole fruit and halves. select firm, well-shaped
fruit for this method, rejecting the mellow and soft fruit. pack
the cans tightly with the fruit, and pour in hot water with
sugar dissolved in it, a half cup to the quart can. more sugar
can be used, if so desired. set the jars in a boiler on a rack,
and surround them with warm water, to a height that will not
allow the water to boil into the cans.
set the cover on each jar, but do not fasten them. cover the
boiler closely, bring the water to a boil, and allow it to boil
for an hour. at the end of this time, test the fruit for
tenderness with a fork, pour in more sirup if it is necessary.
remove the jars when the water has cooled sufficiently, and
adjust the covers.
cold
water is sometimes used at the
beginning, but this makes the process longer.
this is a good method also for the canning of whole vegetables
like peas and asparagus. the cooking of vegetables should
continue for at least two hours, and three hours are better for
peas and string beans.
apparatus is constructed for this method of canning, but the
ordinary boiler answers the purpose.
preserving.
a good method for peaches, apricots, and quinces. select firm
and handsome fruit and prepare it carefully. allow a pound of
sugar to a pound of fruit. (what is the measure of a pound of
sugar?) place enough water in the kettle to cover the fruit,
dissolve the sugar in the water, put the fruit into the kettle,
and cook very gently until the fruit becomes a clear color.
rapid boiling spoils the shape of the fruit. do not stir at all,
but skim off any scum that rises to the top. when the fruit is
done, put it with great care into the jars. if the sirup is
thin, boil it down for a short time, and then fill the jar.
close the jar as in canning.
this is a difficult process for beginners.
jam making, and fruit butter.
this is the most economical of the preserving processes and the
easiest for the novice. it is nothing more than a fruit sauce,
with a larger amount of sugar than usual to assist in its
preservation.
soft and somewhat imperfect fruit may be used. if in the basket
of fruit bought for canning or preserving there are some fully
ripe or poorly shaped specimens, these may be used for jam. for
jam proper allow a pint of sugar to a pound of fruit. cook the
fruit with enough water to prevent its sticking to the kettle,
using as little as possible.
mash the fruit by stirring it occasionally as it cooks. when the
fruit is soft, add the sugar, stir thoroughly, and cook gently
for about five minutes. test by cooling a spoonful on a saucer.
the jam should thicken slightly. when ready, pour it into jelly
glasses, or somewhat larger earthen jars—“jam pots.” seal, as
directed for jelly.
the fruit butter is even more like fruit sauce than is the
jam, for it is softer than jam, and contains less sugar. a cup
or only a
half
cup of sugar to the pound of fruit is enough.
proceed exactly as in jam-making.
apple butter may be flavored with spices, with ginger root and
lemon juice, and with other fruits. one or two quinces or a
slice of pineapple cooked with the apples gives a pleasing
variety. exercise the inventive faculty here.
jelly making.
there is another principle involved in jelly
making in addition to the principle of preservation. fruit
contains a substance known as pectose, one of the carbohydrates,
that partially solidifies the fruit juice when the water in the
juice is partially evaporated. the addition of sugar helps in
this process, but no amount of sugar will set the jelly if the
pectose is not present. some fruits have more than others, and
also more when not over-ripe. currants and firm apples are good
jelly makers, and serve as a basis for other fruits that do not
jelly well. mellow summer apples do not set well. crab apples
are excellent for this purpose.
there is another step in this process, the straining out of the
juice from the pulp. for this, prepare a jelly bag from firm
cotton cloth which has been boiled and washed. this bag must be
hung in such a way that the juice drops from the point of the
bag into a bowl below. it may be hung upon a stick between two
chairs, or upon the rod of a strong towel rack over a table.
. apple jelly.
select tart, red-skinned apples, cut them in
small pieces with the skins on, retain the cores, and put them
in a kettle with cold water to barely cover. when thoroughly
cooked and mashed, put this pulp into the jelly bag, and allow
the juice to drip as long as it will. do not squeeze the bag,
nor stir the pulp if you wish clear jelly. this dripping process
is a matter of hours, and in the home kitchen may continue all
night. allow a pint of sugar to a pint of juice. return the
juice to the kettle, and allow it to simmer for twenty-five
minutes or half an hour, skimming when necessary. in the
meantime, heat the sugar, being careful not to melt or burn it.
stir the sugar gently into the juice, and boil five minutes.
test a little upon a saucer. it should show signs of jellying as
it cools. boil longer, if necessary. finish as directed. jelly
often does not set until twenty-four hours have elapsed.
. currant jelly.
the method is the same as with apple jelly.
it is not necessary to remove the currants from the stem. heat
just long enough before the straining to make the juices flow
well.
very agreeable flavors are secured by the combining of two or
more fruits in a jelly; quince and pineapple with apple;—a leaf
of rose geranium or lemon verbena in a glass of apple jelly;
raspberry with currant. white apple jelly may be flavored with
mint leaves, and used in place of mint sauce with meat.
pickling.
pickles are not desirable in the diet. if acid is craved, it is
much wiser to secure it by fresh fruits, and by the use of lemon
juice.
drying.
this process should not be discarded if there is a supply of
fruit in the orchard or garden. place thinly sliced apples and
peaches upon plates or trays, protect by clean cheesecloth, and
dry in the sun. the color may be dark, but the flavor is
excellent.
laboratory management.—the fruit selected for use in the
school kitchen depends upon the time of year. the autumn is the
season for preserving, but some fruit is available at any time
of year: in the winter, apple and peach butter from the dried
fruit; in the spring rhubarb jam or jelly; in the late spring or
early summer, strawberry jam. if the school program and the
equipment permit the serving of meals by the class, fruit may be
preserved in the fall for these occasions.
. explain the value of fruit in the diet.
. why is cooked fruit sometimes better than raw?
. inquire the price of fresh fruit in the market, and compute the cost of
a -calorie portion of two of the most common and cheapest.
. the same with one or two of the dried fruits.
. what are the important points in the preparation of fresh fruit for the
table?
. what changes are effected in baking an apple?
. what are the principles of the preservation of food?
. what is meant by a preservative?
. what is meant by sterilization?
. what is mold? decay? fermentation?
. what are the important points in canning?
. what is the difference between canned fruit and “preserves”?
. how does jelly making differ from the other processes?
. what is one of the most important points in cooking dried fruits?
. find the cost of a can of peaches at the grocery. weigh the contents
and count the peaches. compare with the cost of an equal amount of
home-canned peaches. what points in the problem must be taken into
account?
. the same problem with jelly bought at the grocery and made at home.
. work out the problem of estimating the comparative cost of canned
peaches and dried peaches, when calculated to the same food value.
the distinction between the fruit and the vegetable is purely arbitrary,
since both are parts of plants and have the same general composition.
botanically the tomato is as truly a fruit as the apple; but when it is
stewed and served with meat, it is classed as a vegetable. other parts of
plants, however, besides the fruit are used as vegetables.
composition and nutritive value.—vegetables are much like fruits in
composition, being richest usually in carbohydrates and ash, but sometimes
containing a large amount of protein. some have carbohydrates in the form
of starch, as the potato, and others in the form of sugar, as the beet;
young corn is rich in sugar, old corn in starch. all have more or less
cellulose, that in lettuce being very tender, while that in beets is so
firm as to be softened only by long cooking. study carefully figs.  and
. notice how the amount of water compares with the amount in fruits.
see, too, that beans, both green and dry, are richer in protein than other
vegetables. celery has the highest percentage of water, and is valuable
for its ash and the bulk it gives because of the large amount of
cellulose.
fig. .—composition of vegetables.
fig. .—composition of vegetables.
to explain these facts we must understand something of the physiology of
the plant. the stem is the carrier of water and nutritive material to
other parts of the plant. the onion bulb, the parsnip root, and the potato
tuber are the winter storehouses of food for the next year’s plant when
the
leaves first sprout. in the dry bean seed, and also in the pea and
lentil, the young plant lies dormant, with a large supply of all the
foodstuffs ready for its first growth when warmth and moisture are
supplied in the spring. classified according to their nutritive value, the
vegetables rank as follows. leaves are grouped with stems.
the seedscontain all the foodstuffs. high in protein.
roots and tubers and the bulbcontain all the foodstuffs. low in protein and fat. high in starch or some form of sugar.
rinds (squash and pumpkin)contain all the foodstuffs in small amounts. mineral content the chief value.
leaves and stemsmineral content the chief value.
certain substances in some vegetables are supposed to have a physiological
effect, but we should be cautious in accepting statements that have not
been scientifically proved; for instance, that celery is “good for the
nerves.” it is doubtless true that the oils which give onions and the
cabbage their strong flavors do not agree with some people, and these
vegetables should be eaten with caution.
how to buy.—much interest is added to the study of vegetables by the
examination of a seed catalogue easily obtainable from a firm selling
seeds and plants. in this way, one may increase one’s knowledge of
varieties for planting in the home garden, even if they are not common on
the market. city markets offer an increasing variety of vegetables, and
the purchaser should not hesitate to buy a vegetable because it is new to
her. an inexpensive italian vegetable, fenucchi, is now sometimes found on
sale, and its characteristic flavor is very agreeable.
fig. .—-calorie portions of vegetables.
a. fowler, photographer.
asparagus
beets
cabbage
carrots
corn
cucumbers
lettuce
onions
potatoes
spinach
tomatoes
the season of vegetables is so extended by canning, by the shipping of
vegetables from the south, and by growing under glass that there is always
a wide range of choice. there are in winter, however, some tempting
delicacies in the way of green vegetables that the buyer with a limited
purse should pass by. a cucumber at fifty cents or even at ten cents is
not a sensible purchase. lettuce, grown under glass, at ten cents a head
is not an extravagance, if the income allows thirty-five to forty cents
per capita per day for food. as a rule, select the less expensive
vegetable, provided it is in good condition. the prices are so fluctuating
that a definite statement is impossible. (see chapter xvii.)
root vegetables should be uniform in size, sound, the skins
fair.
head vegetables should be solid, with but few waste leaves on
the outside.
vegetables with hard rind should be sound and firm.
asparagus should be even in size, the stalks not bitten by
insects.
cauliflower should be firm and white, not affected by insects
or blight.
celery should be firm and white, free from blemishes, fine in
texture.
peas should have crisp pods well filled, but not too full.
string beans should be crisp and snap easily.
all leaf vegetables should be crisp—not wilted.
uncooked vegetables.—crisp vegetables with tender fiber are
eaten raw. their preparation includes freshening in cold water,
thorough washing to remove grit and insects, thorough drying by
shaking in a soft cloth or wire basket, and cooling on the ice.
lettuce should not be served so wet that the water collects on
the plate, making it impossible to dress the salad with oil. see
salad making, chapter xv.
cooked vegetables.—vegetable cooking is an art much neglected,
and in consequence vegetables are sometimes served lacking their
proper flavor and their original nutrients. to cook
vegetables
in boiling salted water, throwing the water away, is not the
correct method, except in a few cases. with this method much of
the valuable mineral matter and the flavoring substances are
lost in the water. with such strong flavored vegetables as the
cabbage, old onions and beets, and old potatoes this method is
permissible, but even in these cases the nutritive value is
decreased.
principles of cooking.—softening of the fiber.
opening of the starch granules, when starch is present, at a
temperature of ° f. retaining mineral and flavoring matters.
cooking processes.—these rank in value as they do or do not
retain the mineral and flavoring matters.
baking.—no nutritive material lost. the best method for
potatoes and sweet potatoes. used also for squash, pumpkin,
beets, young onions, dried beans, peas, and lentils.
steaming. (cooking in a steamer.)—no nutritive material lost.
a good method for all fresh vegetables. steamed vegetables have
less flavor than baked.
stewing.—cooking in a stew pan or kettle with so little water
that it is almost boiled out at the end of the process, any
remaining liquid being served with the vegetable. the best
method for spinach, which can be cooked with no additional
water, beyond that remaining on the leaves from the washing. the
french use this method almost entirely, and with tender peas and
carrots they omit water and use butter only. a substitute for
this latter is a very small amount of water, with the addition
of butterine or some good butter substitute.
boiling.—cooking in a large amount of boiling, salted water,
the water to be drained off and thrown away. may be used with
old beets of rank flavor, strong onions, old potatoes, or
potatoes boiled with the skins on. a wasteful method.
adjuncts.—salt, pepper, butter, or some other fat, milk,
cheese, bread crumbs, parsley, eggs.
utensils.—a vegetable brush, a sharp knife, a chopper, a potato
masher, a strainer, a colander, a stew pan, kettle or steamer,
baking pan, baking dish, bean pot, frying pan or kettle.
general directions.—wash the vegetables, scrubbing the skin
vegetables with a brush. washing in several waters is important
with spinach to remove all grit. scrape off thin skins or pare
off the thicker. thick skins such as those of old beets are more
easily
removed after cooking. the outer covering must be
removed in the case of peas, shell beans, and sweet corn. pull
or cut strings from string beans with great care. discard all
poor portions. remove and throw away the inner pulp and seeds of
old squashes and pumpkins. the whole of a tender summer squash
is eatable.
when boiling salted water is used, allow one tablespoonful of
salt to four quarts of water. steamed and stewed vegetables are
salted and dressed with butter or butter substitute before
serving. butter is a better dressing for vegetables than white
sauce. where cream is available, nothing is so delicious. use
white sauce very sparingly with some escalloped vegetable for
variety. making a sauce adds to the labor of preparation, and
the sauce hides the delicious flavor of a well-cooked vegetable.
some vegetables are mashed before serving; potatoes, turnip,
squash, either boiled or baked.
time of cooking.—the following table is a guide, but one must
learn from practice, for the time depends upon the quality of
the vegetable, whether tender or tough, and upon the size
whether large or small. test by gently inserting a fork.
allow more time for cooking in a steamer, than for stewing or
boiling. it requires more time to bake a potato than to boil one
of the same size. why?
time-table
(for stewing and boiling unless stated otherwise.)
fifteen minutes.—tender cabbage and sweet corn. these are
usually cooked too long.
thirty minutes.—asparagus; peas; potatoes of medium size;
summer squash; tomatoes.
forty-five minutes.—young beets and carrots; onions; young
parsnips; medium potatoes baked, sweet potatoes boiled.
one hour.—string and shelled beans; cauliflower; oyster
plant; winter squash, steamed or baked; young turnips.
two hours.—old carrots, beets, and turnips.
six to eight hours (or more).—dried beans, lentils, and peas,
baked in the oven, with water added.
the potato, a starchy vegetable.—make it your pride to serve a
plain potato, mealy and inviting. potatoes are “new,” fully
ripe, and old. the new potato is in market in july and august,
and may be recognized by its very thin skin. the later potatoes
have a thicker skin, the color still being fresh. in the spring
after
its winter storage, the potato is “old.” it seems a
little less firm, the color of the exterior is somewhat changed;
perhaps the buds in the eyes of the potato are beginning to
grow. when cooked it has a stronger flavor, and rather darker
color. if the potato has been frozen, a sweet flavor is
developed, and the quality is waxy. potatoes are sometimes
inferior in quality when the season is a poor one, or when some
potato disease is prevalent. the following classification shows
you in how many ways potatoes may be cooked, and also shows you
how easy it is to classify recipes in an orderly way.
i. potatoes cooked whole.
. steamed.
a. with skin.
b. without skin.
. boiled.
a. with skin.
b. without skin.
. baked.
a. with skin.
b. without skin.
ii. potatoes, not whole.
. from raw potatoes.
a. sliced and escalloped.
b. cut in cubes and stewed.
c. cut in slices or fancy shapes and fried.
. from cooked potatoes.
a. mashed.
(a) from boiled potatoes, plain or browned on top.
(b) from baked potatoes, seasoned and served in shell.
b. creamed. from either cold-boiled or baked potatoes;
the latter are better.
c. sauté.
(a) sliced and browned.
(b) hashed and browned.
if you know some other method, see if you can fit it into this
grouping.
. baked potatoes.
method . the best method, for new potatoes. select those
of uniform size. when scrubbed, place them in a
shallow
pan, or upon the rack of the oven. the oven should be hot,
about ° f. or even a higher temperature. (see oven tests,
chapter ix.) the length of time required depends upon the
size of the potato, forty-five minutes being the average time.
a potato is largely water. what is the temperature of the
interior of the potato during the baking process?
test by pressing firmly, protecting the fingers by a soft cloth;
or insert a fork. when the potato is done, it yields to the
pressure of the fingers. if the potatoes cannot be served at
once, break the skin that the steam may escape, cover with a
cloth, and keep them hot.
for convenience at the table, cut the potatoes in two lengthwise,
loosen the content of each half with a fork, sprinkle with salt,
and add a bit of butter, as much as one would add at the table.
potato on the half shell carries serving one step farther.
cut the baked potatoes in two lengthwise, remove the contents,
mash lightly, add butter or butterine, milk, and salt, allowing
a teaspoonful of butter, a tablespoonful of milk and a
shake or two of salt to each potato. these measurements cannot
be given with exactness, because potatoes vary in size. beat
this mixture well, replace lightly in each half shell, and brown
the tops slightly. this is nothing more than mashed baked
potato, prettily served.
invent other variations of this dish, adding ingredients that
are agreeable when mixed with the potato. the beaten white
of an egg added, gives greater lightness to the mixture in the
potato shell.
method . the same as method , except that the potatoes
are pared before baking. a good method when the skins are
not fair. a brown crust is formed on the potato, which is
crisp and pleasant to eat. large potatoes may be cut in two
before baking, or even sliced.
what difference in length of baking will there be between
methods  and ?
. boiled potatoes.
the only way to prevent the loss of nutrients in using this
process is to boil the potatoes with the “jackets” on. this
is the best way with new potatoes. this method with ripe
and old potatoes gives a yellowish color to the surface
and
indeed throughout. it is a labor-saving method for the busy
housewife, as the skin cracks and loosens at the end of the
boiling process, and is easily removed.
if you choose to have a snow-white potato, it must be pared
before boiling, and thus you deliberately waste the valuable
mineral matter provided by nature. if your income permits
this æsthetic pleasure, the mineral matter can of course be
supplied in other vegetables. the woman who can spend but
twenty to thirty cents per capita for food per day should boil
the potatoes with the skins on and gratify her artistic sense in
some other way.
the method of boiling is the same in either case, whether the
potato is pared or not.
have enough boiling water to cover the potatoes. put the
potatoes of uniform size one at a time into the kettle that
the boiling may not stop. allow a gentle boiling to continue
until the potatoes are done. why avoid rapid boiling? test
with a fork at the end of half an hour. when the potatoes
are mellow, drain off the water, and set the kettle where the
remaining moisture will steam off. shake gently to hasten
this process, and sprinkle the potatoes with salt. if they must
stand before serving will you place a tin cover or a cloth over
the kettle? old potatoes, with a strong flavor, should be pared
before boiling, or even soaked in cold water.
. mashed potatoes.—some one devised this convenient method of
serving, to save trouble at the table. mashed potato can be
very poor and unappetizing when wet and lumpy. do not attempt
it with new, poor, or old potatoes. see that the boiled
potatoes are as dry as can be—every particle of water steamed
away. mash thoroughly with the wire masher, add butter or
butterine, salt and milk in about the proportions given for potato
in the half shell. use a tablespoonful or so of cream if it is available.
beat vigorously. the mealiness of the potato and the
vigorous beating are the secrets of success. the finished product
should be light and somewhat moist,—not wet. reheat in the
kettle. pile lightly in a hot dish and serve; or brown the top
before serving.
potato puff. (soufflé.)—with your knowledge of mashed
potato, can you not invent a potato puff?
. escalloped potato.—the name escalloped is applied to any
baked dish that is arranged in layers. escalloped potato
is a palatable dish and this is one of the most economical of
methods.
wash, pare, and slice the potatoes in ⁄-inch pieces. slightly
grease an earthen or enameled baking dish. cover the bottom
of the dish with a layer of the slices, sprinkle the slices lightly
with flour, and put on two teaspoonfuls of butter, or butterine,
in small bits. continue until the dish is nearly full. pour
in milk to barely cover the potatoes, put a cover on the dish
and set the dish in an oven of ° f. remove the cover in
time to allow the top to brown. allow rather more than half
an hour for the baking.
. creamed potatoes.—method , an easy way. chop cold baked
potatoes with the chopper. allow one tablespoonful of butter
to  pint of chopped potato. melt the butter in a saucepan.
stir in the potatoes. shake from the dredger the equivalent
of a tablespoonful of flour, stirring the potato with one
hand as you shake with the other. pour in enough milk to
barely cover the chopped potato. set the saucepan in the
coolest spot on the range; or on the simmering burner of a gas
range, upon an asbestos mat; or turn all into an earthenware
jar, or baking dish, and proceed as with escalloped potato.
allow the mixture to cook until it becomes creamy.
method . cut the cold potatoes in cubes, and heat in a
thin white sauce. see chapter x.
boiled potatoes may be used, but baked are better in texture
and flavor for creaming.
. french fried potatoes.—wash and pare small potatoes, cut in
eighths lengthwise, and soak a few minutes in cold water.
take from water, dry between towels, and fry in deep fat.
drain on brown paper and sprinkle with salt.
() deep fat frying.—an iron kettle is the best for deep
fat,  quarts a convenient size. a wire basket is almost necessary
for frying soft material.
fill the kettle ⁄ full of fat and place over fire. when a
slight blue smoke or vapor rises from it, it is ready to test.
test with small cubes of bread. if bread browns in  minute,
the temperature is right for uncooked mixtures. if it
browns
in  seconds, it is right for cooked materials. care must be
taken to keep the temperatures at the right point, for if too cool,
the material will soak fat; if too hot, both fat and material to
be cooked will burn.
() to clarify fat.—drop several slices raw, pared potato
into the fat and let bubble up. strain all through cheesecloth
back into pail from which fat was taken. the potatoes seem
to absorb food odors and collect crumbs and leave the fat
clear.
. stewed celery.—a green vegetable. stalks of celery, too
tough or coarse for serving uncooked, are delicious when
stewed. the process is simple. wash, scrape, and cut the
stalks crosswise. place them in a stewpan, barely cover with
hot water, adding a teaspoonful of salt to a pint of celery.
cook gently for half an hour or until the celery is tender. use
the liquid remaining in making a sauce, adding some milk
to make the necessary amount of liquid. three fourths of a cup
of sauce is enough for a pint of celery. see chapter x.
. cabbage.—the method given makes cabbage a delicious and
attractive vegetable, as delicate as cauliflower, and the odor
in the kitchen is not noticeable.
select a small cabbage, with the ribs in the leaves not too
thick. prepare the cabbage before washing it by cutting out
the stalks from below with a sharp knife. separate the leaves.
have ready the largest kettle available, nearly full of rapidly
boiling water. drop in one cabbage leaf at a time, pressing
each one down with a long-handled spoon or skimmer. do
this so slowly that the water does not stop boiling. leave the
kettle uncovered, and allow the cabbage to cook from  to
 minutes, depending on the thickness of the leaf stalks.
remove the leaves with a long-handled skimmer, putting them
into a colander standing on a plate. immediately pour the hot
water down the sink drain, turn on the cold water to flush
away the odor, and fill the kettle with cold water. while
the cabbage is cooking, you have made a pint of white sauce,
no.  (ch. x), adding a teaspoonful of salt, and have prepared
⁄ cup of buttered crumbs. cut the cabbage leaves slightly,
place them in a baking dish, pour the white sauce over them,
sprinkle the crumbs on the top, and brown the crumbs in
the
oven or under the gas. if you can, prepare this as a surprise
at home, and ask the family to “guess” what it is. if the
cabbage is a good one, some of the leaves turn a very pretty
green with this method of boiling.
. baked beans.—a nitrogenous vegetable and a meat substitute.
a dish known in old days in new england, baked
to perfection in the old brick oven. baked beans seem difficult
of digestion for some people. the mustard is supposed
to be helpful, and adds something to the flavor. if the molasses
is omitted, or but a small amount used, and if butter
takes the place of pork or suet, the beans seem more digestible.
in different parts of new england the dish is varied. some
people prefer rather dry baked beans, others wish them moist
and very sweet.
utensils.—a kettle. a covered bean pot.
ingredients.—
 quart of white beans.
 teaspoonful of soda.
⁄ lb. salt pork or more, or
 tablespoonfuls of beef fat or butter substitute.
molasses, from two tablespoonfuls to ⁄ cup,
or none.
 teaspoonful of mustard.
method.—wash, and soak the beans in cold water over
night. pour off any water that remains. put the beans into
the kettle, cover with cold water, add the soda, and cook gently
until the beans are slightly softened. the soda aids the softening.
pour off the water again, and put the beans into the
pot. mix the molasses and mustard with a pint of water, and
pour this over the beans, adding more water if the beans are
not covered. place the pork or other fat upon the beans, and
cover the pot. if fat other than pork is used, salt must be
added to the beans. the beans should bake slowly, for from
 to  hours, and even longer in a very slow oven. a stove
of the type shown in fig.  is good for this purpose.
they
can be baked in the ordinary gas oven, if only one burner is
used, and that is turned very low.
laboratory management.—the last experiment is the only one
not easily performed in the school kitchen. the process, can
begin perhaps on one day, and be finished the next. if there is
some apparatus that cooks at a low temperature, the practical
difficulties may be overcome.
vegetable, or “cream” soups.
these are of two classes: the purées (porridge), or thick soups,
with vegetable pulp as the thickening material, and the cream
soups, which are somewhat thinner, the juices of some vegetable
giving the flavor.
potato purée, or soup, is an example of the first; cream of
tomato of the second. the line is not sharply drawn between the
two in many cook books. milk is an important ingredient in these
soups, so that they are sometimes known as milk soups. butter
and flour are used in both,—the flour in the purée “binds” the
mixture and makes it smoother; in the cream soup the flour is
used for thickening as well.
dried beans, peas, or lentils make a delicious purée, the secret
of success being long slow cooking in some low temperature
apparatus. they are brought to perfection in the atkinson
cooker.
. potato pureé.
ingredients.
potato  cup
milk  quart
flour  tablespoonful
butter  tablespoonful
salt  teaspoonfuls
celery stalks, cut small  teaspoonful
onion, chopped  tablespoonful
pepper, cayenne to taste.
remarks.—if a thicker purée is desired, use more of the
mashed potato. if celery salt is used, omit one teaspoonful of
the salt. less onion may be used, and the pepper omitted.
utensils.—make the list yourself, after reading the
directions for mixing.
method of mixing.—boil and mash the potato, or use cold
mashed potato. heat the milk in the double boiler with the
celery and onion. add the milk gradually to the mashed potato,
beating vigorously.
put this mixture through a strainer into the double
boiler,
and
reheat it. melt the butter in a small saucepan, or stir in the
flour, add slowly half a cup of the soup to the butter and
flour paste, and then pour this slowly into the mixture in the
double boiler, stirring all the time. the soup will be ready to
serve in about ten minutes.
the important point in this recipe is the quality of the
mashed potato. it should be dry and light. it may be made from
hot, mealy baked potatoes. if cold mashed potato is used, this
should be made light again with a fork. an excellent luncheon
dish. will serve four to six people.
. cream of tomato soup.
ingredients.
tomato juice ⁄ cup
milk  quart
flour  tablespoonfuls
butter  tablespoonfuls
salt  teaspoonfuls
bicarbonate of soda ⁄ teaspoonful
pepper, cayenne to taste.
remarks.—celery and onion may be added, but are not
necessary. when you become expert, you will be able to use a
larger amount of tomato juice, and even omit the soda.
method of mixing.—this you will be able to work out for
yourself. first perform this simple experiment. stir together a
tablespoonful of stewed tomato and a tablespoonful of milk. what
happens? heat this mixture. what further do you notice? how may
you best extract the juice from the tomato? you have noticed the
effect of the acid tomato upon the milk. the soda is added to
partly counteract this effect. will you stir the soda into the
tomato juice or into the milk? will you stir the tomato juice
into the milk, or the milk into the tomato juice? will you cook
the mixture at all? how long before serving will you mix the
two? when will you add the butter and flour?
laboratory management.—an individual portion of soup may be
made with ⁄ cup of liquid, but it is better to allow  cup
when possible to each pupil, or two pupils may work together.
the important point in this soup is to prevent the curdling, so
you safeguard the milk at each step.
croutons may be served with any of these soups.
. chili sauce.
ingredients.
tomatoes , medium sized and ripe
green pepper , finely chopped
vinegar  cups
sugar  tablespoonfuls
salt  tablespoonful
clove  teaspoonfuls
cinnamon  teaspoonfuls
allspice  teaspoonfuls
nutmeg  teaspoonfuls grated
method.—peel tomatoes and slice into a preserving kettle. add
other ingredients and heat to the boiling point. cook slowly two
and one half hours. pour into preserve jars and seal.
. what is the distinction between fruits and vegetables?
. how does the composition of apples compare with that of carrots?
. contrast the nutritive values of celery, potatoes, and old beans.
. what other foods must be served with potato to make a meal complete?
. how may we best retain the mineral matter of vegetables in cooking?
. is it allowable to cook a vegetable in boiling water and throw away the
water?
. why must more time be allowed for baking a potato than for boiling?
. why more time for an old beet than for a young?
. find the cost of potatoes in your locality. estimate the cost of a dish
of mashed potato for five people.
. estimate the cost of -calorie portions of several vegetables. see
fig. .
the common grains, sometimes called
cereals,[]
yield some of the most
important of all the food materials. those most widely used are wheat,
maize, or indian corn, oats, rice, barley, rye, and millet. in this
country wheat and corn are the two great crops upon which our prosperity
largely depends, and a shortage in one of these crops is felt in the
business world, not only in this country, but abroad. rice is the
important cereal in china, japan, and india, and a failure of the rice
crop may mean famine to millions of people, especially in india. these
facts are mentioned to show that the race has learned to depend upon the
grains as a staple food, and a study of their composition proves that this
common habit is founded in reason. the grains are all members of the grass
family, and the edible portion is the seed. from these seeds are
manufactured pure starch, breakfast cereals, meal, and flour. like beans
and peas, these seeds are the storehouses of food for the young plants,
and we therefore find the high nutritive value depicted in fig. . notice
that the carbohydrate (starch) content is high in all; that all contain
protein, oats, wheat, and rye being about equal in this and higher than
the others; oats are highest in fat, corn ranking next. the ash contains
the same important mineral substances that we found in the fruits, the
percentages of each differing somewhat with
the
different grains and
being quite different for the cereals as a class than for the fruits and
vegetables as a class. it must be remembered that these percentages are
given for the whole grain, and that the amounts of the nutrients in the
manufactured product depend upon the process employed.
manufacture of cereal food
materials.[]—the
primitive method of making
the material in the grain available for use was by grinding the grain
between two stones, or by pounding one stone upon another, and this method
is used by the mexicans and certain of the american indians to this day,
human muscle being the power employed. wind and water were harnessed for
grinding grain, and were the only motive powers available until the
invention of steam, the grinding being done by stones. in a connecticut
town there still exists a mill stone, one of a pair so small that they
were carried into the settlement on horseback, and when placed in a small
mill by a brook, they ground a bushel of corn in a day.
fig. .—composition of cereals.
breakfast cereals and meal are now made in the great factories that
produce flour; steam is the motive power and the grains are broken, or
rolled, between steel rollers. (see chapter xii.)
breakfast cereals.—the ready-to-eat breakfast cereal has met the popular
demand for a quickly prepared food for the first meal of the day. a few of
these are made under known conditions, but they are sometimes manufactured
from inferior grain, and the presence of grit at times indicates a
possible lack of cleanliness in the process. it is a question, too,
whether or not the starch has been subjected to heat for a sufficient
length of time, and whether they can be masticated sufficiently to make
the grain digestible, and the nutritive material available. their use for
young children is undesirable. for older people, they add
variety
to the
diet, but they are usually more expensive than the home-cooked breakfast
foods, even when the cost of fuel is taken into account. see fig. .
cooked breakfast cereals.—it is an easy task to cook a cereal, especially
now that the fireless cooker in some form is present in so many homes. the
cereal for breakfast does not necessitate early rising; as it may be
prepared the day or evening before and be served in palatable form in the
morning.
the most common breakfast cereals are made from oats, wheat, and corn,
varying in fineness of grain from those ground like a meal to the coarser
cracked wheat and the samp made from corn. it is well to use kinds made
from different grains, but when the worth of a few has been proved, it is
not wise to try another kind simply because it has a new label. one
manufacturer confessed to a visitor that the same cereal was put into
boxes of different colors and sold under different names as a means of
inviting purchasers. the cereal foods made from whole grains are
especially valuable on account of the high mineral content.
it usually pays to buy in boxes, rather than in bulk, in the case of
cereals; and always from a reliable grocer. if you purchase a box of
cereal as a “bargain,” weigh its contents and compare the weight with the
weight of a box bought in the regular way. also examine such a box for the
presence of insects. these may be recognized sometimes by a webby
substance, and again the insects themselves may be detected. do not buy
too large a stock of cereals, since they are better when they are fresh
from the factory, and a good firm renews its stock often.
fig. .—-calorie portions of starches and
cereals. a. fowler, photographer.
no.kindweight of portionounces
.shredded wheat.
.cornmeal.
.farina.
.rice.
.tapioca.
.cornstarch.
.hominy grits.
.rolled oats.
.flaked wheat.
.corn flakes.
.puffed wheat.
.puffed rice.
principles of cooking.—. softening of the fiber by
long-continued low temperature with a supply of water present.
. complete opening of the starch granules by the boiling
temperature of water.
. the protein present presents no special problem. its
digestibility is not especially affected, but the softening of
the fiber of the cereal makes the protein available to us.
methods.—there are two classes into which the cereals may be
divided,—the flaked and the granular. the weighing experiments
(page ) show that the granular is the heavier. this means that
more water will be absorbed by a given measure of the granular,
because it contains more material.
in experimenting with a cereal at home it is well to try the
proportion of water and cereal printed on the box the first
time, altering the proportion if the first result is not
satisfactory. there should be enough water to soften the cereal,
and only just enough. if the cooked cereal is stiff, the
measure of water is short; if so thin that the cereal runs on
the plate, too much water was allowed.
. preparation of breakfast cereal.
ingredients.
 part, by measure, flaked cereal to  of water.
 part granular cereal to  to  of water.
 cup of dry cereal will serve three or four people.
samp, cracked wheat, and coarse corn meal will take from  to  parts of water.
salt. a tablespoonful to a quart of water is an average amount.
utensils: a measuring cup; a double boiler; a fork.
method.—measure the cereal and water, put the water into the
inner part of the double boiler with the salt. have the
lower part of the boiler ready—about half full of hot water;
place the inner boiler directly upon the stove or over the flame.
when the water is boiling rapidly, shake the cereal into the water
from a cup, so slowly that the water does not stop boiling. this
is the first secret of a well-cooked cereal. the rapidly boiling
water keeps the grains of cereal in motion, and thus they do
not stick to the vessel nor to each other, and the heat reaches
the starch in the grains equally. if the grains begin to settle,
shake the vessel gently, but do not stir, even with a fork.
allow this process to continue for about five minutes, or until
you see a thickening of the mass, so much so that the
separate
grains do not settle. if toward the end of this stage there is
danger of sticking, lift the mass with the fork, but do not stir
it, as this motion will break the grains. this first process
opens the starch grains. place the inner part of the boiler
in the outer over boiling water and allow the cooking to continue
for at least one hour. for this is the second secret of the
perfect cereal,—a long-continued process that softens the
fiber and develops flavor. one cereal, advertised as being
cooked in three minutes, remains unpalatable after that length
of time, but is delicious at the end of two hours. if you have a
fireless cooker, put the cereal in the double boiler into the
cooker overnight for the second stage. any low temperature
apparatus gives the desired result.
. the uses of cold cereal.—never throw away cooked cereals.
the cold cereal is useful in many ways.
(a) mold in small cups with dates or other fruit, and serve
with sugar and cream for luncheon.
(b) cool corn meal mush in a flat dish, cut it in slices when
cold, and brown the slices in a frying pan, with beef fat, or
a butter substitute. serve with sugar, molasses, or sirup for
breakfast or luncheon.
(c) rice or hominy may be mixed with a beaten egg, molded
into small cakes, and browned either in the frying pan, or
in the oven.
(d) a small remaining portion of any cereal may be used to
thicken soup.
(e) any cooked cereal may be used in muffins or even yeast
bread. (see those chapters.)
. corn meal “mush.”—this is cooked by the same method as
the other cereals, except that the amount of water is larger
and the first boiling should continue longer. the meal must
be scattered slowly into the boiling water, or else be mixed
first with cold water, as it lumps very easily. the second stage
of the process should continue several hours.
rice.—rice varies very much in quality and in the shape of the grain.
louisiana and chinese rice are among those that have a firm and large
grain keeping its shape well
when
cooked. inferior varieties become too
soft, and the finished product is pasty and poor in color and flavor. much
is said at present about the harmful effect of the polishing process upon
the quality of the rice. an unpolished rice may sometimes be found on the
market, brownish in color and with a good flavor.
. boiled rice.—rice may be cooked in the double boiler by the
same method as other cereals, allowing  part of rice to  of
water. the rice should be well washed in cold water.
the second stage need not be continued so long, from three
quarters of an hour to an hour being sufficient. the flavor is
improved by the use of milk in place of half of the water. by
this method the nutritive value is much increased.
another method used by the chinese continues the boiling
throughout the whole process. a very large amount of water
is used, several quarts for one cup of rice, and when the water
is boiling violently the rice is scattered in very slowly. the
boiling continues from twenty minutes to half an hour, or until
the grains are tender, and then the water is drained off, through
a colander. the rice in the colander should then be placed
where the remaining moisture will steam off. by this method
nutrients are lost, but the grains of the rice stand out distinctly
and are light and dry. it is a difficult method for the
novice, because its success depends upon the removal of the
rice from the water just at the moment it is tender, but not too
soft. the grains should be tested in twenty minutes.
corn products.—corn being our most abundant grain, it is the cheapest,
and we should promote its use. hominy and samp and indian meal, when well
cooked, are all most palatable. there is a difference between old and new
process corn meal, to be noticed in the flavor and in the behavior of the
two kinds in cooking. the new process meal now more largely on the market
has been deprived of the germ, which contains a large amount of oil, and
although the meal does not deteriorate so soon, there is some loss of
flavor.
moreover,
when the new process meal is used in an old-time
recipe, more wetting must be used than the recipe calls for and a larger
amount of fat.
the old process of grinding between stones is still employed in some
localities. southern and rhode island corn meal are ground in this way,
and may be found at some groceries. there are also two colors, the yellow
and the white, each with a distinctive flavor, and some people who think
they dislike corn meal find the white meal agreeable.
pure starches.—these occur as food materials in several forms. cornstarch
is the starchy portion only removed from the grain of corn. wheat starch
is more largely used for laundry purposes than for food. rice flour may be
treated as starch in cooking. arrowroot is a fine starch from the roots of
a family of plants growing in the west indies and other warm climates. it
is used principally in cooking for invalids. cassava, manioca, tapioca,
and sago are starchy materials in granular form. the first three are made
from the pith of the cassava plant, the sago from the sago palm. the pure
starches are all easily digested and inexpensive. corn starch is the most
abundant and cheapest pure starch in this country.
the starch granule.—to understand the behavior of materials like
cornstarch, rice flour, and arrowroot in cooking, we need to know more of
the starch grain. cornstarch is composed of myriads of tiny granules
somewhat like those pictured in fig. , but smaller. the starch granules
of different plants differ in size and even in shape, but they all have a
covering lying in folds, the pure starch being within. the granule unfolds
or bursts when exposed to heat. when these granules are floating in water,
and, being heated, open at the same moment, the starch paste is smooth;
otherwise, the starch lumps.
a. starch experiments.
starch turns a characteristic blue color in the presence of
iodine. this is an unfailing starch test, but must be used in
the cold.
. grate a piece of potato into a small amount of water, and
strain out the pulp. the starch settles from the water in a few
minutes. pour off the water, and add a drop of diluted iodine to
the remaining starch. if a microscope is available, dilute this
mixture and with a dropper tube place a drop upon a slide. the
potato starch granules are comparatively large and easy to see
through the microscope.
. drop a teaspoonful of dry starch into boiling water.
. mix a teaspoonful of starch with a small quantity of cold
water, and stir this into boiling water.
. mix a teaspoonful of starch with ¼ cup of cold water, and
bring the water to the boiling point, stirring the mixture as it
heats.
why are  and  similar in result, and different from ?
fig. .—changes of starch cells in cooking:
a, cells of a raw potato with starch grains in natural condition; b,
cells of a partially cooked potato; c, cells of a thoroughly boiled
potato. farmers’ bulletin no. , u. s. dept. agriculture.
desserts from the starches.—cornstarch, in particular, is often disliked,
because it is undercooked, and too large a proportion is used. it may be
made very palatable, and is too valuable in cooking and too inexpensive to
be discarded.
. chocolate cornstarch.
milk pint
cornstarch tablespoonfuls, level
cocoa (baker’s) tablespoonfuls, level
sugar⁄ cup
salt⁄ teaspoonful
vanilla teaspoonful
what utensils? you should be able to plan the method of mixing. the milk
must be heated in a double boiler. which method of mixing in the
cornstarch will you use? how can you best add the cocoa, sugar, and salt?
the vanilla?
it is difficult to boil milk directly over the fire or flame, without
scorching it. since the starch cannot well be exposed to the boiling
temperature in this case, the process must continue in the double boiler
until the mixture has thickened well, for at least half an hour, three
quarters being better. when the cooking is finished, pour the mixture into
molds which have been wet in cold water. when the mixture is cooled, chill
it in the refrigerator. serve with cream or milk and sugar for those who
may want it sweeter. this gives a soft mold, that is much more palatable
than one so stiff, that it has a firm shape. this will serve four or five
people.
. tapioca and sago.—these materials make delicious desserts
with fruit. they are also used with eggs and milk. (see
chapter xv.)
laboratory management.—the undivided portion of cereal may be ⁄ cup.
cornstarch may be made with ⁄ cup of liquid.
macaroni, spaghetti, and vermicelli are valuable cereal products
made from flour, this form of cereal food having originated in italy. the
italians manufacture the paste in a large variety of forms, and some of
the small fancy shapes are also used in soup. the composition of macaroni
is shown in fig. . it is a valuable material, and when served or cooked
with cheese may well be the main dish of a home luncheon.
. boiled macaroni.
ingredients.
macaroni⁄ cup, broken in inch pieces
boiling water quarts
salt tablespoonful
cream⁄ cup
method.—cook macaroni in boiling salted water twenty minutes
or until soft, drain in a strainer, pour cold water over it to
remove stickiness. add cream and reheat. a thin white sauce may
be used in place of the cream.
. macaroni baked with cheese.—cover the bottom of a baking
dish with plain boiled macaroni. sprinkle with grated
cheese. add another layer of macaroni and another of cheese.
repeat until the dish is full. pour a thin sauce over this,
almost filling the dish. cover with buttered crumbs and
bake in hot oven until crumbs are brown. some prefer to
omit the crumbs and have a thick layer of the cheese on top
which becomes crisp and brown. boiled macaroni and spaghetti
may be served with tomato sauce and a little grated cheese.
this is called “italian style.”
. for what reasons are the cereal products so valuable?
. compare the composition of the different grains.
. what changes are effected in the proper cookery of cereals?
. what are the important points in practice?
. what are the advantages of a good “ready to serve” breakfast cereal?
. ascertain the cost of a box of puffed cereal and an uncooked cereal of
the same size. weigh the contents of the two.
. estimate the cost of each one served to a family of six.
. what is the cost of a -calorie portion?
. what is the advantage of serving dry toast with a cereal?
eggs are a specially interesting food because they contain all the
elements necessary to the development of the young chick within the shell.
the structure of the egg is familiar, with its division into the yolk and
white, and it is interesting to note the details of this structure.
break a fresh egg carefully into a saucer. the shell is porous, allowing
water to evaporate from the egg and air to enter. to this porosity is due
the fact that other substances may enter the egg, giving it an unnatural
flavor and even hastening its deterioration. within the shell is a fine
membrane which protects the white. the yolk is also divided from the white
by a more delicate membrane which enables one to separate the yolk from
the white of a fresh egg. a careful examination reveals at each end of the
yolk a continuation of this membrane in the form of small cords which are
fastened at each end of the shell, holding the yolk evenly suspended in
the center of the shell. rough handling or jolting breaks this membrane,
and the yolk drops to one side.
lift the white carefully with a fork, and notice its elasticity. this
cohesive property makes it possible to beat air into the white until the
whole mass become porous. the yolk is creamy rather than light when
beaten, and a bit of the yolk mixed with the white prevents the latter
from becoming light and dry.
composition of the egg.—figure  gives the composition of the yolk and
white taken together, and of the yolk and white separated. the protein
content is high, and the fat content as well, the yolk containing a higher
percentage of these two foodstuffs than the white. the mineral matter is
of high value, iron and phosphorus being found in ideal forms in the yolk.
in using the egg as food we are availing ourselves of one of nature’s
richest storehouses. a single egg of average size yields about 
calories, of which  come from the yolk and  from the white. a very
large egg, weighing two and two thirds ounces, will yield  calories.
fig. .—composition of eggs and cheese.
fresh eggs and cold storage eggs.—the fresh-laid egg is always desired
for its delicious flavor, and this flavor changes but little in a week or
two if the egg is kept cool. it is desirable to preserve eggs, however,
for future use at the season when they are most abundant and cheap. many
methods have been tried, such as laying them away in sawdust, sinking them
in water-glass solution, or coating the shell with paraffin or some other
substance to prevent evaporation and the entrance of air. the introduction
of cold storage on a large scale promises a solution of the problem. if
eggs are fresh when placed in storage, it is possible to keep them just
above the freezing temperature for months without appreciable
deterioration.
eggs too long in storage may be detected by the musty odor and flavor, the
running of the yolk into the white, and the thin quality of the white
which prevents beating stiff. some states have already passed stringent
laws in regard to the sale of cold storage eggs.
the cost of eggs and how to buy.—the demand for fresh eggs is great, and
so many eggs are exported, that the price is high, even in the summer.
twenty-five cents a dozen is a reasonable price, but this is below the
average at the
present
date. the thirty-five or forty-cent daily
allowance for food will permit the moderate use of eggs at thirty-five
cents a dozen, but not a liberal use in cakes and desserts. they should be
used at such a price and with that allowance as the main dish for
breakfast or luncheon at times, and not in sweet dishes calling for three
or four eggs. if a recipe for soft custard calls for three eggs to a pint
of milk, leave out one egg or even two, and use one or two tablespoonfuls
of cornstarch instead. select eggs with a hard shell, and yolk of rich
yellow. if the shell is soft and the yolk pale, these deficiencies should
be reported, as they can be corrected by the poultryman. the difference in
color of the shells, whether white or brown, is not of great consequence.
if you can buy eggs by the crate direct from the poultryman, this is a
saving, provided the eggs can be used before they deteriorate. a small
crate holds fifteen dozen; the usual size thirty dozen. some express
companies have a special rate for eggs, and parcel post should aid in this
method of buying.
relative digestibility of soft and hard-cooked eggs.—the fact must be
recalled that to digest is to dissolve, and that the digestion of food
means a dissolving by the digestive juices, aided by water. when we speak
of the digestibility of food we may mean the ease and comfort of
digestion, or the length of time taken by the process, or the completeness
of the process. if we take the third of these meanings, hard-cooked egg is
as digestible as the soft-cooked or the raw egg, because it is completely
dissolved in digestion in the course of time. if the second meaning of
digestion is taken, the hard-cooked egg may be slightly less digestible,
for a slightly longer time is consumed in the process. the latest
researches, however, show that the digestive process is longer with any
food than was formerly supposed, and the difference in this case is not
especially important. indeed, we must
accept
the conclusions of the
scientist and frankly admit that the differences of temperature in cooking
of egg do not have any great effect upon its digestibility.
why then the popular idea that a hard-boiled egg is “absolutely
indigestible”? a hard-boiled egg, or more than one, eaten rapidly, without
mastication, at a picnic, and with much sweet food at an unusual hour, may
interfere with the “ease and comfort in digestion” resulting from such a
meal. but if the whites of the hard-boiled eggs are chopped fine, the yolk
mashed, and the two served upon toast, thus insuring mastication, a dish
is produced that is of average digestibility and that may be used for
breakfast or luncheon without hesitation.
if a tender, jellylike consistency is wanted, cook the egg below the
boiling point of water. if, however, a firmer egg is preferred, use the
old-time method, and cook the egg three or four minutes in boiling water.
it is the easier and quicker method.
moreover, do not hesitate to use an egg “boiled” half an hour, provided it
is chopped fine or sliced.
. eggs used raw.—an egg, swallowed whole, followed by a cracker,
is a “quick lunch” that is not harmful, and it is sometimes
convenient to be able to take an egg in this way. a sprinkling
of salt upon it makes it more agreeable.
. beaten eggs.—beat the yolk and white separately. add to
the yolk a teaspoonful of sugar, a shake of salt, some flavoring,
and ⁄ of a cup of milk. beat the white gently into this
mixture and serve in a glass. the flavoring may be a quarter
of a teaspoonful of vanilla, or a tablespoonful of orange juice.
this is sometimes served to an invalid who can take milk, and
is an agreeable luncheon for any one. if milk does not agree
with one, a larger amount of fruit juice may be used with the
addition of some water, possibly carbonated. the
white
alone is given in cases of severe illness, mixed with a small
amount of water, and fruit juice if the physician permits the
latter. this is sometimes the only food that can be retained
by an invalid.
principles of egg cookery.—protein in the form of an
egg-albumin is the foodstuff to consider in the cooking of eggs.
heat produces in the egg a change in color and in texture or
firmness, the firmness or hardness depending upon the degree of
heat and the length of time given to the cooking. coagulation is
the term used for this change in the egg-albumin.
. the white of egg begins to coagulate and to show an opaque
white at about ° f.
. a temperature somewhat below the boiling point of water for
about ten minutes will give the white a jellylike, tender
consistency, and slightly cook the yolk. continued for an hour,
the white becomes solid and adheres to the shell.
. the boiling point of water gives a firmer consistency than a
temperature below this point. the white is free from the shell.
. a high temperature, that of a hot pan, will produce a
leathery consistency if long continued.
a. an experiment with the egg.
apparatus and materials.—a ring stand, wire net, bunsen burner,
glass beaker, test tube, chemical thermometer, white of egg.
method.—put the beaker two thirds full of water on the wire
net over the flame. put enough white of egg into the test tube
to cover the bulb of the thermometer when this is put into the
tube. clamp the test tube so that it rests in the water in the
beaker. the surface of the water should stand above the top of
the white of egg. clamp the thermometer so that it is held in
the white of egg in the test tube. the white should be stirred
with a fork before it is put into the test tube, and only a
small quantity used.
note:
. the temperature when the first visible change occurs.
. the temperature when the whole mass becomes of a jellylike consistency.
. the temperature when the water reaches the boiling point. remove; note the consistency.
. jellied or coddled eggs.—see that the shells are whole and clean.
if the eggs are just taken from the refrigerator, lay them
in
warm water a few minutes. make ready a double boiler, the
lower part half full of boiling water. put the required number
of eggs into the inner boiler, cover with water that has just
stopped boiling, put on the boiler cover, and stand the boiler
where the water below will no longer boil. the eggs will be
done in from six to eight minutes.
having performed the preceding experiment, you should be
able to invent another way of accomplishing this result.
. boiled eggs.
put one egg at a time from a tablespoon into
boiling water. allow the water to boil for three or four
minutes, depending upon the preference of those served.
remove the eggs, and serve at once.
the hard-boiled egg should remain in the boiling water half
an hour.
bearing in mind the fact that hard-boiled eggs must be
chopped or sliced, cannot you invent a way of using them in a
luncheon dish?
. poached eggs.—make ready a frying pan by setting muffin
rings in it, and filling it about half full of gently simmering
water, with a teaspoonful of salt dissolved in it. break the
eggs one at a time into a saucer, and slip each egg carefully into
a muffin ring. see that the pan stands where the water is just
below the boiling point, for rapidly bubbling water breaks the
eggs. when the white begins to set, pour the hot water
gently over the tops of the eggs from a spoon. cook until the
white is firm. slip a griddle cake turner under the egg, lift
it gently, and place it upon a piece of buttered toast which
you have ready on a hot plate, or platter, and remove the ring.
an easier method resembling the poached egg is to break
the egg raw into a small buttered cup or “patty,” standing the
cups in a pan of water just below the boiling point, the pan
being on the top of the stove or in the oven. each egg should
have a sprinkling of salt, and may have a bit of butter, and a
shake of pepper. cover the pan. this process is longer than
the other, and the eggs must be watched to see when the
process is complete.
. scrambled eggs.
as the name denotes, this is a process needing
a quick motion. allow an egg to each person. have
ready
a frying pan heated, a broad bladed knife, and a tablespoonful
of butter, or butter substitute, ready to melt in the pan.
() melt the butter, break the eggs into the pan, without
beating them, and begin to scrape them from the bottom of
the pan with the knife, as fast as you can move your hand.
this is an old-time method, and gives a mixture of white and
yellow color. stop the process when the eggs are softer than
you wish them for serving, as they will stiffen after they are
removed from the fire. sprinkle in salt, before you give
the last scramble, and serve at once.
() beat the eggs, adding a tablespoonful of water for each
egg, and a shake of salt for each, and proceed as in ().
. the omelet.
the novice should see an omelet made, as there
is a “knack” in the motion not to be conveyed by words.
the omelet is a french dish, and is made to perfection by the
french cook. a perfect omelet is rolled or folded over, and is
creamy within and a golden brown without. “omelet pans”
are made for the purpose, but a small frying pan may be used.
the pan should be perfectly smooth. do not attempt to
make an omelet with more than two eggs until you become
expert. this is one method, and others are used by different
french cooks. the first stage makes the whole mass creamy,
the second browns one surface.
() have the pan warm enough to melt two teaspoonfuls of
butter, but not hot. beat two eggs with a fork until they are
creamy but not foamy, and add two teaspoonfuls of water,
with two shakes of salt.
put the mixture into the pan, standing the pan where it
has a medium heat. if over gas, the flame should be low, and
covered with asbestos. proceed as with the scrambled egg,
with great rapidity, and when the mass is creamy, lift the pan,
tip it slightly, and push the whole mass toward the handle end
of the pan. put two teaspoonfuls more of butter in the pan,
and set it where the heat is intense. smooth the mass of egg
over the whole surface of the pan that the omelet may become
brown underneath. shake the pan gently back and forth, lift
the omelet at the edge with a knife to see if the browning is
accomplished, take the pan from the fire, fold or roll the omelet
from the handle end of the pan to the front, and turn it out
upon a hot
plate.
a method easier for the novice is to accomplish the first
stage in a bowl set into a teakettle, beating into the mass as
it thickens a teaspoonful of butter, or a tablespoonful of
cream. when the mixture is evenly creamy, turn it into the
hot buttered pan and proceed as with ().
() light omelet.—this is not a true omelet, but in reality
a soufflé cooked in a frying pan. it is somewhat insipid in
flavor and is not easier to make well than the french omelet.
as commonly served it is apt to be underdone or tough.
with the light omelet, the eggs and whites are separated and
the whites beaten until light and dry. beat the yolks until
creamy, adding water and salt as in (). pour this mixture
over the white, and cut and fold the mass. see page .
pour this into a buttered baking dish and set in a moderate
oven. the oven should not be more than ° f. serve in
the pan.
when gas is used, the soufflé may be set in the oven with
the flame low, and browned for a moment under the flame
turned high.
both of these omelets may be varied by the addition of
chopped parsley or chopped ham, or grated cheese.
laboratory management. when the price of eggs is high, some of
the experiments can be demonstrated by the teacher. eggs should
be used when the price is at its lowest, even if this interferes
with the logical sequence of lessons.
milk is the natural food of the young mammal, and contains all
the foodstuffs in a form easily assimilable. starch is not
present, the carbohydrate being found in the form of lactose, or
milk sugar, a sugar differing somewhat from the sugars found in
vegetables and fruit (see chapter x).
whole milk and the milk products, cream, butter, and cheese, are
all important food materials among the nations of the western
world; and the manufacture of milk products, such as condensed
milk, butter, and cheese, has
developed
large industries. while
the chinese and japanese are two great peoples who have not
utilized milk or any of its products as food for grown people to
any extent, yet we are fully justified in counting these foods
among the necessities. nothing can fully take the place of milk
in the family dietary.
figure  shows how all the foodstuffs are represented in milk.
when milk first comes from the cow the fat is suspended in tiny,
invisible particles throughout the water, giving the milk its
yellow tint, and the fat rises to the top in the form of cream
after a few hours. the protein, sugar, and ash are dissolved in
the water. when milk reaches the stomach, the protein separates
from the water in the form of curd. this change is brought about
by an enzyme (soluble ferment) called rennin, which is present,
along with pepsin, in the gastric juice. curd is also formed by
the souring of milk through the action of bacteria, or by adding
acid directly to the milk. milk should never be gulped down, but
taken in sips, so that only small portions of curd are formed in
the stomach, because these are much easier to digest than large
ones. sometimes milk is soured purposely, as in buttermilk or
zoolak or matzoon, that curds may form and be beaten fine before
it is drunk. this is very easy to digest, because then no large
curds can form. for the same reason, it is often better to take
milk with bread or some other food, or to cook it in some dish.
skim milk is a valuable food, for it has everything found in
whole milk but the fat. we miss the flavor of the fat in
drinking it, hence it is better to use it in pudding or soup or
in cooking cereals where we do not care so much about the milk
flavor. study fig. , comparing the percentages of the
foodstuffs in whole, skim, and buttermilk, and cream. notice
that the skim milk is higher than the whole milk in protein and
sugar, that it has as much ash, and a trace of fat even. it does
not tell us, however,
that
the forms of ash in milk are most
valuable, and that it is richer in calcium than any other food
material. how these foods compare in fuel value is shown in fig.
fig. .—composition of milk and
cream.
fig. .—-calorie portions of
milk and cream. a. fowler, photographer.
no.kindweight of portion,ounces
.cream (.% fat).
.whole milk.
.skim milk.
.buttermilk.
wholesome and clean milk.—at present, the milk supply is one of
our most pressing community problems, showing how closely the
country and the city are united. a case of typhoid fever in one
farm family, not properly cared for, may be the seed of a
serious epidemic in some town. to insure clean milk to the
consumer, and a fair return in money to the producer, is a great
sanitary and commercial problem, not to be solved in a day.
milk is a medium in which bacteria flourish, both the harmless
and the disease producing. typhoid fever and other fatal
diseases may be carried by milk from unclean
barns
and dairies,
and tuberculosis is possible from diseased cows. the cows must
be in good health, and the stable clean. figure  shows a
stable with cement floor and good drainage. the cows must
themselves be clean, and should be curried and washed. the
milkers should have clean clothes and hands, and all receptacles
should be sterilized. the milk must be rapidly cooled (see fig.
), bottled in sterilized bottles, kept cool during
transportation, and delivered as promptly as possible to the
consumer. “certified” milk is produced and handled under the
best conditions, but costs at least  cents a quart. since a
quart of milk is equivalent to a pound of steak or to  eggs,
milk even at  to  cents a quart is more economical than meat
and eggs at ordinary prices. at the usual price of  to  cents
a quart, milk is very economical as compared with other
perishable foods.
fig. .—a modern cow house.
courtesy of the walker-gordon laboratory.
fig. .—milk bottling room.
courtesy of walker-gordon laboratory.
the question of preservation and pasteurization can be treated
here but briefly. preservatives are forbidden by law in most
states. pasteurization is heating at a
temperature
sufficiently
high to kill any disease germs present, but not high enough to
give a cooked taste. this process, while it destroys most of the
bacteria, does not kill the spores of all. the chief arguments
against pasteurization are () that on a commercial scale it is
difficult to really accomplish this, and () that it is easily
used to cover the sale of unclean milk. the argument for it is,
that it is impossible to obtain as yet an ideal supply for a
large city in hot weather, and that pasteurization, if properly
conducted, kills nearly all of the dangerous bacteria and saves
the lives of many babies. clean milk that needs no
pasteurization is our ultimate aim, and we must remember that
milk pasteurized under unknown conditions needs to be kept cold
and treated with even more care than fresh milk, for it “spoils”
quite as easily, only we may not know it because it may not
taste sour.
in the last few years the question of pasteurization
has
been
studied with very great care. it is found best to heat the milk
for  to  minutes at a temperature of ° to ° f. if it
is certain that this method has been used, one need not hesitate
to trust the milk, for the arguments against pasteurization do
not properly apply here.
how to buy.—investigate by question and inspection, if
possible, the available milk supply. be sure to do this in the
country in the summer. always buy bottled milk. where the income
is small, good quality milk should be used for the little
children and invalids, and skim milk purchased for cooking. in
many places skim milk is supplied in bottles by reliable firms.
the usual price for bottled milk in the city is  to  cents,
and this is of good average quality. keep milk cold. if there is
no ice, use an ice substitute (page ), and in very hot weather
pasteurize or scald the milk, cooling afterward as quickly as
possible by placing in cold water and stirring the water.
principles of cookery.—clean, sweet milk is an ideal food,
which requires no cooking. heating milk to ° f. changes its
properties in some way, so that it is not considered an ideal
food for babies’ regular diet. if it must be used, for reasons
of safety, some uncooked food, such as orange juice, should also
be given. this is the reason for pasteurizing milk instead of
boiling it.
heating milk in an open vessel causes some of the protein to
harden into a thin “skin” on the top. this can be prevented by
stirring the milk until it is cool.
. to pasteurize milk.
this cannot be done accurately without
a thermometer. the milk bottle should be placed upon a
rack in a kettle of water, with a clean thermometer inserted
through the cover of the bottle. heat the water slowly,
and watch the thermometer. when it reaches ° f., see that
the water becomes no hotter. set the kettle on a rack
on
the stove top, or use a simmering burner with rack and asbestos
mat. it is difficult to keep the temperature even, but
it should remain at -° f. half an hour. at the end of
half an hour, the bottle should be removed, and cooled as
rapidly as possible in running cold water.
. rennet custard.
 quart milk, two tablespoonfuls of sugar,
a shake of salt, flavoring,  rennet tablet. the flavoring
may be:  teaspoonful vanilla, or a few tablespoonfuls of
orange juice, or the vanilla, plus three or four tablespoonfuls of
cocoa to suit the taste.
to prepare.—this is a process without cooking. rennet
tablets are made from the stomach of the calf, and contain the
digestive enzyme, rennin, which results in the solidifying of the
curd of the milk. rennet custard has passed the first stage of
milk digestion.
put all the flavoring substances into the milk, and warm it
slightly, not more than ° f. the cocoa when used should
be “dissolved” in a small amount of hot water. dissolve
the rennet in a tablespoonful of cold water, and stir this very
thoroughly into the milk. pour the milk into the cups in which
the custard will be served, and set the cups in a warm but not
hot place. a good method is to place them in a pan of warm
water (° f.). the milk becomes firm in a half hour or an
hour, and as soon as it is set, should be put in the ice box, otherwise
the process continues and the custard becomes watery
as the curd shrinks and forces out the whey. serve very cold
with fruit on the top, or whipped cream with the cocoa flavoring;
or put grated nutmeg or powdered cinnamon on the top.
this is a simple and delicious dessert, and one of the most wholesome.
for children it should be flavored with fruit juice or
vanilla rather than with cocoa.
. uses of sour milk.
do not throw away any sour milk that is
clean and not stale. milk that has soured enough to set, is a
delicious dessert, with cream and sugar. the acid is very pleasant,
being the same as that of buttermilk. sour milk is better for
griddlecakes and muffins than sweet milk. (see chapter xi.)
another excellent use for sour milk is to make it into cottage
cheese. (see below.)
matzoon and other similar preparations are essentially soured milks,
prepared under controlled conditions. these preparations are the common
form of milk in certain parts of the orient, where milk is never used
sweet.
kumyss is milk slightly soured and fermented with one species of yeast.
this is a russian method. these preparations are excellent for invalids
and exhausted people, for they can sometimes be assimilated because of the
fine curds when sweet milk cannot.
condensed milk is a practical method of preserving milk. the milk is
evaporated under pressure at a high temperature in apparatus constructed
for the purpose. cane sugar or glucose is sometimes added. a new patent
process condenses the milk at low temperature, preserving it for a short
period, as compared with the condensed milk in tins, but it keeps well for
several days, and bears transportation. condensed milk may be used in
cooking, when clean fresh milk is not available. the unsweetened kinds are
most useful, but, like pasteurized milk, must be treated with care after
the cans are opened.
cheese.—cheese is made from the curd of milk, and contains the most
nutritive parts of the milk in highly concentrated form. in the process of
manufacture, the milk is first curdled by rennet, and the whey strained
out. the curds after preliminary treatment, varying according to the style
of cheese to be made, are finally pressed together very slowly in a cheese
press, which is screwed down more tightly as the cheese becomes dryer. the
cheeses are then covered with cheesecloth and “ripened” slowly, the
ripening process giving characteristic consistency and flavor. this
ripening is due to the action of bacteria and molds. (see page .)
foreign varieties of cheese, made originally in some one locality, have
marked colors, quality, and flavors, as
brie,
camembert, roquefort, and
the swiss cheeses. parmesan is an italian cheese, excellent with macaroni
and spaghetti.
american cheeses vary in color, in strength of flavor, in creaminess,
and in degree of hardness. much the greater part is, however, of the
general type known as “american cheddar” or “standard factory” cheese.
club cheese is an american cheese of good quality, put up in small jars.
it is a soft cheese, excellent to serve with crackers, but is too
expensive for common use.
cottage cheese is a home product made from sour milk, and used at once.
composition and nutritive value.—cheese is high in protein, and usually
in fat. (see fig. .) note the small amount of water, which makes cheese
a very concentrated food. the protein content makes it a meat substitute,
for those with whom cheese does not disagree. being a dense as well as
concentrated form of food,
it
should be eaten in small quantities, and in
combination with other food materials in such a way that it will become
finely divided, or it will not be easily digested. the ash content is
high, the most valuable of the ash constituents of the milk being retained
in the cheese.
the cost of cheese.—the foreign cheeses are expensive, but american
cheeses may be classed among the moderate priced foods and they compare
favorably with other protein foods.
cheese costs more than beans, and less than most cuts of meat. a good
american cheese costs about twenty-five cents per pound. taking account of
composition as well as cost per pound, we find that a given amount of
money buys about twice as much food value when spent for cheese as it
would if spent for beef. see fig. .
fig. .—-calorie
portions of cheese. a. fowler, photographer.
no.kindweight of portion,ounces
.swiss.
.cream.
.american.
.roquefort.
.parmesan.
.cottage.
care of cheese in the pantry.—cheese should be kept dry and covered, that
its odor may not be noticeable. soft cheese should be kept in the ice box.
the receptacle for cheese should be thoroughly sterilized before each new
purchase is put away.
. uncooked cheese.—serve a cream cheese with a salad of lettuce,
and the imported cheeses with crackers and fruit for
dessert. american cheese may be thinly sliced and used in
sandwiches. a small piece of cheese with apple pie or pudding
is an old-fashioned combination that is always agreeable, but
sometimes difficult of digestion.
. cottage cheese.—use sour milk that has set. other ingredients:
salt to taste, cayenne pepper or paprika, if liked.
quality and flavor are improved by the addition of a tablespoonful
of butter or two tablespoonfuls of cream to a pint of
the curd, but these are not necessary.
warm the milk slowly, until the whey begins to separate
from the curd. if this process is continued too long, and
the
milk becomes hot, the curd will be tough. place a piece of
cheesecloth over a bowl, pour in the curds and whey, and lift
the cloth carefully, allowing the whey to run through. squeeze
out the remaining whey. add the seasoning and other ingredients
to the curd, shape in balls, and chill before serving. it
is delicious served with lettuce and dressing as a salad, or with
gingerbread for dessert at luncheon or supper.
principles of cooking cheese.—the fat in the cheese is melted by
heat. the protein is toughened by a high temperature, therefore
a low temperature process should be used.
. cheese cooked with other food materials.—a creamy cheese
should be selected for cooking. cheese may be grated and
sprinkled on the top of potato on the half shell, or any
other mashed potato; or it may be sliced and placed with each
layer in escalloped potato. its use is common with macaroni;
and a dish of macaroni with milk and cheese is a good meat
substitute, and may be used as the main dish of a luncheon or
simple dinner. those to whom cheese is agreeable will find
many places for its use. its flavor harmonizes with celery and
with tomato. the italians serve grated parmesan cheese with
soup, and with spaghetti that has a tomato sauce.
. cheese crackers.—select crackers of a firm quality that will
not crumble or flake easily, and of a small size. spread very
thinly with soft butter, put the crackers in a pan, and
sprinkle grated cheese upon each one. set the pan in a moderate
oven until the cheese is melted. a sprinkling of paprika
may be used. serve with lettuce, celery, or other green salad.
. compare the composition of eggs, milk, and cheese.
. how may an egg which has been kept too long in cold storage be
detected?
. what is the effect of the boiling temperature of water upon an egg?
. compare a hard- and a soft-cooked egg for digestibility.
. what are the dangers from unclean milk?
. how may the milk supply be safeguarded?
. why is cheese a meat substitute?
. what caution should we exercise in using it?
. what precaution must we take in cooking cheese?
fats are composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, but have much more
carbon than the other kinds of foodstuffs. notice in fig.  that olive
oil and lard are pure fats; the other fat foods containing water, protein,
and ash. fat is available in various forms, with differing flavors and a
wide range of prices. to many people it is unpalatable in some of its
cheapest forms; yet its use is important, and some kind should be included
in the diet. fluid and emulsified fats are the most easily digested, hence
olive oil, cream, and egg yolk are highly desirable. bacon and butter
belong nearly in the same class. a vigorous man at hard labor can digest
fat of any kind without difficulty, and needs it because it gives so much
fuel in proportion to its bulk.
fat tends to retard gastric digestion, and delicate persons must be
careful about taking with it other foods which are hard to digest, or
taking it in the form of fried foods, pastries, rich cakes, and sauces.
persons with delicate appetite, who lose weight because they do not get
enough fuel, may be benefited by taking a little more fat in the diet,
especially if they do not digest starch and sugar readily, but a very
large amount (over  or  ounces a day) will not be perfectly digested.
fat as a food.—beef fat, as it occurs with lean, is a digestible fat.
if thoroughly browned in the cooking process, it is most palatable, and
the taste for it should be cultivated. in gravy, it may be used with
potato, instead of butter. fat tried out from suet,
may
be used in place
of butter as an ingredient in some puddings, and even in batter mixtures.
it may also be used with vegetables when the price of butter is
prohibitive. see fig. .
fig. .—composition of fat foods.
fig. .—-calorie
portions of fat foods.a. fowler, photographer.
no.kindweight of portionounces
.cream (extra rich, % fat).
.olive oil.
.butter.
.oleomargarine.
.suet.
.bacon.
bacon is a digestible and agreeable form of fat, but it is not so cheap
as beef fat, though cheaper than butter.
fat pork is lower in price than bacon, and can be assimilated by
vigorous people, especially those living out of doors.
cream is one of the most delicious fatty food materials, and is
digestible, but ranks with butter and bacon as to cost. while it is not a
cheap food, it is not such an extravagance when moderately used as some
people suppose, who have not worked out the problem. usually the most
economical source of cream is to take it from the top of the bottle of
milk. the remaining partially skimmed milk may be used at table or in
cooking or for making cottage cheese.
butter is a digestible fat, ranking at present among the more expensive
food materials.
watchfulness is necessary with both cream and milk that cleanliness and
quality may be insured.
butter substitutes.—these are made from beef fat and other edible fats
and oils, and are much less expensive than butter. they may be used in
cooking with good result. the usual trade names are butterine, or
oleomargarine, or some word similar to these. oleomargarine has the same
food value as butter at lower cost, but lacks fine flavor.
olive or sweet oil.—the fat content of olive oil is one hundred per
cent, its fuel value being equal to that of lard. see fig. . it is made
in italy, france, spain, and california, the oils from the different
countries differing somewhat in flavor. the cheaper grades are sometimes
adulterated with corn oil or cottonseed oil, which have the same food
value but should, of course, be sold under their own names and not at
olive oil prices. an american firm is now manufacturing olive oil in
spain; this and the california olive oil are of high grade. italian oil by
the gallon is of good quality, and usually somewhat less expensive than
the french. it is a costly food material, but valuable in the dietary.
never buy it in small bottles, as this adds greatly to the cost. the most
economical method is to purchase by the gallon in a tin can. if kept cool,
it will not deteriorate except very slowly. always wipe off the mouth of
the bottle or can before pouring out the oil.
fat as a cooking medium.—fat is necessary for the sauté, and for deep fat
frying. for deep fat frying several preparations are made from cottonseed
oil that are agreeable to use and of moderate price.
lard has been the most commonly used, but many people object to the
flavor. beef drippings should be saved and kept cool in covered jelly
glasses. these drippings are useful for browning vegetables, meatballs,
and in pan-broiling if a small amount of additional fat is necessary.
when deep fat frying is used, great pains must be taken to see that the
fat is sufficiently hot in order that the food material may not soak fat,
and the cooked food must be kept hot when the fat is draining off on
absorptive paper. the best fats for this purpose are the vegetable oils.
the refined cottonseed oils now on the market are excellent. for details
of use see page . keep a box of sand to pour into it, if the kettle of
fat takes fire. never pour water into blazing fat.
principles of cooking.
fat melts at a low temperature.
at about ° f. it begins to smoke.
at a higher temperature, a chemical change takes place, and the
fat finally “burns,” as the hydrogen and oxygen pass off.
it is emulsified by mixing with a substance like egg.
. to whip cream.—chill the cream, and set it in a bowl of ice
water, or chipped ice. if the cream is warm, the beating will
churn the cream to butter.
() for a fine, close-whipped cream use a dover egg beater.
() for a lighter whipped cream, use a wire beater.
. to mold butter.—a pair of wooden butter pats is necessary
for this. dip these first into hot water, then into cold. cut
off a square piece of butter, enough for one person, make it
flat or round with two knives, and then roll it into shape
between the butter pats. chill, and serve in a dish on
ice;
or give one to each person on a butter plate, just at the last
moment before serving the meal. never serve soft butter.
. to cook bacon.—bacon has alternate layers of fat and lean,
but it is the fat that has chief consideration in the cooking
process. the aim is to brown and crisp the fat without
burning it and without causing a volume of smoke in the
kitchen. make ready a frying pan, and have at hand a jar
for holding fat standing on a plate. cut the bacon in thin
slices with a sharp knife. heat the pan, and put in the bacon.
the fat will begin to “try out” at the melting point. pour
this melted fat into the jar. turn the pieces of bacon with a fork.
if the smoke is rising in volumes the pan is too hot. the
novice should not try this experiment for the first time by herself.
the fat may even burst into flame if the pan is too hot.
when the bacon is sufficiently cooked to become crisp on cooling,
it is ready to serve, by itself, with toast, or with eggs.
the making of sauces and gravies.—many sauces and gravies are made from a
fat, mixed with a starchy substance, the two mingled with a liquid. the
fat gives flavor and nutriment, the starch is used for thickening, the
liquid also gives flavor. you are now familiar with the cooking of fat and
starch, and can readily understand that the combination of all these
ingredients is not an easy matter. the fat will float upon the top of the
liquid unless the right amount of starch or flour is used, and the flour
will have a tendency to lump. there are several good methods in use. the
method given for your experiment is one of the simplest, because it uses
only a few utensils, and gives uniformly good results. it requires no more
watchfulness than the other methods.
these sauces and gravies are not foods for little children and invalids.
. foundation recipe for sauces.
proportions.
  () thin sauce (for milk toast)
       tablespoonful of fat,  of flour, ⁄ pint
liquid.
  or () medium sauce (for vegetables).
       tablespoonfuls of fat,  of flour, ⁄ pint liquid.
  or () thicker sauce, also for vegetables, meats, fish, and macaroni.
       tablespoonfuls of fat,  of flour, ⁄ pint liquid.
        salt is used to taste.
method.—melt the fat in a saucepan. pour in the flour,
all at once, and stir the flour and fat together, until the mass
thickens slightly. pour in all the liquid at once, cold. set
the saucepan where the heat is moderate.
stir steadily with a wooden spoon until the mixture thickens.
. a white sauce is made with butter, and milk the liquid. stop
the cooking just short of the boiling point.
. a tomato sauce is made with butter or beef fat, strained tomato
juice the liquid. cook a piece of onion, a sprig of parsley,
or a small portion of dried herbs, and a clove with the tomato
before straining, if these flavors are liked.
. a brown sauce or meat gravy may be made in the same way, using
beef fat, and (as the liquid) water that has been poured into
the pan in which the meat is cooked. when you are familiar
with cooking there is an easier way for thickened meat gravies,
as follows:
pour off some of the fat from the meat pan. set the pan
upon the stove and stir in the flour,—about two tablespoonfuls
for the ordinary roasting pan. when the flour is thoroughly
mixed in, add about a pint of water, cold or warm, and stir
again. pour this mixture through a strainer. with practice
you can make an excellent gravy in this way. it requires
judgment to proportion the flour and liquid to the material
in the pan.
the sugars
sugars are of common occurrence in the vegetable world in the fruits and
juices of many plants. pure grape juice may contain as high as  per cent
of glucose though usually it is not so concentrated. glucose is also found
in considerable amount in sweet corn and onions. it is not so sweet
as
cane sugar (sucrose). fructose is one of the sweetest of sugars, and
helps to give honey its great sweetness.
lactose or milk sugar is found chiefly in milk. it is the least sweet of
all the sugars. if there were as much cane sugar in milk, we should soon
grow tired of it because it would be too sweet. it is sometimes added to
milk to make its fuel value higher, especially in case the milk has been
diluted, as in the diet of babies and invalids.
maltose or malt sugar is formed from starch in germinating seeds.
sucrose or cane sugar is most commonly manufactured from sugar cane and
sugar beets. to a much smaller extent it is made commercially from the
sugar maple, sorghum cane, and sugar palm, and it is found in considerable
amount in some common fruits and vegetables.
its manufacture forms a great industry, and its consumption is enormous,
some ten million tons coming into commerce annually, and this does not
represent the total consumption.
figure  shows the composition of several common sugars. notice that the
granulated sugar is a pure foodstuff, being  per cent carbohydrate,
while all the others contain traces of protein, ash, and water. sugar is a
fuel food, exclusively, like olive oil and other pure fats.
fig. .—composition of sugars.
sugar is a valuable food material, but should not be used in excess; the
tendency in the united states is rather toward an excessive use of sugar.
it is liable to cause an acid fermentation in digestion, when taken in
large amounts, and is sure to irritate the stomach. it should be well
diluted by other foods. the amount that may be eaten daily varies for most
people from two ounces for young children to four ounces for adults, but
many people cannot eat these amounts without more or less irritation of
the stomach. it is a common practice to oversweeten cakes and desserts,
the
sweetness
of the sugar often disguising other agreeable flavors. the
liking for sweets should be well under control, for the eating of too much
sugar is a habit easy to form, and one which crowds out other valuable
foods.
cane sugar is sold both brown and white, and is manufactured in
powdered, granulated, and solid form, the latter usually cut in cubes or
dominoes.
the canes are first crushed, the juices passing from the machine being of
a rather dark greenish color. this juice is first clarified and filtered,
and then boiled down in order to crystallize the sugar, the liquid sirup
forming molasses. in the older methods the sirup was boiled in open pans,
and the crystals filtered from the molasses by a slow process. in the
modern process the sirup is boiled at a low temperature in vacuum pans,
and the sugar is separated from the molasses by a centrifugal machine,
built on the same principle as a cream separator. the principles of beet
sugar manufacture are essentially the same, with some differences in
detail.
the molasses manufactured in the older method is richer in cane sugar
and is a better table molasses than the new process molasses, the latter
being used chiefly for the manufacture of alcohol. molasses is either dark
or light, the darker having a stronger flavor especially suited to
gingerbread and indian meal pudding. molasses comes in the bulk, and may
be slightly acid; or in cans, in which case no acid fermentation should
have taken place. where canned molasses is used in a batter, it is
sometimes necessary to use baking powder instead of soda. “new orleans” is
a light-colored molasses, “porto rico” dark.
brown sugar has not passed through the refining processes necessary to the
whitening of the sugar. it is softer than the granulated white, has a
decided brownish color and a rich flavor.
in buying sugar it is economy to purchase granulated in large
quantities, a fraction of a cent per pound being saved in this way. the
cut sugar comes in convenient boxes, which keep the product clean.
powdered sugar may be bought in small quantities, three or five pounds,
since it is not used so much in cooking as the granulated.
candy, homemade and purchased.—candy, if not eaten between meals, is an
allowable form of sugar. the best time for eating it is at the end of a
meal, one or two pieces. even in this case, however, it would be better
for the body if the craving for sweet were satisfied by fruit rather than
candy.
candy made at home costs less than high grade commercial candy, even
counting in the labor. it is superior to cheap grade candy, which may even
contain poisonous coloring matter. it is a pleasure to make it at times,
and it is always a pleasing gift at the holiday season.
principles of cooking.
a sirup is formed by cooking sugar with water.
the sirup thickens if process is prolonged and water evaporates.
cane sugar is changed to glucose and fructose by boiling with an acid.
heated without additional water, the sugar is partially decomposed, giving off water and becoming brown in color. this is “caramel,” used for coloring, and flavoring.
the final stage of heating leaves pure carbon.
. peanut brittle.
ingredients.
sugarcups
salt⁄teaspoonful
peanutsquart
method.—shell the peanuts and chop them in small pieces.
put the sugar in a saucepan and place over a moderate fire.
stir from the bottom until the sugar is entirely melted and of
a
rich brown color. the sugar will lump badly at first, but these
lumps will entirely melt in time. turn the chopped peanuts
and salt into the sirup and stir together and immediately
turn out on a buttered pan. when cold, break into pieces.
. fudge.
ingredients.
sugarcups
cream of tartar⁄teaspoonful
chocolatesquares
milk or watercup
vanillateaspoonful
method.—mix the first four ingredients and place over a
hot fire. stir steadily until the mixture begins to boil. stir
occasionally after this until, when half a teaspoonful is dropped
into cold water, it may be rolled to a soft ball with the fingers.
set the saucepan in a cool place and leave until it becomes
just lukewarm. add the vanilla and stir the mixture until it
becomes thick and seems very slightly granular. pour it into
a buttered tin and as soon as possible cut into squares. the
exact point at which to remove the fudge from the fire and
again at which to cease stirring and pour into the pan is a
matter which only practice can teach.
. penocha.
ingredients.
brown sugarcups
buttertablespoonfuls
milk, cream, or watercup
cream of tartar⁄teaspoon or less
vanillateaspoon
method.—as with recipe . the very dark brown sugar
contains some acid and therefore less cream of tartar may
be used. chopped nuts may be added with the vanilla to
both fudge and penocha.
. fondant for french creams.
ingredients.
sugarcups
cream of tartar⁄teaspoonful
boiling water⁄cup
method.—mix the sugar and cream of tartar. add the
boiling water and place over a moderate fire, stirring slowly
and steadily until the sugar is dissolved. do not stir after
the mixture begins to boil, but let it boil slowly until the
sirup will form a soft ball in cold water. turn out on a platter
without scraping the saucepan. the success of the fondant
depends upon the complete changing of the cane sugar into
fructose and glucose, the crystals of the latter being much finer
than those of cane sugar. stirring the mixture while it boils or
before it has cooled sufficiently will result in the formation of
cane sugar crystals, and the fondant will be harsh and rough.
when the fondant is barely lukewarm begin to stir it with
long steady strokes and continue this until the mixture becomes
creamy and thick and begins to break away from the sides of
the dish and the spoon. then gather it all together into a
round mass and knead like bread until it becomes pliable. it
may then be wrapped in oiled paper or put into a covered
bowl or fruit jar and kept until wanted.
fondant is the foundation for all bonbons and may be made
up into a great variety of shapes and with many flavors. it
may be mixed with chopped candied fruits or nuts or coated
with chocolate.
laboratory management.—the holiday time is the natural season for the
candy-making lesson. it is not worth while to spend much time on this
topic, at the sacrifice of others.
. what is meant by a fuel food?
. why should fat be taken daily?
. compare the cost of different kinds of fat.
. why is beef fat less expensive than butter?
. how is fat mixed with other ingredients in a sauce?
. what is the chief point to consider in the cookery of fat?
. what is the difference between cane sugar and honey?
. compare the cost of a pound of homemade candy with that of good quality
bought at a shop.
. how is fat changed in digestion?
. how is sugar changed in digestion?
wheat flour is the important material in this group, but muffins and
biscuit may be varied by the use of corn meal, rye, and graham flour, and
cooked cereals may also be utilized. the ingredients are flour, salt, a
liquid, sometimes a fat, eggs, and sugar. the flavorings are spices,
essences, fruit juice, dried fruits, nuts, chocolate. the mixture must be
smooth, but it is also necessary to make it porous or “light.” this is
accomplished by means of leavening agents, “to leaven” meaning “to make
light.”
leavening agents.—the batter, or dough, is leavened by introducing into
it air or a gas that expands when heated in the oven, thus making the
whole more porous and larger in bulk.
air.—this is introduced into the batter by beating, or by
beating air into the white of egg and stirring the beaten white
into the batter.
steam.—the water in the batter turns to steam in the oven,
and as it expands it assists in the leavening of the mass. see
popovers.
carbon dioxide gas.—this is introduced in three ways.
() by using an acid with a carbonate.
() by yeast fermentation.
() by machinery.
yeast fermentation is studied in the chapter on bread making
(chapter xii), and the mechanical method is a commercial process
exclusively. only the first method will be treated in this
chapter.
when an acid and any alkaline carbonate are dissolved
together,
a chemical action takes place, a gas is given off (carbon
dioxide) and another substance is formed that is neutral, being
neither acid nor alkaline, and known as a “salt.” in selecting
the two substances we must bear in mind this neutral substance
that remains in the batter and insure its harmlessness.
the lactic acid of sour milk is probably the earliest used,
being a domestic product. the lactic acid is neutralized by
bicarbonate of sodium, the latter being also called “baking
soda.” the resulting salt is harmless.
acid molasses with soda is another old-fashioned method. here
the acid is developed by the fermentation of the molasses.
cream of tartar (acid potassium tartrate), obtained from
crystals deposited in wine vats, came into use later,
neutralized by bicarbonate of soda, two parts of cream of tartar
to one of soda.
baking powder.—the first baking powders were made of cream of
tartar and bicarbonate of soda, mixed with a starch, to prevent
the slight chemical action which would cause the powder to lose
strength; and these two substances are now used in the best
baking powders. the resulting salt is the rochelle salt of
medicine.
an acid phosphate is sometimes used with soda, and this gives
a harmless neutral substance.
cheaper acids have sometimes been used, especially alum. it is
best not to use an alum powder. select a standard kind, avoiding
those that offer prizes for a certain number of boxes purchased.
even if these latter do not contain alum, there is probably an
excess of starch or flour.
the advantage of baking powder is in the accuracy of the
proportions of the two substances by weight. even though the
measuring of the cream of tartar and soda separately is
accurate, the proportions may not be correct. there is no great
advantage in homemade baking powder. it costs almost as much as
the manufactured, and is not as perfect a product.
the proportions of the main ingredients.—attempts are made to define the
degrees of stiffness of batters and doughs, but these distinctions are not
very accurate. a “pour batter” is liquid enough to pour, and a “dough
batter” soft enough to drop from a spoon; a “soft dough” is next in grade,
and “dough” is the stiffest of all.
to understand proportioning the ingredients, the nature of the ingredients
when heated must be taken into account. butter and other fats melt when
heated, and behave like a liquid in the mixture. therefore, when there is
a very large amount of butter, no other wetting is necessary, as in pound
cake. we may make a scale, with a thin popover mixture at one extreme,
with no butter in it, and the stiff pound cake at the other, with butter
the only liquid (except the flavoring). between these two are the mixtures
of medium stiffness, with both butter and liquid. this general rule may be
given: as the quantity of butter is increased, the batter must increase in
stiffness, and there must be either less liquid or more flour.
a beaten egg looks like a liquid and behaves so during the mixing, but in
the oven it stiffens. for this reason we can make a sponge cake with many
eggs and no liquid in the mixing, and use no other leavening agent than
the air beaten into the egg.
one old-fashioned rule for sponge cake reads: take the weight of the eggs
in sugar and half their weight in flour, with the juice and rind of a
lemon for ten eggs. such a rule was adapted to the days when eggs were
cheap. we should now use fewer eggs in sponge cake, and this means that
water and baking powder must replace the eggs omitted.
methods of mixing.—() for popovers, griddlecakes, muffins,
and plain cake.
sift together the dry ingredients.
beat the eggs, without separating the yolk and white, and stir
the eggs and milk together.
pour the liquid gradually into the flour, first stirring, then
beating.
melt the butter or other shortening, and beat it into the
batter.
() biscuits and shortcakes.
sift together the dry ingredients.
cut in or chop in the butter.
add the wetting slowly.
() a richer, fine-grained butter cake.
sift together the dry ingredients.
cream the butter, and beat in the sugar.
beat the whites and yolks of the eggs separately.
beat the yolks into the creamed butter and sugar.
add the flour and milk alternately; that is, a quarter or third
of the flour, then a portion of the milk, and so on. first stir,
then beat vigorously.
fold in the beaten whites lightly and do not beat the mixture
again.
() sponge cake.
if baking powder is used, sift with the flour.
beat the whites and yolks of the eggs separately.
beat the sugar into the yolks, and add the liquid and flavoring.
add the flour and beaten whites in alternate portions, dividing
both into quarters or thirds.
baking.—this is a science and an art that requires much practice. do not
be discouraged if you do not succeed at first.
concerning the utensils for baking, see chapter ii. the cups or pans are
prepared by warming and greasing. use a bit of soft paper or a brush for
greasing the pan and ordinarily an inexpensive fat, reserving butter for
delicate cake. flour sprinkled on a pan is sufficient for biscuit and
cookies. line a pan for loaf cake with white paper, and grease the paper.
see that the oven is ready before the mixing begins. we shall not be able
to bake accurately until our ovens are equipped with thermometers. in the
meantime we must use some simple oven test. the indicators on the doors of
some ovens are a guide, although they are not really accurate according to
the scale of the thermometer. a glass door is also a convenience.
a loaf should be baked at a lower temperature than a biscuit or muffin.
why?
for loaves, ° f. test by the hand, counting fifteen slowly, fifteen
seconds. a piece of white paper will become a delicate brown in five
minutes.
for biscuits, muffins, and small cakes, ° to ° f.—test by the
hand, a count of ten. a piece of paper becomes a deeper golden brown in
five minutes.
any mixture containing baking powder may stand some little time before it
is put in the oven, provided it is kept cold. the action of the baking
powder is not immediate, and is very slight at a low temperature.
the stages of the baking are first, the rising; second, the crusting over;
third, the baking of the interior; and last, a shrinkage of the whole.
many ovens bake unevenly, and pans must be shifted. this should be done
with care and not before the third stage of the baking. it is often well
to cool off the oven the latter part of the time. an oven that is too hot
may be cooled by a pan of water. paper may be laid over the top of the
cake if the browning has been too rapid. these are all makeshifts, and
indicate a poor oven, or poor management of the fire. do not look into the
oven for the first ten minutes of baking, and always close the oven door
gently.
when we are privileged to have electric ovens, with glass doors, and an
accurate thermometer, baking will be an easy and accurate process.
a. experiments with baking powder.
. dissolve half a teaspoonful of baking powder in two
tablespoonfuls of water and heat in a test tube, or saucepan,
over a flame; notice the effervescence when the bubbling is at
its
height,
and hold a lighted match in the mouth of the tube.
this is a simple test for carbon dioxide.
. dissolve  teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar in ⁄ cup water
in a glass.
dissolve  teaspoonful of bicarbonate of soda in ⁄ cup water
in a glass.
taste both of these.
test both with litmus paper, noting the change of color. there
are several vegetable coloring matters that change color in this
way, in the presence of an acid or an alkaline substance.
turn the two solutions together, and test with both blue and
pink litmus paper, after the solution has stood for several
minutes. what results?
taste this mixed solution to see if you can detect any
difference.
to prove that there is a substance still left, evaporate the
water.
. a pretty form of this experiment is to use, instead of
litmus, the water in which red cabbage has previously been
boiled and which therefore contains some of the coloring matter
of the cabbage. the changes in color are very striking, and
prove conclusively that neither the cream of tartar nor the soda
remains such.
b. oven experiments.
if one oven in the school kitchen can be equipped with a
chemical thermometer inserted in the oven, the following
experiments are helpful.
. let each pupil test the oven by feeling, when it has reached
. place pieces of white paper, one for each pupil, in the oven
for five minutes at the various temperatures. these may be
pasted in the notebook for future reference.
. popovers, puffovers, or mahogany cakes.
ingredients for .
flourpint
milkpint
eggs
salt⁄teaspoonful
some rules give two eggs only.
for baking, heavy earthen cups, hot and greased.
method of mixing is no.
special points.—the liquid must be poured very slowly into
the flour to prevent lumping. a large dover egg beater is
convenient for beating out lumps, if any occur.
the leavening of the popover is effected by steam, and it
is not necessary therefore to spend time and strength in the
long beating sometimes recommended. this has been conclusively
proved by experiment. neither is it necessary to
put the batter into the oven immediately, as sometimes directed.
it may stand all day or even over night.
pour the batter in the hot cups, having each cup two thirds
full. the baking of the popovers is unique, in that they should
be put into an intensely hot oven for the first stage of the baking—as
hot as ° f., or even more—then the oven must be
cooled. this first stage crusts the top; then the expansive
force of the steam pushes up the top; and the muffin “pops” or
“puffs” over. the more moderate heat cooks the sides and
the bottom, and makes an agreeable crust. the perfect puffover
is hollow. three quarters of an hour is the average time
of baking. if at the end of that time the oven door is set ajar,
and the popovers allowed to remain longer, they are improved,
coming from the oven stiff and crisp with a rich brown color,
rather than soft and underdone. in an old family cookbook,
one recipe, sixty years old, calls popovers “mahogany cakes.”
they may be eaten as a muffin, or served with a pudding
sauce as a dessert.
. plain muffins.
ingredients for .
flourpint
baking powderteaspoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
eggsor 
milk⁄cup
butter, or butter substitutetablespoonful
sugar, if desiredtablespoonful
for baking, greased muffin pan. bake about half an hour.
method of mixing is no. .
this recipe may be varied in many ways.
(a) use ⁄ cup cooked cereal in place of an equal quantity
of flour. will you change the amount of
wetting?
(b) one cup fine white corn meal, or ⁄ cup yellow meal in
place of equal quantities of flour. corn meal absorbs
more water than white flour.
what change in the wetting?
the oven should be the temperature for bread, and the
baking at least ⁄ of an hour.
(c) one cup graham or rye meal in place of an equal
quantity of flour.
. baking-powder biscuit.
ingredients.
flourpint
baking powderteaspoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
butter, or butter substitute or tablespoonfuls
milkscant cup
for shaping, molding board, rolling pin, and biscuit cutter.
for baking, an iron sheet or pan sprinkled with flour. oven
about ° f., a ten-second test, or golden brown paper.
bake twenty minutes to half an hour.
method of mixing is no. .
to shape. dust the board with flour, turn out the dough,
dredge with flour, pat into a firm mass, and then pat or lightly
roll out to ⁄ inch thickness. cut out with a cutter dipped in
flour. (a small glass or the top of a round tin can may be used.)
variations.—add  egg. this makes a delicious biscuit.
sprinkle the top with granulated sugar, and spice. dried
currants washed, and dredged with flour, may be laid on the top.
increase the butter to two or three tablespoonfuls, and decrease
the wetting and the mixture becomes shortcake. this
is the mixture to use for the true strawberry shortcake. many
other fruits may be used, both uncooked and cooked.
. sour milk griddlecakes.
ingredients.
flour⁄cups
salt⁄teaspoonful
melted buttertablespoonfuls
sour milkcups
soda⁄teaspoonfuls
egg
method.—mix dry ingredients. add sour milk, egg well
beaten, and melted butter in order given. beat thoroughly.
drop by spoonfuls on a greased griddle and let cook until the
edges are cooked and the cake full of bubbles. turn with a
cake turner or spatula knife and cook on the other side. serve
with butter and sirup or scraped maple sugar.
. sweet milk griddlecakes.
ingredients.
flourcups
baking powderteaspoonfuls
saltteaspoonful
sugar⁄cup
milkcups
egg
melted buttertablespoonfuls
method.—mix dry ingredients. beat egg and mix with it
the milk. pour liquid ingredients into the dry ingredients and
stir altogether until smooth. add the melted butter and cook
the cakes the same as with sour milk griddlecakes.
. cookies.—cookies may be plain, or rich in butter; crisp
and thin, or soft and thick. they may be sweetened with
sugar, or molasses, and spiced in various ways. it would be
an interesting exercise to tabulate all the possible forms of
cookies.
ingredients.
buttercup
sugar⁄cups
eggs
milktablespoonfuls
flourabout  cups
baking powderteaspoonful
salt⁄teaspoonfuls
the flavoring may be two teaspoonfuls of vanilla, or lemon
essence, one or two tablespoonfuls of ground spice, or caraway
seeds.
for baking, a floured iron sheet or flat pan. temperature
° f., or even more. the baking requires from  to 
minutes, depending on the thickness of the cooky.
fig. .—materials and utensils for
fancy cookies. courtesy of miss anna m. barrows.
the method of mixing is no. . notice that this is a stiff
dough. the amount of flour depends somewhat upon the expertness
of the cooky maker. the flour used in rolling out
must be accounted for, as the expert can manage a softer
dough than the novice. mix the baking powder and salt with
one cup of the flour.
shaping the cookies.—figure  shows you the apparatus.
the dough is turned out upon the floured board, gently rolled
out to a quarter of an inch, cut and placed in a floured pan; or
cut off a small piece, roll in the flour, until it forms a ball, set
the ball in the pan, and pat it down to a round. this may seem
to take longer, but it is easier, and there is no board to clean
afterward.
a plainer cooky is made with ⁄ cup butter, and ⁄ cup water
or milk, with somewhat more flour.
. butter cake.—a foundation recipe. learn to make one cake
well, and vary it by changing the forms and flavors.
ingredients.
butter⁄cup
sugarcup
eggs
milk⁄cup
flour⁄cup
baking powder⁄teaspoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
the flavoring may be  teaspoonful of vanilla or lemon
essence, or ⁄ teaspoonful of almond, or two teaspoonfuls of
spices. raisins, ⁄ cup, citron ⁄ lb., nuts, ⁄ cup. the rind
of ⁄ orange is delicious with the vanilla flavor. with the vanilla
use  tablespoonfuls of cocoa, for a chocolate flavor.
to make a plainer cake, omit one egg, use ⁄ cup butter, and
⁄ cup of milk.
if you use ⁄ cup butter, making a richer cake, what other
changes should be made?
bake in deep or shallow pan, jelly cake tins, or small tin cups.
the mixing is method .
as layer cake, it may be used with a variety of fillings and
icings,—jelly, cream filling, soft icing with nuts, raisins, or
dates.
a chocolate filling.—one half cup milk,  ounces unsweetened
chocolate,  cup of sugar, yolk of one egg,  teaspoonful
vanilla extract. break up the chocolate, melt it in a
bowl over hot water or in a double boiler, with the sugar and the
milk. when the mixture is smooth add the beaten yolk, cook
for one or two minutes, add the vanilla, and remove from the fire.
fig. .—a loaf of sponge cake.
courtesy of dept. of foods and cookery, teachers college.
. sponge cake.—the old-time sponge cake is given on page .
sponge cakes should be baked in a very moderate oven, below
° f., the bread temperature. (see fig. .)
. hot water sponge cake.
ingredients.
eggs
sugarcup
hot water or milk⁄cup
flourcup
baking powder⁄teaspoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
lemon or⁄teaspoonful
vanilla extract⁄teaspoonful
method.—separate eggs and beat yolks and whites thoroughly.
mix and sift the dry ingredients. add the sugar
gradually to beaten yolks alternately with water until well
blended. next add the flavoring and then fold in the stiffly
beaten whites together with the dry ingredients until blended.
bake in a buttered shallow pan in a moderate oven for twenty-five
minutes or until cake shrinks from the side of the pan.
. plain gingerbread.
ingredients.
molassescup
boiling water⁄cup
flour⁄cups
sodateaspoonful
ginger⁄teaspoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
buttertablespoonfuls
method.—melt butter in boiling water. mix dry ingredients.
add the molasses to the water and butter and stir this mixture
into the dry ingredients, beating vigorously. pour into a
buttered shallow pan and bake twenty minutes in a moderate
oven. if the molasses is taken from a freshly opened can, no
acid will be present and the soda should be omitted and  teaspoonfuls
of baking powder used instead.
laboratory management.—effective work in batters cannot be accomplished
with less than ⁄ cup liquid, though a smaller portion is sometimes used.
it is well to have some group work, so that the pupils may learn to beat
larger quantities. if there is a school lunch room, large quantities may
be utilized there.
pastry.—pastry is a stiff dough with a large proportion of shortening,
and is flaky when baked rather than porous. pastry and pies should not be
used as a staple food, but when well made and properly masticated, pies
may be eaten occasionally by people in good health. the crust should be
flaky, and thoroughly baked.
. foundation recipes for pastry.
. proportions.
() plain crust.
this crust is more digestible and more economical than the
“short” or rich crust and may be used for english deep apple
pie, or meat or chicken pies.
flourcups
baking powderteaspoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
fat (butter or lard,or half of each)⁄cup (measured solid)
ice water⁄cup
() short crust.
flourcups
salt⁄teaspoonful
fat (equal partsbutter and lard)⁄cup
ice water⁄cup
() rich flaky crust.
same as () (more fat is to be added later)
. method of mixing for all.
have all the ingredients and utensils icy cold. mix the dry
ingredients and cut in the fat with two knives. stir in the ice
water until the dough will just hold together. toss upon a
floured board and roll to ⁄ inch or less in thickness. roll this
up. if not ready to be used, this pie crust may be covered
with moist cheesecloth and put on the ice until wanted. this
amount of crust will make two medium-sized pies with two
crusts each.
. method of shaping.
for plain crust.—cut off ⁄ of the roll of crust. roll out
to about ⁄ inch thickness. have a deep dish ready containing
either the apple or meat fillings (see recipes below) and
with the edge of dish buttered. invert a small cup in the
center of the dish to hold up the crust if apples are used.
lay the rolled-out crust over the top, having rolled it a
little
larger than the dish. turn under the edges of the crust and
crimp them down on the dish. make several small cuts in the
top of the crust to let the steam escape. bake in a moderate
oven until the filling (if apples) is cooked and the crust brown.
for short crust.—cut off ⁄ of the roll of crust and roll
very thin, keeping the shape round. line a buttered pie
plate with the crust. fill this with the desired filling, moisten
the edge of bottom crust with water, and cover with another
round of crust rolled as before. crimp down the edges of the
top crust and make cuts in the top as before. bake until the
filling is cooked and the crust is brown.
for rich crust.—roll the crust to ⁄ inch thickness. have
ready ⁄ cup ice-cold fat. cut off small bits of this and spread
it in dabs over the rolled-out crust. roll this again and then
proceed as for the “short” crust ().
. apple pie filling.
use juicy, tart apples. pare, cut in quarters, core, and
slice apples into pie dish, filling it heaping full. add ⁄ cup
water and ⁄ cup sugar. any flavor desired may be used, lemon
rind, or spices. a little butter gives an agreeable flavor.
. lemon pie filling.
ingredients.
 heaping tablespoonful cornstarchmixed with a little cold water egg whole, or yolks of  eggs
large cup hot waterjuice and rind of  lemon
piece butter the size of walnuta very little salt
 cup sugarwhites of  eggs
powdered sugar,  tablespoonful
method.
mix the starch with the cold water, add the boiling water
and cook until it thickens, and add the butter and sugar.
beat the egg (or yolks) and add the other ingredients. add the
lemon last. when the pie is done, if two yolks were used, beat
the whites with a tablespoonful of powdered sugar, place on the
top, and brown in a moderate oven.
. meat or chicken pie.
use left-over, cooked meat. cut the meat into dice or small
bits and fill the dish. sprinkle with salt and moisten with
gravy, if possible. if not, add  cup hot water and dredge
lightly with flour. have top crust only.
how would the time for cooking this pie compare with that
for deep apple pie?
. what are the chief ingredients of batter mixtures and doughs?
. explain leavening by air.
. why is steam a leavening agent?
. how is gas formed for leavening purposes?
. how does the presence of butter or other fat affect the stiffness of a
mixture?
. what are the important points to remember in mixing ingredients?
. why are baking-powder biscuits mixed differently from popovers?
. what are the most practical oven tests?
. why is a loaf cake baked longer than cookies?
. how many muffins, average size, can be made from a pint of flour?
. compare the cost of homemade cake with bakers’ cake.
. what are the advantages of the homemade over the bakers’, or the
bakers’ over the homemade?
yeast bread when well made is a food of which the palate never tires, and
it is usually recognized as a part of every well-planned meal. the quick
breads are a convenient substitute at times, but they are not the staff of
life in the same sense, and are, on the whole, less widely used.
the making of a perfect loaf of bread is the goal of all those who aspire
to excel in cookery; and the art of bread making requires not only a clear
understanding of the underlying principles, but patience and persistence
in experimentation and practice until a uniformly perfect product is
achieved. the fact that in yeast we have a living organism with which to
deal makes the whole process a delicate one, in which every detail is of
importance, whether it be a matter of ingredients, proportions, methods of
mixing, or temperature.
the standard of good bread.—there will always be some difference of
opinion in regard to a desirable quality in bread, and individual
preference will control the final result, whether the crumb of the bread
shall be dry and porous or somewhat more moist and finer in grain. french
bread is of the former type, the english preferring a close grain and
solid loaf. allowing for these differences, it is still possible to
standardize bread, and to state in percentages the different points to be
considered in judging a loaf.
we must consider the size and symmetry of the loaf, in order that the
interior of the bread may be baked to the
very
center, without overbaking
or burning the crust, and therefore very large loaves should be avoided.
the crust should be uniform in color, the shade ranging from a light
golden to a darker brown, and the quality may be soft or crisp, but never
tough. the crumb should be light, the cavities evenly distributed
throughout the loaf and of uniform size. it should also be elastic,
tender, and yet not pasty, evenly baked without streaks and heavy portions
near the crust, and the color should be creamy rather than a snowy white.
(fig. .)
the following score cards will be useful in judging loaves, and in the
bread contests which are interesting and helpful.
i. general appearance%
. shape.%
. size.%
. crust.%
 (a) color
 (b) smoothness
ii. internal appearance%
. depth of crust%
. texture (lightness)%
. crumb%
 (a) moisture, elasticity (%)
 (b) color (%)
iii. flavor%
i. external appearance%
. shape%
. size%
. crust%
 (a) color
 (b) smoothness
ii. internal factors%
. depth of crust%
. texture%
. crumb%
 (a) moisture (%)
 (b) color (%)
iii. flavor%
note.—these two score cards are the average of the work of
sixty students in judging bread in experimental cookery,
department of foods and cookery, teachers college, columbia
university. see also bulletin , university of illinois.
digestibility and nutritive value.—bread of the standard described is
readily digestible when at least twelve hours old and stands high in
nutritive value. figure  compares the composition of several varieties.
fig. .—composition of bread.
like the cereals, it has considerable protein, and some fat, but is
highest in starch. the white bread, unless made with milk, has very little
ash. a slice almost one inch thick weighing . ounces, from a baker’s
five-cent loaf, will yield  calories.
the cost of bread.—the table in chapter xvii states the amount of protein
and energy obtained for ten cents from bread as compared with other common
foods, and makes the fact clear that bread is essentially one of the
cheapest foods, remaining relatively so whatever the general fluctuations
in food prices may be.
a pound loaf of bread at the bakery should cost five cents, the cost being
slightly less when the bread is made at home, even taking the fuel into
account. it is an open question, however, whether bread should be made at
home or bought at the bakery, all the circumstances being weighed in the
balance by the individual. (see chapter xvii.) in america, we need to
learn to dictate and control the methods in
the
public bakeries because
bakers’ bread is being used more and more, although it is said that  per
cent is still made at home. if bread is to be bought, it is necessary for
the housekeeper to understand the bread-making process and the standard of
good bread that she may criticize intelligently, and force the public
bakeries to furnish bread made under ideal conditions. such bread is
supplied in france, where the housekeepers in the city, though noted for
their thrift, do not think of bread making at home as a practical or
economical procedure. it must be understood that the baker’s oven is
fitted to do better work than the small oven of the average kitchen, and
if the public through laws and inspection will control the quality of the
materials used and the cleanliness of the process, baker’s bread will be a
useful “ready-cooked” food.
the ingredients of bread.—the essential ingredients are flour, water, and
yeast. the liquid may be milk, or milk and water, the milk changing the
flavor slightly and increasing the nutritive value, while the cream in the
milk increases the tenderness of the crumb and crust. the non-essentials
include salt to develop flavor, sugar sometimes added to hasten
fermentation and also for flavor, and a fat to increase tenderness, as,
for instance, butter or some cheaper fat. spices and dried fruits are used
in sweet breads, and when eggs are added sweet bread becomes a plain cake
having a delicious and characteristic flavor.
the characteristics of good flour.—the average composition of flour is as
follows:
protein.per cent
fat.per cent
carbohydrate.per cent
fuel valuecal. per pound
-calorie portiongrams ( ounce)
the protein occurs in the form of gluten, which has the property of
stretching and expanding, and which makes the framework of the loaf of
bread, since it retains the air and carbon dioxide, and hardens when
baked. the protein of oats and corn lacks this property, and therefore
oatmeal and corn meal give a very different type of bread. rye flour
contains gluten, and the rye loaf therefore resembles the wheat loaf.
wheat and flour differ largely on account of the difference in the amount
of gluten, and the gluten itself varies in quality with the variety of
wheat.
fig. .—experiment illustrating the effect of
the kind of wheat upon the size of the loaf. courtesy of utah
agricultural college.
figure  shows the result of an experiment with flour made from different
kinds of wheat, all the other factors in the bread making being identical.
this effect of the difference in the composition of the flour is very
striking. again, the same variety of wheat will differ from season to
season,
and the time of planting, also, affects the quality of the grain.
the time of planting and reaping gives us two classes of wheat and flour,
the winter and spring. winter wheat is sown in the fall and obtains its
first growth before winter, living through the winter in those latitudes
where the climate is sufficiently mild, being harvested in early summer.
spring wheat is sown in the spring and harvested late and it is the wheat
of the great flour-producing state, minnesota. the difference in the
composition of the two wheats is shown in this
table.[]
waterproteinfatcarbo-hydrateash
wheat
spring varieties.....
winter varieties.....
note that the spring wheat contains more protein and therefore more
gluten. the flour from spring wheat is creamy in color, granular to the
touch, has more gluten, and is known as a strong flour. flour from
winter wheat is somewhat whiter in color and smoother to the touch,
feeling more like cornstarch, and if a portion is squeezed in the hand, it
retains the imprint of the fingers. it has less gluten, more starch, and
is known as a soft flour. this type of flour is sometimes called “pastry
flour,” the smaller percentage of gluten making it more desirable for
pastry or cake than the stronger flour.
flour manufacturers and bakers are constantly experimenting to find the
best possible varieties and combinations of varieties for bread flour.
some difference of opinion
exists,
but a combination of winter and spring
wheat in flour is considered the best for bread by some authorities.
we must learn to like a creamy color in bread, for this means the presence
of more gluten. to summarize: a good bread flour contains a large
percentage of gluten, is creamy in color, and granular to the touch.
manufacture of flour.—modern machinery has taken the place of the
old-time stones in the grinding of flour, although the two main divisions
of the process remain the same, these being the crushing of the grain and
the sifting out of the coarse portion. milling now includes many stages in
the process not possible with the cruder machinery of former times, and
the present effects a greater number of separations and permits the miller
to make a greater variety of products.
fig. .—a dissected grain of wheat. courtesy
of washburn crosby co.
figure  shows a dissected kernel of wheat, with its five layers of bran.
within these at b is a shell of glutinous matter, yellowish and of
flinty hardness, and within this, but not sharply divided from it, lie the
starch granules in a network of woody fiber, the germ lying at a. the
milling process must remove the bran coats and the germ, and crush and
roll the remaining portions to the necessary fineness. the germ if allowed
to remain affects the color and keeping properties. the breaking and
rolling are accomplished by steel machinery, and the final sifting is done
through silk bolting cloth.
by
the new machinery about  per cent of the
wheat is saved for food,  per cent being bran, “shorts,” and other
by-products used chiefly for cattle feeding.
figure  shows the vertical section of a mill, simplified in the drawing
that all the steps of the process may be clear. the diagram does not, of
course, show the actual arrangement of the
mill.[]
fig. .—simplified diagram of a flour mill.
courtesy of the washburn crosby co.
the typical parts in a modern flour mill are as follows: () scales, for
weighing wheat as it is received. () receiving separator, for separating
other kinds of seeds from wheat. () storage bins, for reserve supply of
wheat in advance of mill requirements. () mill separator, for further
separating foreign seeds from wheat. () scourer, for removing dust from
wheat kernels. () cockle cylinder, for removing all round seeds. ()
wheat washer, for thoroughly cleansing the wheat. () wheat dryer, for
drying wheat after washing. () st break rolls, for rupturing bran,
enabling bran and germ to be separated from interior. () st break
scalper, for sifting middlings through bolting cloth to separate from
bran. () d break rolls, for further loosening the middlings from bran.
() d break scalper, for separating more middlings from bran. () d
break rolls, for further loosening middlings from bran. () d break
scalper, for final separation of middlings from bran. () bran duster,
for dusting low grade flour from bran. () bran bin, for packing bran for
shipment. () grading reel, for separating middlings by sifting through
various sizes of bolting cloth. () dust collector and purifier, for
cleaning and purifying middlings by air and sifting. () smooth rolls,
for grinding purified middlings very fine to flour. () flour bolter, for
sifting flour from purified middlings. () d
reduction
rolls, for
further grinding of purified middlings. () flour bolter, for separating
flour from purified middlings of second grading. () flour bin and
packer, for packing flour for shipment. () elevator, for raising
products to the various machines.
other forms of flour.—there has been much discussion of entire wheat
flour versus white flour, and the practical conclusions are as follows:
the bread from whole wheat flour compares favorably with that from white
flour (see fig. ), but this material is slightly less available for
digestion than the material of the white flour. the mineral content is
higher, and when the income is so limited that this cannot be furnished in
milk, green vegetables, and fruit, whole wheat bread should be used. it
makes a pleasing variety, too, for any table.
graham flour is a coarse flour, containing the outer bran. it is useful
for its effect upon the intestines in case of constipation, but has to be
avoided by some people on account of its irritating effect. white flour
may have coarser material mixed with it, for variety in bread making, such
as rye or indian meal, or graham flour.
yeast in bread.—yeast is put into bread dough in order to produce carbon
dioxide gas to lighten the whole mass. it is studied in the chapter on
preservation of fruit, but in bread making we need to foster its growth
instead of destroying it as, you will recall, we found necessary in
preserving. you can easily reason out for yourself just how this should be
done, especially after performing the experiments with yeast.
if yeast is in good condition, it has little effect on the flavor of
bread, even if used in a rather large quantity to hasten the process.
the best forms of yeast now in use are the compressed and dried cakes, the
former needing to be fresh, the
latter
keeping the vitality of the yeast
cells for a long time. liquid yeast may be made at home, but it is
somewhat uncertain unless made with great exactness, and less easy to
manage on the whole than the other forms.
proportions of the ingredients.—one part of water to three of flour, or
one cup to three of flour for a loaf, is an average proportion. the
practiced bread maker will vary this slightly to suit the variations in
the flour from time to time, but it is a safe rule for the beginner to
follow. spring wheat flour requires somewhat more water than the winter
wheat, or the blend of the two. salt should be used sparingly, for
although it improves the flavor of the loaf, salt is a preservative which
retards or prevents the growth of lower organisms, and in the case of
bread it acts therefore as a check to fermentation. one teaspoonful to a
loaf is the largest amount that it is best to use.
the quantity of yeast depends upon several conditions. the larger the
amount of yeast used, the shorter is the time of rising, and as many as
two compressed yeast cakes may be used to one loaf if it is necessary to
hasten the process, without any perceptible effect on the color, texture
or flavor. if a very large amount of yeast is used, the bread is
“crumbly,” and a difference in flavor will be noticed. a smaller amount
may be used if time is allowed for the rising, even ⁄ cake of compressed
yeast to a loaf, if the bread is to rise over night in warm weather. it
must be remembered that, if the rising process is too prolonged, other
organisms have a chance to work, and the bread may sour.
a small amount of sugar hastens fermentation, and from one to two
teaspoonfuls to a loaf may be used. many people prefer the flavor of bread
with no sugar, however. some bakers use malt extract both as a yeast food
to hasten fermentation and for its effect upon the flavor.
fat, or shortening, should be sparingly used, not more than one or two
teaspoonfuls being allowed to a loaf. if you study a number of bread
recipes, you will see that this ingredient varies more than the others. as
a matter of fact, if the flour is of good quality and the bread well made,
this ingredient is not necessary (in loaf bread at least), although it
seems to improve the quality of biscuit and rolls.
methods of mixing and the rising of bread.—dissolve the yeast in a
portion of the liquid, stir this mixture into the remaining liquid, add
half the flour, and beat the mixture thoroughly at this stage. add the
sugar if any is to be used. when this soft mixture, called the “sponge,”
becomes full of bubbles, add the salt, the shortening if used, and the
remaining flour. knead the dough by the hand, or by the machine, for about
ten minutes, or until it is smooth and elastic. put it into a greased
bowl, cover the bowl, and allow the dough to remain until it doubles its
bulk. some bread makers knead in all the flour at the first, and obtain a
good result. the first rising is more rapid, however, and experience seems
to prove that the results are better on the whole with the sponge. cut the
dough down, knead again, using as little flour as possible. shape into
loaves, place the loaves in greased pans, cover, and leave again until the
loaves double their bulk, when they are ready for baking. if left too
long, the bubbles of gas become too large.
temperature and time are important, in this matter of mixing and
rising. the process may be shortened to five or six hours, including the
baking, or lengthened to twenty-four by the choice of the amount of yeast
and the temperature. the shorter process is the better, on the whole.
after reading over the sections of the chapter on preservation of fruit,
performing the yeast experiments, and discussing the results, you will be
able to answer these questions:
. what should be the temperature of the ingredients when the
bread is mixed?
. if milk is used, how may the souring of the milk be
prevented?
. what temperature will you secure for the bread while it is
rising?
. if an emergency occurs, and the dough cannot be kneaded or
baked at the moment it is ready, what can be done? can you think
of two expedients?
a few suggestions.—the kneading stretches the gluten and long kneading
gives a fine grain. in such a recipe as that for the making of parker
house rolls, a very delicate quality results from a protracted process;
one old-fashioned housekeeper recommends a half hour’s kneading three
times. fortunately a sufficiently good bread or roll may be made by ten or
fifteen minutes’ kneading at a time.
bread dough may be cut or stirred with a large knife in place of the
kneading, and this is a good method to teach to those who live in crowded
space and find it difficult to have a perfectly clean kitchen and proper
utensils. with this method the dough must be softer, and it remains in the
bowl until it is turned into the baking pan. the resulting loaf is
somewhat moist, and not fine-grained, but the flavor is good.
brushing the surface of the dough in the bowl or pan with water or milk
will prevent the formation of a dry crust on the top.
baking the bread.—the temperature of the oven should be steady, and about
° f. an authority recommends ° c. (° f.) when the loaf is put in,
rising to ° c. (°
the amount of flour for one loaf has been
given. a loaf this size should be baked in a pan ⁄ to  inches × ⁄
to  ×  to ⁄. the material of the pan is not of great consequence.
tin gives good results, a longer time
being
required for baking in a
granite pan. a loaf should bake about one hour. (see fig. .)
fig. .—a few loaves of bread. courtesy of
the dept. of foods and cookery, teachers college.
rolls and biscuit may be shaped in many ways. (see fig. .) how will
the baking differ from that of the loaf?
fig. .—rolls of different shapes. courtesy
of the dept. of foods and cookery, teachers college.
care of bread after baking.—remove from the pans, cool on a rack, place
in tin box or stone jar, and cover with paraffin paper.
uses of stale bread.—bread that has become too dry may be freshened by
moistening the surface and heating in the oven. bread may be used for
toast, croutons for soup, escalloped dishes, puddings, crumbs for coating
other food materials, and may be made into cups for holding other
materials.
a. experiment with gluten.
materials.— cup of flour, a -inch square of cheesecloth, a
piece of string, a pan or tin or granite plate.
method.—tie the flour in the cheesecloth, and wash it,
preferably under the faucet, until the starch is washed out.
remove the gluten, stretch and knead into a ball. place the ball
on a pan in the oven. note results. note temperature of oven, if
possible.
b. experiments with yeast.
. materials, (a)  cake of yeast dissolved in ⁄ of a
cupful of lukewarm water with water added to make ⁄ cupful,
(b) ⁄ cup water and ⁄ cup flour stirred together + 
tablespoonful of molasses. divide this mixture into three parts.
method.—add  tablespoonfuls of (a) to each of two thirds
of (b). put remaining portion of (a) into a saucepan and
bring it to the boiling point and then add it to the third part
of (b). number these bowls , , .
() surround bowl no.  with lukewarm water and keep the water
at this temperature by adding warmer water from time to time.
note result.
() surround bowl no.  with cracked ice and salt. note result.
() surround bowl no.  with lukewarm water as in no. . note
result.
() before the end of the hour remove bowl no.  from the ice
water and surround it with water at ° f. and watch results.
state conclusions as to effect of temperature upon the growth of
the yeast cell.
. materials.— yeast cake dissolved in ⁄ cup of water °
f. +  tablespoonful molasses. limewater.  small wide-mouthed
bottles, or test tubes,  saucers or beakers.
method.—fill the small bottle, cover with a saucer and
invert; or the same with the test tubes. keep the bottles at a
temperature of ° f. until they are emptied. test for carbon
dioxide with a match, and with limewater.
. plain bread.—you should be able to make your own recipe for
plain bread from the foregoing pages. write this out in detail.
. milk bread.
proportions.
milkcups
buttertablespoonfuls
sugartablespoonful
salt⁄teaspoonfuls
yeastcake dissolved in ⁄ cup lukewarm water
sifted flourcups
special method.—scald milk and add to this the butter, sugar,
and salt. cool this until it is just lukewarm. add the dissolved
yeast and stir in the flour beating thoroughly. proceed
as in general directions.
. entire wheat bread.
proportions.
scalded milk cups
sugar⁄ cup
 or
molasses⁄ cup
salt teaspoonful
yeast cake dissolvedin ⁄ cup lukewarm water
entire wheat flour⁄ cups
special method.—add sweetening and salt to scalded milk
and cool until lukewarm. add dissolved yeast and beat in
the flour. cover with cloth and let rise to double its bulk.
again beat and turn into greased bread pans, filling half full.
let this rise to not quite double its bulk, and bake same as
white bread. this mixture may also be baked in gem pans.
. parker house rolls.
proportions.
scalded milkcups
buttertablespoonfuls
sugartablespoonfuls
saltteaspoonful
yeastcake dissolved in⁄ cup lukewarm water
flour
special method.—add butter, sugar, and salt to milk. when
lukewarm, add dissolved yeast cake and three cups of flour.
beat thoroughly, cover and let rise until light. cut down
and add enough flour to knead (it will take about ⁄ cups).
let rise again, toss on floured board and knead, pat and roll
out to ⁄ inch thickness. shape with a biscuit cutter first
dipped in flour. dip the handle of a case knife in flour and
make a crease through the middle of each round. brush over
of each piece with melted butter, fold over, and press edges
together. place in greased pan, one inch apart, cover, let rise,
and bake in hot oven twelve to fifteen minutes. as the rolls
rise they will part slightly, and if hastened in rising are apt to
lose their shape.
. buns.
proportions.
scalded milkcup
butter⁄cup
sugar⁄cup
salt⁄teaspoonful
raisins cutin quarterscup
yeastcake dissolved in⁄ cup lukewarm water
ext. lemonteaspoonful
special method.—add ⁄ sugar and salt to milk. when lukewarm,
add dissolved yeast and ⁄ cups flour. cover and let rise
until light. add butter, remaining sugar, raisins, lemon, and
flour enough to make a stiff batter. let rise, shape like biscuits,
let rise again and bake. if wanted glazed, brush over with
beaten egg before baking.
. german coffee bread.
proportions.
scalded milkcup
butter⁄cup
sugar⁄cup
salt⁄teaspoonful
egg
yeastcake dissolved in⁄ cup lukewarm milk
raisins stoned andcut in pieces⁄cup
flour
special method.—add butter, sugar, and salt to milk. when
lukewarm add dissolved yeast cake, egg well beaten, flour
to make a stiff batter, and raisins. cover and let rise. when
light spread in buttered pan one half inch thick. cover
and
let rise again. before baking brush over with well beaten egg
and cover with following mixture. melt  tablespoonfuls
butter, add ⁄ cup sugar and  teaspoonful cinnamon. when
sugar is partially melted, add  tablespoonfuls flour and remove
from fire.
laboratory management.—for individual work or for work in
groups of two, the use of ⁄ cup of liquid will be found to
make as small an amount of dough as it is desirable to handle.
in making the white bread two portions may be baked in one tin,
brushing with butter where the two portions touch each other, so
that the loaves will separate when baked.
where it is necessary to hurry the process not less than ⁄
yeast cake should be used with this quantity.
it is impossible in an ordinary school period to complete the
entire process. a number of solutions will occur to the teacher.
one of these is to arrange the lessons as follows:
lesson i.
yeast experiments, summary, bread mixed in groups and set to
rise, demonstration by teacher of kneading, using dough
previously prepared.
lesson ii.
quantity of dough set to rise by volunteer pupils before class.
dough kneaded, shaped and set to rise by pupils. review of yeast
experiments. baking of bread.
lesson iii.
parker house rolls or sweet breads mixed and set to rise,
completed by volunteers after class.
in recipes where three risings are called for one may be
omitted, if necessary.
. toast.—directions for making toast will be found in chapter
to serve toast.—toast should be served as soon as it is made,
if possible, and if not must be kept hot. fold it in a napkin.
toast may also be buttered, piled neatly on a plate, and kept
hot in the oven until it is time for serving.
for milk toast the bread is cut somewhat thicker than for
buttered toast. the milk is prepared by thickening, no.  under
white sauce. dip each slice of toast in the thickened milk
and then put the slices in a dish for serving and pour the thickened
milk over. to moisten toast that is too dry, or when
moist toast is wanted to serve under some other food, place it
in a steamer or colander over boiling water a few minutes
before
buttering it. this is much better than toast moistened
with boiling water.
. the sandwich.—the sandwich is a convenient way of serving
bread and other foods away from the table, for picnics, teas,
and receptions.
to prepare the bread.—either white or brown bread may
be used. select a well-shaped loaf of fine grain that will not
crumb when it is sliced. cut off the end of the loaf, spread
the loaf evenly with butter, cut a thin slice, butter again, and
so on. the butter should be softened. be careful to spread
it evenly and see that it is near the edge of the bread. sandwiches
may be made either with or without the crust. if the
crust is to be removed, cut it off the loaf before buttering and
slicing.
the filling.—there is an endless variety of filling possible
for sandwiches, from slices of meat and poultry, which
make a substantial luncheon for picnics, to the dainty fillings
used for afternoon teas and receptions. a crisp bit of lettuce
leaf with mayonnaise dressing is always acceptable. cream
cheese mixed with nuts and raisins is a good filling. for a
sweet sandwich, jam or jelly may be spread on the slices and
possibly a small amount of cream cheese put between. you
can invent many combinations.
the shape of the sandwich may be oblong, triangular, or round.
the round sandwich is cut with a sharp cooky cutter. the
pieces remaining may be dried and used for bread crumbs.
the crusts may always be utilized in this way.
. croutons.—cut a slice of bread a day old ⁄ inch thick. spread
with soft butter, cut off the crust, put the slices in a pan,
cut in cubes and set the pan in the oven until the croutons are
brown.
. what is a standard for good bread?
. describe a perfect loaf.
. how do climate and method of raising affect the composition of wheat
and flour?
. what are the essentials of good bread flour?
. why is it so necessary to control temperature in bread making?
. what is the best temperature and why?
. explain the part played by gluten in bread making.
. state the underlying principles of bread making.
. explain the advantage of a bread machine over the hand in kneading.
. what is the best temperature for baking a loaf? for baking biscuit?
. what are the principles and practical points in toast-making? (see
chapter iv.)
. what is the argument in connection with homemade bread versus
baker’s bread?
. how can the public insure good quality baker’s bread?
. what is the nutritive value and digestibility of bread?
. how much bread in the -calorie portion?
the meats that we commonly use are derived from the flesh of domestic and
wild animals of herbivorous habits and from fowls. the flesh of
carnivorous animals is seldom used as food. the various kinds are obtained
as follows:
meatanimal
beefox
vealcalf
muttonsheep
lambyoung sheep
porkpig
ham and baconpig
venisondeer
under the head of poultry we include the common fowl, turkeys, ducks and
geese, the guinea hen, and game birds.
fig. .—fiber cells of plain muscular tissue.
kimber’s anatomy for nurses.
quality of good meat.—the quality of meat is dependent on the condition
of the animal from which it is derived. the creature should be in perfect
health and well fed. good beef is largely obtained from the cattle ranges
of the west, but there is no reason why cattle should not be raised to
greater extent in the east. sheep for mutton are best raised where the
climate is not too severe. methods of slaughter, transportation, and
preservation
all affect the quality of beef. the pure food laws and
federal meat inspection law are valuable to the consumer in their control
of the quality of the meat, that it shall be free from disease and from
adulterations. see chapter xvii for the discussion of preservatives and
pure food laws.
fig. .—cuts of beef.
key:
a.ribs
b.hip bone
c.loin
d.porterhouse
e.prime ribs
f.shoulder
g.neck
h.head
i.brisket
j.shin
l.navel
m.plate
n.flank
o.leg
p.horseshoe
q.round
r.oxtail
s.rump
z.sirloin
courtesy of bureau of publications, teachers college.
in meat as it is purchased we have bone, fat, and the flesh, consisting of
the muscle of the animal with its connective tissue. the color of the meat
should be clear and fairly bright, not purplish or dull. there should be
little or no odor, and the meat should be firm and elastic to the touch.
beef should be a bright red and well streaked with fat.
veal should be pink and is somewhat less firm than beef. if watery and
flabby, it is too young.
mutton is a duller red, and firm. the fat is white or slightly yellow
and hard.
lamb is pink, rather than red, and slightly less firm.
pork is rather pale, somewhat less firm than beef and mutton, and the
fat is softer.
fig. .—the hind quarter of beef hanging.
cuts:a, leg; b, round; c, rump; d, top sirloin; e, loin; f,
flank.
bones:g, leg bone; h, socket bone; j, rump bone; k, hip bone;
e, back bone; m, part of rump bone; n, wing rib.
courtesy of bureau of publications, teachers college
tough and tender meat.—to understand the difference between the tough and
tender cuts we must be familiar with the structure of the muscle (see fig.
). each muscle consists of bundles of tubes held together by connective
tissue. in tough meat, the muscle tubes are thicker and there is more
connective tissue present. exercise strengthens the muscle, and this
accounts for the fact that the unexercised muscles of the young animal
give us a softer meat. in the mature animal the muscles most exercised
furnish the tough meat, and the less used muscles the tender. if you study
fig. , you can easily determine where the tough meat will occur, if you
think of the proportionate amount of exercise that the different muscles
receive. the tough cuts come from the neck and legs, the tender cuts from
the
middle
of the back, the toughness increasing as the cuts approach the
neck and the hind legs. the muscles of the abdomen are also tender, but
they give a coarse-grained meat. the various cuts of meat are shown as
they occur in the standing animal in fig. , and in the hind and fore
quarters hanging, in figs.  and . the individual cuts of beef and
mutton are shown in the figures that follow. the tender cuts from the ribs
and loin are the most highly prized, and therefore bring the highest
price. these cuts are liked because of their tenderness although the
nutritive value of the tough meat is as high or possibly even higher than
that of the tender. all meat is now high-priced, and you will find the
reasons for this discussed in chapter xvii. for the sake of economy we are
forced to use the relatively cheaper cuts, and to seek for meat
substitutes. we must also take pains to use the cooking processes that
will make the tough meats palatable.
fig. .—the fore quarter of beef, hanging.
.st and d ribs primeroasts
.d and th ribs prime”
.th and th ribs”
.th rib”
.th rib”
.th rib”
.chuck steaks, or roasts, th to th ribs”
.chuck pot roast”
.neckbeef tea, etc.
.yoke”
.navelstew and corning
.plate”
.brisketcorning
.cross ribpot roast
.shoulder”
.shinsoup
courtesy of the bureau of publications, teachers college.
composition and nutritive value.—figure  shows you the composition of
several common meats. meat is valuable chiefly for its protein, fat, and
mineral salts. the juices of the meat in the muscle cells contain
nitrogenous extractive materials which give flavor, and are possibly
stimulating, but they have no food value. from the bone and also from the
connective tissue, gelatin is dissolved in cooking. gelatin is a protein,
but differs in certain chemical properties from other proteins, and cannot
be used as the only source of nitrogen. it is a very useful protein,
however, and as it can be substituted in part for more expensive proteins,
it used to be called a “protein saver.”
in spite of the fact that meat is a common article of diet it should not
be used in excess. other forms of protein, as those in eggs and milk, are
usually digested as easily, and most people can digest vegetable proteins
if the vegetables are carefully prepared. very little children should not
have
meat, for it has stimulating properties which are undesirable for
them, and it takes away the taste for foods more important for growth (see
food for growth, chapter xviii). when used largely in the diet, meat tends
to cause intestinal putrefaction and to form excess of acid in the body.
it is less likely to be harmful if taken with plenty of fruits and green
vegetables and liberal drinking of clear water.
fig. a.—left: chuck rib roast, th and th
ribs. right: blade rib, th and th ribs.
fig. b.—left: st cut prime rib roast.
right: d cut prime rib roast. courtesy of bureau of publications,
teachers college.
fig. a.—porterhouse steak; delmonico steak.
courtesy of bureau of publications, teachers college.
fig. b.—flatbone sirloin steak; hip steak.
it should be realized that in none of the european countries is meat used
so liberally as in the united states, and that there are reasons to
believe that we might be better off if we could satisfy ourselves with a
meat consumption nearer the average of other civilized peoples—say half
as much meat per person per year as we are now accustomed to use. the fuel
value of meat depends largely upon the amount of fat which is eaten. if a
pound of steak contains  ounces of fat and  ounces of clear lean, the
rejection of the fat means a loss of fully one half of the fuel value. the
following table shows the difference between raw meat of the same cut,
free from bones and connective tissue, due to differences in amounts of
fat. most people would prefer the strictly lean meat.
table showing -calorie portions of raw edible meat
lean meatmedium fat
weight, ouncesweight, ounces
beef, round..
chicken (fowl)..
lamb, leg..
mutton, leg..
pork, loin chops..
veal, leg..
fig. a.—: rib lamb chops, french. : rib
lamb chops. : loin lamb chops. : left: blade shoulder chop. right: round
bone shoulder chop. : chuck steak. : skirt steak. : flank steak.
fig. b.—left.—top and bottom round.
right.—round bone sirloin steak. courtesy of bureau of publications,
teachers college.
for very complete and conveniently arranged tables giving the percentage
composition, the food values per pound and per ounce, the weight and
nutrients of the -calorie portions of all the important meats and other
food materials as well, see rose’s “laboratory handbook for dietetics.”
dangers from meat.—three dangers from meat must be recognized; () animal
parasites, such as the trichina sometimes found in pork, () poisons
developed in the meat by bacteria when it is kept too long or without
sufficient refrigeration, this danger being recognized as ptomaine
poisoning, () bacteria, sometimes present in meat, which are directly
injurious to man and which are now held to be the cause of most of the
sickness commonly attributed to ptomaine poisoning. government protection
must be given us here, but the housekeeper too has a responsibility. if
the raw meat has failed to receive proper inspection, we can protect
ourselves by cooking the meat to a degree that will kill any parasite
present. for this reason meat should not be served that looks raw or too
underdone. the cooked meat should be pink rather than red.
meat poisoning may be avoided in the first place by exercising great
care in regard to the odor of meat. meat may hang to “ripen,” as the
butchers say, but one must learn to distinguish between the odor of
properly ripened meat, and that of even slightly tainted meat. quite as
important is the rapid cooling of meat, poultry, fish, and soups that
are not to be used at once. cases of digestive disturbance and even actual
poisoning sometimes occur when underdone meat, especially lamb, veal, or
poultry, remains warm overnight.
fig. .—composition of meats.
the effect of heat upon meat.—the fat of meat is melted by heat. the
meat fiber shrinks and
hardens
with intense heat; on the other hand it
softens at a temperature somewhat below the boiling point of water. the
structure of the muscle must be studied further in order to make the
principles of cooking perfectly clear. if you think of the structure of
the muscle cell as somewhat resembling the structure of an orange, you can
picture quite clearly what happens under different conditions. open a
section of orange and separate some of the single cells. these may
represent the muscle cells of meat that can be seen only under the
microscope. if you cut across one of these tiny cells, the contents will
escape, and this is what happens when the muscle cells are cut across.
then, too, if the muscle is heated, the juices will pass through the
membrane of the cell, and this happens, too, if the meat is put into cold
water. the substances in the juices of the meat which are not coagulated
by heat are called the extractives, because they can be extracted by hot
water. the most valuable protein matter remains behind in the muscle cell,
however. among these proteins are those known as meat albumin, and this
behaves in cooking very much as does the white of egg,—that is to say, it
coagulates.
bearing these facts in mind, we can decide just what to do in order to
bring about the result that we desire in meat cookery, for sometimes we
wish to extract the juices and sometimes we wish to have all, or nearly
all, retained in the meat. we are now ready to state the principles of
meat cookery as follows:
. juices retained.
in broiling, pan broiling, roasting, and boiling the high temperature
coagulates the meat albumin and hardens the fiber on the surface, thus
forming a coating which prevents the further escape of juices. in the
roasting and boiling
of
large pieces the temperature may then be lowered
to prevent the further shrinking and hardening of the fiber in the
interior of the meat, which comes from a protracted high temperature. with
a very thick steak after the surface searing the cooking may be completed
in the oven.
. juices extracted.
in beef juice or beef tea, this may be done by placing the chopped beef in
a jar and placing the jar in an oven, or in hot water; or for beef tea and
ordinary soup by putting the chopped meat, or small pieces of meat, in
cold water and heating the water slowly.
. juices partly retained and partly extracted.
this is desirable in stews, in braised beef, and in pot roast. state for
yourself just how this would be accomplished.
. connective tissue softened at low temperature, and with water.
. sterilization by continued heat which destroys parasites and
bacteria.
. rapid cooling, when serving is not immediate.
flavors suitable with meat.
herbs. all the pot herbs including savory, marjoram, thyme,
sage, pot marigold.
vegetables. onion, carrot, turnip, celery, celery root,
parsley root and leaf.
spices. clove, allspice, mustard, red, black, and white
pepper. some nationalities use nutmeg.
acids. lemon, tomato, and other acid fruits.
experiment a.
chop finely a small piece of meat, squeeze out the juice with a
lemon squeezer and heat this juice in a saucepan. observe the
coagulation that takes place.
experiment b.
() apparatus.—if possible,  glass beakers,  square wire
net. if these are not available, use an ordinary tumbler and a
small saucepan.
() method.—a. put a small piece of meat in a beaker with
cold water, and allow it to stand.
b. bring water to the boiling point in the beaker on the net
over the gas flame. throw in a small piece of meat.
compare the appearance of the two pieces of meat and the water
in the two beakers.
. broiled steak.
() wipe steak with a damp cloth. if a wood
or coal stove is used, have a bed of glowing coals ready. if
gas is used, have the gas broiler thoroughly heated. grease
the bars of the broiler. place steak in the broiler and sear meat
first on one side, then on the other. continue to turn the
broiler and cook the meat until it is brown and done according
to taste. steak an inch thick will take about ten minutes to
be cooked to a medium degree. chops are broiled in the same
way.
() steak and chops may also be broiled in the pan. an
iron frying pan is the best utensil. heat the pan, and brush
it over with a small piece of fat cut from the steak or the
chops. the purpose of this is merely to keep the meat from
sticking to the pan. the principle of procedure is the same as
with (). the steak or chops must be frequently turned,
using a knife and a fork, being careful not to prick the meat
with the fork. the length of time is slightly longer than
for (). this method must not be confused with the frying
of steak in a pan with a large amount of fat. by this method
the steak is not fried, and it is often a convenient substitute
for ().
. roast of beef.
wipe roast with a damp cloth. sprinkle with
salt and dredge with flour. place in a roasting pan, fat side
up if it is a standing roast. put the roast in a very hot
oven and after fifteen minutes reduce the heat. baste roast
two or three times with the fat that tries out during cooking.
the usual allowance of time for a medium rare roast is fifteen
minutes for every pound of meat.
roast beef gravy.—after the roast has been taken from
the
pan, pour out all but ⁄ tablespoonfuls of the melted fat. stir
in  heaping tablespoonful of flour and brown very slightly.
add one cup of cold water and stir constantly until thickened.
add ⁄ teaspoonful salt. strain.
. bouillon.
shin of beef pounds
cold water quarts
peppercorns⁄ teaspoonful
cloves
bay leaf⁄
thyme sprigs
marjoram sprig
parsley sprigs
carrotturniponion⁄ cup eachcut in dice
celerysalt tablespoonful
wipe beef and cut the lean meat in inch cubes. brown one
third of the meat in fat cut from meat or marrow from a marrow
bone. put remaining two thirds with bone and fat in
soup kettle, add water and let stand for thirty minutes. place
on back of range, add browned meat, and heat gradually to
the boiling point. cover and cook slowly six hours, keeping
below the boiling point during cooking. add the vegetables
and seasonings, cook one and one half hours, strain and cool as
quickly as possible. this is called soup stock.
to clarify bouillon.—when stock is cold, remove fat
which has hardened on top and put quantity to be cleared into
a stew pan. allow white and shell of one egg to each quart of
stock. put over fire and stir constantly until boiling point
is reached. boil two minutes. set back on stove and let
simmer twenty minutes. remove scum and strain through
double thickness of cheesecloth.
. general directions for meat soups.
soup making is an art that
is well worth cultivating. the expert soup maker will obtain
delicious flavors by adding bits of many kinds of left overs—almost
anything that is found in the refrigerator in the way of
fruit, vegetables, and pieces of meat. with the coming of the
gas stove, many people have given up soup making. these
various left overs add much to the flavor of the soup and
can be used in a thickened soup which is like the bouillon
strained and thickened. the thickening may be flour, arrowroot,
cold cereal, sago, tapioca, or rice. spaghetti,
vermicelli,
and fancy forms of paste are sometimes served. vegetables
may be cut into dice or fancy shapes and served in the clear
soup. a great variety is possible in flavoring and serving soup
if one will take the trouble to make it an art.
soup meat may be served in a soup of the old-fashioned
kind, thickened and containing vegetables. in such a soup some
fat is left, and the total result is a dish that makes a meal when
served with bread.
when the soup is a clear soup, the meat that is left may be
used for made over dishes; although some practical housekeepers
think that it costs almost as much to make it palatable
as to buy fresh meat. try it in an escalloped dish with plenty
of tomato, onion, and some dried herbs for additional flavor.
. beef stew with dumplings.
lean meatpounds
potatoescups, cut in ⁄ inch slices
turnipcarrot⁄cup each, cut in half inch cubes
onion⁄small one, cut in thin slices
floursaltpepper⁄cup
wipe meat, cut in ⁄ inch cubes, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and dredge with flour. cut some of the fat in small
pieces and try out in frying pan. add meat and stir constantly,
that the surface may be quickly seared. when well
browned, put in kettle, and rinse frying pan with boiling water,
that none of the flavor may be lost. cover with boiling water
and boil five minutes, then cook below the boiling point until
meat is tender (about  hours). add vegetables except potatoes
and seasoning the last hour of cooking. parboil potatoes five
minutes and add to stew  minutes before taking from
fire.
thicken stew with ⁄ cup flour mixed with enough cold water
to pour easily. pour in deep hot platter and surround with
dumplings.
teacher’s note.—broiled steak would be suitable for group work,
using small steaks (delmonico cut). a small roast may be
prepared by a group and roasted after class. this meat and that
left from the steak should be used in a subsequent class for a
lesson on left over meat. broiled or pan-broiled chops may be
prepared individually.
. dumplings.
flourcups
baking powderteaspoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
butterteaspoonfuls
milk⁄cup
mix and sift dry ingredients. work in butter with a knife,
add milk gradually. remove enough liquid from stew so that
when dumplings are dropped in they will rest on top of meat.
drop by spoonfuls and let cook about twenty minutes.
the stew should be thickened before dumplings are
dropped in.
. uses of left over meat.
() rissoles.—run meat together with small piece of onion
through a chopper. add salt, pepper, a little cold cereal,
or bread crumbs, and beaten egg, allowing one egg to about a
pound of meat. shape into flat round cakes, roll in flour and
sauté in butter until well browned. these may be served
with tomato sauce.
tomato sauce.
onionteaspoonful chopped
salt⁄teaspoonful
pepper
flourtablespoonfuls
buttertablespoonfuls
sugarteaspoonful
cloves
tomatoescups
brown the onion in butter and stir in the flour. when
it has bubbled up, add the tomatoes and seasonings.
stir constantly until it thickens. strain into a hot bowl.
teacher’s note.—one sixth of these recipes would be as small an
amount as it would be practicable to use.
() croquettes.
cold meat or chickencups
salt⁄teaspoonful
pepper⁄teaspoonful
cayennefewgrains
onion juicefewdrops
white saucecup, thick, hot
beaten egg
dried bread crumbs
mix ingredients in order given and let mixture cool. shape
into croquettes, roll in crumbs, beaten egg and crumbs again,
place in a frying basket and fry in deep fat to a golden brown.
() escalloped meat
cold meat
bread crumbs, softcups
onionslice, chopped fine
salt⁄teaspoonful
mixed poultry seasoningtablespoonful
a little chopped celery is desirable
this is a simple method of serving left over meat that needs
no specific recipe. layers of bread crumbs are alternated with
layers of meat which may be chopped or cut into small pieces.
liquid may be used like tomato or tomato juice, or soup that
is left over, or plain water. the flavor may be varied by the
use of the different materials that are suitable to meat. layers
of mashed potato may be used instead of bread.
poultry
in selecting poultry see that the flesh is firm, that there is a good
amount of fat underneath the skin, and that the skin is whole and a good
yellow. notice the odor of the fowl particularly. the skin of cold-storage
poultry has not such a good color and is sometimes broken. often the flesh
is shrunken, and if the cold storage has been too long continued the odor
is unpleasant. refrigeration is allowable for a period. another way to
judge cold-storage poultry is
by
the price. well-fed poultry freshly
killed brings a high market price and a bargain quite often proves to be
poultry too long in cold storage. good quality poultry is at present a
high-priced food.
to prepare poultry for cooking, the “dressing” of the chicken is often
done now at the market. if it is necessary to do this at home, make an
incision with a sharp knife just inside of one of the legs, in the groin.
insert the hand and remove all the entrails. the skin must be loosened at
the neck and the crop removed. in any case, wash the chicken thoroughly
inside and out, even holding the cavity under running water. if there is
hair remaining on the chicken, singe this off over burning paper or over a
gas flame.
the composition is essentially the same as that of meat. the white of
chicken, fowls, and turkeys is thought to be more digestible than the dark
meat.
the principles of cookery are the same as with the meat. chicken
soup is made on the same principle as beef soup. after
straining, it is delicious with the addition of milk or cream.
the meat of the chicken may be chopped fine and used as a
thickening. rice may be added or a hard-boiled egg chopped fine.
chicken may be served cold, for luncheon or supper, and is
always very desirable in made-over dishes. any stuffing left
over may be used in the made dishes.
. roast chicken.
dress and clean a chicken. fill the cavity with
stuffing and sew edges together. truss chicken and place on
its back in a roasting pan. rub surface with salt and spread
breast and legs with butter. dredge with flour. put a little
water in bottom of pan. place in hot oven and when flour is
well browned, reduce the temperature. baste frequently during
roasting with liquid in pan. when breast meat is tender and
a brown crust formed the bird is cooked. a four-pound chicken
requires about ⁄
hours.
stuffing. (see recipe for stuffing, page .)
mix all together. no moisture need be added as the
juices of the chicken will be sufficient.
gravy.—pour off liquid from pan in which chicken has
been roasted. add  tablespoonfuls of either chicken fat or
butter. stir in  tablespoonfuls of flour and let bubble
up. add one cup stock, in which giblets, neck, and tips
of wings have been cooked, and stir steadily until thickened.
add ⁄ teaspoonful salt.
. chicken fricassee.
clean and cut up a fowl. cover with
boiling water and let boil  minutes. simmer until meat is
tender. remove chicken from kettle and place pieces in hot,
greased frying pan. sauté until browned. put on platter.
melt  tablespoonfuls chicken fat in pan. add  tablespoonfuls
flour. stir and let bubble up. add  cups chicken
stock, stir and let boil until thickened. pour over chicken
on platter.
laboratory management.—a lesson on poultry is a very
expensive one and difficult to manage so that each may have a
share of the work. such a lesson is suitable where the pupils
have had work in previous years and are used to working in
groups.
preserved meats and poultry.—smoked and salted meats are valuable foods,
although the nutritive content is somewhat less available for digestion.
the salted and smoked meats need long and slow cooking below the boiling
temperature of water.
canned meats and poultry of good quality are now in the market, and
they are convenient and useful when not used to excess. buy well-known
brands. the government inspection of canned meats is of great importance,
for the individual cannot protect himself. canned soups are convenient for
those who cook by gas and who live in small quarters. buy good brands even
if they are somewhat more expensive. the best firms manufacturing
canned
soup are scrupulously clean in their methods and pride themselves on
using good material.
other parts of meat and poultry.—some of the internal organs of the
animals and fowl are used for food. most of them are comparatively cheap,
and may be made palatable.
the liver and kidneys are organs having to do with the waste
products of the body and objection is raised to their use on
that account. if used, they should be soaked in cold salted
water, put into fresh cold water, and allowed to heat very
slowly. this water should be poured off, and then a brown stew
can be made. what flavors are pleasant with liver and kidneys?
make your own recipe for liver or kidney stew.
the heart does not contain waste products. why is it tough?
what process would you select to make it tender? even when
softened, it would not be attractive or very palatable without
further treatment. it is hollow, somewhat as the chicken is
before roasting. look over the recipes and flavors suitable to
meat and see if you cannot make your own for baked heart.
sweetbreads, the pancreas, are highly prized on account of
their delicacy, and are costly. they may be broiled, or served
in sauce in pastry cases or in patties.
calf’s head and brain.—the brain is sometimes used as
substitute for sweetbreads. from the meat and bones of the head
soup and stew may be made.
. from what animals are meats derived?
. what are the chief values of meat?
. why should its use be limited?
. what actual dangers may arise from its use?
. what precautions must be exercised by the government, inspector and the
housekeeper?
. we are told that chicken pie should have the crust pricked or lifted
when it comes from the oven. is this reasonable?
. how may you judge good meats in the market?
. why is the neck of beef tough? for what would you use it?
. why is porterhouse steak tender? why is it not used in a stew? (it
would make a delicious stew.)
. what cuts would you select for stewing and braising?
. make a list of the cuts of beef and mutton and lamb, pork, etc., in
your notebook, with the best methods of cookery for each.
. add to this list the current prices of each in your locality.
. what is the size and cost of a -calorie portion of beef round?
. with this in mind, calculate how much round steak you would buy for
dinner for five people. how much porterhouse?
. explain the structure of the muscle.
. what takes place when meat is seared? when is this process used?
. explain the principle of soup making. devise an experiment to show the
effect of salt upon the pieces of meat. what is the nutritive value of
soup meat?
. explain the principle of stewing meats.
. what is the difference between broiling and pan broiling?
. what are some of the best ways of utilizing left over meat and
poultry?
. which is more economical, croquettes or an escalloped dish? explain
fully.
. how may you distinguish poultry in good condition from that too long
in cold storage?
. why is good poultry not a cheap food?
. discuss making soup versus buying canned soup.
. what are the advantages of canned meat? the possible disadvantages?
fish and shellfish are valuable assets as food, so much so that the
government has a bureau of fisheries, and has established stations at
intervals on the coast and on inland lakes for the study and production of
those foods that come from salt and fresh water. we have used these
products of the waters as if the supply were limitless, forgetting that
fish and shellfish are living creatures with habits that we cannot ignore
without working havoc to the species. young salmon and shad are hatched in
the upper reaches of the rivers, and if we insist on trapping the mature
fish at the river mouth on their northern migrations, the number of young
decreases, and salmon and shad become high-priced foods. to ignore fishery
and game laws is an ignorant and dishonest proceeding, with far-reaching
economic results.
varieties of fish.—in bulletin no.  of the office of experiment
stations, united states department of agriculture, forty-four different
fish are listed, all used as food. a visit to the fish stall in the market
of a seaboard city will acquaint you with many interesting species. fresh
and salt water fish differ in flavor, and there is a difference to be
detected between fish from running, or from lake water, brook trout, for
instance, having a superior flavor. the food supply also influences the
flavor, and both fresh and salt water fish have a better flavor when taken
from sandy and rocky bottoms rather than muddy. the habit of the fish also
has
an effect on the quality and taste. the chequit, for instance, is so
sluggish and easy to catch that it is sometimes called “lazy” or
“weakfish,” and it is watery and poor flavored compared with the shad, a
fish of more vigorous habits. the amount of fat also causes a difference
in flavor, such high flavored fish as salmon and shad containing much fat.
the distinctive flavors of mackerel and herring are apparently not due to
fat, since their fat content is not particularly high. among the most
common and best liked fish are bass, blackfish, bluefish, cod, flounder,
haddock, halibut, herring, mackerel, porgy (sometimes called scup or
scuppaug), salmon, shad, smelt, weakfish, whitefish. brook trout and
salmon trout are luxuries.
fig. .—composition of fish.
composition and nutritive value.—figure  shows the composition of
several kinds. compare their composition with that of meat. the nutritive
content is high, yet fish seems a lighter and less satisfying food than
meat, although on the seaboard of some countries it is the chief animal
food. the digestibility of fish and meat are about equal, but some
varieties of fish are less digestible than others, this being true of the
oily and strong-flavored fish,—herring, mackerel, salmon, and shad.
there are popular prejudices for and against fish that are not warranted.
the idea that fish is a “brain food” because it contains phosphorus was
exploded long since, for fish contains no more phosphorus than some other
foods, and phosphorus is no more valuable to the brain than to the other
tissues.
fish, however, is valuable in the dietary for supplying protein and giving
variety, and in season, it is one of the cheaper foods.
quality of fish.—fish deteriorates and decomposes much more rapidly than
meat, and is at its best when cleaned
and
cooked just after being caught.
ice will preserve fish for a short time only. if ever on a camping trip
you have eaten bluefish caught in the surf, or trout from the brook,
cooked immediately, you know what flavor a fish may have. fish should be
killed immediately, and put on ice if they are not to be cooked at once.
if there is no ice, clean the fish, sprinkle the flesh with pepper and
salt, wrap in a wet cloth, and set in a breeze or draught.
when fish are transported over long distances they should be packed in ice
in refrigerator cars, and you will notice that the fishman in the shop
keeps the fish on ice until he sells them.
in selecting fish, see that the flesh feels firm and that the eyes are
still bright. if you have a keen sense of smell, this will also guide you,
although to the novice the odor of fish may be disagreeable even if
untainted.
fish in season and caught plentifully near by, are of good quality and
should be cheap. shad and salmon have their season in the spring, bluefish
come north in the summer, sometimes as late as august, porgies are a
summer and autumn fish, and smelt are abundant in the winter. deep-sea
fish like cod and halibut have a long season, and may be bought at any
time.
the scaling and cleaning of fish are important first steps.
in the city this may be done for you at the market, but
sometimes on fishing expeditions when you are not a successful
fisher you may make yourself useful by cleaning the fish. clean
the fish on a large piece of paper. use a sharp strong knife,
and rub off the scales from the tail to the head. to skin a fish
well, you should first watch an expert. cut through the skin of
the back
and
abdomen, loosen it at the tail and pull it off.
remove the head, open the abdomen, and take out the entrails.
burn the paper on which the fish has been cleaned. fish is boned
by slitting the flesh down the back, and patiently separating
the flesh from the side bones, and finally pulling out the spine
and attached bones. the strong odor of fish clings to everything
the fish touches. wash the fish, the knife, and your own hands
in cold water and salt. always pour the water in which fish is
washed or cooked down the sink at once, pour in some salt, and
flush the trap with cold water. the utensils, and dishes in
which fish is served, need very careful washing in several
waters.
the connective tissue of fish softens and dissolves more
readily than does that of meat. fish varies in the dryness of
the flesh, but there is no such thing as tough fish, and the
texture of the muscles is about the same in all parts of the
fish, although there is a difference in flavor in the dark and
white flesh when these both occur. on account of this
characteristic of the connective tissue the fish “falls apart”
and our aim must be to prevent this.
principles of cooking.
. the protein is affected as in all other foods where it
occurs.
. the fat is melted.
. connective tissue quickly softened.
to avoid the breaking of the fish it may be wrapped in cloth for
boiling, and the water should simmer only. the coating of small
fish or slices of large fish with beaten egg and crumbs tends to
hold it together. in all cases avoid overcooking. fish is done
when a fork easily pierces it and separates the flakes of flesh
from the bone.
. boiled fish.
use thick pieces of large fish for boiling, or
if small fish are used they may be boiled whole. add salt and
vinegar to water in proportion of  tablespoonful of salt and
two of vinegar to three quarts of water. use enough water
to cover the fish. wrap the fish in cheesecloth to prevent
breaking apart, and plunge into boiling water. do not let
the water boil after fish is in. the fish is done when the flesh
leaves the bone or when the flesh flakes apart easily. the usual
time for a thick piece is - minutes.
mock hollandaise sauce.
buttertablespoonfuls
flourtablespoonfuls
eggs
milkcups
saltteaspoonful
lemon⁄ to .
make as for white sauce, adding the beaten eggs just before
taking from fire and stirring until well thickened. add lemon
juice just before serving. this sauce is suitable for boiled fish and
vegetables.
. left over fish.
fish may be picked apart, mixed with cream
sauce, and served as creamed fish or served as an escallop.
escalloped fish.
cups left over fish, picked over and freed of bones.
cup thin white sauce, dried bread crumbs buttered.
butter a baking dish and line with crumbs. add a layer
of fish, using half, and cover with half the sauce. cover with
a layer of crumbs. add another layer of fish, sauce, and
crumbs, making this last layer of crumbs quite thick. place
in a hot oven and leave until crumbs are brown and fish is
heated through.
to butter crumbs.
melt a little butter in a saucepan and turn the crumbs
in, stirring them over and over with a spoon until all the
crumbs are coated.
. baked fish.
almost any medium sized fish is suitable for baking.
the favorites are bluefish, shad, haddock, and halibut,
sliced.
clean the fish, seeing that all scales are removed. stuff and
sew. shape with skewers to form a letter s and place upright on
a baking pan or lay fish on side. if the fish is not a fat kind, put
strips of salt pork over it and in pan or cut gashes in fish and
lay strips of pork in them. dredge with flour. bake one
hour for a three-pound fish, in a hot oven, basting frequently
with the tried-out fat. serve with drawn butter or hollandaise
sauce.
fish stuffing.
dried crumbscup
melted butter⁄cup
salt⁄teaspoonful
pepper⁄teaspoonful
onion juicea few drops
parsleycaperspicklesteaspoonful each,finely chopped
mix ingredients in order given.
. creamed codfish.
soak the fish in cold water, and pull it apart
with knife and fork. put it in a saucepan of cold water,
allow the water to heat slowly, and stop the heating just
before the water reaches the boiling point. pour off the water,
shake the saucepan over the fire, add a thin white sauce, no. ,
and reheat. serve on toast if desired.
. codfish balls or cakes.
ingredients.
codfish, picked cup
potatoes, cut in cubes cups
egg
salt, if neededto taste
flour for dredging
method.
put the fish and potatoes in a stewpan, cover with cold
water, bring the water to the boiling point, and cook until
the potato is tender. the whole process will take about 
minutes. drain off the water very thoroughly and shake the
stewpan over the fire to dry the contents. it is very necessary
to have the mixture free from water. mash and heat
the mixture in the stewpan, and add the egg. taste to see
if more salt is needed, as is sometimes the case. finish as
follows:
(a) shape into round flat cakes about an inch thick, dredge
with flour and
sauté.
(b) the same, browning the cakes on a greased pan in the
oven, or under the gas flame, turning if necessary.
(c) shape in balls, place these in a wire frying basket, lower
the basket into hot fat until the balls brown, lift the basket,
drain, and drain the balls on paper. keep hot until it is time
to serve.
laboratory management.—for individual work or work in groups
of two, small fish, as perch, may be procured and these may be
stuffed and baked in the period.
the shellfish are of two classes; the mollusks including clams, mussels
(seldom used in this country), oysters, and scallops, and the
crustaceans,—lobsters and crabs. none of the mollusks have high nutritive
value, but they are a protein food, and add to the variety of the diet.
the composition of the oyster is shown in fig. , and it will be noted
that the fat percentage is small and the calorie value low.
the oyster is raised in beds in the ocean, or bays often near the river
mouth, and it is the neighborhood to the river that makes it possible for
the oyster to carry germs of contagion, particularly of typhoid fever,
when city sewage poured into the river passes over the oyster bed. here,
too, government protection is essential, and this is a matter that has
created so much excitement that conditions are already improved. there is
an association of oyster growers who make a point of advertising clean
oyster beds, and cleanly methods of handling and transporting.
oysters vary in size and flavor, the flavor seeming to depend upon the
locality. the smaller are sought for serving raw, and the medium and
larger for cooking. they are sold by the measure or number when taken from
the shell, the latter giving the surer quantity; and the price is usually
one cent apiece. they are in season from september to may. the whole flesh
of the oyster is soft and edible, even the muscle by which it opens and
shuts its shell being tender.
clams are of two kinds, distinguished differently in different places.
they are known as hard and soft, or round
and
long, and in rhode island
the hard round clam still bears the indian name quahaug, the soft shell
clam being the only “clam.”
the long clam lies buried in the soft mud of creeks and muddy shores left
exposed at low tide, when they are dug by hoes from the mud. the round
clam lies on the bottom of shallow warm waters, and is raked with an
implement made for the purpose. the round clam is used when very young and
small in place of raw oysters; but both kinds when matured have a tough
portion that is not softened in cooking, and that is more or less
indigestible. the long “neck” which protrudes from the shell has to be
discarded.
both kinds may be roasted in the shell, and are very palatable served hot
with melted butter, salt, and pepper. they are most commonly used in soups
and in chowder. they are purchased by the quantity or number, are cheaper
than oysters, and are always in season.
scallops, as purchased, are only a part of the animal in the shell,
consisting solely of the round white muscle which operates the shell. the
escallop, or scallop, is migratory, moving by a shooting motion, the
mature scallops reaching the creeks and shores in the autumn, and though
found in so-called beds they are not fixtures like the oysters. the flavor
is sweet, and they have a quality that makes them more or less
indigestible, especially when fried. they are very palatable and more
digestible served in a stew made like an oyster stew. they are sold by the
measure and are cheap in season.
the lobster is now a luxury, for methods of catching in the past have made
them scarce in their old haunts. the lobster is a much more highly
developed animal than the mollusk, having strong muscles inside its coat
of mail, and the flesh has a protein content that compares very favorably
with
meat. when fresh, and not served with rich sauces or eaten at
irregular hours, it is not especially indigestible, and may be the main
dish at luncheon or supper, served simply with salt, pepper, and melted
butter and not taken with meat foods. its own delicious flavor needs no
addition in the way of sauces and high seasoning.
the crab is essentially like the lobster, being smaller, and having a
sweeter flavor. the soft shell crab is caught just as the old shell is
shed, and is highly esteemed as a delicacy. both lobsters and crabs are
cooked in the shell, and if allowed to die naturally before cooking they
are uneatable. they may be purchased alive or cooked, and one is surer of
their condition when they are bought alive. twenty-five cents a pound is
now an average price for lobsters in shell. crabs are somewhat less
expensive at times, but soft shells are always high-priced.
the following table shows the food value of a few of this group in terms
of the weight of the -calorie portion.
-calorie portions of fish and shellfish
fresh fish
weight of -calorie portion
kindas purchased(entrails removed)edible material
ouncesounces
blue fish..
cod...
flounder..
haddock..
halibut steak..
mackerel..
salmon..
salt or smoked fish
cod, salt..
herring, smoked..
halibut, smoked..
mackerel, salt..
shellfish
clams.
crabs.
lobster.
oysters.
scallops.
preserved fish and shellfish.—smoking and salting are two old-time
methods that are still in use, and smoked salmon, herring, and finnan
haddie furnish us well-flavored foods at a reasonable price. small smoked
herring are eaten uncooked, and the other two kinds are excellent broiled,
or parboiled and finished in the oven. salt cod should not be despised,
for it is convenient and may be made palatable. like the meats, the fish
preserved by these methods are slightly less available for digestion.
preserving in oil is made familiar to us by the sardine of italy in
olive oil and the small herring of america in cottonseed oil, which also
bears the name of sardine. the latter is less delicate in flavor than the
european sardine, but is of course cheaper, and is palatable and of equal
food value.
canned fish and shellfish are used in localities where fresh fish are
not easily available, and should not be unwholesome if the process is
properly inspected. canned salmon is the most common, and makes an
excellent luncheon dish when well prepared (see chapter on salads).
principles of cooking.—the protein in all of these is the chief
consideration. the oyster is more delicate when cooked just below the
boiling point of water for a brief period only. this is also true of the
clam, except the tough membranes which must be chopped. the flesh of both
lobster and clam is toughened by cooking, and the process should be short.
general directions.—all fish and shellfish should be thoroughly
cleansed in cold water before using, and under running water
when possible. wash oysters, clams, and scallops in a colander
or strainer under the faucet. if the oyster or clam liquor is
used, put it through a fine strainer.
. to serve oysters and small clams raw.
arrange on finely
chopped ice on a plate, with a piece of lemon in the center.
cut a section of lemon, not a slice. horse-radish is sometimes
served with the raw oyster. garnish with parsley if you wish.
. creamed oysters.
clean oysters of all pieces of shell. cook
them below the boiling point for a few minutes until plump
and edges begin to curl. drain and add to white sauce seasoned
with celery salt. serve on toast, in bread cases, or patty
shells.
. sautéd oysters.
clean one pint of oysters, sprinkle on both
sides with salt and pepper. lift by the tough muscle with
a fork and dip on both sides in cracker crumbs and sauté in
butter until well browned on both sides.
. clam chowder.
proportions.
clamsquart
potatoescups, cut in ⁄ inch dice
onionone,chopped
salttablespoonful
pepper⁄teaspoonful
buttertablespoonfuls
milkcups, scalded
soda crackers
clean and pick over clams, separate the hard and soft part
of clams and chop the former. strain clam liquor through
cheesecloth. try out the pork and fry the onion in it until
brown and turn into a large kettle. boil potatoes until tender,
drain, and pour potatoes into kettle. add clams, milk, butter,
and crackers broken into small pieces. let cook three minutes.
just before serving add clam liquor previously heated. serve
in bowls.
. to prepare lobster and crabs for serving.
make ready a large
kettle of rapidly boiling water. wrap a piece of paper around
the lobster or crab, and plunge it head downward into the boiling
water. let the water boil gently for  minutes—longer
if the lobsters are very large.
to open, a strong pair of scissors is the best utensil and sometimes
a hammer is necessary for the heavy claws. pull out
the flesh, keeping it as whole as possible. the stomach of the
lobster and crab should be taken out and can be recognized
near the head. the long intestine should also be removed
and is easy to find in the hinderpart by splitting open this part
and removing a long white string. the soft green portion
is the liver and is eatable.
to serve.—(a) pick apart and serve on lettuce with a
french dressing, or (b) serve hot with melted butter.
meat substitutes
among these, beans, peas, lentils, eggs, milk, and cheese have already
been mentioned. fish is classed also as a meat substitute.
nuts.—these are a valuable meat substitute, some of them having a good
protein content, and a high fat content as well. (see fig. .) they maybe
served raw for dessert, with some fruit either fresh or dried, raisins and
nuts being a pleasing combination. they should be thoroughly masticated.
they are also palatable and possibly more digestible when cooked. the
reason that many people consider nuts indigestible is because they eat
them between meals, and do not give them a proper place in a meal, eating
them
when
enough food of other kinds has been taken. one who is
open-minded in the matter of menus will find that nuts, raw or cooked, can
literally take the place of meat in a meal.
fig. .—composition of nuts.
almonds are always available in the markets and are so rich in
protein and fat that a pound of shelled almonds is equivalent in
food value to about three pounds of steak. at usual prices a
good grade of almonds is more economical than the ordinary cuts
of meat.
chestnuts are a staple food in parts of italy, and have a
delicious flavor in soups, stuffings, and sauces. our own native
chestnuts, boiled and served whole or roasted, make an excellent
simple dessert.
hickory nuts, english walnuts, pecan nuts, and filberts
are not only palatable in muffins, cake, and yeast bread, but
add to the food value in a rational way.
peanuts are rich in oil and protein. they are nearly equal to
almonds in food value and are even more economical. peanuts are
too concentrated a food for eating between meals or to be taken
after a meal already sufficient, but they may take the place of
meat in the meal and peanut butter may be used on bread and in
sandwiches without butter. they, too, may be used with cake and
cookies.
chopped nuts may be served with a variety of desserts.
remember always that they are to be considered food.
-calorie portions of shelled nuts
kindweight of -calorie portionounces
brazil nuts.
chestnuts.
filberts.
hickory nuts.
peanuts.
pecans.
walnuts (english).
teacher’s note.—when time permits and circumstances make
desirable the development of the economic phase of the food
work, students may be directed to look up the composition, or
the food value per ounce or per pound, of a variety of the foods
of whatever group is under study and work out the return in food
value for a given expenditure of money. the tables in rose’s
“laboratory handbook for dietetics” will be found especially
useful in such work.
. what is the chief food value of fish?
. compare the composition of fish and meat.
. what are the causes influencing the flavor and quality of fish?
. what precautions may be taken to prevent the spoiling of fish?
. how may the oyster beds be safeguarded?
. in what way does the cookery of fish and shellfish resemble that of
meat?
. in what important way does the cookery of fish differ from that of
meat?
. why is fish cheapest in season?
. estimate the cost of -calorie portion of one or two given varieties.
. what precaution is necessary in opening a lobster?
. what must a food contain to make a meat substitute?
. what are the important meat substitutes?
. in what way should nuts be used in the diet?
. what are some of the practical ways of using nuts?
. price several kinds of nuts and several cuts of meat in the market,
then look up the composition of each, remembering that the whole kernel of
the nut is eaten, but often only the lean part of the meat. with this in
mind calculate the food value actually obtained for a given expenditure in
each case.
salads and desserts are sometimes looked upon as luxuries, and something
to be omitted where people must exercise strict economy, and as more or
less indigestible forms of food to be avoided. as a matter of fact both of
these types of dishes are extremely valuable in giving variety to the
diet. they may be very inexpensive, and when they have the right relation
to the rest of the meal, are not more indigestible than many other forms
of food. a heavy salad or rich dessert eaten after a sufficient amount of
other food will naturally cause digestive disturbance.
to disprove the theory of great cost of desserts, two friends once had an
amusing contest to see which could serve the largest number of palatable
desserts at the lowest price. it was interesting to see how many could be
made for a cost of from six to ten cents for a family of five.
materials used for salad.—the word “salad” is said to be derived from the
latin “salis” (salt) which implies that the salad has been looked upon
more or less as a relish. we all associate with a salad appetizing
crispness and freshness. the materials used in the modern salad are so
varied that a complete list would include nearly all our fruits and
vegetables and meat foods.
green vegetables.—celery, chicory or endive, corn salad,
cress, cucumber, dandelion, lettuce, onions, peppers, romaine or
cos lettuce, radishes, and tomatoes.
cooked vegetables.—beans, string and whole, beets,
cauliflower, carrots, potatoes, and spinach.
fruits uncooked.—any fresh fruit, possibly with the exception
of some of the berries.
meat and poultry.—the white meats like veal, chicken, and
turkey are more attractive in salad, but any kind of cold meat
may be used.
fish and shellfish.—lobsters, crabs, scallops, and cold fish.
nuts.—several kinds may be used in combination with fruit.
jellies.—tomato jelly, meat, chicken, and fish molded in
jelly, may be served as a salad.
eggs.—hard-boiled eggs are used as a garnish.
cream cheese.—may be served with lettuce.
salad dressings.—plain lettuce or celery served with salt is in a sense a
salad, but it is our custom to dress the lettuce with a mixture which
contains an acid and usually an oil. a very simple, old-fashioned form of
dressing used in this country is vinegar and sugar. substitute lemon juice
or fresh lime juice for the vinegar and you will have a very refreshing
and simple salad for a summer day.
the ordinary dressing consists of vinegar or lemon juice, and oil; another
form is mayonnaise, where the yolk and sometimes the white of egg are used
to hold the oil and vinegar together.
another form is a cooked dressing which may be bottled and kept for a
longer time than the french dressing or the mayonnaise.
olive oil.—this is the most delicious oil for salad dressing
when the flavor is liked and when it can be afforded.
cottonseed and corn oil.—there are now in the market
clarified cottonseed oil and corn oil that may be used in
mayonnaise dressing, and the flavor is not unacceptable, and
certainly superior to the poorer grades of olive oil which quite
likely contain one of these oils as an adulterant. cottonseed
oil makes a better substitute for olive oil then does corn oil
as it is at present refined.
butter.—butter may be used in boiled salad dressing for those
who dislike the flavor of the oils.
the acids in dressing.—these may be either vinegar or lemon
juice, and many people with whom the vinegar disagrees can eat a
salad made with lemon juice. the acid should not be used in
excess in any case; the best dressings do not give a
distinctively acid taste.
adjuncts.—salt, mustard, cayenne pepper, paprika.
fig. .—a cucumber salad. courtesy of dept.
of foods and cookery, teachers college.
general directions.—the two important points in the preparation
of the material for salad are, first, that everything should
be thoroughly dry, and, second, thoroughly chilled. the
importance of these two points cannot be overemphasized, and
they are of equal value in salad making. many a salad is
unpalatable because it is watery and wilted. for the preparation
of green vegetables see chapter vii. vegetables should be cut in
cubes or sometimes in slices. meat, poultry, and shellfish
should be cut in small pieces or chopped. the prepared meat
should be mixed with some
of
the oil and acid and allowed to
stand in an ice box for some time before it is dressed and
arranged for serving. this process is called marinating in the
cookbooks, and gives a flavor to the salad that it cannot have
if a dressing is poured over the meat just before serving.
combinations in salad.—several well-known combinations will at
once occur to you. meat salads usually have a mixture of celery.
several vegetables may be used together, as beans and carrots,
or carrots, peas, and string beans with lettuce. apples, nuts,
and celery make a pleasing combination. indeed there would seem
to be no end to the possibilities here.
fig. .—a salad with salmon molded in
gelatin. courtesy of dept. of foods and cookery, teachers college.
serving and garnishing.—the principle here is to make the dish
attractive with as little labor as possible. everything served
as a garnish should be eatable. a bed of crisp dry lettuce
leaves is the most attractive setting for any salad. when this
is not procurable, cress makes an attractive border to a salad.
figure  shows you a salmon jelly molded in a ring and
attractively served in lettuce. figure  shows a cucumber
placed on lettuce leaves, dressed with a french dressing and
sprinkled with chopped peppers. the cucumber is sliced ready to
serve; the slices being cut not entirely through the cucumber.
this is rapidly prepared
and
is most attractive. when the salad
is arranged in its dish, it should be put in the ice box and
allowed to remain until it is time to take it to the table. the
salad is sometimes served on individual plates.
. french dressing.
ingredients.
salt⁄teaspoonful
pepper⁄teaspoonful
vinegartablespoonfuls
olive oiltablespoonfuls
method.
mix the salt, pepper, and vinegar and stir in the olive oil
slowly. a few drops of onion juice may be added.
. mayonnaise dressing.
ingredients.
mustardteaspoonful
saltteaspoonful
powdered sugarteaspoonful
a few grains of cayenne
eggsyolksof 
lemon juicetablespoonfuls
vinegartablespoonfuls
olive oil⁄cups
method.
stir together the eggs, mustard, salt, pepper, and sugar.
add the oil, a drop at a time, stirring and beating constantly.
the back of a silver fork is a good thing for mixing mayonnaise,
though some people prefer a dover beater. as the dressing becomes
very thick it should be thinned occasionally with vinegar
and lemon, alternately, but never let it lose its consistency.
after the first, the oil may be added more rapidly. all ingredients
and utensils must be cold. if the weather is warm, the
bowl should be surrounded with ice water. if the dressing should
separate, begin with another yolk of egg and stir the separated
mixture into it slowly, as before. set the bowl in a cold
place and it should keep for many days.
. boiled dressing.
ingredients.
eggs
mustard⁄teaspoonful
salt⁄tablespoonful
sugar⁄tablespoonful
vinegartablespoonfuls
hot water⁄cup
buttertablespoonful
a few grainsof cayenne
method.
mix the dry ingredients and beat with the eggs until light.
add the vinegar and water and cook in a double boiler, stirring
constantly until thick and smooth. remove from the fire, stir
in the butter and set away to cool. a little cream added after the
dressing cools is a great addition. sour cream may be used instead
of the water, in which case less vinegar and butter should be used.
. potato salad.
ingredients.
potatoes, cold-boiled or baked
parsley or onion juice
egg, hard-boiled, olives, pickled beets, etc.
french dressing
method.
cut the cold-boiled or baked potatoes into ⁄-inch cubes.
marinate (i.e. mix and let stand) with french dressing. chopped
parsley or onion juice may be mixed with potatoes. arrange
in a mound and garnish with slices of hard-boiled egg, olives,
pickled beets, etc.
. chicken salad.
ingredients.
cold-boiled or roast fowl
celery, ⁄ as much as fowl
french dressing
mayonnaise or boiled dressing
olives
method.
cut cold-boiled or roast fowl in ⁄-inch cubes. add to this
⁄ as much celery which has been washed, scraped, and cut
into
cubes. marinate with french dressing. just before serving
moisten with mayonnaise or boiled salad dressing. garnish
with celery tips and olives.
. waldorf salad.
ingredients.
apples, tart and juicy
celery, ⁄ as much as apples
mayonnaise dressing
lettuce leaves
method.
select tart, juicy apples. cut in quarters, pare and core
and cut in ⁄-inch cubes. add half as much celery, washed,
scraped, and cut into cubes. mix with boiled or mayonnaise
dressing and serve cold on lettuce leaves. if handsome red
apples can be had, they may be washed and polished and a
slice cut from the stem end and the apple used as a cup after
scooping out the inside to use for a filling with the celery. serve
on a lettuce leaf. chopped nuts may be mixed with the apple
and celery if desired.
. stuffed tomato salad.
ingredients.
tomatoes, medium sized
boiling water
salt
cucumbers (or celery)
mayonnaise dressing
lettuce leaves
method.
cover medium sized tomatoes with boiling water for a minute
and remove the skin. cut a thin slice from the top and
take out part of the seeds and pulp. sprinkle inside of the
tomato with salt, invert, and let stand one half hour. fill
tomatoes with cucumbers (or celery) cut in small cubes and
moistened with mayonnaise dressing. arrange on lettuce
leaves and garnish top with mayonnaise dressing.
laboratory management.—⁄ egg yolk ( teaspoonful) and ⁄
cup of olive oil is as small a quantity as is practicable to use
in making the mayonnaise. this quantity made by groups of two
works out well as the process of adding the oil drop by drop is
difficult for a beginner working alone. the boiled dressing
works in well as a variation of the boiled custard.
desserts
the dessert in this country includes the sweet dish, or the fruit at the
end of the meal. in simple meals the dessert is usually one of the two,
although in more elaborate meals fruit is served after the sweet dish, and
sometimes crackers and cheese are served at the last. from the point of
view of nutrition and digestibility this is more than is necessary, and
you will notice that when both are served, the fruit is often declined.
like the salad, the dessert may be made from a large variety of materials
and bears different names. there are hot puddings and cold puddings, pies
and tarts, jellies and ices and ice creams. it is very interesting to read
over the many dishes of this class in a cookbook and to attempt to
classify them. if you are fortunate enough to have access to a cookbook of
the eighteenth century, you will find that much labor was given to the
preparation of elaborate structures which served as table ornaments; even
now you will find french cooks who spend much time in making elaborate
displays of their skill. for everyday life the dessert should be
attractive to the eye and yet simple.
materials used in desserts.
eggs, milk, and cream; these are important and are used in custards,
in dishes stiffened with gelatin or thickened with cornstarch,
or in ice cream.
breadstuffs.—cake and sponge cake, bread crumbs and sliced
bread, are valuable in desserts. bread pudding may be made a
very delicious dish. bread may be combined with fruit in the shape
of an escalloped dish. baking-powder biscuits, crust, and shortcake
are also used.
other starchy substances.—these are cornstarch, arrowroot,
sago, tapioca and manioca.
fruits.—raw and cooked fruits of every possible kind. a few
fruits like the lemon, orange, grapefruit, and melon are not cooked.
for preparing fruit served alone, see chapter
gelatin.—this material has been mentioned in the chapter on
meat. it is prepared for use in desserts in a number of forms, the
granular being the most convenient. gelatin has the property,
first, of absorbing water, then of dissolving at the boiling temperature
of water and becoming stiff again when cool. after dissolving,
as it is cooling and just as it begins to thicken slightly, it can be
beaten like white of egg. if beating is attempted while the liquid is
warm, or again if it becomes too stiff, the result is not successful.
this property makes it useful in the sponges and other fancy
desserts where the light spongy texture is desirable.
fig. .—a gelatin mold. courtesy of dept. of
foods and cookery, teachers college.
making desserts attractive.—this is done by serving hot desserts in a
dish around which a napkin may be folded; and cold desserts, especially
those made with gelatin, may be molded in some attractive form and
garnished. figure  shows a very simple gelatin dessert garnished with
candied cherries and a little angelica, the stem of a plant which has been
sugared, and the whole surrounded with whipped
cream.
whipping the cream
and putting it around the base takes only a few minutes. as in salad, the
garnish should be eatable and easily prepared.
. boiled custard.
ingredients.
milkpt.
sugartablespoonfuls
eggs
vanilla⁄teaspoonful
salt⁄teaspoonful
method.
put the milk, sugar, and salt in a double boiler to scald. separate
the eggs and set the whites in a cold place until wanted.
beat the yolks until lemon-colored. pour a little of the scalded
milk on the yolks of the eggs, stirring until well mixed. set the
double boiler back on the stove and pour the egg and milk mixture
slowly into the rest of the scalded milk, stirring constantly until
thickened enough to coat the spoon. remove from the fire, add
the flavoring, and turn into a dish to cool. just before serving
beat the whites to a very stiff froth and pile by spoonfuls on the
custard. the whites may be sweetened with powdered sugar
after beating if desired. corn starch may be used, and fewer eggs.
. baked custard.
ingredients.
milkpt.
sugartablespoonfuls
salt⁄teaspoonful
eggs
lemon orvanilla⁄teaspoonful
method.
scald the milk, sugar, and salt together. beat the eggs in a
baking dish and pour the scalded milk over them. add the
flavoring and stir well. set the baking dish in a pan of boiling
water and bake in a moderate oven until a knife thrust into
the custard will come out clean. serve cold either plain, or with
chocolate sauce. nutmeg may be grated on top of the custard
before baking, or caramel flavoring may be added in place of
the vanilla.
. chocolate sauce.
ingredients.
chocolatesquare
sugar⁄cup
boiling water⁄cup
cream⁄cup
method.
mix the chocolate, boiling water, and sugar together and
stir over the fire until smooth and thick. add the cream and
serve hot.
. caramel flavoring.
ingredients.
sugarcups
boiling watercup
method.
pour the sugar into a saucepan and stir over the fire until it
becomes a thick brown sirup. pour the boiling water on this
and leave on the fire, stirring occasionally until the sugar is all
dissolved. this may be bottled and kept for some time.
. shortcake.
ingredients.
flourcup
baking powderteaspoonful
salt⁄teaspoonful
buttertablespoonfuls
 or
one half butter and one half lard.
milk⁄cup
method.
mix dry ingredients and cut butter into this mixture with two
knives. stir in the milk and spread the mixture out on a buttered
layer cake tin. bake in a hot oven until brown. wash
and hull a box of strawberries, sprinkle with ⁄ cup of sugar, and
crush with a spoon. when the shortcake is done remove from
the pan, cut around the edge with a sharp knife and right through
the center of the cake, making two layers of it. spread the lower
layer with butter and then with the crushed strawberry. replace
the top layer and serve hot. fresh peaches, preserves, or a
mixture of orange and banana may be used for this
shortcake.
another kind of strawberry cake is made of sponge cake, and
served cold with whipped cream.
. steamed pudding.
ingredients.
suet choppedcup
raisins, currants, and citron slicedcup
egg
sweet milkcup
molasses⁄cup
sodateaspoonful
salt⁄teaspoonful
flour⁄cups
method.
skin, wash, and chop the suet, and dredge with flour. wash,
pick over and seed the dried fruit, slice the citron if it is used,
and dredge all with flour. stir together the milk and molasses,
sift the dry ingredients with the flour, and stir the liquid into
the flour slowly. add the suet, beating the mass thoroughly,
and last the fruit, sprinkling in both the suet and the fruit as
you stir. fill a greased mold ⁄ full, close tightly, and cook in
a kettle of boiling water for three hours. serve with a hard
or foamy sauce.
laboratory management.—this can be made in class if each
pupil will bring an empty baking powder or cocoa tin to school.
a strip of greased cloth should be fastened around the edge of
the cover. the recipe can be made in ⁄ cup proportions, and
this amount can be cooked if the class period is two hours in
length, but it is better to have the cooking finished at home.
this is a seasonable exercise at thanksgiving or christmas.
. brown betty or apple scallop.
ingredients.
buttered crumbs
tart cooking apples
sugar
cinnamon
a little water
teacher’s note.—individual shortcakes may be made by using a
stiffer dough and rolling and cutting them like
biscuits.
method.
put a layer of buttered crumbs in a baking dish. pare and
slice tart cooking apples and put a layer into the dish. sprinkle
with sugar, cinnamon, and a little water. add a layer of bread
crumbs and repeat with apples, flavoring and cover the top
with crumbs. bake in a moderate oven until apples are cooked
and crumbs brown. any fruit such as peaches or blueberries
may be used instead of apples. serve hot with hard or foamy
sauce or cold with cream and sugar, or the bread may be used
in slices, buttered.
. hard sauce.
ingredients.
butter⁄cup
powdered sugarcup
lemon extract⁄teaspoonful
 or
vanilla⁄teaspoonful
nutmeg
method.
cream the butter; add sugar gradually, and flavoring.
grate nutmeg over the top. chill before serving.
. foamy sauce.
ingredients.
butter⁄cup
powdered sugarcup
egg
vanillateaspoonful
method.
cream the butter, add gradually the sugar, the egg well
beaten, and vanilla. beat while heating over hot water.
. tapioca cream.
ingredients.
pearl tapioca⁄cup
 or
minute tapioca⁄tablespoonfuls
scalded milkcups
eggs,or 
sugar⁄cup
salt⁄teaspoonful
vanilla⁄teaspoonful
method.
minute tapioca needs no soaking. if pearl tapioca is used,
it must be soaked one hour in cold water to cover. pick over
and wash the tapioca, drain off the water and add tapioca to
the milk and salt scalded in the double boiler, and cook until
the tapioca is transparent, or about ⁄ hour. beat eggs and
add the sugar to them. combine mixtures by pouring a little
of the hot mixture in the egg and then stirring this into the
mixture remaining in the double boiler. stir over fire until
it becomes thick. add the flavoring and pour into a dish to
cool.
. apple tapioca.
ingredients.
minute tapioca⁄cup
lemon peel
boiling water⁄cups
salt⁄teaspoonful
tart apples
sugar⁄cup
method.
cook the tapioca in salt water until it becomes transparent.
core and pare the apples and place in the bottom of the
baking dish. fill the cavities with sugar and add a little lemon
peel. pour the tapioca over the apples and bake in a moderate
oven until the apples are soft. serve cold with sugar and
cream.
. lemon jelly.
ingredients.
shredded gelatin⁄box
 or
granulated gelatintablespoonfuls
lemon juice⁄cup
cold water⁄cup
boiling water⁄cups
sugarcup
method.
soak the gelatin in cold water for  minutes. add the boiling
water and sugar and stir until it dissolves. add the
lemon
juice and strain into a mold and set away to harden. when it
is stiff loosen from the sides of the mold (a cloth wrung out of
hot water may be needed). turn on to a plate and serve with
whipped cream or soft custard.
. snow pudding.
ingredients.
granulated gelatintablespoonful
cold water⁄cup
boiling watercup
sugarcup
lemon juice⁄cup
eggswhites of 
method.
mix as for lemon jelly. set aside in a cool place, and as
soon as it becomes sirupy stir occasionally until quite thick.
then beat with wire spoon or whisk until frothy. fold in
the beaten whites, and continue to beat lightly until quite
stiff. pile by spoonfuls on a plate and serve with boiled custard,
or mold as in fig. .
frozen mixtures.—there are some interesting principles to note here. the
freezing is accomplished by using a mixture of chopped ice and rock salt.
can you explain how this reduces the temperature?
another interesting point is this: have you ever seen a milk bottle on a
cold winter morning with the paper cover or even the metal cap pushed up,
the frozen milk standing high above the top of the bottle? what does this
suggest to you in connection with the filling of the ice cream freezer?
it must be noted, too, that a larger amount of flavoring material is
needed in a frozen dessert than in one that is not. the frozen custard,
for instance, needs more vanilla than one prepared in the ordinary manner.
can you account for this?
method of freezing.
there are many patterns of ice cream freezers that are well
constructed and inexpensive. they are sold by the size, a 
quart
freezer giving you  quarts of the frozen cream. see that the crank
is oiled and the whole apparatus clean. have ready pounded ice
and rock salt, usually in the proportion of  part salt to  of ice.
machines come for cutting the ice, but it is easy to pound it in a
strong bag. set the freezer can in place, put around it the ice and
salt alternately, shaking down and packing firmly. have the ice
cream mixture cool, pour it in, having the can not more than ⁄ full.
put on the lid, cover with ice and salt, and begin to turn the
crank. open and stir down once or twice, being careful to keep
out the salt. take out the crank before the cream is too stiff. pack
the cream firmly down in the can. see that the melted water is
removed from the pail, put in more ice and salt, and leave until the
ice cream is firm.
to mold ice cream or mousse. directions for packing in a mold
are given under strawberry mousse.
. american ice cream.
(a) ingredients.
creamquart
sugar⁄cup
vanillatablespoonful
method.
mix ingredients and freeze.
(b) ingredients.
milkpint
flourtablespoonful
egg
sugarcup
salt⁄teaspoonful
creamquart
vanillatablespoonful
method. as in french ice cream.
. french ice cream.
ingredients.
creamquart
milkquart
eggsor  to  yolks
sugar⁄cups
vanillatablespoonfuls
method.
make a custard of milk, eggs, sugar, and vanilla. add
cream, chill and freeze.
. milk sherbet.
ingredients.
milkcups
sugar⁄cups
lemonsjuiceof 
method.
mix juice and sugar, stirring constantly while slowly adding
milk. if the mixture should curdle, this will disappear when
frozen.
. raspberry ice.
ingredients.
watercups
sugar⁄cups
raspberry juicecups
lemon juicetablespoonfuls
method.
make a sirup by boiling water and sugar twenty minutes,
add raspberry juice, strain and freeze. any fruit juice may
be used for this sherbet.
. strawberry mousse.
ingredients.
creamquart
strawberriesbox
sugarcup
granulated gelatin⁄tablespoonfuls
cold watertablespoonfuls
hot watertablespoonfuls
method.
wash and hull berries, sprinkle with sugar, and let stand
one hour; mash and rub through a fine sieve, add the gelatin
soaked in cold water and dissolved in hot water. set in a pan
of ice water and stir until it begins to thicken; then fold in
the whipped cream, put into a mold, cover, pack in two parts
ice to one of salt, and let stand four hours. use a mold
with
a tight cover and seal the crack with a strip of cloth dipped
in melted butter and bound around the mold while still wet.
. explain the value of salads and desserts in the dietary.
. what are the important points in a good salad?
. give a number of agreeable combinations of material in a salad.
. what are the substitutes for olive oil?
. why should mayonnaise dressing be kept cold in the mixing?
. make a classification of the different types of dessert.
. what is gelatin, and why is it useful in desserts?
. what are the underlying principles of custard making?
. why is it important that the can in a freezer should not be filled to
the top?
. why does chopped ice and salt freeze the mixture?
. estimate the cost of the following dishes for five people: potato
salad with boiled dressing; a baked custard; a brown betty; french ice
cream; raspberry or lemon ice.
. explain what is meant by garnishing.
the preparation of a number of dishes assembled for a meal requires a
skill quite different from that necessary for the making of a single dish.
a menu being decided upon, it needs an accurate sense of time,
forethought, and promptness, to have a number of dishes ready at the same
time, or in proper sequence if several courses are served. such questions
as the following must be answered:
technique of preparation.
. what steps in preparation can be taken ahead of time, as
washing, paring, cutting, etc.?
. what dishes take the longest to cook?
. which must be served the moment they are done?
. which can be kept hot for some time without injury?
. which can be finished and cooled perhaps several hours
before?
. do the dishes selected require the same utensils at the same
time? (if so, the menus must be changed.)
. what is the order of serving?
to understand the bearing of these questions you will need to select some
menu and make a plan for preparing it. (see exercises at the end of this
chapter.)
the fact is obvious that in preparing a meal you cannot finish the dishes
one at a time, but that steps individual to each dish must be interwoven
with each other, and the cook must have them all “on her mind,” and is
often doing half a dozen things at once. as a high school girl, preparing
a
part of her first meal, remarked, “this is as good training as
mathematics.”
the woman at home will devise many ways of easing and shortening the labor
just before the meal is served, avoiding haste and anxiety in this way.
with the fireless cooker and other slow-cooking apparatus, the heavy work
may sometimes be done far ahead of mealtime. a dessert can be prepared and
be cooking as breakfast dishes are washed, and at the time left overs are
put away they can be arranged ready for serving, as in the case of poultry
or meat to be served cold. while the preparation of the midday meal is in
progress, something can sometimes be done for the last meal, too. this,
indeed, is a field for generalship, and it is a successful campaign when
the meals are all on time and well prepared, and the cook and family
cheerful.
important points in serving each dish.—each dish should be perfectly
done, neither over nor under cooked. all hot dishes should be hot, and
cold dishes cold. lukewarm food is not agreeable. bread and cake and some
kinds of pastry are the only foods that may have the temperature of the
room. sliced meat and salads should be cold. chill chocolate éclairs
before serving and see how much they are improved; indeed, experiment with
a number of foods that are usually served at room temperature.
to keep food hot.—a hot closet above a coal or gas range is
made for this purpose, and steam heaters sometimes have
hot-closets. a double boiler is a help, and one utensil may be
set into a larger, filled with boiling water. some dishes can be
set back on the stove, or over a simmering gas burner with an
asbestos mat underneath. the oven may be used sometimes, with
the door set ajar. the food may be kept covered unless it will
steam, in which case cover it with a towel. serve food in hot
dishes.
to keep food cool.—leave the dish in the ice box until the last
possible moment. sometimes serve with ice (butter in
warm
weather). if ice is lacking, use other cooling devices. serve
in chilled dishes.
garnishing the dish.—all food must be neatly placed in the
dish, and arranged or piled with some sort of symmetry, and this
is the most that some people have time to do. many foods may be
served in the utensil or dish in which they are cooked, and in
the case of a baking dish, if its appearance is not neat, a
napkin can be folded about it. the simplest form of garnish is
browning on the top, which makes many dishes attractive (mashed
potato).
make the garnishing simple, and have it eatable when possible.
slices of hard-boiled eggs on spinach, chopped parsley and
butter on boiled or mashed potato, parsley and slices of lemon,
with meat and fish.
vegetable borders are attractive and save labor in dish
washing. arrange the meat in the center of the platter, and pile
mashed potato, or boiled rice or peas or beans, or a mixture of
hot vegetables around the edge. this saves time in table
service, too.
the garnishing of salads, desserts, and cakes is treated in
previous chapters.
table equipment and service.—this is a place where beauty is a large
element, and most people understand the charm of a daintily laid table, as
the family gathers for a meal. but many factors must be taken into
account, for it is an easy matter to pass from the simple and beautiful to
an extravagant display, to spend more on the dining-room equipment than
the income warrants, and to waste much energy in unnecessary work. our
great need here is to learn to see beauty in simplicity. we must remember,
too, that many people in our country live in crowded quarters, and have no
time for anything but the simplest kind of table
service.[]
the table should be firm, large enough to accommodate the
family comfortably, and it should permit of extension when
occasion demands a larger board. the top should have an oil
finish that will not easily mar and that can be washed off. have
a thick cloth or pad to protect it—the “silence cloth.”
table covers may be the small doilies with centerpiece, strips
of fine linen crash, or blue or brown and white japanese
toweling laid across both ways, a cloth that just covers the
table, or a large cloth that hangs well below the table edge.
the doilies and strips are used conventionally for breakfast and
luncheon, but save much labor when used for all meals. the color
may be white, or tinted, but the dark-colored cloth should be
banished.
the material may be linen or mercerized cotton. many people
think white table oilcloth is impossible, but a table covered
with it may be made very pretty; it can be kept clean by washing
at the end of each meal, and the saving in labor is
incalculable.
the pattern and quality and cost of table linens are mentioned
in chapter xxi.
napkins may match the tablecloths. a small size economizes
labor. avoid fringes, selecting a scalloped edge or hemstitch.
japanese paper napkins are useful in summer, and for box
luncheons.
the dishes.—only a few practical suggestions can be given
here. this is a topic for the art class.
buy from “open stock.” this means, not a single set, but a
pattern that the manufacturer and retailer have always on hand,
so that the purchaser can buy one plate or cup and saucer, to
replace breakage.
an elaborate or highly colored design becomes wearisome, is not
practical for those who have a limited supply of dishes, and is
in questionable taste. a positive color demands always the same
general scheme for other decorations. a band of color, or a
narrow design at the edge, of a color harmonizing easily with
other colors, is in good taste. gold and green are safe colors.
see fig. . white dishes with a raised border are dainty, and
any color scheme may be used with them. see fig. .
the number of dishes depends upon the simplicity or
elaborateness of the method of living and the size of the
family. it is much better to begin with a few, and increase the
number when necessary, than to have the shelves filled with
unused ware. (see exercises.)
glassware is pressed or cut, the latter being beautiful, but
an expensive luxury. glasses for water, and dishes for berries,
are made with simple and attractive designs in the pressed ware,
and serve all ordinary purposes. a pretty shape for the glass
for water is shown in fig. .
silver and plated silver for knives, forks, and spoons, coffee
and tea sets, all add to the charm of the table. a large
collection is not necessary for everyday use, and it adds
greatly to the labor of the housewife. figure  shows some good
designs in spoons, and spoons and forks of different sizes come
in the same design. a simple design is easy to clean. three
sizes of spoons, tablespoons, teaspoons, and coffee spoons, and
two sizes of forks are all sufficient, with a few larger spoons
for service and desserts.
triple-plated ware lasts for years, if well cared for, and comes
in good designs.
pewter, familiar in olden days, is being used again in colonial
designs, and makes an attractive tea or coffee set, is less
costly than solid silver, and has a better tone and color than
plated ware.
cutlery.—plated knives are easy to care for, but steel knives
are more effective for some purposes. purchase good quality
steel knives, especially in the carving set.
fig. .—good designs for table silver.
courtesy of gorham co.
setting the table.—the first principles here are to have everything clean
and shining, and to lay everything straight. have as little on the table
as possible. it is not comfortable to have a large array of articles at
one’s place. figure  shows you a dainty and well-laid table, arranged
for a sunday night supper, and this arrangement is a good one for any
meal, with substitutes for the chafing dish.
be sure that the cloth is straight, the center fold in the
middle of the table, and that the cloth hangs evenly on all
sides. see that centerpiece and doilies are laid at even
distance.
laying each place.—in fig.  the knife, edge out, is at the
right, with one spoon, and the glass is at the right, in line
with the end of the knife. two forks are at the left, and a
plate for bread and butter, with bread knife are at the left,
opposite the glass. the napkin is at the left. this plan,
somewhat elaborated, may be safely followed for formal service.
two knives may be placed at the right, with the soup spoon, and
three forks at the left. if more than these are needed, they may
be supplied later, laid on the plate placed for a certain
course, in the middle of the plate, handle toward the guest.
fig. .—a table set for sunday night supper.
courtesy of dept. of foods and cookery, teachers college.
the other articles on the table may vary widely. for everyday
use, where there is no maid, or only one, set in places
convenient to pass, the salt and pepper, vinegar and sugar,
bread plate and butter plate, and any small dish of condiment or
pickle, with pretty mats for the hot dishes to be set on later,
and enough spoons for serving. see that the arrangement is
symmetrical and convenient. a table laid in this way has room
for little more in the way of “decoration” than a slender vase
holding a few flowers in the center. the dishes for dessert can
be ready on a side table.
for formal service nothing is placed on the table in addition to
the equipment at each place, but some centerpiece containing
ferns or flowers, with pretty dishes of silver or glass holding
relishes, candies, or dried fruits, a graceful arrangement being
to alternate four of these with four candlesticks for meals
served late in the day.
table decorations.—here fancy may run riot with color
schemes, and pretty devices for special occasions. a painted
place card, a small bonbon box, a single flower with a pin for
fastening it on,—all these have their place at times. satin
ribbon is not an appropriate table decoration laid across the
table in a broad band, even when it displays a class color. find
some other way to make the color effective. a color scheme in
the food can be carried out to a degree for some occasion, but
do not let the color interfere with a really satisfactory menu.
relishes have already been suggested as decoration—radishes cut
in rose shape, olives, candies, and fruit.
the tray for invalid and convalescent.—figures  and 
suggest the daintiness possible in setting a tray. it is well
worth while to spend time in the careful arrangement of the
tray, for pretty dishes in orderly array may tempt the appetite
of the invalid.
fig. .—a convalescent’s tray. courtesy of
the dept. of foods and cookery, teachers college.
fig. .—a convalescent’s tray with rack for
holding cover. courtesy of the dept. of foods and cookery, teachers
college.
waiting on the table.—when we wait on ourselves, this should be done with
cheerfulness, and all should take a share. after the food is on the table,
one person can “help” one thing and one another. it is a good plan for the
young people of the family to take turns as waiter in removing the soiled
dishes and food and putting on the dessert. a quick method is to place a
tray on a small stand near the table, taking
the
dishes from one place at
a time, and sorting them on the tray as you go. the tray can then be
carried into the kitchen, with the dishes partly arranged for washing.
one mother uses a plan for having everybody help at breakfast time,
modeled after the tray system of a cafeteria. the breakfast is cooked
ready to serve, and on the kitchen table is a small tray for each one of
the family of four. all necessary articles are at hand, and even the boy
of seven sets his own tray and helps himself to food, and takes his place
at the table; and then when the meal is ended each one carries out his
dishes and puts them in neat array for washing.
the waitress at a formal meal has to be alert, rapid yet gentle in all her
motions, with a desire to make other people comfortable, and a faculty for
remembering their likes and dislikes. a good waitress does not pass a
second time a dish once declined.
the waitress must know the menu, and have everything ready for each course
at hand on the sideboard, with dishes kept hot in the hot closet.
the table is laid in time, she herself is immaculate, and the room is well
aired and the temperature agreeable. a piece of bread is folded in each
napkin. if the first course is cold,—perhaps a grapefruit,—she arranges
these at each place. if it is to be a hot bouillon, the cook tells her
that all is ready, and then she informs the hostess that dinner or
luncheon is served.
the details of this type of waiting vary with the place and the taste of
the hostess, but the following method is simple and rapid.
serving.—serve everything from the side table. hold the dish to
be served firmly in two hands with a napkin underneath, a
tablespoon and fork being placed on the dish. pass to the left
of the guest, and hold the dish at a convenient height and near
the
plate. after all the dishes in a course are passed in this
way, watch to see if second helps are needed.
remove the soiled plates at the left, and place the clean at the
left, removing with the left hand and placing with the right.
fill glasses at the right, and remove silver at the right before
dessert when there are pieces left unused.
brush crumbs with a soft, folded napkin upon a plate, at the
left, just before dessert when everything is taken from the
table but the center decoration, the candies, and the glass of
water. with this plan the guest helps himself each time, even
the after-dinner coffee being passed on a tray with cream and
sugar, and he can take as little as he pleases, or decline. some
hostesses have some of the courses arranged on individual plates
and placed, and these may be placed either from the left or
right. but the other method is simple and satisfactory.
the finger bowls may be set on plates of dessert size with a
doily underneath. if a spoon or fork is needed with the dessert,
one or both may be placed on the plate also, one on each side,
if both are used. the bowls should be less than half full of
water and the water should be a comfortable temperature, neither
cold nor noticeably warm. set the plates arranged in this way
before each guest. the guest himself will remove the bowl and
doily and silver before the dessert is passed. in large banquets
the food must be placed on the individual plate.
the question is sometimes asked, “who shall be served first?” it
is a good plan to change this from course to course, beginning
the first time with the guest of honor. it is not a matter of
great importance, provided no one has to wait long. two
waitresses make the service quicker.
the guests of honor sit at the right of the host and hostess.
the number of courses.—two or three courses are enough for
everyday comfort and health. in formal serving, it is good taste
not to have too many. a first course of grapefruit or perhaps
oyster cocktail, a soup, a fish course, or some light substitute
for it,—the main course with meat, a salad, dessert,
coffee—make a quite sufficient meal. the “entrée” is a light
dish, say sweetbreads in cases, after the fish course, but it is
quite unnecessary. many people are becoming very weary of the
long-drawn-out dinners and banquets, which are certainly far
from hygienic.
carving.—this is an art that used to be taught as an accomplishment to
girls, and it is not an easy matter to master.
if not done at the table, it must nevertheless be well done.
watch a good carver, and practice when you have a chance. a few
simple directions can be given, but a demonstration is really
necessary. first and foremost, have a sharp, strong knife, and a
strong fork. the next essential is a platter large enough to
hold the meat, without having it slip off. the fork must be
firmly placed in the meat, and the meat held down. notice the
shape of the cut of meat. meat must be cut across the grain.
loosen from the bone, notice the grain, and cut evenly and
firmly. with fowl, discover the joints, pierce with the end of
the knife, disjoint, and lay at the side, and then slice the
breast across the grain. if carving at the table, learn the
preference of those served, whether they wish light or dark
meat, meat well done or underdone. have a spoon for dish gravy
and stuffing.
. plan the order of work for the following menus: (a) cooked cereal and
cream, stewed prunes, poached egg on toast, popovers, coffee. (b) tomato
bisque, lamb chops with peas and mashed potatoes, plain lettuce with
french dressing, brown betty with foamy sauce, black coffee.
. what are the important points in serving each dish? give some simple
garnishes.
. obtain price lists and estimate the cost of table furnishings.
. what do you consider good taste in china and silver?
. what are the important points in table setting?
. make a list of dishes to be used for the menus given above, or other
menus.
. what are the fundamentals in waiting on the table?
. how may the home service be made comfortable?
. discuss different methods in formal service.
. how may the guest be made most comfortable?
this is at all times an important matter, but the notable increase in food
prices, during the last decade, has made it a matter of interest to all.
the cost of food is one item only in the whole cost of living, and this is
affected by many conditions in manufacture and commerce and the business
of the nations. economists and others interested in social questions are
studying the problem, but as yet they do not agree upon the cause, or
causes, of the increased cost of living. we cannot hope, therefore, to
understand the situation fully; but we must be determined to spend money
as wisely as we can, and to learn what we may about food prices in
relation to food values. there are a few causes of the difference in price
between one food and another that are more or less unchanging. the cost of
food may be considered from several points of view. the question of the
cost for each individual a day and relation of cost and nutritive value
are studied in chapter xviii. the proportion of the income to be spent for
food is taken up in chapter xix.
labor and prices.—the amount of labor involved in producing a food
material affects its price. meats cost more than staple vegetable foods,
like corn, wheat, or beans, because we must raise the corn first to feed
the animals. meat is as cheap as vegetable foods only when the animal can
find its own food, as in the pioneer days of any country, when only a
small part of the land is under cultivation. to the pilgrim fathers, meat
was cheaper than corn, in terms
of
labor, with deer at hand in the forest
and corn raised with difficulty in small clearings. meat production is now
an industry, and the product an expensive one, especially as the wide
cattle ranges of our west, where the animals have formerly found natural
food, are now used more and more for other purposes.
transportation.—carrying food from place to place increases its cost. in
one sense this is another form of labor. each person who handles the food
material from producer to consumer adds something to what the consumer
pays. we have heard much discussion of late of the “middleman,” and the
effort to bring the producer and consumer closer together. this simply
means doing away with some person who handles the product after it leaves
the producer and before it reaches the consumer and who must have
something for his labor. in transportation there is another element
involved, the original cost of the means of conveyance; and the natural
wear and tear on the product are items that increase the final cost. the
modern farmer who carries his produce to market in an auto truck must have
a return for the original cost of the truck and the keeping of it in
repair. the long-distance railway furnishes cold-storage cars, and the
cost of these and their maintenance affect freight rates. a peach from
south africa costs from fifty to sixty cents in the boston market. it is
probably true, in this case, that a fancy price is asked because african
fruit is a novelty here; but the difficulty and expense of long-distance
transportation naturally make it costly.
demand and supply.—the relation of demand to supply affects the price of
food in a way not difficult to understand. where the supply is permanently
small and the demand widespread, the price of the particular food material
will be high, and vice versa. olive oil is a good example of the
permanently
high-priced food. california olive oil brings a high price
not only because it is pure and well flavored, but because many people
want it, and the industry is a small one. many years are needed to
establish an olive grove, and olive raising is not a popular way of making
money, because it is slow. one enterprising american firm has bought an
olive grove in spain, and is using new methods there, but the product,
though delicious, is no cheaper. although the manufacture of olive oil
will doubtless remain a rather small industry, the use of olive oil is
increasing, in this country, at least. it does not seem likely, therefore,
to become a cheap form of fat.
we find nearly the opposite of this in cottonseed oil, a large supply and
a relatively smaller demand making a low price. the seed (a by-product of
the cotton industry) contains a large quantity of oil, and it is not all
used as food. therefore, it is permanently a low-priced fat, as contrasted
with the permanently high-priced fat, olive oil.
agricultural conditions.—there are two things of which the farmer can
never feel sure, the kind of weather to expect and the general character
of the season. of course, the season affects the quality and the amount of
any crop, and this, again, influences the price.
another aspect of the effect of season on food is this: that a food is in
its own locality cheaper when it is in season than at other times of year,
when it has to be brought from a distance.
insect pests and plant diseases not infrequently spoil a crop, and the
market price goes up with the smaller supply. this is what happened not
long since to the potato crop and potato prices, when potatoes were
affected by the potato blight. moreover, if the farmer succeeds in keeping
his crop free from a particular pest, it means a more or less permanent
increase in his expenses, for in fighting insects
and
fungi there is an
outlay for machinery and chemicals, and much labor is expended.
unfortunately, injurious insects and plant diseases are on the increase,
and this may mean a permanent rise in the cost of certain foods. another
fact has to be reckoned with in comparing the prices of different foods.
some vegetables are more difficult to raise than others, even when the
season is favorable, and the insects at least partly conquered. some
plants have more vitality than others, and grow under almost any condition
of soil and moisture.
animal diseases must also affect the price of food. if a large number of
cattle are found to have tuberculosis, and are condemned as food, healthy
cattle bring a higher price, because, again, the supply is small in
relation to the demand.
quality of food.—poor food always costs less money than good food, but it
may not be economy to buy it. there may be more usable material in one
good apple at five cents than in three wormy ones for five.
form and place in which food is sold.—food in the package costs more than
in bulk, and each fancy label adds a fraction to the cost. plate-glass
windows and ribbon decorations in a shop and the large expense of rent on
a fashionable street are all paid for by the consumer.
relative cost of home and shop products.—when prepared food of any kind
is purchased, one pays for raw material plus the cost of fuel and the
labor involved in the cooking and the cleaning of apparatus and kitchen.
for example, canned soup sold by one of the best manufacturers brings a
good price because so much time and labor are used in a careful inspection
of all material, and in keeping up a high standard of cleanliness.
remember, too, that whenever cooked food appears on the table, these two
items, fuel and labor, are in reality added to the cost of the raw
material.
we may not pay cash always for the labor, but it must be
accounted for in time and energy. the woman who says, “my time doesn’t
count,” has a poor opinion of herself. whether or not it is better to buy
cooked food or to prepare food at home is discussed on page .
other elements in food prices.—so far we have considered those causes of
food prices that are what may be called “natural,” always to be taken into
account, and only partly under our control. there are others that have to
do with big business methods and interests and that have great influence
at some one period in a nation’s life, and less at others. they are more
or less under our control if we have the wisdom and courage to act. a
discussion of these causes is part of the study of economics proper, and
we can only stop by the way to think of them for a moment.
transportation must always increase cost, as we have learned, but bad
methods, involving the handling of food by many people, increase it
unnecessarily. our present methods of marketing food are clumsy, and not
economical, especially in large cities. the subject is being seriously
studied with a view to improvement, possibly by the establishment of
public markets.
at present we have a bewildering state of things, but the housekeeper who
sincerely desires, can learn to buy and prepare the less costly foods in
an appetizing way, and leave nothing for the garbage pail but the parts
that are actually not eatable.
comparative costs.—it would be useless to print here a list of actual
prices, since they vary in different localities, and are constantly
changing. this list can be made by yourselves in your notebooks for your
own home town, and for the current year. the table on page  is a guide,
however, for in spite of fluctuations in prices there are
certain
foods
that are permanently more economical than others; for example, grain
products than meats, for reasons already explained. as a rule, the rising
cost of food has been so general as not to change greatly the relative
economy of the different types of food as compared with each other.
cost and nutritive value.—the discussion of cost has dealt so far with
the cost of food materials as they are found in the market. what we are
really seeking to learn is the amount of nutritive material to be
obtained for a given sum of money, and in order to do this, we must think
of our purchases in terms of the foodstuffs and their values. the
accompanying table from a government
bulletin[]
gives an estimate of
cost from this point of view in terms of protein and fuel value. notice
that wheat bread is a cheap food, standing first in the amount of building
material and energy.
amounts of protein and energy obtained for  cents expended
for bread and other foods at certain assumed prices per pound
ouncesouncescalories
wheat bread cents per lb...
cheese cents per lb...
beef, average cents per lb...
porterhouse steak cents per lb..
dried beef cents per lb...
eggs cents per lb...
milk cents per qt...
potatoes cents per bu..—
apples⁄ cents per lb..—
the price quoted for eggs is low, and even less could be obtained for ten
cents at prevailing prices in -. this kind of estimate is a help
in making menus and dietaries. (see chapter xviii.) another method of
estimating economy for this purpose is by calculating the cost of
-calorie portions of various food materials. a table giving such a
comparison will be found in the next chapter.
purchasing food
in addition to the general principles of buying discussed in chapter xxi
there are some details to be studied in purchasing food.
personal attention in buying food.—it is absolutely necessary to visit
the market and the grocery where food is purchased. the purchaser would
not fail to visit a shop before deciding to patronize it regularly, but
frequent calls are necessary if buying is to be economical. select the
grocery, market, and bakery with a view to their cleanliness. notice if
the doors and windows are screened, and if proper effort is made to catch
flies that may have entered. refuse to buy food that is exposed upon the
sidewalk, and if it is within doors, see that it is protected from dust
and flies. the best markets now have tiled walls and floors, which help to
insure cleanliness. the difference in odor is marked between a market that
is properly cleaned daily, and one where the proprietor uses uncleanly
methods. meat and vegetables, in particular, should be personally selected
whenever this is possible. the butcher must understand that the purchaser
is familiar with the different cuts of meat and that honest service is
demanded in regard to the quality, trimming, and weight of the meat. one
does not want to be too suspicious, but it is well for the butcher to know
that the purchaser has a set of standard scales at home by which to
prove
the accuracy of his weighing. it is also important to inspect fruit and
vegetables for quality and cost.
quantities in which to purchase food.—the amount that one purchases of a
certain food depends on its keeping qualities, and upon the storage space
available at home. a general rule may be stated: buy perishable foods in
small quantities; non-perishable foods in large. the reason for buying in
larger quantity is that the cost is somewhat less, although sometimes it
seems but little less. some one has remarked that no one is a good buyer
who does not consider a quarter of a cent. in a modern house or apartment
where there is not room for a barrel of flour or sugar, then the quantity
must be gauged by the space. the same is true of canned goods as of flour
and sugar. buying by the dozen saves a little on each can if you have
shelf room for piling the cans.
foods may be classed in this connection as perishable, semi-perishable,
and non-perishable. this depends somewhat for any one housekeeper upon the
size of her refrigerator, and upon an available place where food may be
cool, even if not so cold as in the refrigerator. those foods classed here
as perishable are those which readily “spoil,” that is, those that are
affected by mold and bacteria on account of the moisture that they
contain, and also those that lose flavor and freshness quickly. those most
easily affected should be kept the coldest; those in the semi-perishable
group do not deteriorate so rapidly, although a low temperature is
desirable with all of these. under the non-perishable foods are classed
those that are not subject to bacteria or mold in ordinary circumstances.
these should be kept dry, however, and never in a heated place. in a
sense, no food material is non-perishable. insects sometimes develop in
the cereal products, for instance, and the material is
thus
rendered
unfit for food. the food adjuncts do not spoil except as they lose flavor
if kept too long.
perishable.—milk, cream, uncooked meat, uncooked fish,
shellfish, berries, fruits with delicate skins, lettuce, and
vegetables that wilt easily.
semi-perishable.—butter, eggs, cooked meat and fish, root
vegetables, cooked vegetables, left overs in general, skin
fruits like apples, bananas, oranges, and lemons, dried fruits,
scalded milk and cream, smoked and salted fish and meats, open
molasses and sirup.
non-perishable.—flour, meals and cereals, sugar, salt, and
other condiments and flavorings, jellies, preserves and canned
goods, coffee, tea, cocoa, and chocolate.
suggestions for buying.—milk and cream must be delivered daily. the
average amount used by the family is the regular order. fresh meat should
be delivered on the day wanted unless the refrigerator is large with a
space for hanging meat. even then, it should not be kept more than
twenty-four hours. meat should not be placed directly on the ice. fresh
berries and delicate vegetables should be delivered on the day wanted.
butter and eggs may be purchased once a week; other semi-perishables in
quantities depending on storage space. it is economical to buy a box of
lemons, and the root vegetables in large quantities. flour and sugar are
purchased by the bag or barrel; lump sugar, in boxes. breakfast cereals
are best bought in packages, and it is wise not to buy a large number at
one time. it is better to purchase oftener and have fresher material.
coffee may be bought in pound cans, but it is economy to purchase it in
five or ten pound quantities, unground. tea comes in closely sealed
packages, in ⁄, ⁄, and  lb. and larger. cocoa is bought in ⁄ lb.
cans, but it is economy to buy in large cans if it is frequently used.
macaroni is bought by the package, and the number at one time
must
depend
on how much it is used in the menu. rice, tapioca, and sago may be bought
in bulk and kept in tin or glass jars. salt by the bag or box. spices,
ground, in tight boxes; whole in bulk, to be kept in tightly closed cans.
molasses comes by the gallon or in cans. if in bulk, it is usually acid;
in the can it is not. vinegar comes by the gallon, or in bottles. canned
and preserved goods, singly, by the dozen, or case. bakery products, when
bought at all, should be purchased daily, or every other day. do not buy
so much that stale bread accumulates.
weights, measures, and packages.—the buyer is at a disadvantage here in
regard to quantities, for the baskets in which fruits and vegetables are
sold do not always conform to the standard dry measures, and dishonest
dealers evade the law in regard to the use of standard scales. even if
they have the standard, they resort to tricks that give the customer short
weights. here the bureau of weights and measures, with its commissioner
and corps of inspectors, comes to the aid of the purchaser. effective work
has been done in our cities in enforcing the laws, and this work
continues.
selling fruit, vegetables, and even eggs by weight would simplify matters
in many ways, and this is the custom in some parts of the united states
with vegetables and fruit, although it is not yet a common practice; with
eggs it seems more convenient to sell by the dozen, but grading according
to size is a step toward standardization.
the alluring packages in which so many articles are offered are quite
uneven as to the quantities they contain. they certainly do away with some
handling of food, and they keep out dust. unfortunately, an attractive
package does not guarantee a clean factory or clean handling in the
packing. dried figs, for example, in pretty baskets are
sometimes
packed
in uncleanly places. moreover, small packages are poor economy, since the
box adds to the cost of the food material, and sometimes there seems even
more package than food. if the family consumes many biscuits or
“crackers,” it costs considerably more to buy them in packages. yet, these
are convenient, and should be cleanly, and are justified for these
reasons, provided the housekeeper does not buy many small packages.
the quantities in canned goods are variable and sometimes below measure
when purchased from a second-rate dealer. in september, , the net
weight amendment to the national food law will go into effect, after
which, in general, foods sold in packages must be labeled to show net
weight or measure or numerical count.
as already suggested, you should own standard scales for testing the
purchases made by weight, even baker’s bread. buy fruit and vegetables by
the quart, peck, and bushel, rather than by the basket of uncertain
measure. examine baskets containing small fruits to see if they have false
bottoms. if you discover small measure, report at once to the dealer, and
to whatever authority has charge of such matters in your town.
quality.—modern methods of manufacture, transportation, and storage make
it difficult to determine the history and quality of food we purchase in
the markets. yet the consumer has a natural right to know if the food
offered for sale is the best of its kind; fresh eggs, clean milk, meat
from healthy animals, untainted and free from harmful preservatives, sound
vegetables and fruit, manufactured and preserved foodstuffs unspoiled by
the manufacturing processes, free from harmful preservatives, and of good
flavor. many people must be in danger of forgetting the flavor of a
fresh-laid egg. the familiar signs in many small shops,
“fresh
eggs,”
“strictly fresh eggs,” “fancy eggs,” are amusing, but they bespeak an
unnatural state of things.
as our business methods have created conditions beyond the control of the
individual consumer it follows that we must take concerted action, and
make and enforce whatever laws are necessary. this is done partly through
the federal government, and partly through state laws and municipal
ordinances. thus, while we may not know the actual conditions in which
food is produced, we may through legislation seek to insure that the food
we buy shall be
() what it purports to be in kind and amount,
() free from deterioration or unwholesome conditions,
() possessed of full nutritive value.
the federal food and drugs act of june , , commonly known as “the
pure food law,” and on which subsequent legislation by most of the states
has been largely based, defines the main types of adulteration and
misbranding, but, except in the case of confectionery and of habit-forming
drugs, does not name the specific substances which are to be prohibited or
restricted in use, nor does the law itself contain standards of
composition for foods.
according to this law a food is deemed adulterated:
() if any substance has been mixed or packed with it so as to reduce or
lower or injuriously affect its quality or strength.
() if any substance has been substituted, wholly or in part.
() if any valuable constituent has been wholly or in part abstracted.
() if it be mixed, colored, coated, powdered, or stained in a manner
whereby damage or inferiority is concealed.
() if it contain any added poisonous or other added deleterious
ingredient which may render such article injurious to health.
() if it consists in whole or in part of a filthy, decomposed, or putrid
animal or vegetable substance, or any portion of an animal unfit for food,
or if it be the product of a diseased animal, or one that has died
otherwise than by slaughter.
and a food is deemed to be misbranded:
() if it be an imitation of or offered for sale under the distinctive
name of another article.
() if it be labeled or branded so as to deceive or mislead the purchaser,
or purport to be a foreign product when not so, or if the contents shall
have been substituted in whole or in part, or if it fail to bear a
statement on the label of the quantity or proportion of any narcotic or
habit-forming drug which it contains.
() if it bear an incorrect statement of weight or measure.
() if the package containing it or its label shall bear any statement,
design, or device which is false or misleading in any particular.
for a fuller discussion of the basis of pure food legislation and the
essential features of the united states laws see sherman’s “food
products,” from which a part of the summary here given is drawn.
the modern cold storage plant is of immense service in keeping food from
the season of abundance to that of scarcity, but it may prove worse than
useless if improperly managed. state and federal laws must control the
management, and government inspection must be thorough. cold storage would
be a benefit to all under proper conditions of management, and the prices
of many foods would be evenly adjusted by the maintenance of a steady
supply. many states now have laws regulating cold storage plants and there
is every reason to hope that the abuses which
have
sometimes existed will
be eliminated and the usefulness of cold storage extended.
we may feel that the progress of the pure food movement has been most
satisfactory, even though much more remains to be done. the states
generally have either enacted new food laws, or revised their laws
following the national law. under the national law over  prosecutions
have already () been decided in favor of the government.
congress has passed an even more stringent law for meat inspection
supplementary to the pure food law with ample appropriation for its
enforcement. moreover, in , the secretary of agriculture appointed
outside experts to inspect meat-packing establishments throughout the
country. this inspection is to check up the regular work being done by the
bureau of animal industry.
the enforcing of federal and state laws has already largely stopped the
misbranding of package foods as to weight or measure, cheap substitutions,
the removal of valuable ingredients, and the sale of decomposed or tainted
food derived from diseased animals. remember that abuses can be kept down
to any extent that we are willing to pay for. taxpayers must appropriate
money to pay for inspection, for laws, no matter how good, will not insure
pure food unless carried out faithfully by an adequate number of specially
trained inspectors.
in the face of all these difficulties we must not be frightened into that
state of mind where danger seems to lurk in every mouthful. we must use
caution and common sense in our buying, and earnestly support every good
movement for bettering conditions.
there is a certain difference in quality even at a first class dealer’s
that one must learn to distinguish. one can of peaches will cost more than
another, because the peaches
are
larger. if it is only this, and there is
only a slight difference in flavor in favor of the more costly, buy the
cheaper by all means. a fancy brand of imported preserves brings a fancy
price which it is not worth while to pay. we have to learn to distinguish
between poor and good quality, on the one hand, and between good and what
may be called “fancy,” on the other. we should demand the good, but most
of us cannot afford the “fancy.”
ready-cooked foods.—more and more cooked food, canned or otherwise, is
taking its place in the market. when canned goods were first manufactured
on a large scale they comprised fruits, vegetables, meats, and fish, but
we are now accustomed to a miscellaneous variety, including soups, baked
beans, puddings, and pudding sauces, spaghetti, hashed meat, and
shellfish. bakery products have a larger sale than ever, and are found in
small towns, and even in country districts carried there by bakers’
wagons. in our large cities we find the “delicatessen shop” very common,
where small portions of cooked meats and fowl may be purchased after the
custom of europe, and these stores are open even on sunday.
how shall we decide what is best for us in our buying? we must not condemn
entirely the buying of cooked food without a careful study of the
situation. the custom has grown with changes in our mode of living,
especially in cities, where the small apartment is common, and where gas
is the fuel. under these conditions it is difficult to prepare foods that
need long and slow cooking, and these processes are more expensive when
gas is used. the long slow cooking of soup and beans, the even baking of
bread, are difficult to accomplish. the odors from these processes fill
the small apartment, and scent it for some time, and this is unpleasant at
all seasons.
take another example, the canning and preserving of fruits. the first cost
of the fruit is usually high in the city, and this plus the sugar and the
gas, and the labor and the lack of storage space make it seem
impracticable in these conditions, and many people decide in favor of
buying goods already canned. such housekeeping is simplified by buying
cooked products to some extent. the fireless cooker helps here, but not
for all processes. counting in fuel, the cost is not so much greater as we
might suppose; and comfort and convenience are increased. under other
conditions, even in the city, a different conclusion is reached. if coal
is the fuel, and a steady fire is kept, perhaps in winter for heating
purposes, then it is economy to cook most food materials at home.
in the country and small village different conditions prevail. here the
abundance of certain fruits in season makes it economical to can and dry,
even counting fuel and labor. in some sections many people can their own
vegetables also. however, even in the country in the summer, it is a
decided relief to the farmer’s wife, probably short of “help,” to win a
little leisure by buying staple bakery products. here if strict economy is
not necessary, is it not better to save strength rather than money? each
housekeeper must work out these problems for herself.
. what are the more permanent factors in the cost of food material?
. why is vegetable food usually cheaper than animal food?
. explain the effect of season upon the cost.
. why does transportation affect the cost of food?
. why is clean milk more costly than unclean?
. how do business conditions affect the cost?
. why is wheat bread a truly cheap food?
. how can we estimate the cost of the actual nutrients in food?
. describe the working of the pure food law.
. why are such laws necessary?
. how may we all aid in the passage and enforcement of pure food laws?
when we have learned to choose and cook wholesome and appetizing food we
have not solved the whole problem of successful feeding. it is possible to
make people sick with good food, if it is badly selected and fed at wrong
times or in unsuitable amounts. whether children grow to their full size
and strength depends more upon the choice of their food than upon any
other one thing. the effect of food is strikingly shown in the case of the
white rats in fig. . the two upper ones are the same age. both had the
same mother, lived in the same kind of clean cages, and had plenty of
food, but the diet of the upper was good for growth, while that for the
middle one was not. it remained perfectly well, but became stunted because
of the character of its food. you can see that it resembles the lowest one
in the illustration, which is only one fourth as old. in this chapter we
shall consider how and when and in what amounts to serve food so that
every one may get from it the fullest benefit in both health and
happiness.
fig. .—the effect of food on growth.
reprinted from publication of the carnegie institution. courtesy
professor lafayette b. mendel.
in chapter i we learned that the body is a working machine whose first
requirement is fuel. hence the first consideration in the diet is to have
the proper amount of fuel for each day, to provide energy for the constant
internal work that keeps the body alive, and for the variable external
work
which may be so light as to consist of the few movements that one
makes lying in bed, or sitting quietly; or so hard as to exercise many
muscles, as playing tennis, bicycling, or swimming.
fig. .—respiration calorimeter, open. from
the “journal of biological chemistry.” courtesy of professor graham
lusk.
energy requirements of adults.—we have also learned something about the
foods which supply this energy; we must now find out how much fuel (in the
form of food) it takes to do different amounts of work, just as the owner
of an automobile wants to know how much gasoline per mile or per hour is
required to run his machine under different conditions. very careful
experiments have been made on many men in different ways to measure their
energy
output,
the most accurate and interesting being those made in a
respiration calorimeter, a device so delicate as to be able to measure the
extra heat given off when one changes from lying perfectly quiet to
sitting up equally still, thus adding the work of holding the upper part
of the body upright. a respiration calorimeter large enough to hold a
child is shown in figs.  and . you can see that it consists of a
chamber with thick walls to prevent loss of heat. in fig.  the door is
open. when an experiment is going on the door is closed, as in fig. ,
air being furnished through special tubes. the walls are fitted with
delicate thermometers and every
device
which will help to get the exact
amount of heat given off from the body is employed.
fig. .—respiration calorimeter, closed. from
the “journal of biological chemistry.” courtesy of professor graham
lusk.
just as it takes more fuel to run a big machine than a little one, so it
takes more energy for a large person than a small one; therefore we must
know the weight of the one whose food requirements we wish to calculate,
as well as the amount of energy required to do different kinds and amounts
of work. the following table will help in calculating the approximate fuel
requirements of any grown person. the food needs of children and young
people under twenty-five will be discussed later.
approximate energy requirements of average-sized man
occupationcalories per pound per hour
sleeping.
sitting quietly.
at light muscular exercise.
at active muscular exercise.
at severe muscular exercise.
light exercise may be understood to include work equivalent to standing
and working with the hands, as at a desk in chemistry or cookery; or work
involving the feet like walking or running a sewing machine. many persons,
as students, stenographers, seamstresses, bookkeepers, teachers, and
tailors do little or no work heavier than this.
active exercise involves more muscles, as in bicycling compared with
walking, or exercise with dumb-bells as compared with typewriting.
carpenters, general houseworkers, and mail carriers do about this grade of
work while on duty.
severe exercise not only involves a good many muscles, but causes enough
strain to harden and enlarge them. bicycling up grade, swimming, and other
active sports would be included in this kind of exercise. lumbermen,
excavators, and a few others do even heavier work than this.
knowing the weight of a grown man or woman, and something of the daily
occupation, as in the case of a professional man, we can estimate the
probable energy requirement somewhat as follows:
sleeping,  hours;  × . calories = . calories per pound.
sitting quietly (at meals, reading, etc.),  hours;  × . calories
= . per pound.
at light muscular exercise (dressing, standing, walking, etc.),
 × . calories = . calories per pound.
at active muscular exercise  hours,  × . calories
=  calories per pound.
total calories per pound for  hours, ;  ×  pounds (the weight of
the average man) = , or approximately , calories per day required.
calculate in this way the energy requirement for various grown persons
whom you know.
energy requirements during growth.—in estimating food requirements of
those who are under twenty-five years old, we must bear in mind that the
same materials which serve for fuel serve in part for building material.
protein is used for muscle building as well as for supplying energy, and
the larger one grows, the greater the reserves of carbohydrate and fat
which he can carry. furthermore, internal activity is greater in the young
than the middle aged or very old, and external activity is apt also to be
greater. think, for instance, how much running children do compared with
their parents. for all these reasons, we cannot use the table for adults
in calculating the energy requirement of young people. in the following
table an attempt has been made to take account of their greater needs, but
the estimates include only moderate exercise; with hard work more will be
required. notice that the highest allowance per pound of body weight is
for the youngest children.
energy requirements during growth
age in yearscalories per poundper day
under 
-not less than 
with these two tables for calculating energy requirement we can determine
about how much will be needed by each member of the family. a group
consisting of a professional man, his wife, and three children under 
will require about , calories per day; a workingman’s family with the
same number of children from , to ,, because of the harder work
which both parents and possibly the children will do.
protein requirement.—since few of our foods consist of a single
foodstuff, and we are not likely to make even a single meal on pure fat,
or pure protein, or pure carbohydrate alone, we are sure to get some
building material in any diet, but we must see to it that we are getting
amounts which furnish the best possible conditions for growth and repair.
as we have already seen, nitrogen in the form of protein is necessary to
the life of every cell in the body. from protein, too, muscle is built,
though we cannot build good muscle merely by feeding protein; a diet
moderate in its amount of protein, but with plenty of fuel for healthy
exercise is best for muscle building. under all ordinary conditions, if
ten to fifteen calories in every hundred ( to  per cent of the total
calories) are from protein, the need for this kind of building material
will be met. thus a family requiring , calories per day should have
from  to  of these as protein calories. the following table gives
the
protein
calories in the -calorie portions of some common food
materials.
table showing distribution of calories in
-calorie portions of common food materials
food materialweightdistribution of calories
ouncesproteinfatcarbohydrate
almonds, shelled.
apples, fresh.
bacon.—
bananas.
beans, dried.
beef, lean round.—
bread.
butter.—
cabbage.
carrots.
cheese, american.—
cod, salt (boneless).—
cornmeal.
eggs, whole.—
flour, white.
lamb chops.—
lentils.
macaroni.
milk, whole.
milk, skimmed.
oats, rolled.
peanuts, shelled.
peas, canned.
peas, dried.
salmon, canned.—
veal.—
walnuts, shelled.
notice that some foods, like bread, have about the right proportion of
protein calories; others, like beef, beans, and peas are very high in
protein calories. by combining some foods high in protein with others
containing little or none, we can get the right proportion. thus, 
calories of beef combined with  each of bread and butter will give 
calories of which , or . per cent, are from protein.
beef
bread
butter
 totals
 ( ÷  = . or .%)
it is interesting to work out other combinations which give these good
proportions.
ash requirement.—we are also assured of ash in any ordinary diet, but
some attention should be paid to kind and amount, especially as many
common foods have lost the parts richest in ash. patent flour, for
instance, made from the inner part of the grain, is not so rich in ash as
whole or cracked wheat. valuable salts are also lost in cooking vegetables
when the water in which they were cooked is thrown away. if not desired
with the vegetable, this should be saved for gravy or soup. it is not
necessary to calculate a definite amount of ash for the diet, if
ash-bearing foods are freely used. by reference to the table on page 
you can see what foods are valuable for supplying the important kinds of
ash. milk is particularly rich in calcium and hence is required when the
bones are growing. eggs have iron and phosphorus in forms well suited to
growth. but if eggs are too
expensive,
the vegetables and fruits
generally will supply these same substances.
diet for growth.—diets made in the chemical laboratory from mixtures of
pure (isolated) protein, fat, carbohydrate, and ash to satisfy all the
requirements which we have so far mentioned, do not behave alike when fed
to animals. the kind of protein is important as well as the amount. this
is shown by experiments in which only one protein is fed at a time. on
some, the animals will not thrive. on others, adult animals do very well,
but the young ones become stunted like the one shown on page . milk has
been found to contain proteins on which young animals can thrive. but even
in diets containing the protein from milk, young animals do not develop
normally unless the salts of milk are added too. no perfect substitute for
milk has ever been found. during the first year of life, a child lives on
it almost exclusively; for the first five years it should be considered
the most important article in the diet; and throughout the period of
growth it should be freely used if children are to become vigorous men and
women. if not liked as a beverage, it can be used in cocoa, or cereal
coffee, in soups, puddings, and other dishes. considering what milk may
save in the way of more expensive protein foods, such as eggs and meat,
and of ash-supplying foods like fruits and vegetables, it is to be
regarded as a cheap food. it is possible to get the proper amounts of fuel
and protein from white bread and meat, but such a diet is poorly balanced
as to ash constituents and especially lacks calcium. it would need to be
balanced by adding some fruit or vegetable and even then would not contain
as much calcium as is best for growing people. a diet of bread and milk,
on the other hand, is so nearly perfectly balanced (supplying fuel,
protein, and ash constituents in suitable amounts) that it can be taken
exclusively
for a long time. whole wheat bread and milk would be even
better, because the whole wheat would supply more iron, in which white
bread and milk are not rich. the addition of fruits and vegetables to the
bread and milk diet would also be an advantage—partly for the same
reason.
other foods especially valuable for growth are eggs and cereals from whole
grains. children should acquire the habit of eating fruits and green
vegetables of all kinds, for when they are older and likely to take less
milk and cereals, the fruits and vegetables supply important ash
constituents and also help to prevent constipation.
the foods good for children are also good for adults, but the latter can
keep their bodies in good repair with less protein and ash in proportion
to body weight than are required during growth, and many kinds of protein
serve for repair. if there are not enough milk and eggs to go around,
adults can take meat, nuts, peas, beans and bread for protein, and trust
to these and fruit and vegetables for ash. when the body has been wasted
by sickness, however, a return to the foods of growth, especially a diet
of milk and eggs, is best for building it up again.
the number of meals in a day.—knowing how much and what kinds of food are
best for each member of the family, we must next find out how to divide
the total food for the day into meals. few of us could take our required
fuel in one meal, and if we could, we should probably be hungry before the
time for the next meal. some persons get along very well with two meals a
day, but usually their fuel requirement is not high. most people are more
comfortable and more likely to eat a suitable amount in a deliberate
fashion if they have three meals a day. when large amounts of fuel have to
be taken, four or five meals may be better than three; babies who have to
eat in proportion to their
size,
often ⁄ times as much as their
mothers, take ⁄ times as many meals, i.e.  or  in a day.
the amount of food for each meal.—while the number of meals depends
largely on the amount to be eaten in the whole day, and the appetite of
the subject, the amount at each meal is most influenced by the nature of
the daily occupation. the baby with nothing to do but eat and sleep has
meals uniform in kind and amount. the business man who works very hard
through the middle of the day, and has not time to take an elaborate meal,
nor time to rest after it so that it may digest easily, takes a light
luncheon and makes up for it at breakfast and dinner. the outdoor worker
who has a long hard day and expends much energy, takes an hour at noon for
a substantial dinner, in addition to a hearty breakfast and supper and
sometimes a mid-forenoon or mid-afternoon lunch.
regularity of meals.—more important than the number of meals is
regularity as to time of eating and amount of food. training for the
digestive tract is just as important as training the eye or the hand or
the brain. we cannot expect good digestions if we have a hearty luncheon
to-day, none at all to-morrow, and perhaps a scanty and hasty late one the
next day. to take food into the stomach between meals is to demoralize the
digestive system. foods that are excellent as part of a meal provoke
headaches and bad complexions, and many symptoms of a protesting stomach,
when taken between meals. the younger the person, the more important is
regularity. little children soon suffer if their meals are not “on the
minute.” adults have more difficulty in controlling their time, but if
they have to be late to meals, they should be more careful than usual to
eat slowly and to choose plain simple food that will digest easily.
mental attitude toward meals.—good food may be provided at the proper
time and yet the members of a
family
may fail to keep well and happy
unless they come to meals in the right condition. haste, chill,
exhaustion, anxiety, excitement, fretfulness, or anger may interfere with
the digestion of the most digestible of meals. orderly table service, good
manners, and cheerful conversation are very important factors in the
success of a meal. peace and joy as well as “calories” are watchwords of
good nutrition.
balanced meals.—having determined how many meals to serve in the day and
what their hours shall be, the next question is how to choose and
distribute the constituents of the day’s ration so as to promote
digestibility and satisfaction. a meal of pure protein, or fat, or
carbohydrate would not be relished, and would have some physiological
disadvantages. digestion is likely to be more complete on a mixed diet. a
meal of carbohydrate alone leaves the stomach more quickly than any other
kind, and one would feel hungry before the next meal, though one might
have had plenty of fuel; a meal of fat alone would leave the stomach very
slowly, and one would not have so good an appetite for the next meal; a
meal of pure protein would stimulate heat production without any
particular advantages, except possibly in very cold weather: it would be
decidedly undesirable in hot weather. for these and other reasons it is
best to have the different foodstuffs represented in each meal, and to see
that no one contains an excess of fat, which tends to retard all
digestion. this is what is usually meant by a balanced meal, but it may
also include care that about the same proportion of fuel is served at the
same meal each day. a meal does not need to be “balanced” in quite the
same sense as a day’s ration. the latter must have a definite amount of
fuel, a suitable proportion of protein, ash well represented, some food
for bulk, the whole selected with regard for the physical condition,
tastes, habits, and pocketbooks of those to be fed.
menus.—food taken at a stated time constitutes a meal. it may consist of
a single food material, as bread, or a single dish, as soup; or it may
contain many kinds of food and many dishes. when the day’s ration consists
of a single food, there is no trouble in arranging the bill of fare, for
all meals are alike. but as soon as we have two foods, we may consider
whether they will digest better if eaten together or separately, and which
way they will please the palate better. balanced diets do not necessarily
afford attractive menus. macaroni and oatmeal would make a fairly well
balanced meal except as regards ash constituents, but no one would call
such a combination pleasing. by the substitution of a little cheese and an
orange for the oatmeal, a meal containing about the same fuel value and
proportion of protein could be arranged, and it would certainly appeal
more to the appetite, and furnish better proportions of ash constituents.
in the construction of the menu for the day or meal, we must consider not
only food values and time of day and combinations which shall be
digestible, but flavor, color, texture, and temperature of our foods. the
study of digestible combinations belongs to the science of nutrition. the
harmonious blending of tastes, odors, colors, and the like is an art. just
as there are pleasing combinations of sound, so there are harmonies of
flavor; certain dishes seem naturally to “go together.” habit has a great
deal to do with food combinations. a chinaman would not eat sugar on rice;
a japanese would not cook beans with molasses as the bostonian does. it is
interesting to experiment with new combinations, and study to find out why
old ones are pleasing. why do we like crackers with soup? butter on bread?
toast with eggs? peas with lamb chops?
digestible menus.—some of our eating habits are worth preserving and
cultivating. fresh fruit for breakfast
stimulates
the appetite and helps
to prevent or overcome constipation. a mild-flavored food like cereal is
better relished before we have had meats or other highly flavored food.
soup at the beginning of a meal puts the stomach in better condition to
digest the food that follows. ice cream at the end of a meal is less
likely to chill the stomach than at the beginning. bread and butter afford
a good combination of fat and carbohydrate. crackers help in the breaking
up of cheese into particles easy to digest.
not all of our eating habits are good, however. griddlecakes, melted
butter, and maple sirup taste good, but the cakes make a pasty mass
difficult for digestive juices to penetrate. the sirup is likely to
ferment, and the butter coating the whole delays digestion greatly.
chicken salad is popular, but combinations of protein with much fat (as in
the mayonnaise dressing) always digest very slowly. simple dishes, without
rich sauces or gravies, and not excessively high in fat, are easiest of
digestion. pastries, fried foods, meats with much fat, like pork and
sausage, are always more or less difficult and should be attempted only by
the strong, or when the body is free from physical or nervous weariness,
and not about to undertake mental work.
attention to the art of menu making not only helps to make the diet easier
to digest, but also better balanced. foods which are similar in color,
flavor, and texture, like potatoes and rice, are not artistic in
combination, and it is better to substitute for one of them a green
vegetable, or meat or butter, in which case we get a better balance, as
more ash, protein, or fat would then be included with the starch of the
rice or potato.
in making the bill of fare it is a great mistake to consider each meal by
itself alone. if we do so, some days are likely to be very high in fuel,
while others may be very low.
then,
too, the impression left from one
meal carries over to the next. we do not care to see on the dinner table
the same foods that we saw at luncheon. our love of variety is one of
nature’s ways of seeing to it that we get different kinds of foodstuffs in
our diet. variety stimulates appetite, but this does not mean a great
variety at one meal. the truest variety is obtained by a few well-selected
dishes at each meal. if we do not exhaust our resources on one meal, we
shall be able to have a greater range of foods in the course of a week. a
hotel may have fifty or sixty items on its bill of fare, but after a few
days one feels as if there were a great sameness, because all of them are
impressed on the mind at each meal and every day.
dietaries.—a dietary, as we shall use the term
here,[]
is a statement
of the food requirements of a person or group of persons for a day or some
other definite length of time, with a selection of foods to satisfy this
requirement.
the first part of a family dietary will have to be calculated according to
the age, weight, and occupation, as stated on pages -. when
complete, it will stand somewhat like this:
food requirements
members offamilyageweightpoundstotalcaloriesproteincalories
man-
woman-
girl-
boy-
boy-
total requirements,-
in selecting food to satisfy these requirements it is a good plan to make
first a list of those foods that need to be included in the day’s dietary,
no matter what the particular menu may be. this will include foods for
growth where there are children, special dishes needed if any one is sick,
and those common foods which we are accustomed to include in every day’s
menu, such as bread and butter.
for the family which we are considering, this list will stand somewhat as
follows:
food-calorie portions
milk[]
( for each child, the rest for the adults)
cereal
eggs (for children) (counting ⁄ portion per egg)
fruit
green vegetable
meat or meat substitute
bread
butter
this list is to be kept in planning the menu, whose character is further
determined by certain dishes which we wish particularly to have included.
for instance, we may desire roast beef for dinner. this is a highly
flavored meat, and a protein food which will go a long way towards
satisfying the adult’s protein needs. special protein food for breakfast
may well be omitted, or take the form of eggs, which are a contrast to the
meat in flavor, form, etc. protein food for luncheon might be fish or some
other meat substitute.
vegetables for dinner should not only harmonize with the meat, but
contrast pleasingly with each other. this result is insured by choosing
one vegetable from the starchy type, as potatoes or sweet potatoes, and
the other vegetable of the green or succulent group, as spinach or
asparagus.
below are two menus, in which have been kept in mind
the
foods which
ought to be included (see page ) and the artistic arrangement of the
day’s meals, with roast beef as the keynote.
menu no. i.menu no. ii.
breakfastbreakfast
orangesgrapes
flaked wheatoatmeal
twice baked rolls and buttertoast with butter
milk for childrencereal café au lait for children
coffee for adultscoffee for adults
luncheonluncheon
creamed salmon on toasteggs au gratin
peasstewed tomatoes
graham bread and butterbread and butter
stewed pearsraspberry tapioca
milk to drinkcocoa
dinnerdinner
clear tomato soupjulienne soup
roast beefroast beef
mashed potatoes, string beanscreamed macaroni, spinach
cabbage saladcelery and nut salad
lemon jelly, whipped creampineapple ice, lady fingers
milk for children to drinkmilk for children to drink
by a little calculation from tables giving the -calorie portions of
food
materials[]
we can find out whether or not we have well-balanced
dietaries. let us take, for example, menu i, and make a list of the foods
required to prepare it for a family of this size.
food material-calorieportionstotalcaloriesproteincalories
oranges.
flaked wheat.
rolls.
milk for children.
thin cream for cereal.
butter for rolls.
sugar for coffee.—
creamed salmon
  salmon.
  milk.
  flour.
  butter.
  toast.
peas.
butter for peas.
graham bread.
butter for bread.
pears.
sugar for pears.—
milk to drink.
tomato soup
 tomatoes.
 butter.
 flour.
roast beef.
mashed potatoes.
  milk.
  butter.
string beans.
butter for beans.
bread.
butter.
cabbage salad
  cabbage.
  lettuce.—
  heavy cream for dressing.
lemon jelly
  gelatin.
  lemon juice.—
  sugar.—
whipped cream
  heavy cream.
milk to drink.
 totals ,
it is evident that we have enough protein, and as a good share of it is
from milk, we know that it will satisfy the children’s requirements in the
best possible way. the adults will get theirs largely from the salmon and
meat. comparing this list with our first tentative one, we find that we
have used in building up our dietary  portions of milk,  of cereal, 
of fruit (not including lemon juice), . of green vegetable,  of meat
(including salmon),  of bread, and  of butter, but no eggs. we have a
good representation of the different kinds of foodstuffs, with this
exception, and as the boys would need the eggs most, we could put them in
for their breakfast, thus adding about  total calories and  protein
calories. with this addition we are still slightly deficient in total
energy, but to add one or two hundred calories is a very simple matter. a
second serving of potatoes, an extra roll for those whose fuel requirement
is highest, or a slightly more liberal use of butter, might well solve the
problem. this dietary calculation shows how the menu may help in getting a
balanced diet, and how knowledge of food values can be applied as a check
on the menu. if we had had fewer dishes in each meal, we should have had
to plan to serve larger portions of some or all of them, or to use more
freely such staples as bread, butter, and milk.
each family must find out the kind of menu best suited to its resources.
some typical meal plans suitable for everyday use are given below.
typical breakfast plans
fruit
toast
beverage
fruit
cereal
toast
beverage
fruit
meat
toast
beverage
fruit
cereal
meat
toast
beverage
fruit
cereal
meat
 other hot dish
toast
beverage
typical luncheon plans i
hot dish
bread and butter
beverage
hot dish
bread and butter
simple dessert
beverage
soup
another hot dish
bread and butter
dessert
beverage
soup
 other hot dishes
salad
dessert
beverage
typical dinner plans
 hot dishes (as meat and vegetable)
bread and butter
dessert
soup
 or  other hot dishes (as meat and one or two vegetables)
bread and butter
dessert
beverage
soup
 or  hot dishes
a relish (as jelly or pickle)
bread and butter
salad
dessert
beverage
more elaborate plans than these should usually be reserved for
state occasions.
the cost of the dietary.—the types of menu used will depend very largely
upon the income of the family. it is comparatively easy to plan attractive
bills of fare if one does not have to consider the amount of work involved
in preparing them, or the cost of the materials to be used. with knowledge
of food values an expensive dietary may be wholesome, but there is great
temptation to overeating and waste of food, and it is wise to keep meals
simple for the sake of good digestion. most families have to consider
carefully the cost of food if any money is to be saved for books or travel
or emergencies. a dietary such as planned on page  will probably cost
from $. to $. for the day, or from ⁄ to  cents per 
calories, depending on the locality. nothing is allowed for waste, which
may, if the cook and those who eat the food are not careful, amount to
from  to
per cent of the total cost. it is often estimated that the
“average” man will consume about  calories per day, and the cost may
be expressed on this basis as from  to  cents per man per day; or the
dietary spoken of as a -cent or -cent dietary or whatever the exact
cost per  calories may be. the cost of food for such a family for a
year would at this rate be from $ to $.
if the allowance for food be placed at  per cent of the total
income,[]
this dietary would be appropriate for a family with an income
of $ to $ per year. the majority of families have to get along
with a lower expenditure for food, yet they want to be well nourished and
to enjoy their fare. fortunately there is no real connection between cost
and nutritive value, some of the most nutritious foods being among the
cheapest. at the same time, we cannot get wholesome food for nothing.
there are very few foods which to-day cost less than ⁄ of a cent per 
calories, and these are mostly cereal products, such as cornmeal, rolled
oats, and flour, or sugars and molasses. these alone will not make a
well-balanced, palatable dietary, though they will supply all the fuel
needed for an “average” man for a day for ten cents. in many parts of the
country to-day it is hardly possible to make a dietary satisfactory week
in and week out with an average allowance of less than ⁄ of a cent per
 calories, and even this sum will prove satisfactory only provided
there be skill in food preparation as well as food selection. with an
allowance of  cent per  calories it is possible almost anywhere to
make a balanced dietary with some attractiveness in appearance and flavor.
in
choosing foods with regard to cost a table that shows which are cheap
fuel and which dear, is a great help. prices vary so much with place and
season that it is difficult to make one which is very exact, and some
rearrangement to suit any particular region may be necessary. the table on
page  will, however, serve as a guide.
table of food materials
arranged according to cost per  calories
group igroup iigroup iiigroup iv
less than ¢ per  calories-¢ per  calories⁄-¢ per  caloriesover ¢ per  calories
apples, driedalmondsbeans, cannedasparagus
bacon (all fat eaten)apricots, driedlimasbeans, canned, string
beans, driedbananasbeans, string, freshcelery
breadbutter, over, ¢ per poundbeets, freshchicken
butter under ¢ per poundcabbagecauliflowercod, fresh
corned beefcarrots, oldcodfish, saltcucumbers
cornmealcheesecorn, cannedlettuce
cornflakeschestnutseggs, -¢ per doz.olives
cornstarchchocolatehaddockoysters
cottonseed oilcocoahalibutpeaches, canned
crackers, sodacreamhampears, canned
dateseggs under ¢ per doz.lamb chopssalmon, canned
farinafigsonions (city prices)sardines, canned
flourgrapesorangesscallops
grapenutsmilk,  to ¢ per qt.round steaksteak, choice cuts
lardolive oilrump of beefspinach
lentilspeaches, driedtomatoesveal, loin
macaronipeanutsveal, leg
milk at ¢ or less per qt.peanut butter
molassespork sausage
oatmealpuffed cereals
oleomargarinesweet potatoes
rolled oatsturnips
peas, driedwalnuts
potatoes
raisins
pork, salt fat
prunes
rice
suet
sugar
tapioca
inspection of this table shows that if we can afford only one cent per 
calories for food, we must get a large share from group i, and a few from
group ii; if we wish to use foods in group iii, we shall have to do so
sparingly, or offset them with some of the very cheapest in group i, to
keep the average as we wish it.
when we plan an attractive menu and find it is too expensive for us, we
may often carry out our plan by substituting cheaper foods of the same
sort. thus in the dietary on page  we may substitute as follows:
bananas for oranges.
top milk for cream.
oleomargarine for a part of the butter.
bean loaf with tomato sauce for creamed salmon and peas.
stewed apricots for pears.
rump roast instead of rib roast.
doing this, omitting the soup and crackers and the salad for dinner, and
increasing bread and potatoes, flaked wheat, and other cheaper foods to
prevent any deficiency in fuel, we can still prepare palatable and
digestible meals with the right food values, and save perhaps  per cent
on the total cost for the day.
feeding the sick.—when illness is serious enough for a physician to be
consulted, he will give directions concerning the diet, and these should
be scrupulously followed. if the case is so severe as to demand a trained
nurse, she will have charge of the feeding, under the physician’s
guidance.
many times, however, a member of the family is temporarily
indisposed and needs food different from the ordinary family bill of fare.
it is well to remember that in the first day or two of illness, fasting or
taking of very little food does no harm, and may be an excellent help
toward recovery, as it gives the digestive tract a chance to rest, if it
has been disturbed.
nevertheless, the internal work of the body goes on, . calorie per pound
per hour being expended during sleep, and about . calorie per pound per
hour during waking hours in bed. a person in bed for twenty-four hours
will require about . calorie per pound per hour to prevent use of body
material for fuel. a man of average weight, lying in bed, will thus need
about  calories per day. hence we must see to it, that after a person
has been sick for more than a few days (during which he can afford to burn
body fat) enough fuel is given to satisfy his energy requirements if he
can possibly digest it.
food for an invalid must always be given in its most digestible forms.
milk is one of the most valuable foods in sickness, not only because it
supplies so many body needs, but because it can be used in so many
ways,—hot, or cold, flavored or plain, made into junkets or sherbets,
combined with eggs in eggnogs and custards, fermented as in kumyss or
soured as in buttermilk or zoolak. in some form or other milk can almost
always be made digestible. eggs are also of great value, not only poached
or dropped and served on toast, but as dainty omelets, or in beverages, as
eggnog, egg lemonade, and orangeade. mild fruit juices, as orange, grape,
or pineapple, are not only refreshing but of considerable fuel value. if
there is no fever, chicken, lamb chops, tender broiled steak or roast beef
may serve to add variety to the menu. broths stimulate the appetite and
help
digestion,
though they are of little or no food value themselves.
cereals, eggs, and milk may be added to increase their food value. cereals
in the form of gruels or delicate puddings, as cornstarch blancmange and
tapioca cream, are easily digested. vegetables are best given rather
sparingly, and only delicate, mild-flavored ones, such as spinach or
asparagus, if digestion is much disturbed. in getting an invalid to take
sufficient food, much depends upon the attractiveness of the service.
remember that very little things, like a fingermark on a glass, or coffee
spilled into the saucer, may take away appetite and prevent enough food
being eaten. food in small quantities and taken at more frequent intervals
than in health helps towards the best results. knowledge of what
particular diet is best in different diseases comes only through careful
study of the science of nutrition after much study of chemistry and
physiology.
. calculate your own energy requirement.
. calculate the energy requirement of your family group.
. find the cost for your locality of the dietary arranged from menu no.
. make a dietary yielding , calories, from ten to fifteen per cent
of which shall be protein calories, from menu no. ii, and calculate its
cost.
. find out the lowest sum for which a balanced dietary could be obtained
in your locality.
. revise the dietary from menu no. i, so that it shall not cost over one
cent per hundred calories.
. plan an ideal day’s dietary for yourself.
. plan a day’s dietary for an invalid which shall yield  calories,
 of which shall be protein calories.
the divisions of the income for which we should provide are food, shelter,
including taxes and operating expenses, clothing, and the “higher life,”
including recreation, education, and savings. the size of the income
determines largely the proportion of money allotted to each division. we
must be nourished and protected from the elements by shelter and clothing,
and an income must at least provide for these necessities to be a living
wage. yet we justly claim something more from our income than mere
existence.
in most families there is a fairly definite income. when the amount is not
known it is wise to estimate upon the minimum income and have a surplus,
rather than to expend too much. seventy-five years ago things cost less
and incomes were less, to-day the incomes have increased and cost of
living is growing higher. the question is one to be studied relatively,
and the cost of living will depend on the ratio between income and one’s
methods of living.
just what other satisfactions than the merely physical are to be gratified
is the great question for the woman who divides the income. the problem is
naturally hardest with the smallest income, where the “must be” crowds out
the “may be.” but there is room for choice even with the small wage.
this work of dividing the income and deciding on the ideals should be
shared by the family. when the home is first started the husband and wife
should discuss frankly the
problems
of division and should agree on the
methods of expenditure. this common understanding between members of a
family forms a bond of union, and each feels a greater pleasure and pride
in doing his part. the fact that there is a budget and a system brings
orderliness in methods of work and freedom from worry and anxiety as well
as a saving of money. and this saving of money and strength is the same as
an increase in income. this budget or division of expenses acts as a
sailing chart and can be referred to from month to month. it should not,
however, become a burden, and one should not worry if every penny is not
accounted for.
statisticians tell us that about  per cent of the male adults of our
country earn somewhat less than $ a year. that in large cities $ to
$ a year is necessary to bring up a family to live decently and enjoy
human happiness. much depends upon how this income is divided as to
whether results will tend to develop efficiency in the members of such a
family. as the income increases from $ to $ it is possible to
apportion the income and indicate certain percentages which represent wise
family expenditures so as to include the higher intellectual and emotional
life as well as the physical welfare of the family.
from comparison of many budgets statisticians have worked out certain
percentages that are helpful in making our decisions, although they are
not to be taken as fixed rules.
expenditure for food.—on examining the budgets of families having incomes
from $ to $, it is found that the percentage spent for food
increases as the income decreases, amounting sometimes to at least  per
cent of the income. this means that there is a limit to the money spent
per capita per day for food, below which we cannot go and maintain life
with even sufficient efficiency for unskilled labor. figure  shows that
a $ income gives about  per cent
to
food. an expenditure of thirty
cents per capita per day for food in a family of five with an income of
$, is . per cent; i.e. more than one third of the total income.
suggestions as to allowance for food in families of different incomes are
contained in the tables of budgets given farther on in this chapter.
fig. .—typical division of a small income.
courtesy of ladies’ home journal, oct., .
thrift in buying and using is necessary with the small
income,
and highly
important with the larger where we are prone to yield to a foolish impulse
to please a whim of the palate.
expenditure for shelter.—the increased cost of building and the general
advance in rentals make the expenditure for shelter a large one.
the question whether homes should be owned or rented is a vital one.
ownership is possible for comparatively few, but there is probably nothing
that contributes more to the upbuilding of a community and the development
of good citizenship than the permanent residence of families in
localities. the pride of the members is enlisted in the home, its
surroundings and general community welfare. this sense of ownership makes
a house more a home although real home spirit is not confined to
ownership of buildings. there are of course advantages and disadvantages
of ownership, and these should be carefully weighed. preference for fresh
air, more space, less crowded conditions even if they necessitate daily
travel, have driven people of limited incomes and certain ideals from the
crowded cities to the suburbs in search of homes. when it is possible it
is certainly much more advantageous to own than to rent a home, when
living means the attainment of certain ideals in the lives of the members
of the family.
in deciding upon the proper expenditure, we must take into account the
location, whether convenient to business, school, and church, sanitary
conditions in surroundings and in the house or apartment, the appearance
of the house and the attractiveness of the neighborhood as well as its
convenience and healthfulness. the house should be adapted to the needs of
the family and selected with this thought in mind. see the companion
volume, “shelter and clothing,” chapters ii and iii.
it has been estimated that  per cent of incomes
ranging
from $ to
$ will secure a home, not including operating expenses, with the
proper sanitary conditions and one which will contribute to a right
standard of living. if necessary to secure healthful surroundings more
than  per cent may need to be spent, but  per cent of the income is
the limit of the amount to be spent upon rent unless this also includes
heat (as in many apartments) when as much as  per cent may be so spent.
if more than this is paid, it is practically impossible to avoid debt when
any unforeseen contingency arises. one thrifty german woman used  per
cent of the small family income for rent, in order to have more bedrooms
than most tenement-house dwellers can afford. she did make ends meet by
working until midnight at the family sewing, and tailoring; but though she
was the very soul of thrift in regard to food, and had never called in a
doctor, she could not save money until the children began to earn.
operating expenses.—the question of operating expense is closely
associated with the selection of shelter and should be carefully
considered with it in the division of the income. they are the expenses
necessary to keep the house clean, warm, lighted, insured, and in constant
repair. to these must be added in a suburban community water tax, property
tax, perhaps even a fire tax.
in city apartments, heat and hot water are often furnished, and this must
be taken into account in deciding between apartment and house, and between
renting and ownership.
labor is an important item in the running of the house. the close
connection of selecting and operating a home will be seen. should the
administrator divide the family income in such a way that little is left
for operating, the little things of everyday life become a constant source
of worry.
the questions of the number of rooms, and their
care,
relative expense of
heating by furnace, steam, or hot water, the cost of regular service in
wages per week in order to attain one’s ideals, the cost of extra service,
the lighting by gas, oil, or electricity are all problems of operating.
knowledge of sanitary science will make the homemaker demand cleanliness
in her surroundings, quick disposal of waste, and the prompt removal of
dust. much care in planning is necessary here in order that there may be
no leakage and that there may be the full share of comfort for each
member.
for the income of from $ to $ it has been estimated that a
proportion of from  to  per cent must usually be spent for operating
in order to secure comfort. much must necessarily depend upon the amount
of hired service required, which, in turn, depends largely upon whether
the homemaker is to give her time chiefly to the care of her children or
chiefly to the conduct of the housework.
clothing.—a large proportion of the family income is spent on clothing. a
knowledge of textiles and of purchasing is necessary in order to do this
wisely and economically. clothing is as necessary an expense as food, for
it conserves the heat which the food furnishes and thus maintains body
temperature. health is the main factor in efficiency, and health is
preserved by clothing which protects the body from sudden changes in
temperatures, and conserves the energy for other purposes. money should be
spent on clothing to secure health, but too often more than the right
percentage of income is expended because of love of display. the instinct
for show, color, ornamentation is a primitive one, and the æsthetic “want”
is, in one sense, as real as the physical and should be considered in
expenditures for this purpose. it is a duty to look well, but it is not
necessary, nor does it show good sense, to sacrifice the health,
happiness, and higher life of the family by economizing
on
food and other
essentials in order to secure hats, shoes, gowns, and accessories that
cater to a mania for show. if the income be limited so that the essentials
of clothing only can be purchased, the margin of income which can be spent
for pleasure may, if taste so dictates, be spent on clothing instead of
pictures, books, or some recreation. that is a matter for the individual
or family to decide. in the typical budgets cited below it will be seen
that the expenditure for clothing was usually between  and  per cent.
the higher life.—there are other needs of family life for which money
must be spent besides the material ones of food, shelter, and clothing. in
the division of some family incomes little thought is given to this phase
of living. after the income reaches a certain amount, it is possible so to
plan that education, recreation, philanthropy, and savings all figure in
the division of expenditures. some writers say that  per cent of the
income of $ to $ should be spent in this way. if thought is given
to this, it would mean opportunities for books, periodicals, lectures, and
membership in societies; some travel and vacation, social clubs, theaters
and concerts; charity and church expenditures; life insurance and other
savings. it is the idea of ownership of property, of homes, of possessions
of all kinds that has led from primitive living to advanced civilization.
and with advanced civilization comes the need for the higher life which
should be satisfied and can be through wise division of funds. the choice
of things to satisfy this higher life rests with the individual; it may be
music, it may be the cultivation of altruistic feeling in the help given
to neighbors; it may be a bank account for some future good, or money
spent on excursions, lectures, or theater. whatever it is, it satisfies
the emotional, spiritual, and intellectual life of man and distinguishes
him as one of advanced civilization.
savings.—something should be saved yearly even if at first it is but
little. small amounts put away regularly in a savings bank mount up to a
considerable sum at compound interest, for regular saving is the only kind
that counts. life and sickness insurance are other forms of saving.
allowances.—each member of the family should have a personal allowance,
even though it is small. one mother gave each of her children five cents a
week, beginning at five years of age, and increasing a cent a week each
year, until they were old enough to be trusted with more. even at this age
opposite characteristics showed themselves. one boy saved his allowance
until he had a quarter to spend at one time; another was in debt before
the end of the week. each had a bank, and kept accounts, as well. it is
sometimes better for a child if he “earns” his allowances by performance
of such household duties as seem best adapted to promote his development.
suggested and typical budgets.—in preparation for the division of one’s
income it is helpful to study the budgets of other families or
individuals. mrs. richards in her book on “the cost of living” gives a
theoretical division of incomes, which is shown in the accompanying table
headed suggested budgets. it is interesting to study this account and then
those of families who have worked out their problems (either with or
without the preparation of definite budgets in advance) as shown in the
table of typical budgets.
in new york city it has been estimated by those studying the problems of
the cost of living of to-day that it is impossible for the average family
of mother, father, and three children under  years to get food enough to
keep the body in good condition with clothing and shelter to meet the most
urgent demands of decency for less than
this amount in other
localities would probably buy more. this means that in new york city for
$ a family of five can have a very bare existence, and that with $
this family can begin to maintain a decent standard of living unless there
is long sickness or other catastrophe. at $ a normal family standard
can be maintained so as to preserve health, and so that the family will
have opportunities to develop in a self-respecting manner. when one
considers that many families subsist on $ or $ a year, it is
necessarily under conditions of shelter and with limitations of food and
clothing, not conducive to the best development.
suggested
budgets[]
key:
f  food
r  rent
o  operating expenses, wages, fuel, light, etc.
c  clothes
h  higher life, books, travel, church, charity, savings, insurance
percentage for
family incomefroch
two adults andtwo or three children(equal to four adults):
  ideal division±±
  $ to $±±
  $ to $
  $ to $
  under $
typical
budgets[]
 percentage for
family incomefood  rent and car fares to and from work operating expenses; fuel, wages, etc. clothes  higher life, savings, charity, etc.
$, three adults, two children . . .  .
$ (mass.), three adults, no children     
$ (mass.), two adults, one child, much company     
$ (st. louis), four adults, two children . . . .
$ (mass.), two adults, three children     
$ (boston), two adults, two children     .travel, sickness, and sundries: .
$ (n.y.), two adults, three children . . . . .
$ (“mean” englishman) two adults, three children . . . . .
$, dr. engel’s estimates     .
typical
budgets[]
average income $average income $average income $
rent$$$
carfare
fuel and light
furniture
insurance
food
meals eaten away from home
clothing
health
taxes, dues and contributions
recreation and amusement
education
miscellaneous
  total$$$
. what definite aims should the wise homemaker have in mind in dividing
the income?
. what ideals should affect the amount spent for food?
. what should determine selection of the house whether owned or rented?
. what is meant by the operating expenses of a house?
. what ideals should determine the amount spent for clothing?
. in what ways should the “higher life” of the family or individual be
considered in the division of the income?
. plan to keep account of every penny of spending money for one year.
look over and criticize at the end of the year.
. plan a budget for a family of five in your community having $.
suppose they have $, how would you change your budget?
. work out with your parents a budget or schedule of probable household
expenditures for your home for the next month; the next year.
the housekeeper should learn to use the labor-saving devices for her
records that are now employed so largely in the world of business. this
equipment should include a desk with fittings for systematized and rapid
work. a roll-top desk, with pigeonholes and drawers is convenient, but a
flat-topped desk with drawers below gives a larger space for writing,
although it has to be supplemented by boxes to take the place of
pigeonholes. such desks may be purchased for twenty dollars and upward, in
woods to match other furniture. it is a pleasure to have artistic desk
furnishings, but a large amount may be spent on these, and the desk still
be unequipped for practical purposes.
files and loose-leaf books.—a card file is as advantageous to the
housekeeper as to the business man. some desks contain a place for the
card file in the upper right-hand drawer.
guide cards are furnished in several colors to indicate divisions of the
file, and these are plain, or with printed numbers and letters. the record
cards also are made of several colors, to indicate different uses. the
suggestions here cover only a few of the possibilities. visit some office
furnishing department or shop to see what an array of conveniences has
been devised for the dispatch of business. if you once form the habit, you
will find new uses for the card file almost daily, and will keep on the
cards, addresses, engagements, cash accounts, shopping lists, inventories
of
clothing and furnishings, menus and recipes. a loose-leaf book is
preferred by some people for inventories and accounts.
a letter file shaped like a pocketbook can be purchased for only
twenty-five cents, and will serve the purpose for a small correspondence.
large files with guide cards are made for a larger correspondence.
the small file will answer for filing bills and is useful also for
clippings. some desks have bill files in the pigeonholes, and a letter
file in one of the large drawers.
have regular hours daily for attending to work at the desk, stated times
for planning menus, making shopping lists, looking over the inventories,
recording expenditures, and balancing accounts.
order in time and place are studied further in the chapter on housewifery.
keeping of accounts.—this has been called by many, drudgery and tedious
routine. many business men go through much such drudgery to attain their
goals, why should not the housewife be willing to make a similar sacrifice
in her home for the sake of the service she is rendering the members of
her household? the aim in keeping the accounts is to register the amounts
spent for various purposes so that all phases of life will be considered
and so that the manager will be able to profit the second year because of
the experience of the first year. this makes housekeeping interesting and
businesslike. the expenditure is made to produce the maximum of value
received and is accompanied by the greatest possible pleasure.
in keeping accounts there should be some method of showing the receipts
and expenses, the income and the outgo, so that a balance can be made at
any time. the items should be so listed, too, that it is possible to tell
what expenditure has been made for any one item, as rent, or food, or
other
necessities. it is only in this way that the accounts become of
value for future use.
there are many ways of keeping such accounts. the simplest one for the
housewife is the best if it shows the points mentioned above. the envelope
system is used by some when the income is small, and a certain amount of
money according to budget plan is put in labeled envelopes for various
purposes, as rent, food, operating expenses, etc. as sums are drawn from
the various envelopes, a slip of paper put in the particular envelope
registers the amount drawn. it is easy at the end of the month to balance
the accounts. this system necessitates the presence of a good deal of
money on hand, and sometimes of confusion of accounts, if money is
borrowed from one envelope for use in another.
butchergrocerbakermilkicelightservicefuel and other headings according to expense
january
jan. 
jan. 
(dates of expenditures)
totals
various systems of card catalogues, journals, and ledgers are in use, and
all have more or less value. the simplest form for the average young woman
or housewife can be kept in an ordinary blank book and the spaces ruled
according to one’s need. the account book can be started in somewhat the
following manner, with the dates of expenditures in the first column and
the respective amounts opposite under
their
proper heads. in this way it
is possible by using double pages of the blank book to keep all the items
for each month in horizontal series. the columns for items of expenses
should be ruled as needed, but it is desirable to keep them under as few
heads as will suffice to give the information which may be desired. the
use of the double page is advisable, for then the outer edge of the
left-hand page can be used for the dates of purchase and plenty of room
for columns of expense left across the two pages. the total in the various
columns can be easily calculated at the end of the first month and a new
set of pages ruled for the second. the expenditures should be entered
daily so as not to be forgotten. a slip of paper kept in one’s purse is of
help if amounts are jotted down while one is shopping. the totals for each
month should be entered in another part of the blank book. rule spaces for
the year with columns for the months across the page and items of expense
corresponding to those in the daily entry at the left-hand side. in this
way at the end of twelve months the totals for each item of expense can be
easily found. if one desires to know from day to day of a month how the
balance stands, it is possible to add to form i two columns for this
purpose. one column should show the
income
or amounts received with
dates, and the second the total sum expended each day. this sum is found
by adding the expense of each item across the page for the day and
entering in the expense column.
form ii
 jan. feb.march april may june july aug. sep. oct. nov. dec. totals
butcher
grocer
baker
milk
ice
light
service
fuel
clothes
rent
dentist
school
sundries and other items
totals
somewhere in the book there should be kept an account of the receipts from
all sources. the balance of the yearly expense account with the sheet of
receipt can be easily made.
some plan must be made for showing which purchases are paid for in cash,
and which are charged. a simple method is to record the articles charged,
with the place, date, and price on a card in the card file in a division
kept for this purpose, and labeled “purchases charged.” when the bill is
rendered, it can be checked up from these cards, and the purchases entered
in the permanent account book. the record in the account book gives thus
the date of
payment,
but not the date of purchase, unless this is added
too. the date of purchase can be recorded in the inventory of household
goods (see chapter xxii).
this simple method of keeping accounts enables one to look over the
monthly and yearly expenses and to see if the expenditure is apportioned
to the different divisions as it should be. if some of the needs of the
physical or intellectual life are being neglected, it should be possible
to cut down or readjust the next year to the satisfaction both of the
housewife and of her family.
it is wise for all girls before they have homes of their own to keep
account of their own small incomes. in many families daughters are given
money for clothing and daily expenses. some such system of keeping
accounts as the above can be used. it is astonishing in examining
accounts
for clothing, to see how few maintain a correct balance. one girl found,
by keeping accounts, that she spent entirely too much for hats and gloves
and did not have the proper underwear to protect her body and maintain the
correct temperature for health. accounts help us to determine whether our
methods of living measure up to the ideals or standards of life which we
have established in order to live rightly.
methods of payment.—payment is either immediate, known as “spot cash,” or
deferred. if deferred, the articles purchased are charged by the dealer,
and a bill rendered the first of each month. when a charge account is
opened, a good business reference must be given. according to another
system, articles may be paid for in installments,—that is, so much each
month, according to some agreement. of this method it may be said that it
is unsafe, or at least unwise, always. remember that more is always paid
in the end.
in either case the payment may be made in bills, specie, or by checks;
although in ordinary shopping immediate payment is usually made in bills
and specie.
the advantage of immediate payment is that the buyer spends only what she
has, and does not count on future money. this method of payment enables
one to keep the balance well in hand. it necessitates, however, keeping
bills and specie in the house, and in one’s pocketbook, with the
possibility of theft or loss; and cash payment takes more time in the
shop, with the long wait for change. sending “collect on delivery”
(c.o.d.) is a way of making cash payment and saving time at the shop. be
sure that in this case there is the exact change at home, and some one
ready to receive the goods.
charging goods makes for economy of time. if you
can
remember that an
article charged means money spent, this is a safe plan. one careful buyer
says that she is too optimistic to have a charge account; too sure that
while she has not cash enough to-day for something that she wants, she
will surely have it by the first of next month.
there is another method of payment introduced by a few large department
stores. the firm requires a monthly deposit at the first of each month and
charges up purchases against this. this is good in so far that the
customer is spending money that he really has, but it restricts purchases
to that one shop, and this is inadvisable in the case of a small income.
the bank account and check book.—whether payment is immediate or
deferred, payment by check is a great convenience. it saves time and is
also a record of money paid.
select a bank, conveniently located, and recommended by a conservative
business man. take to the bank a letter of introduction, with the sum for
deposit. the bank will record your signature, and give you a bank book in
which is recorded the amount deposited. a check book will be given you
that contains blank checks, and provides for keeping account of deposits
and checks drawn. each check has to be filled in, and signed with your
name exactly as recorded at the bank, when you make a payment. this must
be recorded in the proper place when the check is made out, stating date,
amount, and payee. the sums paid out are added, usually for every three
checks, and this sum deducted from the deposit, and the balance carried
forward. in this way you may always know your balance in the bank,
provided you are accurate. great care must be taken to fill in the blank
spaces correctly so that the check cannot be easily altered by any one.
if a check is made out to you, and you wish to cash it,
or
deposit it,
you “indorse” it by writing your name on the back across the left-hand end
of the check. the name must be written exactly as it appears on the face
of the check. if by chance the name is misspelled, write it in with the
correct spelling below.
the checks that you make out are indorsed by the payee in the same way,
and cannot be cashed until so indorsed. therefore, if a check is lost in
the mail, you do not lose the money. the bank should be notified to “stop
payment” on the lost check, and you can then send another check in place
of the first one.
when you wish bills or specie, you go to the bank and present to the
paying teller a check made out to “cash” and signed by yourself. it is
wise not to make out or sign such a check until you reach the bank,
because if such a check is lost on the way, there is danger of its being
cashed by the finder.
once a month you should leave the book with the teller to be balanced. in
a few days you may call for it, and will receive with it the checks that
you have drawn, and that have been returned to the bank by the date to
which the book is balanced. these checks are called vouchers. with these
there is also a list of the amounts showing the total paid out on them by
the bank. check up the vouchers with the list, then check up the vouchers
with your check book to see if all in your check book had been returned to
the bank by the date of balancing. if there are some still out, add that
sum to your check book balance, and then compare the bank book balance
with your check book.
deposits may be sent by mail, either with or without the check book. if
the book is sent, it should go by registered mail. if you do not send the
book, the bank will send a receipt, which you return with the book the
next time
the
balance is made. in either case, write “for deposit” above
your signature on the back.
. of what value is business equipment in household management?
. suggest ways in which a card file might be used in the household.
. suggest a system for filing household letters; bills.
. what should be one’s aim in keeping household accounts?
. estimate the cost of your clothing for the last year.
. name different methods of payment of bills. which do you consider the
best for the family with $ income?
. describe fully payment by check.
. how should a check be indorsed?
. how can one deposit checks by mail?
the first rule in good buying is to know standard quality in your intended
purchase, for then you need not be dependent upon the salesman. the second
is to know your own needs, that you may not be beguiled by the clever
advertisement in the daily paper, or the well-displayed bargain, and will
not need to ask the salesman’s advice about quantity. keep lists of
articles needed in the card file, and make your shopping lists from these.
the third rule is to apportion your purchases to your income and the
divisions of your budget.
where to buy.—patronize reliable firms. there are in any community shops
of different grades, and you will not find the best return for your money
always at those houses where there is the greatest parade of cut prices
and bargains. in the end the reliable places are the cheapest. sometimes a
firm trades on its reputation and a degree of fashion it has attained, but
on the whole it is true that if one house has goods uniformly cheaper than
another, it is because the quality is inferior.
one fact that a good shopper learns is this—that certain articles may be
purchased to greater advantage at one place than another. one firm excels
in silks, another in household linen, another in coffee, and so on.
almost every community now has a “white list” and a branch of the
consumers’ league, the significance of which was explained in “shelter and
clothing,” p. .
how to shop.—know the shops you patronize, first by personal inspection,
unless, of course, you are ordering from a distance.
mail orders and the telephone are helps to the buyer. these should not
entirely take the place of personal visits to the shops, but, if well
used, save many weary hours. the parcel post makes possible buying by mail
even perishable articles direct from the producer. many country dwellers
do a large part of their shopping even for clothing and furniture by mail,
and there are reputable firms who cater largely to this trade, and send
out well-illustrated price lists as guides. however, this method should be
used very cautiously, and it may be unsatisfactory for articles where the
æsthetic element is important, as well as the quality.
bargains, sales, and advertisements.—here the buyer matches her wit
against the wiles of the seller. bargain sales may be made up of sweat
shop goods. many women ignorant of textile production, flock to the sales
of materials and garments, helping the storekeeper to dispose of silk
which is rotting on his shelves, or garments which have been poorly or
cheaply constructed and which go to pieces the first time laundered.
remnants are often cut from materials on the regular shelves, and
sometimes are offered at an advance in price at the so-called bargain
sales. in reliable shops one can sometimes find bargains during clearance
sales. it pays to wait and buy out of season, as much can be saved in this
way. a “best” hat in january, or a white dress in august, may often be
purchased to advantage. in order to do this, one must plan the wardrobe
systematically.
trading stamps and prizes.—remember that nothing is given away, and
that you pay for everything that you receive. it is well to deal with a
firm that sells standard goods at standard prices. a discount is sometimes
allowed for cash.
buying on installments.—methods of payment are discussed in chapter xx.
the installment plan is important to consider, since it is so common for
people of small means. how tempting for a young couple, who have no
savings, to furnish the new home in this way? it is a “gambling on
futures,” however, as much as are some methods in the stock exchange. if
the income stops, because the position is lost, or if sickness comes, and
the installments cannot be paid, the whole outfit may be lost. there have
been real household tragedies of this kind. the better way is to save
until a small amount of simple furniture can be purchased outright. the
installment method is also used by established firms of sound reputation
to tempt one to buy the latest encyclopædia, or the new musical
instrument, or some other much-desired possession. this is safe if one is
absolutely sure of a fixed future income; but here again it is better to
save first and buy outright. you may say that the installment plan gives
the use of the encyclopædia at once, and this is true. but if you have the
saving habit, there will already be a fund on which to draw.
the ethics of shopping.—there is no greater test of good breeding and
kindness than the tour of a crowded shop; and sometimes the silken thread
is strained to the snapping point. remember that tired human beings are at
the counter.
time your shopping that you may not help to crowd business at the closing
hour. if the shop closes at five, leave several minutes before the hour.
as a matter of fact it is only to the shopper that the shop closes at the
stated hour; some of the hardest work of the day comes after hours. avoid
shopping at the luncheon hour, and on saturday afternoon at the time of
the week when the salespeople are most tired. this is also a hard time for
delivery men and boys. consult here the pamphlets of the consumers’
league.
in times of stress, the shopkeeper asks you to carry small bundles home
with you, and this you should cheerfully do. some women carry the c.o.d.
privilege to an extreme, ordering in this way with the intention of
sending certain articles back, thus creating much unnecessary labor.
purchasing of clothing and household textiles.—experience is a good
teacher, but knowledge so gained is often paid for at high price. it seems
an easier way, with much saving of time, money, and energy, for girls to
learn beforehand what to guard against in purchasing their household
textiles for both clothing and furnishings. our great-grandmothers were
sure their household textiles would wear, for they followed every step of
their manufacture and knew they were durable and honest. conditions
changed with the factory system of manufacture, and to-day women know very
little about textile fabrics or the making of garments. this ignorance of
manufacturing processes results in the increased cost of living by the
wasteful expenditures made for household textiles. women rely on the
information given by clerks in stores, often to their sad disadvantage. as
we have learned, about  to  per cent of the family income is usually
spent on clothing and household furnishings for a family of four. is it
not necessary then that girls should learn to make the dollars earned buy
just as much as possible?
there is need of a pure textile law in order that the adulterations of
textiles may be defined. some of us cannot afford to buy pure linen or all
wool, but we do wish to know the percentage of adulterant in order that we
may judge whether the materials will meet our needs. it is beyond the
power of women now to control the making of fabrics, and the government,
therefore, must help to maintain standards and proper supervision of
textile labeling. women can, however, study this problem, and with a
knowledge of
the
manufacture and composition of textiles will come the
power to choose wisely, for manufacturers have been able to perpetuate
these frauds chiefly because of ignorance. (see the companion volume,
“shelter and clothing.”)
some things to remember in purchasing household linens.
. design is important. french designs are the most beautiful in
damasks, scotch and irish are good, and german patterns perhaps
the least attractive. weave often affects the wearing quality of
linen as well as the appearance. the satin stripes and long
threads on surface are apt to wear off quickly and they are
sometimes introduced to cover defects beneath. they cannot stand
heavy ironing as the closer, more even, weaves.
. linen is sometimes adulterated with cotton; if bought as
union goods one may expect it. if bought for pure linen, ravel
the material and untwist warp and woof threads. do the threads
appear long and lustrous? the round threads are best. if cotton
has been used, the ends will fly apart and fuzz, if linen they
will appear more parallel and pointed at the ends when
separated. the cheaper “all linens” are sometimes made from the
tow or short refuse. if the fiber is short, it will not last as
well as the long. moistening with the finger was an
old-fashioned test. a better one is to use a drop of olive oil.
this test must be made at home. water spreads more rapidly on
linen than on cotton. the oil makes the linen fibers more
translucent than cotton.
. cost is a guide. linen is expensive. is the price that which
should insure a good article? if cheap, beware.
. feel the cloth. is it cold and does it feel rather heavy when
crushed in the hand? many buyers in department stores judge by
weight. in purchasing table linen less than ⁄ oz. to the
square yard is not worth buying. above that it improves.
reliable firms will tell the weight. custom house inspectors
judge by the picks or throws of woof to the inch.
. notice the finish. is it full of starch and sizing which can
be picked off? if so, in washing that will all disappear,
leaving a loosely woven instead of a smooth satiny surface.
calendering and beetling make the material smooth and lustrous
and reduce the thickness. do not be deceived. it is better to
buy a soft linen than one stiff with starch which will crack.
. in buying table linen the goods received in december and
january are apt to be the bleach of the previous summer.
remember that poor bleaching affects the wearing quality. one
can sometimes tell by tearing a sample.
for quality, beauty, and variety of patterns, scotch, french,
and irish linens are the best. german damask is excellent. the
unbleached will wear much longer, is less expensive, and is
bought by many housewives and bleached as used.
damask by the yard for tablecloths is slightly cheaper.
tablecloths from ⁄ to  yards are good size for a medium
family of five or six. one dollar a yard is a fair price for
everyday linen. the cloth should about equal  dozen napkins in
cost, and a cloth will usually wear as long as ⁄ to  dozen
napkins. napkins come in three sizes, ⁄, - inches; ⁄,
- inches; ⁄, - inches.
. for family towels, huckaback is the most serviceable,
although damask is used a great deal (see fig. ). linen towels
vary in price from three dollars a dozen up, according to size
and quality. dish towels of linen crash are very serviceable.
fig. .—huckaback towels. courtesy
of j. mccutcheon co.
. bedding. sheets can be purchased ready made in linen or
cotton in various sizes. if they are to be made at home, buy
sheeting that can be obtained for single, two thirds, or
full-sized bed. if cotton, buy in bleached or unbleached
condition. purchase sheets which are long enough to fold over at
the top and protect the blankets. there are several good brands
of cotton sheeting. “fruit of the loom” is one of the best
known.
tubing for pillow cases may also be bought. it has no seams, and
comes in several widths.
. it is better to purchase a certain amount of new linen
annually and gradually supplement that worn than to wait and
have all wear out at once.
some things to remember in purchasing silk.
. that pure silk is seldom manufactured. it is nearly always
weighted, and a large proportion of weighting is to be guarded
against, as it weakens the wearing quality. up to  per cent is
not harmful and helps the silk to take the dye. the fact that it
is heavy in the hand does not always mean that it is a good
piece of material and will wear well—the weight may be due to
artificial “weighting” and not silk. choose rather a softer
pliable silk.
. try the test for strength with the thumb (see “shelter and
clothing,” page ) to see if the warp and woof threads are
equally strong, or stronger one way than the other. if the
latter, it will not wear well.
. fray out the threads. do they break easily? if so, the silk
is not of good quality. if the warp threads are weak, the silk
will split across, if the woof is weak, the silk dress will go
in ribbons.
. if you have time before purchasing, test a sample of silk by
burning. place in a porcelain dish and heat gently for thirty
minutes. the silk will vanish and the weighting remain.
burn the threads to see if there is cotton in warp or woof. burn
end of sample. if it is the same shape after burned, it is
probably weighted.
. close weaves wear better than more loosely woven ones and
soft silks better than stiff. guard against buying soft silks,
however, that are so woven as to pull in the seams when worn.
. are you buying material made of reeled or spun silk? bargains
are seldom found at silk sales. should you expect to find pure
silk at  or  cents a yard or as many yards of silk thread b
as a on a spool? remember that the demand for a cheap product
means the production of cheap products. wear something else
rather than cheap silks.
. is the silk adulterated with mercerized cotton or artificial
silk? try the tests. (see “shelter and clothing,” page .)
some things to remember in purchasing wool.
. wool mixed with cotton makes a cheaper fabric and should not
be sold for all wool. it wears well, but is not as warm as all
wool. garments made of it do not keep their shape as well.
woolens are often adulterated in felting. pull the closely woven
fabric apart and untwist the fibers to see if cotton is present.
. the burning test will help in deciding on the composition.
(see “shelter and clothing,” page .)
. a good woolen or worsted fabric can always be remade. the
inexpensive is not cheap unless you wish something which costs
little but does not look well or wear well. one should not
expect to get blankets of all wool for two dollars a pair. they
cost five or six.
. shoddy is one kind of recovered wool and is used to
cheapen
cost of all-wool material. it can be detected because of
shortness of the staple of wool, but when mixed is difficult to
see.
. the weave of material affects the wearing quality. a close
twill weave is more durable than a basket weave.
some things to remember about color.
. blue. dark blue in woolen material or gingham usually fades
little. light blue is not as durable in color.
. red. woolen material of this color wears well and usually
fades little. red cotton when washed looks less brilliant. it
soon fades by washing.
. black and gray. woolen materials of gray, white, and black
or in combination are generally satisfactory. cotton materials
of gray or black are apt to show starch in washing.
. lavender. this is a poor color to buy. it fades easily in
cotton goods.
. pink. fades with washing. if a deep shade be bought it may
be satisfactory.
. green. usually very unsatisfactory. in good high-priced
ginghams it may not fade, but in cheap ones it is apt to turn
yellow.
. brown. good usually in ginghams, but likely to fade in
woolen materials.
. see chapters on costume design and dressmaking in “shelter
and clothing,” for suggestions in relation to colors one should
wear.
the above brief suggestions must be considered in the light of
the knowledge gained from the study of the chapters on textiles
in the companion volume, “shelter and clothing.”
in purchasing any materials for clothing or household furnishings,
remember that demand causes production and those who are intelligent will
make the right demands in the right places. insist on the honest labeling
of goods and demand that for which you pay. why should cotton
manufacturers label handkerchiefs which are cotton “pure linen,” and sell
them at ten cents? we too should know linen cannot be bought at that
price. the united states government employs experts to examine the
standards of textiles used in making army, navy, and other uniforms, and
will accept
only
those materials from the contracting manufacturers which
stand their tests. if a fuller discussion of the buying of textile
materials is desired, see woolman and mcgowan’s “textiles,” particularly
the chapters on consumer’s judgment of textiles, on social and economic
conditions, and on clothing budgets.
. what rules should be borne in mind in planning to buy the furnishings
for a home?
. what should guide one in relation to where to buy?
. what methods of ordering facilitate shopping?
. what is meant by the ethics of shopping?
. what important facts should you have in mind in buying table linen?
. what knowledge should you have before going to purchase a silk dress?
. what will you think about in selecting colors for your garments?
. mention five important facts to remember in purchasing wool fabrics.
. how does the united states government protect itself in the purchase of
textiles?
. what knowledge should a wise shopper possess?
this old-fashioned word is used here to include the methods and processes
connected with the actual work of the house, excepting the cookery,
sewing, and laundering, which have fuller treatment elsewhere. this
department of household management is a combination of sanitation and the
economics of labor.
order in place.—keep articles of a kind together conveniently arranged in
places set apart for them, these places to be easily accessible. make an
inventory of household goods in a card file,—household linen, personal
apparel, including lists of clothing put away for summer or winter,
dishes, and valuables. each housekeeper must make a scheme that suits her
own needs, but a few suggestions may be helpful.
keep bed linen and towels, piled preferably on shelves, near
bedrooms and bathrooms, marked and numbered. put the clean
underneath when they come from the laundry.
clothing should be kept in an orderly way by each member of
the family. winter clothing and furs should be cleansed for
putting away, protected from moths by wrapping in paper, hanging
in tar bags, putting in cedar chests, or in trunks with some
strong odored substances,—moth balls or cedar oil. camphor is
too expensive. summer clothing should be washed and put away
unstarched and unironed.
dishes and silver should be carefully arranged in very
definite places, and counted often enough to keep account of
breakage and loss.
fig. .—madam, who keeps your house?
courtesy of the woman’s city club, chicago.
brooms, brushes, dusters, and cleansing materials should
have a place of their own, well ventilated when possible, and
all articles put away clean.
order in work and division of labor.—this depends so largely upon the
number of workers, and upon the equipment of the house that no definite
plan can be made for all. the question must be differently answered for
the woman who has a helper one day a week, or with one or two, or with a
large staff of workers. however, there should be some definite plan for
the days of the week and the hours of the day, and some division of work
among the members of the family or between the family and paid helpers.
the young people of the family should each have some regular piece of
work, at least in their own rooms; and the paid helpers should have a
definite plan given them, including some hours to themselves, as regular
as possible. there are emergencies that upset even the most perfect
system, and these must be met as they come, but a fair amount of work at
regular times should be the system.
“domestic service” is too large a social and economic problem to discuss
at length here. miss jane addams calls it “belated industry,” meaning that
in domestic work we are far behind the productive industries of commerce
in organization. we are trying experiments in putting work out, and having
helpers come in, and in time we may bring order out of chaos when
employers and employees are all properly trained and have the right
relation to each other.
processes of housewifery.—good working equipment, including labor-saving
apparatus, is an essential; and we must have knowledge of the effect of
different cleansing materials on fabrics, wood, paint, glass, and metal.
equipment.—brooms should be made of pliable straw (broom corn), be
evenly made, with a light and comfortable handle.
brushes may include the whisk broom, soft brush of bristles both short
and long handled for floors, a long handled brush of wool or soft material
for walls, ceilings, and cornices, a soft brush for furniture, a thin
brush for radiators, a silver brush, and stiff scrubbing brush. the
variety of brushes at a furnishing shop is very large, and interesting to
study. it is economy to buy good quality when you can, and if cleaned and
not abused they last a long time. wash the brushes in soapsuds and water,
drain and dry before putting away. a bamboo beater is convenient. the
dustpan should have a narrow cover at the handle side, and a strong
handle.
carpet sweepers prevent dust from flying and are easy to use, but
inclined to wear off the pile of the carpet.
vacuum cleaners are a necessity in crowded city quarters, where we
cannot beat and shake dusty carpets and rugs out of windows, on the roof,
or in the street, on account of our neighbors. that we cannot all have
them does not make them less necessary. while they may involve no less
muscular exertion they remove dust and old dirt in a remarkable way from
fabrics, and are very useful for taking dirt from cracks in the floor and
woodwork and from upholstered furniture. the principle of operation
differs with different makes, and some are less effective than others, but
there are several patterns that do good work and are not expensive.
experiment with one at the first opportunity. a room cleaned in this way
is markedly different in odor from a room that has been swept with a
broom, even when this is well done.
a good vacuum cleaner must have an air conveying system, a separator or
other means of disposal of the material picked up, and a vacuum producer.
they may be divided, according to the method employed, into those worked
by bellows, by fan, by rotary pump and piston pump. this is a problem to
take to the class in physics.
cleaning cloths.—have a good supply of cheesecloth dusters, and heavier
cloth for work on the floors. a sponge and chamois are useful. the mop,
which is a cloth or fiber fabric on a handle, is something that we ought
to banish when we can, for it is hard to keep clean, and is a trap for
bacteria. a substitute for the common mop is a long handle with a cross
bar covered with corrugated rubber, which is held down on the cloth, and
rubbed back and forth but not fastened to the cloth. avoid the use of
linty old cloths, because the thread and lint clog the traps and drains.
cleaning cloths should be boiled in strong soap suds, rinsed, and
thoroughly dried before putting away. this is a difficult rule to enforce,
for it is a temptation to tuck such things away where they will not show.
watch this matter as you do the garbage pail. when a cloth is too dirty to
wash clean, burn it or send it away with paper refuse.
cleaning materials.—air, sunshine, and water are the great purifiers,
plus muscular energy or the power of machinery, but we frequently use
chemical aids. these should all be kept in stock.
soaps and alkalies.—white and yellow soap, some washing
powder, sal soda, caustic soda, household ammonia. buy these in
quantities if you have room to store them, and if they will not
be used too lavishly because the supply is large. the soap is
not much cheaper by the box, but it hardens with age, and then
it wastes less rapidly when used.
oils and polishes.—crude oil, kerosene, a mixture of linseed
oil, vinegar, and turpentine, one part each, cottonseed oil,
alcohol.
acids.—a solution of oxalic acid marked poison. vinegar is on
hand among kitchen supplies.
gritty substances.—rotten stone, whiting, some gritty soap of
a kind that does not scratch, a gritty powder, or fine sand for
coarse work.
disinfectant and deodorizers.—a weak solution of carbolic
acid
marked poison, chloride of lime, or some reliable
preparation[]
(though these are rather expensive), rock salt,
and coarse common salt.
methods of cleaning.—we must first consider what the substance is that
has to be removed. the fabrics and upholstery used in furnishing catch
dust which contains lint, grit, organic material from our bodies, and
bacteria. fabrics also become spotted (see next chapter). the walls and
ceilings, floors and cracks, catch dust. all wood and glass surfaces
become soiled from the touch of even clean fingers, and the moisture of
the air mixed with dust dulls them. metal surfaces oxidize, and this
oxidized layer must be rubbed off.
to clean fabrics.—if you live in a suburb or in the country,
brush, shake, and beat articles to be cleaned out of doors,
noticing the way of the wind that the dust may not be carried
back into the house.
to cleanse a rug, spread it on the grass, rub with a medium
stiff brush with white soap solution on the wrong side, turn it
over, and rinse with water from the hose; or better still, tack
it by two corners to a wooden wall, and then wash with hose. the
city dweller must resort to the vacuum cleaner, or rely upon a
cleaning establishment. the other alternative is to shake out
the dust in the room, remove each article as it is cleaned, let
the dust settle, and take it out as well as it can be. one
apartment dweller heard this remark rise from the window below
her: “shut the window quick. those dirty people upstairs are
brushing a rug out the window!”
painted surfaces and woodwork should be wiped off with a soft
cloth wrung out of tepid water. a small amount of neutral white
soap solution in the water can be used for paint if it is
greasy, but alkalies are ruinous.
a highly polished surface (piano) is cleaned by washing
with
a sponge and tepid water, and rubbing until dry with a wet
chamois wrung out of cold water. this method was learned from a
piano polisher, and it works excellently. a dry chamois streaks
the surface.
the wood of furniture is kept clean by rubbing with a soft dry
cloth, but once in a while needs cleaning with crude oil or the
mixture of oil, turpentine, and vinegar. bureau drawers need
watching for finger marks.
glass is best cleaned by rubbing on a mixture of whiting and
water. leave it to dry and rub off with a dry cloth. a fine
gritty soap comes for this purpose. ammonia and water and a soft
cloth work well, the success depending upon the final polishing.
very soft tissue paper is satisfactory for polishing.
marble, porcelain, and enamel need little more than white soap
suds, rinsed off and the surface dried. if spotted, use the
finest kind of metal soap.
metals.—fine silver and plated ware should be kept polished
by the daily careful washing, rinsing in hot water. silver will
spot and tarnish. use whiting and alcohol, let it dry on, and
rub off with a clean cloth or chamois.
the silver powders sold at the silversmith’s are very good, but
the patent powders and liquids should not be used, as they
remove too much of the silver.
brass and copper are polished with rotten stone and oil. if
the metal is spotted, use oxalic acid solution with the rotten
stone. after rubbing well, the metal should be washed off in hot
soap suds and finished with a dry cloth.
nickel plate keeps bright if kept clean by daily dry rubbing.
care of rooms.—the bedroom.—the daily care includes airing the room
and its closets, airing and making the bed, dusting, removing lint and
threads from the floor, and removing slops and bringing fresh water if
bathing apparatus is in the room.
to make the bed.—the amount of airing of the bedclothes
depends somewhat upon the weather; bed linen absorbs too much
damp if placed by the window on a rainy or foggy day. pull back
the bedclothes and hang them over a chair set front to the foot
of
the bed, seeing that the bedclothes do not drag on the
floor. on a bright, fresh day remove all the clothes and hang
them singly near the window. if there is a screen in the room,
this is convenient for this purpose. the blankets should be hung
out on the line once in a while, and washed twice a year. one
important point in the cleanliness of the bed is a pad or thick
cloth placed on the mattress under the sheet. the mattress
should be sunned and aired often, and beaten or cleaned with the
vacuum cleaner.
to make the bed, place the cover on the mattress, lay the under
sheet straight, tuck in firmly at top and bottom, and fold the
sides under straight, making angles at the corners. put each
piece on separately, turning the upper sheet down over the
others. the cover is sometimes placed over all, and a strip to
match over the pillows.
care of the washstand.—this is all important, and cannot be
neglected a day, without causing an unpleasant odor. the jars
containing slops should be rinsed in cold water, washed out in
warm soap suds, dried, and aired. if the ware is china, hot
water may crackle the glaze, and then it is impossible to remove
odors. wash and dry all the small articles and wipe out and
refill the water pitcher.
care of the bedroom at night.—fold back, or remove the
covers, and lay the bedclothes partly back. see that drinking
water is in the room, and lighting conveniences.
the living room, dining room, and halls.—the daily care consists in
setting furniture and such small articles as the pictures and ornaments
straight, removing lint and dust from the floor, dusting wherever needed.
the weekly cleaning of all rooms.—whether a thorough cleaning is needed
weekly, depends upon the situation of the house, and the number of people
who use the rooms. the rooms in a country house set in wide green spaces
do not need cleaning so often as those of a city house.
general order for all rooms.—dust all small articles, place
them together and cover them. dust and clean off furniture and
take the lighter pieces from the room. cover what remains.
clean
the textile fabrics in the best way available. brush the walls,
with a special brush, or soft cloth on a broom. dust and cover
pictures. brush the rugs, or use vacuum cleaner. if the floor is
hardwood, brush it with a soft brush, taking long, steady
strokes from corner and sides to center. take up dust in pan,
and carry away to burn, or put in dust can at once. wipe the
floor with moist cloth, or with oiled cloth.
if there is a carpet and a broom is to be used, scatter pieces
of wet paper over it, moisten the broom, and sweep as directed
for brushing, using steady strokes and not allowing the dust to
fly. the broom should be washed and dried. if dust flies, allow
it time to settle. dust the surfaces left exposed. wipe off the
woodwork if necessary, remove covers, and replace all articles.
to have the room perfectly clean, windows should be washed, but
if this is not convenient at the time, or the weather is bad,
rub them and dust the sashes. wash mirrors and the glass of
pictures. this means much labor, and some people cannot
accomplish it every week; and different rooms should have
different cleaning days. but such thorough cleaning occasionally
is necessary for keeping all articles in good condition and also
for the health of the family.
the old-fashioned yearly house cleaning seems hardly necessary
if cleaning is well done through the year, but in both fall and
spring some extra freshening may be necessary in the way of
thorough cleansing of textiles and furniture. all closets should
have everything removed from them and the whole closet cleansed.
drawers should come out, be emptied, washed and aired, and fresh
white or brown paper put in all.
the bathroom and toilet.—this needs very particular care, no matter what
the type may be. all drains and traps should be flushed daily, and a
solution of caustic soda put down weekly. if there is an odor about the
water closet, try salt first, and then some chloride preparation. the
basin, the tub, and the seat and basin of the toilet should be thoroughly
washed daily. when the bathroom is used by more than one person, all
should be taught to leave all the toilet equipment perfectly clean. if the
toilet is not of the water-closet type, even greater care should be taken.
everything
must be kept scrubbed clean, and chloride of lime should be
put down daily, if there is not a removable pail with earth. (see “shelter
and clothing,” p. .)
care of lamps.—if kerosene is used, this is an important feature of
housework.
have a tray for holding necessary articles, soft cloth, paper,
strong, sharp scissors, lamp chimney brush. when the lamp is to
be cleaned, set it upon this tray. take off all the easily
removable parts. fill the lamp through a funnel, and do not let
the kerosene run over. wipe off the charred wick with paper, and
wipe the burner. wash off the lamp in warm soap suds, wash and
polish the chimney and shade, and replace. if you cannot get rid
of odor, take the burner apart, boil it in a solution of washing
soda, and put in a new wick. cleaning a lamp is not nearly so
disagreeable as many people think it, when it is done with good
will. to shirk it means an unpleasant odor in the room and a
poor light. always fill the lamp in the daytime and keep it away
from the fire.
household insects.—keep out flies and mosquitoes by screens, but see
first that your premises are clean, and do what you can in the whole
neighborhood.
flies breed in dirty stables and mosquitoes in standing water.
the stables must be cleaned and kept so, and water drained off
or kerosene put upon it. mosquitoes will breed in water in an
empty milk bottle or old tomato can. if flies enter the house,
kill them in some way. wire or net fly killers cost only ten
cents, and do good work. if the flies are very numerous, catch
them in wire traps, or burn pyrethrum powder in the room. at
night when they are on the ceiling, catch them in a glass of hot
water and soap, not quite full, by holding the glass under the
fly and gently knocking the glass against the ceiling. if the
ceiling is high, tack an empty can on the end of an old broom
stick and set the glass in that.
clothing moths are kept out by precautions already mentioned.
if bed bugs appear, go over the bed with great care and examine
the bedstead. wash it off with kerosene, putting this well into
the cracks. a single insect may be brought in on the clothing.
if they continue to appear, all wall paper should be removed,
woodwork
varnished or painted. it may be necessary to resort to
fumigation, but this should be done by an expert. croton or
water bugs are difficult to destroy, if they are once in a
house. no garbage should be left about, to attract them at
night. there are powders that drive them away, and another
remedy is sulphur paste, which comes for the purpose, and which
may be spread on slices of potato. the u. s. department of
agriculture issues free bulletins on the suppression of
household insects.
precautions against fire.—so many disastrous fires occur as a result of a
careless act that we need to train ourselves in caution. the matches used
should be of the safety type. they should be blown out, never shaken, and
never thrown into a basket of papers. when matches are used, always have a
small fire-proof receptacle in each room. smokers are often careless in
regard to their matches, cigars, and pipes. be careful in summer to see
that a breeze cannot blow some light curtain over a candle or lamp.
if a kettle of fat catches fire, pour on sand, but never water.
as a general rule, extinguish a flame by covering it rather than
by throwing on water.
if clothing catches on fire, wrap a rug or any large woolen
article tightly around the body. to rush into the air is fatal.
if a towel or apron catches fire, roll it up quickly before the
blaze spreads. this can be done without injury to the hands.
small fire extinguishers are not expensive. most kinds contain a
solution of soda and a bottle of sulphuric acid which mix when
the extinguisher is inverted, and throw out a stream of water
charged with gas from a small hose. this works well just as a
fire starts. extinguishers arranged to throw a stream of carbon
tetrachloride are also on the market.
repairs.—too often in planning the budget, and the daily work, the
housekeeper forgets to allow for the constant wear and tear on the house
itself, and its furnishings; but to preserve the beauty and usefulness of
both the house and furniture, as much thought and time are necessary as
for
the
repair of clothing. in addition to the care and cleaning, there
must be a constant attention to small repairs.
inspecting and reporting.—have a series of cards in the card
file, or pages in the notebook, where needed repairs may be
jotted down. have a regular time for looking over different
parts of the house; and give a brief daily look as you pass from
room to room. each member of the family should be asked to
report whatever goes wrong in his province,—a leaky faucet, a
squeaky door, or broken castor, a tear in a curtain, a shade
roller that does not work.
for large repairs, like a leak in the water or waste system or
shingle on a roof, a trained worker is needed; but for small
repairs a special worker from outside is too expensive, and
there needs to be a handy person in the house, who can put in a
screw, and use a monkey wrench, touch up the paint or varnish,
or mend the wall paper. it is pleasant work, and in these days
when schools teach so much handicraft, there should be some one
in the family glad to do it.
a repair outfit.—have a shelf somewhere for the repair “kit.”
look at the woodwork of your house, and see what is needed;
whether paint, or varnish, an oil mixture or stain, or all of
them. have on hand a small can of each, and bottles of alcohol,
turpentine, and glue. two or three paint brushes of good quality
and of different sizes are needed. keep a bundle of wall paper
including pieces of all the patterns on the walls. a box of
tools is needed, including a hammer, gimlet, screw driver,
monkey wrench, a sharp knife, with boxes of nails and screws of
mixed kinds and sizes such as may be found at any hardware
store.
. what are the reasons for keeping an inventory of household goods?
. how should winter garments be cared for in summer?
. obtain a price list and estimate the cost of an equipment of brooms and
cleansing materials.
. what are the advantages of a vacuum cleaner over a broom?
. what are the best methods of removing dust? of cleaning paint and
woodwork and glass?
. how are metals cleaned?
. what are the most important points in caring for a bedroom?
. what is the order of work in a thorough cleaning of a room, and why?
. how should plumbing be cleaned?
. is the old-fashioned order of work the best now—monday, washing;
tuesday, ironing; wednesday, mending; thursday and friday, cleaning; and
saturday, baking?
. how may all the family help to some extent in household work?
. can you plan the best order of work for a day for the home worker who
has no help but some one to wash and iron?
. what are the dangers from different household insects?
. if a kerosene lamp suddenly blazes up, what should you do?
. what is the principle involved in putting out a fire?
. what are some of the simple methods of fire prevention?
. what simple repairing can be done by members of the family?
“washing is a necessity, ironing a luxury.” this terse sentence expresses
very clearly the relative value of the two large divisions of the
laundering process. the thorough washing of clothing is a most important
branch of household sanitation, upon which the health of the family and of
the whole community depends, for disease is communicable by means of
soiled garments and those that are imperfectly cleansed in unsanitary
houses and possibly in commercial laundries. the ideal city will have many
large and spotlessly clean laundries, where skilled labor intelligently
directed will insure clothing as clean as it can possibly be made.
there is an æsthetic element in laundering as well, for good washing
methods give a tinted white to fabrics that it is a pleasure to see, and
ironing makes a smoothness that is pleasant to the touch, and brings out
beauty of design, as in damasks and embroideries. there is an economic
feature, too, in that poor and rough methods of work in both washing and
ironing injure fabrics and shorten their term of usableness.
“washing day” has an ill repute that it does not deserve, for laundering
is a science and an art that it is a pleasure to practice, if one has
skill. make it one of the household arts which you must carefully study,
and you will find it pleasurable as well as necessary.
soil in garments.—the dust and dirt of the street and house that soil our
garments contain inorganic particles
of
earth, lint from textiles,
organic matter from animals and human beings, and also bacteria. the
material from our bodies consists of particles of skin, skin secretions,
and bacteria, which are collected in underwear and bed linen and towels.
spots of grease and stains may fall upon our outer clothing, and fruit
stains affect table linen in particular.
cleansing agents.—water is the great cleanser, and if it is not available
in abundance and used freely, the washing is a failure. all other agents
are merely aids to the water or substitutes for it. in primitive outdoor
methods, still largely used in some countries, the flowing water is the
only agent, and yet the result is fairly good. we aid the process by the
use of soap or washing powders or ammonia.
the air and sun are also purifiers, and clothing should be exposed to
their action for drying whenever possible. there is a sweetness in air and
sun-dried clothing that no artificial drier seems to give. probably there
takes place some oxidation of impurities present in very small amount and,
moreover, any bacteria still clinging to the fabric may be killed by the
sun’s rays. heat is a purifier, oily substances being more readily removed
by hot water and soap than by cold; and the boiling temperature of water
renders bacteria and organic matter harmless.
some mechanical action that forces water through the fabric is necessary,
and the method of accomplishing this is one of the important problems in
laundering. we seek a method that will be thorough, that will not injure
the fabric, and that will economize the muscular energy of the worker.
beating, pounding, and rubbing are the old methods, the use of a machine
the new, and that is the best machine that meets all the requirements of
the properly conducted washing process as described below.
the water should be soft and clean. rain water is a
perfectly
soft
water and excellent for laundering if the cistern is kept clean, and free
from the dust of the roof. lake, river, and well water are sometimes soft.
strainers may be used on the faucets if at any time the water from these
sources becomes muddy. (see chapter v for discussion of soft and hard
water.)
hard water prevents the soap from lathering, and this must be counteracted
for laundering. temporary hardness is removed by boiling. permanent
hardness is not affected by boiling and can be overcome only by the
addition of some substance like ammonia, borax, or soda. only enough of
these should be used to allow the soap to do its work, since they may
injure fabric and the skin of the worker.
soap is the most useful of the cleansing agents added to water. it may
have been accidentally made in the first place by some housewife who put a
greasy pot to soak with a solution of lye made from the ashes of her
hearth fire. heat and alkali break up the fat into two parts, glycerin and
a fatty acid. the fatty acid combines with the alkali, giving soap, and
the glycerin remains free. both animal and vegetable fats are used, and
different forms of alkali, usually potash or caustic soda, the former for
soft, the latter for hard, soap.
in these days soap is much better made in the factory than it can be at
home. in the factory the alkali is proportioned by weight, so that as
little free alkali is left as possible. such a soap is called “neutral.”
resin is added, in yellow laundry soaps, and is supposed to aid in forming
suds. when there is an excess of resin, as in some cheap soaps, it is hard
to rinse out and colors the clothes. borax is sometimes added to soap, and
is useful when the water is hard, but not necessary in soft water. naphtha
or some other petroleum oil in soap increases the cleansing property of
soap, by dissolving fatty or greasy impurities.
a soap solution is essential for use in the boiler and in washing
machines and is useful for rubbing on spots before washing.
to make soap solution, cut up the soap and dissolve it in hot
water, one pound soap to one gallon of water. it should be
strong enough to jelly when cool, and may be kept in jars ready
to use. even more convenient are soap chips which come by the
barrel, but may be bought at pound rates.
bleaching and bluing agents.—the sun, as it bleaches white fabrics, may
be counted in this group. chemical bleaches are used to whiten clothes,
but should not be resorted to unless clothes are yellow from poor washing,
as in the end they weaken the fabric. commercial laundries sometimes use
an excess of acid for this purpose. cream of tartar is a harmless bleach.
javelle water is another household bleach, chloride of lime being the
bleaching substance. this is also a good disinfectant.
to use cream of tartar.—dissolve cream of tartar in hot
water,  teaspoonful to each quart. after the yellowed fabrics
have been thoroughly washed and rinsed, lay them overnight in a
solution of this strength, rinse, blue, and dry in the morning.
javelle water.—⁄ pound chloride of lime,  pound sal soda,
 quarts of cold water. dissolve the chloride in half the water
cold, and the sal soda in the other half boiling. stir together
thoroughly, allow the mixture to stand several hours, pour off
the clear water with care, and bottle it. use a tablespoonful of
the solution to a gallon of water, and heat the yellow fabric in
this mixture after thorough washing, for half an hour, not
allowing the temperature to rise above ° f. rinse very
thoroughly before bluing and drying.
bluing is used to neutralize the slightly yellowish tint of the fabric,
when it cannot be completely bleached.
ultramarine blue is sold in small balls and cakes.
aniline blue is a strong color, and in a very dilute solution
gives
a pleasing pearly tint to the fabric, especially when the
violet tint is used. mix an ounce of the blue with one gallon
water, and bottle for use.
prussian blue is to be avoided, since it is a salt of iron, and
often yellows or spots the clothes. it is usually sold in liquid
form. to test, mix the liquid blue with a strong solution of
washing soda and heat. if the mixture turns red, and there is a
reddish precipitate, the blue is this salt of iron.
starch is used to fill the interstices of fabrics and give a smoothness
and stiffness to the cloth that prevents the rumpling of garments. both
wheat and cornstarch are used for laundry purposes when only the natural
starches are available, the wheat starch being better for home laundering,
as the cornstarch gives a quality that is too stiff and crackling.
recently, however, the manufacturers have learned to make “thin boiling”
starches from corn and have placed on the market a variety of such
modifications of cornstarch for laundry use. rice starch or “rice water”
is used for very thin muslins.
to make starch.—for method of making, see starch experiments,
chapter viii. the starch must be perfectly smooth, and should be
stirred while it is boiling for a few minutes, and strained.
proportions.
. for lingerie,  teaspoonful of starch to  quart water.
. for medium fabrics, ⁄ to  tablespoonfuls starch to 
quart water.
. for stiff work,  tablespoonfuls starch to  quart water.
ironing.—the ironing process is the most difficult art in laundering, and
requires good tools, practice, and patience. in the summer it is an
exhausting labor unless an electric or gas iron is available. much energy
may be saved in hot weather by omitting the ironing of certain articles.
dish towels, even toilet towels, and soft underwear may be stretched and
folded, and are perfectly comfortable to
use.
some women who do their own
work even fold sheets and pillow cases without ironing.
the smoothing of the fabric is accomplished by heated irons, or by
pressing between rollers in a mangle.
to summarize.—the essential steps in laundering are: the forcing of
clear water through the fabric; loosening of the soil and stains by soap
and appropriate chemicals, sterilization by boiling temperature, drying
and sweetening in the air if possible. the less essential are bluing,
starching, and in some cases ironing.
laundry equipment.—we are beginning to realize that a separate room for
laundering purposes is an essential in a well-equipped home. such a
laundry will be light and well ventilated, will have washable floors,
walls, and ceilings, running water and hot water supply, sanitary tubs and
conveniences in the shape of machinery. we shall not have perfect
laundries until electric power is available at a fair price. much is said
about electricity on the farm, and the progressive farmer who has his own
engine should not fail to use the power for all laundry work. trolley
power should be available, and this use of electricity should be made
cooperative when practicable. in a few communities abroad and at home, the
power available in a creamery is used for laundering purposes as well.
where there cannot be a separate laundry, take pains to have the equipment
as good as space will allow.
the tubs.—if possible, have three tubs, for this makes for
economy of time. enameled tubs are the most sanitary, and be
sure that they are white. you cannot tell whether or not the
clothes are clean and blued to the proper tint in a buff-tinted
tub, which you may be tempted to buy because it is cheaper.
round portable tubs, to be set upon a bench, should be of
galvanized iron, which is sanitary and light. wooden tubs are
things of the past, unsanitary and heavy.
equipment for forcing water.—the rubbing board is the old-time
method, yet it wears the fabric and wears out the worker, and
should be used as little as possible. if still considered
necessary, it should be of glass set in wood. the wooden board
is unsanitary and the metal board may at any moment develop a
tiny crack that will tear the fabric.
fortunately, many women are learning that the washing machine,
properly used, is a great economy of fabric, time, and strength.
many machines are on the market, and we need to discriminate and
to select the machine constructed to force the water through the
fabric without injury to the fabric, and with the smallest
amount of muscular energy and that properly exerted without
strain. of course, if machine power is available, the problem is
easy. these many washers may be classed in four groups. one is a
revolving arrangement, sometimes consisting of two corrugated
boards set in the center of a tub of clothes, one objection
being that the clothes are sometimes torn. another type has a
revolving perforated inner cylinder for the clothes, and an
outer one for the soap and water. this is much more expensive.
still a third rocks the clothes in soap and water and is very
effective. a fourth type makes use of suction.
the principle of cleansing by pressure and suction is used in
several machines and hand washers, and these are, on the whole,
inexpensive and practical for home work. the work is
accomplished by an inverted cone, pushed down on the clothes,
and lifted. such a washer is seen standing on the floor in fig.
. the same figure also shows another of this type standing on
the table, and still another to be used in the boiler.
most of these devices can be used with power.
the boiler.—a portable boiler is convenient. it should be made
of good quality tin with copper bottom and must be thoroughly
washed and dried after using.
the wringer is of great assistance to good work. it should be a
good machine having hard rubber rollers, ball-bearing action,
and strong springs at the side. it must be cleaned after using,
dried, the pressure loosened, and the whole kept covered.
the drier.—if clothesline or heavy wire is used, this must be
of good quality, and well cared for. the clothesline should be
taken in after each using. a revolving drier is convenient, and
may
even
be used in apartment houses. the steam drier has a
rack on which clothes are hung, and economizes space and time.
fig. .—simple laundry equipment for the
home. a. fowler, photographer.
irons.—the hand iron is heated in several different ways. the
old-fashioned iron heated on the stove, and the electric iron
are the most satisfactory. in buying hand irons, select those of
good weight, for this makes the work easier. three or four will
suffice for ordinary work, and they should weigh from  or  to
 pounds. a small pointed iron is necessary for fine work, and
for sleeves there is a special, narrow iron. the irons must be
kept clean, and perfectly dry when not in use. wax tied in a
cloth is a good cleaner, and should be at hand during the
ironing process. a stand is necessary on which the iron may
rest, and paper or cloth on which to rub the iron when it comes
from the stove.
electric irons are proving very satisfactory, and although the
first cost is high, they should be used wherever possible.
the mangle.—small mangles, used either cold or heated, are now
made for family use, and are great labor savers in flat work.
towels and small flat pieces may even be put through the
wringer, while they are still damp, with very good effect.
the ironing board.—this should be firm, well padded, and
covered with clean cloth. the cover may be made to tie on so
that it can be easily changed. ironing boards should be placed
in a good light. boards may be attached to the wall, and these
have firm support. in a small room, the board can be made to
turn up.
other apparatus.—a hamper or bag for soiled clothes, a basket
for clean, pail and dipper, a clothes stick, a large pan, a
small and a large saucepan, a teakettle for boiling water, a
knife, wooden spoon, common spoons and measures, a sprinkler or
brush for sprinkling clothes, a clotheshorse, clothes hangers
for waists and dresses. the soiled clothes bag should be washed
weekly, and the hamper should have a removable lining also for
weekly washing.
monday and tuesday are the traditional days for washing and ironing, but
the woman who does her own work, or perhaps has a helper, or one maid, may
find it a good plan to do no more on monday than the mending, removing of
stains, and sorting. this gives time to make the house orderly, after
sunday, and to prepare food, some of which may
last
over the next two
days. some of the clothes may then be soaked overnight.
order of work.—mending, sorting the clothes, removing stains, soaking,
washing, boiling, rinsing, bluing, starching, drying, sprinkling and
rolling, ironing, folding, airing, sorting, and distributing.
methods.—mending and removing spots from fabrics are discussed in
“shelter and clothing.” a few common stains are removed as follows:
fruit and coffee stains.—hold the spotted fabric tightly over
a bowl and pour boiling water through it. of course, remove
stains at once if possible.
peach stains are removed by javelle water. apply a few drops
and pour boiling water through at once.
cocoa and chocolate stains are helped by borax, and by soap
and cold water.
ink.—liquid ink removers provided for the library table are
convenient. wet the spot, use , dry with a blotter, and use ,
and rinse at once. the same thing is done by wetting, applying
an oxalic acid solution first, then javelle water and rinsing.
blood stains are removed by soaking in lukewarm water, and
washing in a soap solution with a little ammonia and kerosene,
or with a naphtha soap.
sorting.—separate the fabrics, wool from cotton and so on, and
colored cotton from white; also separate body linen from bed
linen and from table linen.
soaking.—this hastens the process since it loosens dirt, and
one laboratory experiment seemed to show that soaked clothes are
freer from bacteria, than those that are not.
shrinkable fabrics cannot be soaked. body and table linen should
be soaked separately. the water should be cold, softened with a
little ammonia.
washing.—wash woolens and silk underwear first, in warm, not
hot, soap suds, wring out, rinse, and hang to dry. use a white,
neutral soap. have the same temperature for both washing and
rinsing. boiling water shrinks wool, and yellows silk. hand-knit
wool, as shawls and jackets, stretch in drying. if dried in
a
bag or pillow case, this is partly obviated, or lay them on a
pad on the table.
prepare hot water in the tub, with dissolved soap in it, either
for handwork or a washer. wash table linen first, then bed linen
and towels, and next the body clothes. soap the articles well,
and rub or use a washer. it is well to wash handkerchiefs by
themselves, boiling in a pail for half an hour. if one of the
family has a cold or influenza, soak his handkerchiefs in a
solution of salt and water and perhaps a little bleaching powder
before washing and boiling.
make fresh suds often. this means heavy labor in the case of
portable tubs, but clothes cannot be cleansed in dirty water.
colored cotton and linen articles may be washed last. they
should be put first into salt and water to set the color, washed
in tepid water with white soap, rinsed thoroughly and hung in
the shade, wrong side out.
boiling.—boil the washed clothes in soap solution for ten
minutes. in case of infectious disease, all the patient’s linen
should be boiled an
hour,[]
and of course exposed clothing is
kept separate through the whole process.
rinsing.—this must be thorough and two or three waters must be
used. this is the stage where many laundresses fail. the suction
washers are very useful here.
wringing.—this must take place between every two stages of the
process.
bluing.—add the bluing solution to clean water to the desired
shade, shake each piece, put it through the water, and wring out
at once. do not use bluing in excess.
starching.—next the fabrics that need a little thin starch may
be starched. starch for stiff collars and shirts is rubbed in
at the time of ironing.
drying.—hang out the clothes, having pieces of a kind together,
and the threads straight. if out of doors, hang in such a way
that the air will have easy access.
take down, when dry, and fold lightly in a basket.
sprinkle, roll tightly, and leave them until ironing time.
thin fabrics should be very moist, as they dry quickly.
ironing.—this art must be acquired by watching the expert and
by practice.
fig. .—folding of nightdresses.
courtesy of balderston and limerick.
shake or stretch the article, and lay it straight upon the
board. iron from right to left, arranging the material with the
left hand, and iron with the long thread of the material. bring
the article on the board toward you. iron first the parts that
will wrinkle least, such as ruffles and trimming and sleeves.
embroidery and damask should be ironed on a very soft material
like a turkish towel, right side down. always iron until the
fabric is dry.
all tucks and folds must be carefully straightened, and if
ironed crooked, they must be made very wet and done over again.
when ironing a waist will you do the sleeve or the body first?
large flat pieces, towels, and napkins are folded in the
ironing. doilies and centerpieces should not be folded.
folding is necessary in order to make the garments of convenient
shape for putting away. figures  and  will suggest the
method for some garments.
fig. .—folding of corset covers. courtesy
of balderston and limerick.
commercial laundries.—the convenience of these has been suggested
already. when we can make them all sanitary, and when methods are used
that will not injure the fabric, we can safely put this kind of work out
of the house, but at present many commercial laundries are unsanitary and
ruin the clothes.
cost of laundering.—we cannot have good service without paying for it,
and one cause of poor laundry work is the public demand for cheap work,
and this too has its effect upon the laundry worker. the housekeeper often
fails
to
have the laundry ready when the wagon calls, and yet demands a
quick return, which also results in poor work.
if you have never done any laundering and expect a laundress to do up fine
lingerie at a low rate, it will be a revelation to you to attempt to iron
a shirt waist or lingerie dress, and then decide what remuneration you
would yourself like to receive. one class of high school girls, after a
course of six laundry lessons, decided that a dollar a dozen was fair pay
for ordinary work! this is an interesting question for class and home
discussion.
dry cleaning.—this is accomplished by gasoline, naphtha, or benzine, and
should not be attempted by the city dweller. in the country or suburbs, it
should be done out of doors, far from any source of fire. use a basin or
tub, and immerse the article in the liquid, using as much as if water,
lifting gently up and down. rinse in a second portion. a suction washer
may be used with large garments. do not rub the fabric in the liquid.
lift, drain, and hang to dry. keep the can in a safe place, safety being
insured by coolness.
powdered french chalk may be rubbed into delicate silk and wool, where
there is a grease spot, or an oiliness from the skin. leave for
twenty-four hours, then shake, and brush out.
ether and chalk may be used, but the ether affects some people
unpleasantly, and dissolves out some delicate colors. meal may also be
used for cleaning wool, especially knitted fabrics, but it is difficult to
shake out, and it needs blowing out on the clothesline.
laboratory management.—a few lessons can be given in laundering where
there is no complete equipment. dish towels, doilies, and
napkins can at least be washed in dishpans in the school
kitchen, and a few irons provided. a few such lessons are
helpful at least in developing an appreciation of what good
laundering means at home and to the community.
the following order of practical work is suggested, when there is a school
equipment. (from “a laundry manual,” courtesy of balderston and limerick.)
first course
i. make javelle water, detergent, soap, and give general notes.
ii. removal of stains.
  wash.
    table linen.
       tablecloth for every four students.
       napkin for each student.
       doily for each student.
iii. wash.
    bed linen.
       sheet for every four students.
       pillow case for each student.
  iron.
    tablecloth, napkins, and doilies.
iv. wash.
    drawers and stockings.
  iron.
    sheets and pillow cases.
v. wash.
    towels and plain colored pieces.
  iron.
    drawers and stockings.
vi. wash.
    nightdress and corset covers.
  iron.
    towel and colored clothes.
vii. wash.
    flannel underwear.
  iron.
    nightdress and corset covers.
viii. wash.
    embroideries.
  iron.
    embroideries and flannels.
second course
i. wash.
    white skirts.
    wash and iron.
    doilies and drawn work.
ii. wash.
    shirtwaists.
  iron.
    white skirts.
iii. wash.
    knit and crocheted articles and flannel waists.
  iron.
    shirtwaists.
iv. wash.
    woolen dress goods, down quilt, and blankets.
  iron.
    flannel waists.
v. wash.
    collars and cuffs, child’s dress, ribbons.
    finish quilt and blankets.
vi. wash.
    silks.
  iron.
    silks, collars and cuffs, child’s dress.
vii. wash.
    laces, lace curtains.
viii. wash.
    collarettes, stocks, handkerchiefs.
  iron.
    collarettes, stocks, handkerchiefs.
    finish lace curtains.
. why is ironing less necessary than washing?
. what are the chief cleansing and purifying agents?
. explain the difference between hard and soft water. remedies for
hardness?
. what is soap, and how does it act?
. why do we blue and starch clothes?
. describe the methods of forcing water through clothes.
. why are clothes boiled?
. what are some of the labor saving devices and methods in washing and
ironing?
. why must clothes be sorted according to fabrics?
. what are the essentials of a good washing machine?
. make a list of the cleansers and chemicals necessary to have on the
laundry shelf.
. obtain price lists and estimate the cost of simple but sufficient
laundry equipment.
. obtain a laundry list from a commercial laundry. make a list of the
articles washed at home, and compare cost with the cost of putting out
clothes, estimating fuel, cleansers, labor, and some wear and tear of
apparatus.
elements required by the body
carbon
hydrogen
oxygen
nitrogen
sulphur
phosphorus
iron
calcium
magnesium
potassium
sodium
chlorine
iodine (traces)
fluorine (traces)
silicon (traces)
foodstuffs furnishing these elements
proteins—furnish carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, and sometimes phosphorus and iron
fats—furnish carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
carbohydrates—furnish carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
mineral matter—furnishes phosphorus, iron, calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, chlorine, iodine, fluorine
water—furnishes hydrogen and oxygen
general functions of these foodstuffs
to supply energy
to supply building material
to regulate body processes
special functions of each foodstuff
proteins—supply energy; also nitrogen, sulphur, and sometimes phosphorus for body building
fats—supply energy in the most concentrated form
carbohydrates—supply energy in the most economical form
mineral matter—supplies building material and helps to regulate body processes
water—supplies necessary material (about  per cent of body being water) and helps to regulate body processes
examples of food materials rich in each of the foodstuffs
proteins
eggs
milk
cheese
lean meats
fish
fats
cream
butter
meat fats
vegetable oils
nuts
yolk of egg
carbohydrates
cereals and cereal products
potatoes and other starchy
vegetables
chestnuts
sweet fruits
sugar
mineral matter
milk
green vegetables
fruits
whole wheat and other
whole cereal products
egg yolk
water
fresh fruits
fresh vegetables
milk
beverages, including water as such
digestion of the foodstuffs
having seen what each of the foodstuffs does in nourishing the body, we
may now see how they are prepared for the use of the body in the digestive
tract.
digestion of carbohydrate.—the simplest carbohydrate is a sugar which
cannot be broken up into other sugars. such a simple sugar is called a
monosaccharid. there are two common in foods, glucose and fructose; a
third, galactose, is derived from more complex sugars. two simple sugars
united chemically make a double sugar or disaccharid; thus cane sugar or
sucrose will yield glucose and fructose, while milk sugar or lactose will
yield glucose and galactose, and maltose will yield two portions of
glucose. these three disaccharids are the only common ones. starches,
dextrins, and cellulose or vegetable fiber are made of many simple
glucose
groups, and are hence called polysaccharids. all carbohydrates to be used
by the body must be reduced to simple sugars. glucose needs no digestion
therefore, but the double sugars must be split by enzymes into two simple
sugars in the intestinal juice, one for each kind, namely, sucrase
(sucrose-splitting), maltase (maltose-splitting) and lactase
(lactose-splitting). the digestion of starches and dextrins begins in the
mouth, where amylase (starch-splitting) changes starch first to dextrin
and finally to maltose, and maltase may change a little of the maltose so
formed into glucose. in the stomach there are no enzymes acting on
carbohydrates, but the digestion may continue under the influence of
swallowed saliva for a time. in the pancreatic juice there is another
amylase, which completes the splitting of starch to maltose, and then the
intestinal maltase can reduce this to glucose, which will be absorbed.
cellulose cannot be digested and simply serves to add bulk to the diet.
digestion of fat.—a fat is made up of two parts, one a fatty acid, the
other glycerol. fat cannot be absorbed by the body until it is split into
these two parts. a fat splitting enzyme is called a lipase. there is none
in the mouth; one in the stomach works only on fat in the state of
emulsion; the most powerful is found in the pancreatic juice. since fat
cannot be digested in the mouth nor to any great extent in the stomach, it
is bad to have food coated with it, for the protein and carbohydrates will
have to wait till the fat is digested away, before they can be digested;
that is, till the intestine is reached. this is one reason why pastries
and fried foods are hard to digest.
digestion of protein.—there are no enzymes in the mouth acting on
protein. in the stomach, the hydrochloric acid helps to make it soften and
swell, and then pepsin begins its digestion. protein, like fat and
carbohydrate, can be subdivided into smaller and smaller portions, finally
being reduced to a form which the body can absorb, namely, amino acids, of
which there may be  or  kinds from a single protein.
the digestion in the stomach produces chiefly large fragments of the
original protein, called proteoses. in the pancreatic juice is a powerful
enzyme called trypsin, which digests proteins, first to fragments, next
smaller than proteoses, called peptones, and finally breaks these peptones
into amino acids. in the intestinal juice
is
another enzyme called
erepsin, which also forms amino acids from proteoses and peptones, thus
finishing any digestion of protein left incomplete by the trypsin.
fate of the absorbed foodstuffs
carbohydrates, absorbed as glucose or other monosaccharids, are carried by
the portal blood to the liver, and thence passed into the blood, to be
burned in the muscles, if needed for fuel, or stored temporarily in the
liver and muscles as glycogen (a polysaccharid yielding glucose) for
future conversion to sugar when required as fuel.
fats, passing through the intestinal wall as fatty acids and glycerol,
enter the lymph largely as fat again, and finally pass to the blood to be
burned in the muscles for fuel, or to be stored as fat until needed.
proteins pass into the blood as amino acids. those needed for building
material are taken up by the cells (especially cells of the muscles) and
those not required for this purpose are freed from their nitrogen (in the
liver or muscles) and then burned for fuel.
for a fuller discussion of the fate of the absorbed foodstuffs see chapter
iv of sherman’s “chemistry of food and nutrition.”
edible organic nutrients and fuel values of foods
note .—adapted from table i, appendix, “chemistry of food and
nutrition,” sherman. see this volume for more complete list. also bulletin
, office of experiment stations, u. s. department of agriculture.
note .—e. p. signifies edible portion; a. p. signifies as purchased.
foodprotein (n×.), per centfat, per centcarbo- hydrate, per cent fuel value per pound, calories-calorie portion, grams
applese. p. . . .  
asparagus, fresha. p. . . .  
 cookeda. p. . . .  
bacon, smokede. p. . . ——  
bananase. p. . . .  
beans, dried . . .  
 lima, dried . . .  
 string, freshe. p. . . .  
 baked, canned . . .  
beef 
 fore quarter, leane. p. . . ——  
 hind quarter, leane. p. . . ——  
 porterhouse steake. p. . . ——  
 roasta. p. . . ——  
 round, leane. p. . . ——  
 sirloin steake. p. . . ——  
beets, cookede. p. . . .  
bluefishe. p. . . —— 
bread, graham . . .  
 toasted . . .  
 white, homemade . . .  
 average . . .  
 whole wheat . . .  
butter . . ——  
cabbagee. p. . . .  
carrots, freshe. p. . . .  
celerye. p. . . .  
cheese, american pale . . .  
 full cream . . .  
chicken, broilerse. p. . . ——  
chocolate . . .  
cocoa . . .  
cod, dresseda. p. . . ——  
corn, green . . .  
corn meal . . .  
crackers, buttera. p. . . .  
 sodaa. p. . . .  
 watera. p. . . .  
cream . . .  
cucumberse. p. . . .  
eggs, uncookede. p. . . ——  
farina . . .  
figs, dried . . .  
flour, wheat, average 
 high & med. grades . . .  
fowlse. p. . . ——  
gelatin . . ——  
grapese. p. . . .  
haddocke. p. . . ——  
ham, fresh, leane. p. . . ——  
hominy . . . 
honey . —— .  
kumyss . . .  
lamb, chops, broilede. p. . . ——  
 leg, roast . . ——  
lemonse. p. . . .  
lettucee. p. . . .  
lobster, wholee. p. . . .  
macaroni . . .  
milk, condensed, 
 sweetened . . .  
 skimmed . . .  
 whole . . .  
mutton, fore quartere. p. . . ——  
 hind quartere. p. . . ——  
oatmeal . . .  
olives, greene. p. . . .  
onions, freshe. p. . . .  
orangese. p. . . .  
oysterse. p. . . .  
pea soup, canneda. p. . . .  
peaches, freshe. p. . . .  
peas, canneda. p. . . .  
 greene. p. . . .  
pies, apple . . .  
 squash . . .  
potato chipsa. p. . . .  
potatoes, white, rawe. p. . . .  
 sweet, rawe. p. . . .  
prunes, driede. p. . —— .  
radishese. p. . . .  
raisinse. p. . . . 
rice . . .  
salmon, dresseda. p. . . ——  
shad, wholee. p. . . ——  
shredded wheat . . .  
spinach, fresha. p. . . .  
squashe. p. . . .  
strawberries . . .  
succotash, canned . . .  
sugar —— —— .  
tomatoes, fresha. p. . . .  
 canneda. p. . . .  
turkeye. p. . . ——  
turnipse. p. . . .  
veal, cutlete. p. . . ——  
wheat, cracked . . .  
abbreviations for weighing and measuring, .
accounts, keeping of, .
account book, .
acetylene gas, .
acid phosphate, .
acids, , , .
adulterated food, .
agricultural conditions, .
alcohol, .
alkalies, .
allowances, .
almonds, , .
alum, .
american, ice cream, .
stove, .
amino acids, .
amperage, .
amylase, .
animal foods, .
apple, , , , , .
baked, .
butter, .
jelly, .
pie, .
sauces, .
scallop, .
stewed, .
tapioca, .
apples, dried, .
apricots, dried, , .
artificial ice, , .
“ash,” , , , , , .
ash requirement, .
asparagus, , , , , .
atkinson oven, .
avoirdupois, .
bacon, , , .
bacteria, , .
baked, apple, .
beans, , .
custard, .
fish, .
macaroni, .
potatoes, .
baking, , .
bread, .
baking powder, .
biscuit, .
experiments with, .
bananas, , , .
bank account, .
bargain sales, .
bathroom, to clean, .
batters, .
beans, , , , , , , , .
bed, to make, .
linen, .
bedding, .
bedroom, care of, .
beef, , , .
average composition, .
corned, .
cuts of, .
dried, .
drippings, .
heart, .
roast of, .
rump of, .
stew, .
beet sugar, .
beets, , , , .
benzine, .
berries, .
beverage, water as a, .
beverages, .
fruit, .
bill of fare, .
bleaching agents, .
blood stains, .
bluing, , .
body building, and regulating, .
boiled, custard, .
dressing, .
eggs, .
fish, .
potatoes, .
rice, .
boiler, for clothes, .
for coffee, .
boiling, .
at high altitudes, .
in laundering, .
temperature of water, experiments with, .
bouillon, .
braising, .
brass, to clean, .
bread, .
baking, .
cost of, .
digestibility and nutritive values of, .
entire wheat, , .
german coffee, .
graham, .
ingredients of, , .
machine, .
methods of mixing, .
milk, .
one hundred-calorie portion, .
plain, .
score card, .
wheat, .
white, , .
whole wheat, .
yeast, .
breakfast, cereals, , .
plans, .
brick oven, .
briquet, .
broiled steak, , .
broiling, , .
brooms, .
broths, .
brown betty, .
sauce, .
sugar, .
brushes, .
budget, household, .
typical, .
buns, .
butter, , , , , , .
cake, .
fruit, .
substitutes, .
to mold, .
buttermilk, , .
buying, canned goods, .
fruits, .
groceries and meat, .
on installments, .
sugar, .
vegetables, .
cabbage, , , , .
baked, .
caffeine, .
cake, , .
calcium, , .
calf’s head and brain, .
calorie, definition of, .
portion. see one-hundred-calorie portion.
protein, .
calorimeter, , .
candy, .
cane sugar, .
canned, beans, .
food, .
goods, .
meats, .
poultry, .
canning, , .
caramel flavoring, .
carbohydrate, , , .
digestion of, .
carbohydrates, functions of, .
carbon, , .
carbon dioxide gas, , , .
card file, , .
care, of kitchen, .
of lamps, .
of rooms, .
of washstand, .
carpet sweepers, .
carrots, , , , .
carving, .
cauliflower, , , , .
celery, , , , .
stewed, .
cellulose, , .
cereals, , , , .
breakfast, .
manufacture of, .
molded, .
one-hundred-calorie portion, .
principles of cooking, .
ready to eat, .
uses of cold, .
charcoal, .
check book, .
cheese, , , , , .
cost of, .
cottage, , .
crackers, .
one-hundred-calorie portion, .
principles of cooking, .
chemical elements in body, .
chestnuts, , .
chicken, .
broilers, .
fricassee, .
pie, .
roast, .
salad, .
chili sauce, .
chinaware, .
chocolate, , , , , , .
cornstarch, .
filling, .
sauce, .
stains, .
clam chowder, .
clams, .
small, raw, .
cleaning, agents, .
and polishing, .
bathroom, .
cloths, .
dry, .
equipment, .
fabrics, .
materials, , .
methods of, .
rugs, .
toilet, .
weekly, .
clean milk, .
clothing, expenditure for, .
purchasing of, .
coal, .
fire, to make, .
oil, .
range, .
cocoa, , , , , .
iced, .
shells, .
stains, .
to make, .
coddled eggs, .
coddling, .
codfish, .
balls, .
creamed, .
coffee, , .
iced, .
pots, .
stains, .
to make, .
cake, .
cold storage, .
eggs, .
coloring substances, .
colors in textiles, .
commercial laundries, .
composition of foods,
charts, , , , , , , , , , , .
tables, , , , , , , -.
    see also under name of each food.
condensed milk, .
consumers’ league, .
cooker, fireless, .
steam, .
cookery, principles of, , .
vegetable, .
cookies, .
cooking, apparatus, .
care of food after, .
principles of, .
processes, .
utensils, .
water in, .
copper, to clean, .
corn, canned, .
green, , .
oil, .
products, .
corn meal, , .
mush, .
cornstarch, .
chocolate, .
cost, of dietary, .
of electricity, .
