wag his tail to keep the flies off,” and that lack may have saddened him.
he may have thought that a cow can snort and be dignified at the one
moment, and that timidity is comely in a sheep. he would have scolded the
jackdaw, and tried to out-whistle the throstle, and wondered why his pipe
got tired when the blackbird’s didn’t. there would be flies to be watched,
slender atoms in yellow gauze that flew, and filmy specks that flittered,
and sturdy, thick-ribbed brutes that pounced like cats and bit like dogs
and flew like lightning. he may have mourned for the spider in bad luck
who caught that fly. there would be much to see and remember and compare,
and there would be, always, his two guardians. the flies change from
second to second; one cannot tell if this bird is a visitor or an
inhabitant, and a sheep is just sister to a sheep; but the women were as
rooted as the house itself.
original size
were his nurses comely or harsh-looking? fionn would not know. this was
the one who picked him up when he fell, and that was the one who patted
the bruise. this one said: “mind you do not tumble in the well!”
and that one: “mind the little knees among the nettles.”
but he did tumble and record that the only notable thing about a well is
that it is wet. and as for nettles, if they hit him he hit back. he
slashed into them with a stick and brought them low. there was nothing in
wells or nettles, only women dreaded them. one patronised women and
instructed them and comforted them, for they were afraid about one.
they thought that one should not climb a tree!
“next week,” they said at last, “you may climb this one,” and “next week”
 lived at the end of the world!
but the tree that was climbed was not worth while when it had been climbed
twice. there was a bigger one near by. there were trees that no one could
climb, with vast shadow on one side and vaster sunshine on the other. it
took a long time to walk round them, and you could not see their tops.
it was pleasant to stand on a branch that swayed and sprung, and it was
good to stare at an impenetrable roof of leaves and then climb into it.
how wonderful the loneliness was up there! when he looked down there was
an undulating floor of leaves, green and green and greener to a very
blackness of greeniness; and when he looked up there were leaves again,
green and less green and not green at all, up to a very snow and blindness
of greeniness; and above and below and around there was sway and motion,
the whisper of leaf on leaf, and the eternal silence to which one listened
and at which one tried to look.
when he was six years of age his mother, beautiful, long-haired muirne,
came to see him. she came secretly, for she feared the sons of morna, and
she had paced through lonely places in many counties before she reached
the hut in the wood, and the cot where he lay with his fists shut and
sleep gripped in them.
he awakened to be sure. he would have one ear that would catch an unusual
voice, one eye that would open, however sleepy the other one was. she took
him in her arms and kissed him, and she sang a sleepy song until the small
boy slept again.
we may be sure that the eye that could stay open stayed open that night as
long as it could, and that the one ear listened to the sleepy song until
the song got too low to be heard, until it was too tender to be felt
vibrating along those soft arms, until fionn was asleep again, with a new
picture in his little head and a new notion to ponder on.
the mother of himself! his own mother!
but when he awakened she was gone.
she was going back secretly, in dread of the sons of morna, slipping
through gloomy woods, keeping away from habitations, getting by desolate
and lonely ways to her lord in kerry.
perhaps it was he that was afraid of the sons of morna, and perhaps she
loved him.
the women druids, his guardians, belonged to his father’s people. bovmall
was uail’s sister, and, consequently, fionn’s aunt. only such a blood-tie
could have bound them to the clann-baiscne, for it is not easy, having
moved in the world of court and camp, to go hide with a baby in a wood;
and to live, as they must have lived, in terror.
what stories they would have told the child of the sons of morna. of morna
himself, the huge-shouldered, stern-eyed, violent connachtman; and of his
sons—young goll mor mac morna in particular, as huge-shouldered as
his father, as fierce in the onset, but merry-eyed when the other was
grim, and bubbling with a laughter that made men forgive even his
butcheries. of cona’n mael mac morna his brother, gruff as a badger,
bearded like a boar, bald as a crow, and with a tongue that could manage
an insult where another man would not find even a stammer. his boast was
that when he saw an open door he went into it, and when he saw a closed
door he went into it. when he saw a peaceful man he insulted him, and when
he met a man who was not peaceful he insulted him. there was garra duv mac
morna, and savage art og, who cared as little for their own skins as they
did for the next man’s, and garra must have been rough indeed to have
earned in that clan the name of the rough mac morna. there were others:
wild connachtmen all, as untameable, as unaccountable as their own
wonderful countryside.
fionn would have heard much of them, and it is likely that he practised on
a nettle at taking the head off goll, and that he hunted a sheep from
cover in the implacable manner he intended later on for cona’n the
swearer.
but it is of uail mac baiscne he would have heard most. with what a
dilation of spirit the ladies would have told tales of him, fionn’s
father. how their voices would have become a chant as feat was added to
feat, glory piled on glory. the most famous of men and the most beautiful;
the hardest fighter; the easiest giver; the kingly champion; the chief of
the fianna na h-eirinn. tales of how he had been way-laid and got free; of
how he had been generous and got free; of how he had been angry and went
marching with the speed of an eagle and the direct onfall of a storm;
while in front and at the sides, angled from the prow of his terrific
advance, were fleeing multitudes who did not dare to wait and scarce had
time to run. and of how at last, when the time came to quell him, nothing
less than the whole might of ireland was sufficient for that great
downfall.
we may be sure that on these adventures fionn was with his father, going
step for step with the long-striding hero, and heartening him mightily.
he was given good training by the women in running and leaping and
swimming.
one of them would take a thorn switch in her hand, and fionn would take a
thorn switch in his hand, and each would try to strike the other running
round a tree.
you had to go fast to keep away from the switch behind, and a small boy
feels a switch. fionn would run his best to get away from that prickly
stinger, but how he would run when it was his turn to deal the strokes!
with reason too, for his nurses had suddenly grown implacable. they
pursued him with a savagery which he could not distinguish from hatred,
and they swished him well whenever they got the chance.
fionn learned to run. after a while he could buzz around a tree like a
maddened fly, and oh, the joy, when he felt himself drawing from the
switch and gaining from behind on its bearer! how he strained and panted
to catch on that pursuing person and pursue her and get his own switch
into action.
original size
he learned to jump by chasing hares in a bumpy field. up went the hare and
up went fionn, and away with the two of them, hopping and popping across
the field. if the hare turned while fionn was after her it was switch for
fionn; so that in a while it did not matter to fionn which way the hare
jumped for he could jump that way too. long-ways, sideways or baw-ways,
fionn hopped where the hare hopped, and at last he was the owner of a hop
that any hare would give an ear for.
he was taught to swim, and it may be that his heart sank when he fronted
the lesson. the water was cold. it was deep. one could see the bottom,
leagues below, millions of miles below. a small boy might shiver as he
stared into that wink and blink and twink of brown pebbles and murder. and
these implacable women threw him in!
perhaps he would not go in at first. he may have smiled at them, and
coaxed, and hung back. it was a leg and an arm gripped then; a swing for
fionn, and out and away with him; plop and flop for him; down into chill
deep death for him, and up with a splutter; with a sob; with a grasp at
everything that caught nothing; with a wild flurry; with a raging despair;
with a bubble and snort as he was hauled again down, and down, and down,
and found as suddenly that he had been hauled out.
fionn learned to swim until he could pop into the water like an otter and
slide through it like an eel.
he used to try to chase a fish the way he chased hares in the bumpy field—but
there are terrible spurts in a fish. it may be that a fish cannot hop, but
he gets there in a flash, and he isn’t there in another. up or down,
sideways or endways, it is all one to a fish. he goes and is gone. he
twists this way and disappears the other way. he is over you when he ought
to be under you, and he is biting your toe when you thought you were
biting his tail.
you cannot catch a fish by swimming, but you can try, and fionn tried. he
got a grudging commendation from the terrible women when he was able to
slip noiselessly in the tide, swim under water to where a wild duck was
floating and grip it by the leg.
“qu—,” said the duck, and he disappeared before he had time to get
the “-ack” out of him.
so the time went, and fionn grew long and straight and tough like a
sapling; limber as a willow, and with the flirt and spring of a young
bird. one of the ladies may have said, “he is shaping very well, my dear,”
 and the other replied, as is the morose privilege of an aunt, “he will
never be as good as his father,” but their hearts must have overflowed in
the night, in the silence, in the darkness, when they thought of the
living swiftness they had fashioned, and that dear fair head.
one day his guardians were agitated: they held confabulations at which
fionn was not permitted to assist. a man who passed by in the morning had
spoken to them. they fed the man, and during his feeding fionn had been
shooed from the door as if he were a chicken. when the stranger took his
road the women went with him a short distance. as they passed the man
lifted a hand and bent a knee to fionn.
“my soul to you, young master,” he said, and as he said it, fionn knew
that he could have the man’s soul, or his boots, or his feet, or anything
that belonged to him.
when the women returned they were mysterious and whispery. they chased
fionn into the house, and when they got him in they chased him out again.
they chased each other around the house for another whisper. they
calculated things by the shape of clouds, by lengths of shadows, by the
flight of birds, by two flies racing on a flat stone, by throwing bones
over their left shoulders, and by every kind of trick and game and chance
that you could put a mind to.
they told fionn he must sleep in a tree that night, and they put him under
bonds not to sing or whistle or cough or sneeze until the morning.
fionn did sneeze. he never sneezed so much in his life. he sat up in his
tree and nearly sneezed himself out of it. flies got up his nose, two at a
time, one up each nose, and his head nearly fell off the way he sneezed.
“you are doing that on purpose,” said a savage whisper from the foot of
the tree.
but fionn was not doing it on purpose. he tucked himself into a fork the
way he had been taught, and he passed the crawliest, tickliest night he
had ever known. after a while he did not want to sneeze, he wanted to
scream: and in particular he wanted to come down from the tree. but he did
not scream, nor did he leave the tree. his word was passed, and he stayed
in his tree as silent as a mouse and as watchful, until he fell out of it.
in the morning a band of travelling poets were passing, and the women
handed fionn over to them. this time they could not prevent him
overhearing.
“the sons of morna!” they said.
and fionn’s heart might have swelled with rage, but that it was already
swollen with adventure. and also the expected was happening. behind every
hour of their day and every moment of their lives lay the sons of morna.
fionn had run after them as deer: he jumped after them as hares: he dived
after them as fish. they lived in the house with him: they sat at the
table and ate his meat. one dreamed of them, and they were expected in the
morning as the sun is. they knew only too well that the son of uail was
living, and they knew that their own sons would know no ease while that
son lived; for they believed in those days that like breeds like, and that
the son of uail would be uail with additions.
his guardians knew that their hiding-place must at last be discovered, and
that, when it was found, the sons of morna would come. they had no doubt
of that, and every action of their lives was based on that certainty. for
no secret can remain secret. some broken soldier tramping home to his
people will find it out; a herd seeking his strayed cattle or a band of
travelling musicians will get the wind of it. how many people will move
through even the remotest wood in a year! the crows will tell a secret if
no one else does; and under a bush, behind a clump of bracken, what eyes
may there not be! but if your secret is legged like a young goat! if it is
tongued like a wolf! one can hide a baby, but you cannot hide a boy. he
will rove unless you tie him to a post, and he will whistle then.
the sons of morna came, but there were only two grim women living in a
lonely hut to greet them. we may be sure they were well greeted. one can
imagine goll’s merry stare taking in all that could be seen; cona’n’s grim
eye raking the women’s faces while his tongue raked them again; the rough
mac morna shouldering here and there in the house and about it, with maybe
a hatchet in his hand, and art og coursing further afield and vowing that
if the cub was there he would find him.
but fionn was gone. he was away, bound with his band of poets for the
galtees.
it is likely they were junior poets come to the end of a year’s training,
and returning to their own province to see again the people at home, and
to be wondered at and exclaimed at as they exhibited bits of the knowledge
which they had brought from the great schools. they would know tags of
rhyme and tricks about learning which fionn would hear of; and now and
again, as they rested in a glade or by the brink of a river, they might
try their lessons over. they might even refer to the ogham wands on which
the first words of their tasks and the opening lines of poems were cut;
and it is likely that, being new to these things, they would talk of them
to a youngster, and, thinking that his wits could be no better than their
own, they might have explained to him how ogham was written. but it is far
more likely that his women guardians had already started him at those
lessons.
still this band of young bards would have been of infinite interest to
fionn, not on account of what they had learned, but because of what they
knew. all the things that he should have known as by nature: the look, the
movement, the feeling of crowds; the shouldering and intercourse of man
with man; the clustering of houses and how people bore themselves in and
about them; the movement of armed men, and the homecoming look of wounds;
tales of births, and marriages and deaths; the chase with its multitudes
of men and dogs; all the noise, the dust, the excitement of mere living.
these, to fionn, new come from leaves and shadows and the dipple and
dapple of a wood, would have seemed wonderful; and the tales they would
have told of their masters, their looks, fads, severities, sillinesses,
would have been wonderful also.
that band should have chattered like a rookery.
they must have been young, for one time a leinsterman came on them, a
great robber named fiacuil mac cona, and he killed the poets. he chopped
them up and chopped them down. he did not leave one poeteen of them all.
he put them out of the world and out of life, so that they stopped being,
and no one could tell where they went or what had really happened to them;
and it is a wonder indeed that one can do that to anything let alone a
band. if they were not youngsters, the bold fiacuil could not have managed
them all. or, perhaps, he too had a band, although the record does not say
so; but kill them he did, and they died that way.
fionn saw that deed, and his blood may have been cold enough as he watched
the great robber coursing the poets as a wild dog rages in a flock. and
when his turn came, when they were all dead, and the grim, red-handed man
trod at him, fionn may have shivered, but he would have shown his teeth
and laid roundly on the monster with his hands. perhaps he did that, and
perhaps for that he was spared.
“who are you?” roared the staring black-mouth with the red tongue
squirming in it like a frisky fish.
“the son of uail, son of baiscne,” quoth hardy fionn. and at that the
robber ceased to be a robber, the murderer disappeared, the black-rimmed
chasm packed with red fish and precipices changed to something else, and
the round eyes that had been popping out of their sockets and trying to
bite, changed also. there remained a laughing and crying and loving
servant who wanted to tie himself into knots if that would please the son
of his great captain. fionn went home on the robber’s shoulder, and the
robber gave great snorts and made great jumps and behaved like a
first-rate horse. for this same fiacuil was the husband of bovmall,
fionn’s aunt. he had taken to the wilds when clann-baiscne was broken, and
he was at war with a world that had dared to kill his chief.
a new life for fionn in the robber’s den that was hidden in a vast cold
marsh.
a tricky place that would be, with sudden exits and even suddener
entrances, and with damp, winding, spidery places to hoard treasure in, or
to hide oneself in.
if the robber was a solitary he would, for lack of someone else, have
talked greatly to fionn. he would have shown his weapons and demonstrated
how he used them, and with what slash he chipped his victim, and with what
slice he chopped him. he would have told why a slash was enough for this
man and why that man should be sliced. all men are masters when one is
young, and fionn would have found knowledge here also. he would have seen
fiacuil’s great spear that had thirty rivets of arabian gold in its
socket, and that had to be kept wrapped up and tied down so that it would
not kill people out of mere spitefulness. it had come from faery, out of
the shi’ of aillen mac midna, and it would be brought back again later on
between the same man’s shoulder-blades.
what tales that man could tell a boy, and what questions a boy could ask
him. he would have known a thousand tricks, and because our instinct is to
teach, and because no man can keep a trick from a boy, he would show them
to fionn.
there was the marsh too; a whole new life to be learned; a complicated,
mysterious, dank, slippery, reedy, treacherous life, but with its own
beauty and an allurement that could grow on one, so that you could forget
the solid world and love only that which quaked and gurgled.
in this place you may swim. by this sign and this you will know if it is
safe to do so, said fiacuil mac cona; but in this place, with this sign on
it and that, you must not venture a toe.
but where fionn would venture his toes his ears would follow.
there are coiling weeds down there, the robber counselled him; there are
thin, tough, snaky binders that will trip you and grip you, that will pull
you and will not let you go again until you are drowned; until you are
swaying and swinging away below, with outstretched arms, with outstretched
legs, with a face all stares and smiles and jockeyings, gripped in those
leathery arms, until there is no more to be gripped of you even by them.
“watch these and this and that,” fionn would have been told, “and always
swim with a knife in your teeth.”
he lived there until his guardians found out where he was and came after
him. fiacuil gave him up to them, and he was brought home again to the
woods of slieve bloom, but he had gathered great knowledge and new
supplenesses.
the sons of morna left him alone for a long time. having made their essay
they grew careless.
“let him be,” they said. “he will come to us when the time comes.”
but it is likely too that they had had their own means of getting
information about him. how he shaped? what muscles he had? and did he
spring clean from the mark or had he to get off with a push? fionn stayed
with his guardians and hunted for them. he could run a deer down and haul
it home by the reluctant skull. “come on, goll,” he would say to his stag,
or, lifting it over a tussock with a tough grip on the snout, “are you
coming, bald cona’n, or shall i kick you in the neck?”
the time must have been nigh when he would think of taking the world
itself by the nose, to haul it over tussocks and drag it into his pen; for
he was of the breed in whom mastery is born, and who are good masters.
but reports of his prowess were getting abroad. clann-morna began to
stretch itself uneasily, and, one day, his guardians sent him on his
travels.
“it is best for you to leave us now,” they said to the tall stripling,
“for the sons of morna are watching again to kill you.”
the woods at that may have seemed haunted. a stone might sling at one from
a tree-top; but from which tree of a thousand trees did it come? an arrow
buzzing by one’s ear would slide into the ground and quiver there
silently, menacingly, hinting of the brothers it had left in the quiver
behind; to the right? to the left? how many brothers? in how many
quivers...? fionn was a woodsman, but he had only two eyes to look with,
one set of feet to carry him in one sole direction. but when he was
looking to the front what, or how many whats, could be staring at him from
the back? he might face in this direction, away from, or towards a smile
on a hidden face and a finger on a string. a lance might slide at him from
this bush or from the one yonder.. in the night he might have fought them;
his ears against theirs; his noiseless feet against their lurking ones;
his knowledge of the wood against their legion: but during the day he had
no chance.
fionn went to seek his fortune, to match himself against all that might
happen, and to carve a name for himself that will live while time has an
ear and knows an irishman.
fionn went away, and now he was alone. but he was as fitted for loneliness
as the crane is that haunts the solitudes and bleak wastes of the sea; for
the man with a thought has a comrade, and fionn’s mind worked as featly as
his body did. to be alone was no trouble to him who, however surrounded,
was to be lonely his life long; for this will be said of fionn when all is
said, that all that came to him went from him, and that happiness was
never his companion for more than a moment.
but he was not now looking for loneliness. he was seeking the instruction
of a crowd, and therefore when he met a crowd he went into it. his eyes
were skilled to observe in the moving dusk and dapple of green woods. they
were trained to pick out of shadows birds that were themselves
dun-coloured shades, and to see among trees the animals that are coloured
like the bark of trees. the hare crouching in the fronds was visible to
him, and the fish that swayed in-visibly in the sway and flicker of a
green bank. he would see all that was to be seen, and he would see all
that is passed by the eye that is half blind from use and wont.
at moy life’ he came on lads swimming in a pool; and, as he looked on them
sporting in the flush tide, he thought that the tricks they performed were
not hard for him, and that he could have shown them new ones.
boys must know what another boy can do, and they will match themselves
against everything. they did their best under these observing eyes, and it
was not long until he was invited to compete with them and show his
mettle. such an invitation is a challenge; it is almost, among boys, a
declaration of war. but fionn was so far beyond them in swimming that even
the word master did not apply to that superiority.
while he was swimming one remarked: “he is fair and well shaped,” and
thereafter he was called “fionn” or the fair one. his name came from boys,
and will, perhaps, be preserved by them.
he stayed with these lads for some time, and it may be that they idolised
him at first, for it is the way with boys to be astounded and enraptured
by feats; but in the end, and that was inevitable, they grew jealous of
the stranger. those who had been the champions before he came would
marshal each other, and, by social pressure, would muster all the others
against him; so that in the end not a friendly eye was turned on fionn in
that assembly. for not only did he beat them at swimming, he beat their
best at running and jumping, and when the sport degenerated into violence,
as it was bound to, the roughness of fionn would be ten times as rough as
the roughness of the roughest rough they could put forward. bravery is
pride when one is young, and fionn was proud.
there must have been anger in his mind as he went away leaving that lake
behind him, and those snarling and scowling boys, but there would have
been disappointment also, for his desire at this time should have been
towards friendliness.
he went thence to lock le’in and took service with the king of finntraigh.
that kingdom may have been thus called from fionn himself and would have
been known by another name when he arrived there.
he hunted for the king of finntraigh, and it soon grew evident that there
was no hunter in his service to equal fionn. more, there was no hunter of
them all who even distantly approached him in excellence. the others ran
after deer, using the speed of their legs, the noses of their dogs and a
thousand well-worn tricks to bring them within reach, and, often enough,
the animal escaped them. but the deer that fionn got the track of did not
get away, and it seemed even that the animals sought him so many did he
catch.
the king marvelled at the stories that were told of this new hunter, but
as kings are greater than other people so they are more curious; and,
being on the plane of excellence, they must see all that is excellently
told of.
the king wished to see him, and fionn must have wondered what the king
thought as that gracious lord looked on him. whatever was thought, what
the king said was as direct in utterance as it was in observation.
“if uail the son of baiscne has a son,” said the king, “you would surely
be that son.”
we are not told if the king of finntraigh said anything more, but we know
that fionn left his service soon afterwards.
he went southwards and was next in the employment of the king of kerry,
the same lord who had married his own mother. in that service he came to
such consideration that we hear of him as playing a match of chess with
the king, and by this game we know that he was still a boy in his mind
however mightily his limbs were spreading. able as he was in sports and
huntings, he was yet too young to be politic, but he remained impolitic to
the end of his days, for whatever he was able to do he would do, no matter
who was offended thereat; and whatever he was not able to do he would do
also. that was fionn.
once, as they rested on a chase, a debate arose among the fianna-finn as
to what was the finest music in the world.
“tell us that,” said fionn turning to oisi’n [pronounced usheen]
“the cuckoo calling from the tree that is highest in the hedge,” cried his
merry son.
“a good sound,” said fionn. “and you, oscar,” he asked, “what is to your
mind the finest of music?”
“the top of music is the ring of a spear on a shield,” cried the stout
lad.
“it is a good sound,” said fionn. and the other champions told their
delight; the belling of a stag across water, the baying of a tuneful pack
heard in the distance, the song of a lark, the laugh of a gleeful girl, or
the whisper of a moved one.
“they are good sounds all,” said fionn.
“tell us, chief,” one ventured, “what you think?”
“the music of what happens,” said great fionn, “that is the finest music
in the world.”
he loved “what happened,” and would not evade it by the swerve of a hair;
so on this occasion what was occurring he would have occur, although a
king was his rival and his master. it may be that his mother was watching
the match and that he could not but exhibit his skill before her. he
committed the enormity of winning seven games in succession from the king
himself!!!
it is seldom indeed that a subject can beat a king at chess, and this
monarch was properly amazed.
“who are you at all?” he cried, starting back from the chessboard and
staring on fionn.
“i am the son of a countryman of the luigne of tara,” said fionn.
he may have blushed as he said it, for the king, possibly for the first
time, was really looking at him, and was looking back through twenty years
of time as he did so. the observation of a king is faultless—it is
proved a thousand times over in the tales, and this king’s equipment was
as royal as the next.
“you are no such son,” said the indignant monarch, “but you are the son
that muirne my wife bore to uall mac balscne.”
and at that fionn had no more to say; but his eyes may have flown to his
mother and stayed there.
“you cannot remain here,” his step-father continued. “i do not want you
killed under my protection,” he explained, or complained.
perhaps it was on fionn’s account he dreaded the sons of morna, but no one
knows what fionn thought of him for he never thereafter spoke of his
step-father. as for muirne she must have loved her lord; or she may have
been terrified in truth of the sons of morna and for fionn; but it is so
also, that if a woman loves her second husband she can dislike all that
reminds her of the first one. fionn went on his travels again.
all desires save one are fleeting, but that one lasts for ever. fionn,
with all desires, had the lasting one, for he would go anywhere and
forsake anything for wisdom; and it was in search of this that he went to
the place where finegas lived on a bank of the boyne water. but for dread
of the clann-morna he did not go as fionn. he called himself deimne on
that journey.
we get wise by asking questions, and even if these are not answered we get
wise, for a well-packed question carries its answer on its back as a snail
carries its shell. fionn asked every question he could think of, and his
master, who was a poet, and so an honourable man, answered them all, not
to the limit of his patience, for it was limitless, but to the limit of
his ability.
“why do you live on the bank of a river?” was one of these questions.
“because a poem is a revelation, and it is by the brink of running water
that poetry is revealed to the mind.”
“how long have you been here?” was the next query. “seven years,” the poet
answered.
“it is a long time,” said wondering fionn.
“i would wait twice as long for a poem,” said the inveterate bard.
“have you caught good poems?” fionn asked him.
“the poems i am fit for,” said the mild master. “no person can get more
than that, for a man’s readiness is his limit.”
“would you have got as good poems by the shannon or the suir or by sweet
ana life’?”
“they are good rivers,” was the answer. “they all belong to good gods.”
“but why did you choose this river out of all the rivers?”
finegas beamed on his pupil.
“i would tell you anything,” said he, “and i will tell you that.”
fionn sat at the kindly man’s feet, his hands absent among tall grasses,
and listening with all his ears. “a prophecy was made to me,” finegas
began. “a man of knowledge foretold that i should catch the salmon of
knowledge in the boyne water.”
“and then?” said fionn eagerly.
“then i would have all knowledge.”
“and after that?” the boy insisted.
“what should there be after that?” the poet retorted.
“i mean, what would you do with all knowledge?”
“a weighty question,” said finegas smilingly. “i could answer it if i had
all knowledge, but not until then. what would you do, my dear?”
“i would make a poem,” fionn cried.
“i think too,” said the poet, “that that is what would be done.”
in return for instruction fionn had taken over the service of his master’s
hut, and as he went about the household duties, drawing the water,
lighting the fire, and carrying rushes for the floor and the beds, he
thought over all the poet had taught him, and his mind dwelt on the rules
of metre, the cunningness of words, and the need for a clean, brave mind.
but in his thousand thoughts he yet remembered the salmon of knowledge as
eagerly as his master did. he already venerated finegas for his great
learning, his poetic skill, for an hundred reasons; but, looking on him as
the ordained eater of the salmon of knowledge, he venerated him to the
edge of measure. indeed, he loved as well as venerated this master because
of his unfailing kindness, his patience, his readiness to teach, and his
skill in teaching.
“i have learned much from you, dear master,” said fionn gratefully.
“all that i have is yours if you can take it,” the poet answered, “for you
are entitled to all that you can take, but to no more than that. take, so,
with both hands.”
“you may catch the salmon while i am with you,” the hopeful boy mused.
“would not that be a great happening!” and he stared in ecstasy across the
grass at those visions which a boy’s mind knows.
“let us pray for that,” said finegas fervently.
“here is a question,” fionn continued. “how does this salmon get wisdom
into his flesh?”
“there is a hazel bush overhanging a secret pool in a secret place. the
nuts of knowledge drop from the sacred bush into the pool, and as they
float, a salmon takes them in his mouth and eats them.”
“it would be almost as easy,” the boy submitted, “if one were to set on
the track of the sacred hazel and eat the nuts straight from the bush.”
“that would not be very easy,” said the poet, “and yet it is not as easy
as that, for the bush can only be found by its own knowledge, and that
knowledge can only be got by eating the nuts, and the nuts can only be got
by eating the salmon.”
“we must wait for the salmon,” said fionn in a rage of resignation.
life continued for him in a round of timeless time, wherein days and
nights were uneventful and were yet filled with interest. as the day
packed its load of strength into his frame, so it added its store of
knowledge to his mind, and each night sealed the twain, for it is in the
night that we make secure what we have gathered in the day.
if he had told of these days he would have told of a succession of meals
and sleeps, and of an endless conversation, from which his mind would now
and again slip away to a solitude of its own, where, in large hazy
atmospheres, it swung and drifted and reposed. then he would be back
again, and it was a pleasure for him to catch up on the thought that was
forward and re-create for it all the matter he had missed. but he could
not often make these sleepy sallies; his master was too experienced a
teacher to allow any such bright-faced, eager-eyed abstractions, and as
the druid women had switched his legs around a tree, so finegas chased his
mind, demanding sense in his questions and understanding in his replies.
to ask questions can become the laziest and wobbliest occupation of a
mind, but when you must yourself answer the problem that you have posed,
you will meditate your question with care and frame it with precision.
fionn’s mind learned to jump in a bumpier field than that in which he had
chased rabbits. and when he had asked his question, and given his own
answer to it, finegas would take the matter up and make clear to him where
the query was badly formed or at what point the answer had begun to go
astray, so that fionn came to understand by what successions a good
question grows at last to a good answer.
one day, not long after the conversation told of, finegas came to the
place where fionn was. the poet had a shallow osier basket on his arm, and
on his face there was a look that was at once triumphant and gloomy. he
was excited certainly, but he was sad also, and as he stood gazing on
fionn his eyes were so kind that the boy was touched, and they were yet so
melancholy that it almost made fionn weep. “what is it, my master?” said
the alarmed boy.
the poet placed his osier basket on the grass.
“look in the basket, dear son,” he said. fionn looked.
“there is a salmon in the basket.”
“it is the salmon,” said finegas with a great sigh. fionn leaped for
delight.
“i am glad for you, master,” he cried. “indeed i am glad for you.”
“and i am glad, my dear soul,” the master rejoined.
but, having said it, he bent his brow to his hand and for a long time he
was silent and gathered into himself.
“what should be done now?” fionn demanded, as he stared on the beautiful
fish.
finegas rose from where he sat by the osier basket.
“i will be back in a short time,” he said heavily. “while i am away you
may roast the salmon, so that it will be ready against my return.”
“i will roast it indeed,” said fionn.
the poet gazed long and earnestly on him.
“you will not eat any of my salmon while i am away?” he asked.
“i will not eat the littlest piece,” said fionn.
“i am sure you will not,” the other murmured, as he turned and walked
slowly across the grass and behind the sheltering bushes on the ridge.
fionn cooked the salmon. it was beautiful and tempting and savoury as it
smoked on a wooden platter among cool green leaves; and it looked all
these to finegas when he came from behind the fringing bushes and sat in
the grass outside his door. he gazed on the fish with more than his eyes.
he looked on it with his heart, with his soul in his eyes, and when he
turned to look on fionn the boy did not know whether the love that was in
his eyes was for the fish or for himself. yet he did know that a great
moment had arrived for the poet.
“so,” said finegas, “you did not eat it on me after all?” “did i not
promise?” fionn replied.
“and yet,” his master continued, “i went away so that you might eat the
fish if you felt you had to.”
“why should i want another man’s fish?” said proud fionn.
“because young people have strong desires. i thought you might have tasted
it, and then you would have eaten it on me.”
“i did taste it by chance,” fionn laughed, “for while the fish was
roasting a great blister rose on its skin. i did not like the look of that
blister, and i pressed it down with my thumb. that burned my thumb, so i
popped it in my mouth to heal the smart. if your salmon tastes as nice as
my thumb did,” he laughed, “it will taste very nice.”
“what did you say your name was, dear heart?” the poet asked.
“i said my name was deimne.”
“your name is not deimne,” said the mild man, “your name is fionn.”
“that is true,” the boy answered, “but i do not know how you know it.”
“even if i have not eaten the salmon of knowledge i have some small
science of my own.”
“it is very clever to know things as you know them,” fionn replied
wonderingly. “what more do you know of me, dear master?”
“i know that i did not tell you the truth,” said the heavy-hearted man.
“what did you tell me instead of it?”
“i told you a lie.”
“it is not a good thing to do,” fionn admitted. “what sort of a lie was
the lie, master?” “i told you that the salmon of knowledge was to be
caught by me, according to the prophecy.”
“yes.”
“that was true indeed, and i have caught the fish. but i did not tell you
that the salmon was not to be eaten by me, although that also was in the
prophecy, and that omission was the lie.”
“it is not a great lie,” said fionn soothingly.
“it must not become a greater one,” the poet replied sternly.
“who was the fish given to?” his companion wondered.
“it was given to you,” finegas answered. “it was given to fionn, the son
of uail, the son of baiscne, and it will be given to him.”
“you shall have a half of the fish,” cried fionn.
“i will not eat a piece of its skin that is as small as the point of its
smallest bone,” said the resolute and trembling bard. “let you now eat up
the fish, and i shall watch you and give praise to the gods of the
underworld and of the elements.”
fionn then ate the salmon of knowledge, and when it had disappeared a
great jollity and tranquillity and exuberance returned to the poet.
“ah,” said he, “i had a great combat with that fish.”
“did it fight for its life?” fionn inquired.
“it did, but that was not the fight i meant.”
“you shall eat a salmon of knowledge too,” fionn assured him.
“you have eaten one,” cried the blithe poet, “and if you make such a
promise it will be because you know.”
“i promise it and know it,” said fionn, “you shall eat a salmon of
knowledge yet.”
he had received all that he could get from finegas. his education was
finished and the time had come to test it, and to try all else that he had
of mind and body. he bade farewell to the gentle poet, and set out for
tara of the kings.
it was samhain-tide, and the feast of tara was being held, at which all
that was wise or skilful or well-born in ireland were gathered together.
this is how tara was when tara was. there was the high king’s palace with
its fortification; without it was another fortification enclosing the four
minor palaces, each of which was maintained by one of the four provincial
kings; without that again was the great banqueting hall, and around it and
enclosing all of the sacred hill in its gigantic bound ran the main outer
ramparts of tara. from it, the centre of ireland, four great roads went,
north, south, east, and west, and along these roads, from the top and the
bottom and the two sides of ireland, there moved for weeks before samhain
an endless stream of passengers.
here a gay band went carrying rich treasure to decorate the pavilion of a
munster lord. on another road a vat of seasoned yew, monstrous as a house
on wheels and drawn by an hundred laborious oxen, came bumping and
joggling the ale that thirsty connaught princes would drink. on a road
again the learned men of leinster, each with an idea in his head that
would discomfit a northern ollav and make a southern one gape and fidget,
would be marching solemnly, each by a horse that was piled high on the
back and widely at the sides with clean-peeled willow or oaken wands, that
were carved from the top to the bottom with the ogham signs; the first
lines of poems (for it was an offence against wisdom to commit more than
initial lines to writing), the names and dates of kings, the procession of
laws of tara and of the sub-kingdoms, the names of places and their
meanings. on the brown stallion ambling peacefully yonder there might go
the warring of the gods for two or ten thousand years; this mare with the
dainty pace and the vicious eye might be sidling under a load of oaken
odes in honour of her owner’s family, with a few bundles of tales of
wonder added in case they might be useful; and perhaps the restive piebald
was backing the history of ireland into a ditch.
on such a journey all people spoke together, for all were friends, and no
person regarded the weapon in another man’s hand other than as an
implement to poke a reluctant cow with, or to pacify with loud wallops
some hoof-proud colt.
into this teem and profusion of jolly humanity fionn slipped, and if his
mood had been as bellicose as a wounded boar he would yet have found no
man to quarrel with, and if his eye had been as sharp as a jealous
husband’s he would have found no eye to meet it with calculation or menace
or fear; for the peace of ireland was in being, and for six weeks man was
neighbour to man, and the nation was the guest of the high king. fionn
went in with the notables.
his arrival had been timed for the opening day and the great feast of
welcome. he may have marvelled, looking on the bright city, with its
pillars of gleaming bronze and the roofs that were painted in many
colours, so that each house seemed to be covered by the spreading wings of
some gigantic and gorgeous bird. and the palaces themselves, mellow with
red oak, polished within and without by the wear and the care of a
thousand years, and carved with the patient skill of unending generations
of the most famous artists of the most artistic country of the western
world, would have given him much to marvel at also. it must have seemed
like a city of dream, a city to catch the heart, when, coming over the
great plain, fionn saw tara of the kings held on its hill as in a hand to
gather all the gold of the falling sun, and to restore a brightness as
mellow and tender as that universal largess.
in the great banqueting hall everything was in order for the feast. the
nobles of ireland with their winsome consorts, the learned and artistic
professions represented by the pick of their time were in place. the
ard-ri, corm of the hundred battles, had taken his place on the raised
dais which commanded the whole of that vast hall. at his right hand his
son art, to be afterwards as famous as his famous father, took his seat,
and on his left goll mor mac morna, chief of the fianna of ireland, had
the seat of honour. as the high king took his place he could see every
person who was noted in the land for any reason. he would know every one
who was present, for the fame of all men is sealed at tara, and behind his
chair a herald stood to tell anything the king might not know or had
forgotten.
conn gave the signal and his guests seated themselves.
the time had come for the squires to take their stations behind their
masters and mistresses. but, for the moment, the great room was seated,
and the doors were held to allow a moment of respect to pass before the
servers and squires came in.
looking over his guests, conn observed that a young man was yet standing.
“there is a gentleman,” he murmured, “for whom no seat has been found.”
we may be sure that the master of the banquet blushed at that.
“and,” the king continued, “i do not seem to know the young man.”
nor did his herald, nor did the unfortunate master, nor did anybody; for
the eyes of all were now turned where the king’s went.
“give me my horn,” said the gracious monarch.
the horn of state was put to his hand.
“young gentleman,” he called to the stranger, “i wish to drink to your
health and to welcome you to tara.”
the young man came forward then, greater-shouldered than any mighty man of
that gathering, longer and cleaner limbed, with his fair curls dancing
about his beardless face. the king put the great horn into his hand.
“tell me your name,” he commanded gently.
“i am fionn, the son of uail, the son of baiscne,” said the youth.
and at that saying a touch as of lightning went through the gathering so
that each person quivered, and the son of the great, murdered captain
looked by the king’s shoulder into the twinkling eye of goll. but no word
was uttered, no movement made except the movement and the utterance of the
ard-ri’.
“you are the son of a friend,” said the great-hearted monarch. “you shall
have the seat of a friend.”
he placed fionn at the right hand of his own son art.
it is to be known that on the night of the feast of samhain the doors
separating this world and the next one are opened, and the inhabitants of
either world can leave their respective spheres and appear in the world of
the other beings.
now there was a grandson to the dagda mor, the lord of the underworld, and
he was named aillen mac midna, out of shi’ finnachy, and this aillen bore
an implacable enmity to tara and the ard-ri’.
as well as being monarch of ireland her high king was chief of the people
learned in magic, and it is possible that at some time conn had adventured
into tir na n-og, the land of the young, and had done some deed or misdeed
in aillen’s lordship or in his family. it must have been an ill deed in
truth, for it was in a very rage of revenge that aillen came yearly at the
permitted time to ravage tara.
nine times he had come on this mission of revenge, but it is not to be
supposed that he could actually destroy the holy city: the ard-ri’ and
magicians could prevent that, but he could yet do a damage so considerable
that it was worth conn’s while to take special extra precautions against
him, including the precaution of chance.
therefore, when the feast was over and the banquet had commenced, the
hundred fighter stood from his throne and looked over his assembled
people.
the chain of silence was shaken by the attendant whose duty and honour was
the silver chain, and at that delicate chime the halt went silent, and a
general wonder ensued as to what matter the high king would submit to his
people.
“friends and heroes,” said conn, “aillen, the son of midna, will come
to-night from slieve fuaid with occult, terrible fire against our city. is
there among you one who loves tara and the king, and who will undertake
our defence against that being?”
he spoke in silence, and when he had finished he listened to the same
silence, but it was now deep, ominous, agonized. each man glanced uneasily
on his neighbour and then stared at his wine-cup or his fingers. the
hearts of young men went hot for a gallant moment and were chilled in the
succeeding one, for they had all heard of aillen out of shl finnachy in
the north. the lesser gentlemen looked under their brows at the greater
champions, and these peered furtively at the greatest of all. art og mac
morna of the hard strokes fell to biting his fingers, cona’n the swearer
and garra mac morna grumbled irritably to each other and at their
neighbours, even caelte, the son of rona’n, looked down into his own lap,
and goll mor sipped at his wine without any twinkle in his eye. a horrid
embarrassment came into the great hall, and as the high king stood in that
palpitating silence his noble face changed from kindly to grave and from
that to a terrible sternness. in another moment, to the undying shame of
every person present, he would have been compelled to lift his own
challenge and declare himself the champion of tara for that night, but the
shame that was on the faces of his people would remain in the heart of
their king. goll’s merry mind would help him to forget, but even his heart
would be wrung by a memory that he would not dare to face. it was at that
terrible moment that fionn stood up.
“what,” said he, “will be given to the man who undertakes this defence?”
“all that can be rightly asked will be royally bestowed,” was the king’s
answer.
“who are the sureties?” said fionn.
“the kings of ireland, and red cith with his magicians.”
“i will undertake the defence,” said fionn. and on that, the kings and
magicians who were present bound themselves to the fulfilment of the
bargain.
fionn marched from the banqueting hall, and as he went, all who were
present of nobles and retainers and servants acclaimed him and wished him
luck. but in their hearts they were bidding him good-bye, for all were
assured that the lad was marching to a death so unescapeable that he might
already be counted as a dead man.
it is likely that fionn looked for help to the people of the shi’ 
themselves, for, through his mother, he belonged to the tribes of dana,
although, on the father’s side, his blood was well compounded with mortal
clay. it may be, too, that he knew how events would turn, for he had eaten
the salmon of knowledge. yet it is not recorded that on this occasion he
invoked any magical art as he did on other adventures.
fionn’s way of discovering whatever was happening and hidden was always
the same and is many times referred to. a shallow, oblong dish of pure,
pale gold was brought to him. this dish was filled with clear water. then
fionn would bend his head and stare into the water, and as he stared he
would place his thumb in his mouth under his “tooth of knowledge,” his
“wisdom tooth.”
knowledge, may it be said, is higher than magic and is more to be sought.
it is quite possible to see what is happening and yet not know what is
forward, for while seeing is believing it does not follow that either
seeing or believing is knowing. many a person can see a thing and believe
a thing and know just as little about it as the person who does neither.
but fionn would see and know, or he would under-stand a decent ratio of
his visions. that he was versed in magic is true, for he was ever known as
the knowledgeable man, and later he had two magicians in his household
named dirim and mac-reith to do the rough work of knowledge for their busy
master.
it was not from the shi’, however, that assistance came to fionn.
he marched through the successive fortifications until he came to the
outer, great wall, the boundary of the city, and when he had passed this
he was on the wide plain of tara.
other than himself no person was abroad, for on the night of the feast of
samhain none but a madman would quit the shelter of a house even if it
were on fire; for whatever disasters might be within a house would be as
nothing to the calamities without it.
the noise of the banquet was not now audible to fionn—it is
possible, however, that there was a shamefaced silence in the great hall—and
the lights of the city were hidden by the successive great ramparts. the
sky was over him; the earth under him; and than these there was nothing,
or there was but the darkness and the wind.
but darkness was not a thing to terrify him, bred in the nightness of a
wood and the very fosterling of gloom; nor could the wind afflict his ear
or his heart. there was no note in its orchestra that he had not brooded
on and become, which becoming is magic. the long-drawn moan of it; the
thrilling whisper and hush; the shrill, sweet whistle, so thin it can
scarcely be heard, and is taken more by the nerves than by the ear; the
screech, sudden as a devil’s yell and loud as ten thunders; the cry as of
one who flies with backward look to the shelter of leaves and darkness;
and the sob as of one stricken with an age-long misery, only at times
remembered, but remembered then with what a pang! his ear knew by what
successions they arrived, and by what stages they grew and diminished.
listening in the dark to the bundle of noises which make a noise he could
disentangle them and assign a place and a reason to each gradation of
sound that formed the chorus: there was the patter of a rabbit, and there
the scurrying of a hare; a bush rustled yonder, but that brief rustle was
a bird; that pressure was a wolf, and this hesitation a fox; the scraping
yonder was but a rough leaf against bark, and the scratching beyond it was
a ferret’s claw.
fear cannot be where knowledge is, and fionn was not fearful.
his mind, quietly busy on all sides, picked up one sound and dwelt on it.
“a man,” said fionn, and he listened in that direction, back towards the
city.
a man it was, almost as skilled in darkness as fionn himself “this is no
enemy,” fionn thought; “his walking is open.”
“who comes?” he called.
“a friend,” said the newcomer.
“give a friend’s name,” said fionn.
“fiacuil mac cona,” was the answer.
“ah, my pulse and heart!” cried fionn, and he strode a few paces to meet
the great robber who had fostered him among the marshes.
“so you are not afraid,” he said joyfully.
“i am afraid in good truth,” fiacuil whispered, “and the minute my
business with you is finished i will trot back as quick as legs will carry
me. may the gods protect my going as they protected my coming,” said the
robber piously.
“amen,” said fionn, “and now, tell me what you have come for?”
“have you any plan against this lord of the shl?” fiacuil whispered.
“i will attack him,” said fionn.
“that is not a plan,” the other groaned, “we do not plan to deliver an
attack but to win a victory.”
“is this a very terrible person?” fionn asked.
“terrible indeed. no one can get near him or away from him. he comes out
of the shi’ playing sweet, low music on a timpan and a pipe, and all who
hear this music fall asleep.”
“i will not fall asleep,” said fionn.
“you will indeed, for everybody does.”
“what happens then?” fionn asked.
“when all are asleep aillen mac midna blows a dart of fire out of his
mouth, and everything that is touched by that fire is destroyed, and he
can blow his fire to an incredible distance and to any direction.”
“you are very brave to come to help me,” fionn murmured, “especially when
you are not able to help me at all.”
“i can help,” fiacuil replied, “but i must be paid.”
“what payment?”
“a third of all you earn and a seat at your council.”
“i grant that,” said fionn, “and now, tell me your plan?”
“you remember my spear with the thirty rivets of arabian gold in its
socket?”
“the one,” fionn queried, “that had its head wrapped in a blanket and was
stuck in a bucket of water and was chained to a wall as well—the
venomous birgha?” “that one,” fiacuil replied.
“it is aillen mac midna’s own spear,” he continued, “and it was taken out
of his shi’ by your father.”
“well?” said fionn, wondering nevertheless where fiacuil got the spear,
but too generous to ask.
“when you hear the great man of the shi’ coming, take the wrappings off
the head of the spear and bend your face over it; the heat of the spear,
the stench of it, all its pernicious and acrid qualities will prevent you
from going to sleep.”
“are you sure of that?” said fionn.
“you couldn’t go to sleep close to that stench; nobody could,” fiacuil
replied decidedly.
he continued: “aillen mac midna will be off his guard when he stops
playing and begins to blow his fire; he will think everybody is asleep;
then you can deliver the attack you were speaking of, and all good luck go
with it.”
“i will give him back his spear,” said fionn.
“here it is,” said fiacuil, taking the birgha from under his cloak. “but
be as careful of it, my pulse, be as frightened of it as you are of the
man of dana.”
“i will be frightened of nothing,” said fionn, “and the only person i will
be sorry for is that aillen mac midna, who is going to get his own spear
back.”
“i will go away now,” his companion whispered, “for it is growing darker
where you would have thought there was no more room for darkness, and
there is an eerie feeling abroad which i do not like. that man from the
shi’ may come any minute, and if i catch one sound of his music i am done
for.”
the robber went away and again fionn was alone.
he listened to the retreating footsteps until they could be heard no more,
and the one sound that came to his tense ears was the beating of his own
heart.
even the wind had ceased, and there seemed to be nothing in the world but
the darkness and himself. in that gigantic blackness, in that unseen
quietude and vacancy, the mind could cease to be personal to itself. it
could be overwhelmed and merged in space, so that consciousness would be
transferred or dissipated, and one might sleep standing; for the mind
fears loneliness more than all else, and will escape to the moon rather
than be driven inwards on its own being.
but fionn was not lonely, and he was not afraid when the son of midna
came.
a long stretch of the silent night had gone by, minute following minute in
a slow sequence, wherein as there was no change there was no time; wherein
there was no past and no future, but a stupefying, endless present which
is almost the annihilation of consciousness. a change came then, for the
clouds had also been moving and the moon at last was sensed behind them—not
as a radiance, but as a percolation of light, a gleam that was strained
through matter after matter and was less than the very wraith or
remembrance of itself; a thing seen so narrowly, so sparsely, that the eye
could doubt if it was or was not seeing, and might conceive that its own
memory was re-creating that which was still absent.
but fionn’s eye was the eye of a wild creature that spies on darkness and
moves there wittingly. he saw, then, not a thing but a movement; something
that was darker than the darkness it loomed on; not a being but a
presence, and, as it were, impending pressure. and in a little he heard
the deliberate pace of that great being.
fionn bent to his spear and unloosed its coverings.
then from the darkness there came another sound; a low, sweet sound;
thrillingly joyous, thrillingly low; so low the ear could scarcely note
it, so sweet the ear wished to catch nothing else and would strive to hear
it rather than all sounds that may be heard by man: the music of another
world! the unearthly, dear melody of the shi’! so sweet it was that the
sense strained to it, and having reached must follow drowsily in its wake,
and would merge in it, and could not return again to its own place until
that strange harmony was finished and the ear restored to freedom.
but fionn had taken the covering from his spear, and with his brow pressed
close to it he kept his mind and all his senses engaged on that sizzling,
murderous point.
the music ceased and aillen hissed a fierce blue flame from his mouth, and
it was as though he hissed lightning.
here it would seem that fionn used magic, for spreading out his fringed
mantle he caught the flame. rather he stopped it, for it slid from the
mantle and sped down into the earth to the depth of twenty-six spans; from
which that slope is still called the glen of the mantle, and the rise on
which aillen stood is known as the ard of fire.
one can imagine the surprise of aillen mac midna, seeing his fire caught
and quenched by an invisible hand. and one can imagine that at this check
he might be frightened, for who would be more terrified than a magician
who sees his magic fail, and who, knowing of power, will guess at powers
of which he has no conception and may well dread.
everything had been done by him as it should be done. his pipe had been
played and his timpan, all who heard that music should be asleep, and yet
his fire was caught in full course and was quenched.
aillen, with all the terrific strength of which he was master, blew again,
and the great jet of blue flame came roaring and whistling from him and
was caught and disappeared.
panic swirled into the man from faery; he turned from that terrible spot
and fled, not knowing what might be behind, but dreading it as he had
never before dreaded anything, and the unknown pursued him; that terrible
defence became offence and hung to his heel as a wolf pads by the flank of
a bull.
and aillen was not in his own world! he was in the world of men, where
movement is not easy and the very air a burden. in his own sphere, in his
own element, he might have outrun fionn, but this was fionn’s world,
fionn’s element, and the flying god was not gross enough to outstrip him.
yet what a race he gave, for it was but at the entrance to his own shi’ 
that the pursuer got close enough. fionn put a finger into the thong of
the great spear, and at that cast night fell on aillen mac midna. his eyes
went black, his mind whirled and ceased, there came nothingness where he
had been, and as the birgha whistled into his shoulder-blades he withered
away, he tumbled emptily and was dead. fionn took his lovely head from its
shoulders and went back through the night to tara.
triumphant fionn, who had dealt death to a god, and to whom death would be
dealt, and who is now dead!
he reached the palace at sunrise.
on that morning all were astir early. they wished to see what destruction
had been wrought by the great being, but it was young fionn they saw and
that redoubtable head swinging by its hair. “what is your demand?” said
the ard-ri’. “the thing that it is right i should ask,” said fionn: “the
command of the fianna of ireland.”
“make your choice,” said conn to goll mor; “you will leave ireland, or you
will place your hand in the hand of this champion and be his man.”
goll could do a thing that would be hard for another person, and he could
do it so beautifully that he was not diminished by any action.
“here is my hand,” said goll.
and he twinkled at the stern, young eyes that gazed on him as he made his
submission.
original size
there are people who do not like dogs a bit—they are usually women—but
in this story there is a man who did not like dogs. in fact, he hated
them. when he saw one he used to go black in the face, and he threw rocks
at it until it got out of sight. but the power that protects all creatures
had put a squint into this man’s eye, so that he always threw crooked.
this gentleman’s name was fergus fionnliath, and his stronghold was near
the harbour of galway. whenever a dog barked he would leap out of his
seat, and he would throw everything that he owned out of the window in the
direction of the bark. he gave prizes to servants who disliked dogs, and
when he heard that a man had drowned a litter of pups he used to visit
that person and try to marry his daughter.
now fionn, the son of uail, was the reverse of fergus fionnliath in this
matter, for he delighted in dogs, and he knew everything about them from
the setting of the first little white tooth to the rocking of the last
long yellow one. he knew the affections and antipathies which are proper
in a dog; the degree of obedience to which dogs may be trained without
losing their honourable qualities or becoming servile and suspicious; he
knew the hopes that animate them, the apprehensions which tingle in their
blood, and all that is to be demanded from, or forgiven in, a paw, an ear,
a nose, an eye, or a tooth; and he understood these things because he
loved dogs, for it is by love alone that we understand anything.
among the three hundred dogs which fionn owned there were two to whom he
gave an especial tenderness, and who were his daily and nightly
companions. these two were bran and sceo’lan, but if a person were to
guess for twenty years he would not find out why fionn loved these two
dogs and why he would never be separated from them.
fionn’s mother, muirne, went to wide allen of leinster to visit her son,
and she brought her young sister tuiren with her. the mother and aunt of
the great captain were well treated among the fianna, first, because they
were parents to fionn, and second, because they were beautiful and noble
women.
no words can describe how delightful muirne was—she took the branch;
and as to tuiren, a man could not look at her without becoming angry or
dejected. her face was fresh as a spring morning; her voice more cheerful
than the cuckoo calling from the branch that is highest in the hedge; and
her form swayed like a reed and flowed like a river, so that each person
thought she would surely flow to him.
original size
men who had wives of their own grew moody and downcast because they could
not hope to marry her, while the bachelors of the fianna stared at each
other with truculent, bloodshot eyes, and then they gazed on tuiren so
gently that she may have imagined she was being beamed on by the mild eyes
of the dawn.
it was to an ulster gentleman, iollan eachtach, that she gave her love,
and this chief stated his rights and qualities and asked for her in
marriage.
now fionn did not dislike the man of ulster, but either he did not know
them well or else he knew them too well, for he made a curious stipulation
before consenting to the marriage. he bound iollan to return the lady if
there should be occasion to think her unhappy, and iollan agreed to do so.
the sureties to this bargain were caelte mac ronan, goll mac morna, and
lugaidh. lugaidh himself gave the bride away, but it was not a pleasant
ceremony for him, because he also was in love with the lady, and he would
have preferred keeping her to giving her away. when she had gone he made a
poem about her, beginning:
“there is no more light in the sky—”
and hundreds of sad people learned the poem by heart.
when iollan and tuiren were married they went to ulster, and they lived
together very happily. but the law of life is change; nothing continues in
the same way for any length of time; happiness must become unhappiness,
and will be succeeded again by the joy it had displaced. the past also
must be reckoned with; it is seldom as far behind us as we could wish: it
is more often in front, blocking the way, and the future trips over it
just when we think that the road is clear and joy our own.
iollan had a past. he was not ashamed of it; he merely thought it was
finished, although in truth it was only beginning, for it is that
perpetual beginning of the past that we call the future.
before he joined the fianna he had been in love with a lady of the shi’,
named uct dealv (fair breast), and they had been sweethearts for years.
how often he had visited his sweetheart in faery! with what eagerness and
anticipation he had gone there; the lover’s whistle that he used to give
was known to every person in that shi’, and he had been discussed by more
than one of the delicate sweet ladies of faery. “that is your whistle,
fair breast,” her sister of the shi’ would say.
and uct dealv would reply: “yes, that is my mortal, my lover, my pulse,
and my one treasure.”
original size
she laid her spinning aside, or her embroidery if she was at that, or if
she were baking a cake of fine wheaten bread mixed with honey she would
leave the cake to bake itself and fly to iollan. then they went hand in
hand in the country that smells of apple-blossom and honey, looking on
heavy-boughed trees and on dancing and beaming clouds. or they stood
dreaming together, locked in a clasping of arms and eyes, gazing up and
down on each other, iollan staring down into sweet grey wells that peeped
and flickered under thin brows, and uct dealv looking up into great black
ones that went dreamy and went hot in endless alternation.
then iollan would go back to the world of men, and uct dealv would return
to her occupations in the land of the ever young.
“what did he say?” her sister of the shi’ would ask.
“he said i was the berry of the mountain, the star of knowledge, and the
blossom of the raspberry.”
“they always say the same thing,” her sister pouted.
“but they look other things,” uct dealv insisted. “they feel other
things,” she murmured; and an endless conversation recommenced.
then for some time iollan did not come to faery, and uct dealv marvelled
at that, while her sister made an hundred surmises, each one worse than
the last.
“he is not dead or he would be here,” she said. “he has forgotten you, my
darling.”
news was brought to tlr na n-og of the marriage of iollan and tuiren, and
when uct dealv heard that news her heart ceased to beat for a moment, and
she closed her eyes.
“now!” said her sister of the shi’. “that is how long the love of a mortal
lasts,” she added, in the voice of sad triumph which is proper to sisters.
but on uct dealv there came a rage of jealousy and despair such as no
person in the shi’ had ever heard of, and from that moment she became
capable of every ill deed; for there are two things not easily controlled,
and they are hunger and jealousy. she determined that the woman who had
supplanted her in iollan’s affections should rue the day she did it. she
pondered and brooded revenge in her heart, sitting in thoughtful solitude
and bitter collectedness until at last she had a plan.
she understood the arts of magic and shape-changing, so she changed her
shape into that of fionn’s female runner, the best-known woman in ireland;
then she set out from faery and appeared in the world. she travelled in
the direction of iollan’s stronghold.
iollan knew the appearance of fionn’s messenger, but he was surprised to
see her.
she saluted him.
“health and long life, my master.”.
“health and good days,” he replied. “what brings you here, dear heart?”
“i come from fionn.”
“and your message?” said he.
“the royal captain intends to visit you.”
“he will be welcome,” said iollan. “we shall give him an ulster feast.”
“the world knows what that is,” said the messenger courteously. “and now,”
 she continued, “i have messages for your queen.”
tuiren then walked from the house with the messenger, but when they had
gone a short distance uct dealv drew a hazel rod from beneath her cloak
and struck it on the queen’s shoulder, and on the instant tuiren’s figure
trembled and quivered, and it began to whirl inwards and downwards, and
she changed into the appearance of a hound.
it was sad to see the beautiful, slender dog standing shivering and
astonished, and sad to see the lovely eyes that looked out pitifully in
terror and amazement. but uct dealv did not feel sad. she clasped a chain
about the hound’s neck, and they set off westward towards the house of
fergus fionnliath, who was reputed to be the unfriendliest man in the
world to a dog. it was because of his reputation that uct dealv was
bringing the hound to him. she did not want a good home for this dog: she
wanted the worst home that could be found in the world, and she thought
that fergus would revenge for her the rage and jealousy which she felt
towards tuiren.
as they paced along uct dealv railed bitterly against the hound, and shook
and jerked her chain. many a sharp cry the hound gave in that journey,
many a mild lament.
“ah, supplanter! ah, taker of another girl’s sweetheart!” said uct dealv
fiercely. “how would your lover take it if he could see you now? how would
he look if he saw your pointy ears, your long thin snout, your shivering,
skinny legs, and your long grey tail. he would not love you now, bad
girl!”
“have you heard of fergus fionnliath,” she said again, “the man who does
not like dogs?”
tuiren had indeed heard of him.
“it is to fergus i shall bring you,” cried uct dealv. “he will throw
stones at you. you have never had a stone thrown at you. ah, bad girl! you
do not know how a stone sounds as it nips the ear with a whirling buzz,
nor how jagged and heavy it feels as it thumps against a skinny leg.
robber! mortal! bad girl! you have never been whipped, but you will be
whipped now. you shall hear the song of a lash as it curls forward and
bites inward and drags backward. you shall dig up old bones stealthily at
night, and chew them against famine. you shall whine and squeal at the
moon, and shiver in the cold, and you will never take another girl’s
sweetheart again.”
and it was in those terms and in that tone that she spoke to tuiren as
they journeyed forward, so that the hound trembled and shrank, and whined
pitifully and in despair.
they came to fergus fionnliath’s stronghold, and uct dealv demanded
admittance.
“leave that dog outside,” said the servant.
“i will not do so,” said the pretended messenger.
“you can come in without the dog, or you can stay out with the dog,” said
the surly guardian.
“by my hand,” cried uct dealv, “i will come in with this dog, or your
master shall answer for it to fionn.”
at the name of fionn the servant almost fell out of his standing. he flew
to acquaint his master, and fergus himself came to the great door of the
stronghold.
“by my faith,” he cried in amazement, “it is a dog.”
“a dog it is,” growled the glum servant.
“go you away,” said fergus to uct dealv, “and when you have killed the dog
come back to me and i will give you a present.”
“life and health, my good master, from fionn, the son of uail, the son of
baiscne,” said she to fergus.
“life and health back to fionn,” he replied. “come into the house and give
your message, but leave the dog outside, for i don’t like dogs.”
“the dog comes in,” the messenger replied.
“how is that?” cried fergus angrily.
“fionn sends you this hound to take care of until he comes for her,” said
the messenger.
“i wonder at that,” fergus growled, “for fionn knows well that there is
not a man in the world has less of a liking for dogs than i have.”
“however that may be, master, i have given fionn’s message, and here at my
heel is the dog. do you take her or refuse her?”
“if i could refuse anything to fionn it would be a dog,” said fergus, “but
i could not refuse anything to fionn, so give me the hound.”
uct dealv put the chain in his hand.
“ah, bad dog!” said she.
and then she went away well satisfied with her revenge, and returned to
her own people in the shi.
on the following day fergus called his servant.
“has that dog stopped shivering yet?” he asked.
“it has not, sir,” said the servant.
“bring the beast here,” said his master, “for whoever else is dissatisfied
fionn must be satisfied.”
the dog was brought, and he examined it with a jaundiced and bitter eye.
“it has the shivers indeed,” he said.
“the shivers it has,” said the servant.
“how do you cure the shivers?” his master demanded, for he thought that if
the animal’s legs dropped off fionn would not be satisfied.
“there is a way,” said the servant doubtfully.
“if there is a way, tell it to me,” cried his master angrily.
“if you were to take the beast up in your arms and hug it and kiss it, the
shivers would stop,” said the man.
“do you mean—?” his master thundered, and he stretched his hand for
a club.
“i heard that,” said the servant humbly.
“take that dog up,” fergus commanded, “and hug it and kiss it, and if i
find a single shiver left in the beast i’ll break your head.”
the man bent to the hound, but it snapped a piece out of his hand, and
nearly bit his nose off as well.
“that dog doesn’t like me,” said the man.
“nor do i,” roared fergus; “get out of my sight.”
the man went away and fergus was left alone with the hound, but the poor
creature was so terrified that it began to tremble ten times worse than
before.
“its legs will drop off,” said fergus. “fionn will blame me,” he cried in
despair.
he walked to the hound.
“if you snap at my nose, or if you put as much as the start of a tooth
into the beginning of a finger!” he growled.
he picked up the dog, but it did not snap, it only trembled. he held it
gingerly for a few moments.
“if it has to be hugged,” he said, “i’ll hug it. i’d do more than that for
fionn.”
he tucked and tightened the animal into his breast, and marched moodily up
and down the room. the dog’s nose lay along his breast under his chin, and
as he gave it dutiful hugs, one hug to every five paces, the dog put out
its tongue and licked him timidly under the chin.
“stop,” roared fergus, “stop that forever,” and he grew very red in the
face, and stared truculently down along his nose. a soft brown eye looked
up at him and the shy tongue touched again on his chin.
“if it has to be kissed,” said fergus gloomily, “i’ll kiss it; i’d do more
than that for fionn,” he groaned.
he bent his head, shut his eyes, and brought the dog’s jaw against his
lips. and at that the dog gave little wriggles in his arms, and little
barks, and little licks, so that he could scarcely hold her. he put the
hound down at last.
“there is not a single shiver left in her,” he said.
and that was true.
everywhere he walked the dog followed him, giving little prances and
little pats against him, and keeping her eyes fixed on his with such
eagerness and intelligence that he marvelled.
“that dog likes me,” he murmured in amazement.
“by my hand,” he cried next day, “i like that dog.”
the day after that he was calling her “my one treasure, my little branch.”
 and within a week he could not bear her to be out of his sight for an
instant.
he was tormented by the idea that some evil person might throw a stone at
the hound, so he assembled his servants and retainers and addressed them.
he told them that the hound was the queen of creatures, the pulse of his
heart, and the apple of his eye, and he warned them that the person who as
much as looked sideways on her, or knocked one shiver out of her, would
answer for the deed with pains and indignities. he recited a list of
calamities which would befall such a miscreant, and these woes began with
flaying and ended with dismemberment, and had inside bits of such
complicated and ingenious torment that the blood of the men who heard it
ran chill in their veins, and the women of the household fainted where
they stood.
in course of time the news came to fionn that his mother’s sister was not
living with iollan. he at once sent a messenger calling for fulfilment of
the pledge that had been given to the fianna, and demanding the instant
return of tuiren. iollan was in a sad condition when this demand was made.
he guessed that uct dealv had a hand in the disappearance of his queen,
and he begged that time should be given him in which to find the lost
girl. he promised if he could not discover her within a certain period
that he would deliver his body into fionn’s hands, and would abide by
whatever judgement fionn might pronounce. the great captain agreed to
that.
“tell the wife-loser that i will have the girl or i will have his head,”
 said fionn.
iollan set out then for faery. he knew the way, and in no great time he
came to the hill where uct dealv was.
it was hard to get uct dealv to meet him, but at last she consented, and
they met under the apple boughs of faery.
“well!” said uct dealv. “ah! breaker of vows and traitor to love,” said
she.
“hail and a blessing,” said iollan humbly.
“by my hand,” she cried, “i will give you no blessing, for it was no
blessing you left with me when we parted.”
“i am in danger,” said iollan.
“what is that to me?” she replied fiercely.
“fionn may claim my head,” he murmured.
“let him claim what he can take,” said she.
“no,” said iollan proudly, “he will claim what i can give.”
“tell me your tale,” said she coldly.
iollan told his story then, and, he concluded, “i am certain that you have
hidden the girl.”
“if i save your head from fionn,” the woman of the shi’ replied, “then
your head will belong to me.”
“that is true,” said iollan.
“and if your head is mine, the body that goes under it is mine. do you
agree to that?”
“i do,” said iollan.
“give me your pledge,” said uct dealv, “that if i save you from this
danger you will keep me as your sweetheart until the end of life and
time.”
“i give that pledge,” said iollan.
uct dealv went then to the house of fergus fionnliath, and she broke the
enchantment that was on the hound, so that tuiren’s own shape came back to
her; but in the matter of two small whelps, to which the hound had given
birth, the enchantment could not be broken, so they had to remain as they
were. these two whelps were bran and sceo’lan. they were sent to fionn,
and he loved them for ever after, for they were loyal and affectionate, as
only dogs can be, and they were as intelligent as human beings. besides
that, they were fionn’s own cousins.
tuiren was then asked in marriage by lugaidh who had loved her so long. he
had to prove to her that he was not any other woman’s sweetheart, and when
he proved that they were married, and they lived happily ever after, which
is the proper way to live. he wrote a poem beginning:
“lovely the day. dear is the eye of the dawn—”
and a thousand merry people learned it after him.
but as to fergus fionnliath, he took to his bed, and he stayed there for a
year and a day suffering from blighted affection, and he would have died
in the bed only that fionn sent him a special pup, and in a week that
young hound became the star of fortune and the very pulse of his heart, so
that he got well again, and he also lived happily ever after.
original size
evening was drawing nigh, and the fianna-finn had decided to hunt no more
that day. the hounds were whistled to heel, and a sober, homeward march
began. for men will walk soberly in the evening, however they go in the
day, and dogs will take the mood from their masters. they were pacing so,
through the golden-shafted, tender-coloured eve, when a fawn leaped
suddenly from covert, and, with that leap, all quietness vanished: the men
shouted, the dogs gave tongue, and a furious chase commenced.
fionn loved a chase at any hour, and, with bran and sceo’lan, he
outstripped the men and dogs of his troop, until nothing remained in the
limpid world but fionn, the two hounds, and the nimble, beautiful fawn.
these, and the occasional boulders, round which they raced, or over which
they scrambled; the solitary tree which dozed aloof and beautiful in the
path, the occasional clump of trees that hived sweet shadow as a hive
hoards honey, and the rustling grass that stretched to infinity, and that
moved and crept and swung under the breeze in endless, rhythmic
billowings.
in his wildest moment fionn was thoughtful, and now, although running
hard, he was thoughtful. there was no movement of his beloved hounds that
he did not know; not a twitch or fling of the head, not a cock of the ears
or tail that was not significant to him. but on this chase whatever signs
the dogs gave were not understood by their master.
he had never seen them in such eager flight. they were almost utterly
absorbed in it, but they did not whine with eagerness, nor did they cast
any glance towards him for the encouraging word which he never failed to
give when they sought it.
they did look at him, but it was a look which he could not comprehend.
there was a question and a statement in those deep eyes, and he could not
understand what that question might be, nor what it was they sought to
convey. now and again one of the dogs turned a head in full flight, and
stared, not at fionn, but distantly backwards, over the spreading and
swelling plain where their companions of the hunt had disappeared. “they
are looking for the other hounds,” said fionn.
“and yet they do not give tongue! tongue it, a vran!” he shouted, “bell it
out, a heo’lan!”
it was then they looked at him, the look which he could not understand and
had never seen on a chase. they did not tongue it, nor bell it, but they
added silence to silence and speed to speed, until the lean grey bodies
were one pucker and lashing of movement.
fionn marvelled. “they do not want the other dogs to hear or to come on
this chase,” he murmured, and he wondered what might be passing within
those slender heads.
“the fawn runs well,” his thought continued. “what is it, a vran, my
heart? after her, a heo’lan! hist and away, my loves!”
“there is going and to spare in that beast yet,” his mind went on. “she is
not stretched to the full, nor half stretched. she may outrun even bran,”
 he thought ragingly.
they were racing through a smooth valley in a steady, beautiful, speedy
flight when, suddenly, the fawn stopped and lay on the grass, and it lay
with the calm of an animal that has no fear, and the leisure of one that
is not pressed.
“here is a change,” said fionn, staring in astonishment.
“she is not winded,” he said. “what is she lying down for?” but bran and
sceo’lan did not stop; they added another inch to their long-stretched
easy bodies, and came up on the fawn.
“it is an easy kill,” said fionn regretfully. “they have her,” he cried.
but he was again astonished, for the dogs did not kill. they leaped and
played about the fawn, licking its face, and rubbing delighted noses
against its neck.
fionn came up then. his long spear was lowered in his fist at the thrust,
and his sharp knife was in its sheath, but he did not use them, for the
fawn and the two hounds began to play round him, and the fawn was as
affectionate towards him as the hounds were; so that when a velvet nose
was thrust in his palm, it was as often a fawn’s muzzle as a hound’s.
in that joyous company he came to wide allen of leinster, where the people
were surprised to see the hounds and the fawn and the chief and none other
of the hunters that had set out with them.
when the others reached home, the chief told of his chase, and it was
agreed that such a fawn must not be killed, but that it should be kept and
well treated, and that it should be the pet fawn of the fianna. but some
of those who remembered brah’s parentage thought that as bran herself had
come from the shi so this fawn might have come out of the shi also.
late that night, when he was preparing for rest, the door of fionn’s
chamber opened gently and a young woman came into the room. the captain
stared at her, as he well might, for he had never seen or imagined to see
a woman so beautiful as this was. indeed, she was not a woman, but a young
girl, and her bearing was so gently noble, her look so modestly high, that
the champion dared scarcely look at her, although he could not by any
means have looked away.
as she stood within the doorway, smiling, and shy as a flower, beautifully
timid as a fawn, the chief communed with his heart.
“she is the sky-woman of the dawn,” he said. “she is the light on the
foam. she is white and odorous as an apple-blossom. she smells of spice
and honey. she is my beloved beyond the women of the world. she shall
never be taken from me.”
and that thought was delight and anguish to him: delight because of such
sweet prospect, anguish because it was not yet realised, and might not be.
as the dogs had looked at him on the chase with a look that he did not
understand, so she looked at him, and in her regard there was a question
that baffled him and a statement which he could not follow.
he spoke to her then, mastering his heart to do it.
“i do not seem to know you,” he said.
“you do not know me indeed,” she replied.
“it is the more wonderful,” he continued gently, “for i should know every
person that is here. what do you require from me?”
“i beg your protection, royal captain.”
“i give that to all,” he answered. “against whom do you desire
protection?”
“i am in terror of the fear doirche.”
“the dark man of the shi?”
“he is my enemy,” she said.
“he is mine now,” said fionn. “tell me your story.”
“my name is saeve, and i am a woman of faery,” she commenced. “in the shi’ 
many men gave me their love, but i gave my love to no man of my country.”
“that was not reasonable,” the other chided with a blithe heart.
“i was contented,” she replied, “and what we do not want we do not lack.
but if my love went anywhere it went to a mortal, a man of the men of
ireland.”
“by my hand,” said fionn in mortal distress, “i marvel who that man can
be!”
“he is known to you,” she murmured. “i lived thus in the peace of faery,
hearing often of my mortal champion, for the rumour of his great deeds had
gone through the shi’, until a day came when the black magician of the men
of god put his eye on me, and, after that day, in whatever direction i
looked i saw his eye.”
original size
she stopped at that, and the terror that was in her heart was on her face.
“he is everywhere,” she whispered. “he is in the bushes, and on the hill.
he looked up at me from the water, and he stared down on me from the sky.
his voice commands out of the spaces, and it demands secretly in the
heart. he is not here or there, he is in all places at all times. i cannot
escape from him,” she said, “and i am afraid,” and at that she wept
noiselessly and stared on fionn.
“he is my enemy,” fionn growled. “i name him as my enemy.”
“you will protect me,” she implored.
“where i am let him not come,” said fionn. “i also have knowledge. i am
fionn, the son of uail, the son of baiscne, a man among men and a god
where the gods are.”
“he asked me in marriage,” she continued, “but my mind was full of my own
dear hero, and i refused the dark man.”
“that was your right, and i swear by my hand that if the man you desire is
alive and unmarried he shall marry you or he will answer to me for the
refusal.”
“he is not married,” said saeve, “and you have small control over him.”
 the chief frowned thoughtfully. “except the high king and the kings i have
authority in this land.”
“what man has authority over himself?” said saeve.
“do you mean that i am the man you seek?” said fionn.
“it is to yourself i gave my love,” she replied. “this is good news,”
 fionn cried joyfully, “for the moment you came through the door i loved
and desired you, and the thought that you wished for another man went into
my heart like a sword.” indeed, fionn loved saeve as he had not loved a
woman before and would never love one again. he loved her as he had never
loved anything before. he could not bear to be away from her. when he saw
her he did not see the world, and when he saw the world without her it was
as though he saw nothing, or as if he looked on a prospect that was bleak
and depressing. the belling of a stag had been music to fionn, but when
saeve spoke that was sound enough for him. he had loved to hear the cuckoo
calling in the spring from the tree that is highest in the hedge, or the
blackbird’s jolly whistle in an autumn bush, or the thin, sweet
enchantment that comes to the mind when a lark thrills out of sight in the
air and the hushed fields listen to the song. but his wife’s voice was
sweeter to fionn than the singing of a lark. she filled him with wonder
and surmise. there was magic in the tips of her fingers. her thin palm
ravished him. her slender foot set his heart beating; and whatever way her
head moved there came a new shape of beauty to her face.
“she is always new,” said fionn. “she is always better than any other
woman; she is always better than herself.”
he attended no more to the fianna. he ceased to hunt. he did not listen to
the songs of poets or the curious sayings of magicians, for all of these
were in his wife, and something that was beyond these was in her also.
“she is this world and the next one; she is completion,” said fionn.
it happened that the men of lochlann came on an expedition against
ireland. a monstrous fleet rounded the bluffs of ben edair, and the danes
landed there, to prepare an attack which would render them masters of the
country. fionn and the fianna-finn marched against them. he did not like
the men of lochlann at any time, but this time he moved against them in
wrath, for not only were they attacking ireland, but they had come between
him and the deepest joy his life had known.
it was a hard fight, but a short one. the lochlannachs were driven back to
their ships, and within a week the only danes remaining in ireland were
those that had been buried there.
that finished, he left the victorious fianna and returned swiftly to the
plain of allen, for he could not bear to be one unnecessary day parted
from saeve.
“you are not leaving us!” exclaimed goll mac morna.
“i must go,” fionn replied.
“you will not desert the victory feast,” conan reproached him.
“stay with us, chief,” caelte begged.
“what is a feast without fionn?” they complained.
but he would not stay.
“by my hand,” he cried, “i must go. she will be looking for me from the
window.”
“that will happen indeed,” goll admitted.
“that will happen,” cried fionn. “and when she sees me far out on the
plain, she will run through the great gate to meet me.”
“it would be the queer wife would neglect that run,” cona’n growled.
“i shall hold her hand again,” fionn entrusted to caelte’s ear.
“you will do that, surely.”
“i shall look into her face,” his lord insisted. but he saw that not even
beloved caelte understood the meaning of that, and he knew sadly and yet
proudly that what he meant could not be explained by any one and could not
be comprehended by any one.
“you are in love, dear heart,” said caelte.
“in love he is,” cona’n grumbled. “a cordial for women, a disease for men,
a state of wretchedness.”
“wretched in truth,” the chief murmured. “love makes us poor we have not
eyes enough to see all that is to be seen, nor hands enough to seize the
tenth of all we want. when i look in her eyes i am tormented because i am
not looking at her lips, and when i see her lips my soul cries out, ‘look
at her eyes, look at her eyes.’”
“that is how it happens,” said goll rememberingly.
“that way and no other,” caelte agreed.
and the champions looked backwards in time on these lips and those, and
knew their chief would go.
when fionn came in sight of the great keep his blood and his feet
quickened, and now and again he waved a spear in the air.
“she does not see me yet,” he thought mournfully.
“she cannot see me yet,” he amended, reproaching himself.
but his mind was troubled, for he thought also, or he felt without
thinking, that had the positions been changed he would have seen her at
twice the distance.
“she thinks i have been unable to get away from the battle, or that i was
forced to remain for the feast.”
and, without thinking it, he thought that had the positions been changed
he would have known that nothing could retain the one that was absent.
“women,” he said, “are shamefaced, they do not like to appear eager when
others are observing them.”
but he knew that he would not have known if others were observing him, and
that he would not have cared about it if he had known. and he knew that
his saeve would not have seen, and would not have cared for any eyes than
his.
he gripped his spear on that reflection, and ran as he had not run in his
life, so that it was a panting, dishevelled man that raced heavily through
the gates of the great dun.
within the dun there was disorder. servants were shouting to one another,
and women were running to and fro aimlessly, wringing their hands and
screaming; and, when they saw the champion, those nearest to him ran away,
and there was a general effort on the part of every person to get behind
every other person. but fionn caught the eye of his butler, gariv crona’n,
the rough buzzer, and held it.
“come you here,” he said.
and the rough buzzer came to him without a single buzz in his body.
“where is the flower of allen?” his master demanded.
“i do not know, master,” the terrified servant replied.
“you do not know!” said fionn. “tell what you do know.”
and the man told him this story.
“when you had been away for a day the guards were surprised. they were
looking from the heights of the dun, and the flower of allen was with
them. she, for she had a quest’s eye, called out that the master of the
fianna was coming over the ridges to the dun, and she ran from the keep to
meet you.”
“it was not i,” said fionn.
“it bore your shape,” replied gariv cronan. “it had your armour and your
face, and the dogs, bran and sceo’lan, were with it.”
“they were with me,” said fionn.
“they seemed to be with it,” said the servant humbly
“tell us this tale,” cried fionn.
“we were distrustful,” the servant continued. “we had never known fionn to
return from a combat before it had been fought, and we knew you could not
have reached ben edar or encountered the lochlannachs. so we urged our
lady to let us go out to meet you, but to remain herself in the dun.”
“it was good urging,” fionn assented.
“she would not be advised,” the servant wailed. “she cried to us, ‘let me
go to meet my love’.”
“alas!” said fionn.
“she cried on us, ‘let me go to meet my husband, the father of the child
that is not born.’”
“alas!” groaned deep-wounded fionn. “she ran towards your appearance that
had your arms stretched out to her.”
at that wise fionn put his hand before his eyes, seeing all that happened.
“tell on your tale,” said he.
“she ran to those arms, and when she reached them the figure lifted its
hand. it touched her with a hazel rod, and, while we looked, she
disappeared, and where she had been there was a fawn standing and
shivering. the fawn turned and bounded towards the gate of the dun, but
the hounds that were by flew after her.”
fionn stared on him like a lost man.
“they took her by the throat—” the shivering servant whispered.
“ah!” cried fionn in a terrible voice.
“and they dragged her back to the figure that seemed to be fionn. three
times she broke away and came bounding to us, and three times the dogs
took her by the throat and dragged her back.”
“you stood to look!” the chief snarled.
“no, master, we ran, but she vanished as we got to her; the great hounds
vanished away, and that being that seemed to be fionn disappeared with
them. we were left in the rough grass, staring about us and at each other,
and listening to the moan of the wind and the terror of our hearts.”
“forgive us, dear master,” the servant cried. but the great captain made
him no answer. he stood as though he were dumb and blind, and now and
again he beat terribly on his breast with his closed fist, as though he
would kill that within him which should be dead and could not die. he went
so, beating on his breast, to his inner room in the dun, and he was not
seen again for the rest of that day, nor until the sun rose over moy life’ 
in the morning.
for many years after that time, when he was not fighting against the
enemies of ireland, fionn was searching and hunting through the length and
breadth of the country in the hope that he might again chance on his
lovely lady from the shi’. through all that time he slept in misery each
night and he rose each day to grief. whenever he hunted he brought only
the hounds that he trusted, bran and sceo’lan, lomaire, brod, and lomlu;
for if a fawn was chased each of these five great dogs would know if that
was a fawn to be killed or one to be protected, and so there was small
danger to saeve and a small hope of finding her.
once, when seven years had passed in fruitless search, fionn and the chief
nobles of the fianna were hunting ben gulbain. all the hounds of the
fianna were out, for fionn had now given up hope of encountering the
flower of allen. as the hunt swept along the sides of the hill there arose
a great outcry of hounds from a narrow place high on the slope and, over
all that uproar there came the savage baying of fionn’s own dogs.
“what is this for?” said fionn, and with his companions he pressed to the
spot whence the noise came.
“they are fighting all the hounds of the fianna,” cried a champion.
and they were. the five wise hounds were in a circle and were giving
battle to an hundred dogs at once. they were bristling and terrible, and
each bite from those great, keen jaws was woe to the beast that received
it. nor did they fight in silence as was their custom and training, but
between each onslaught the great heads were uplifted, and they pealed
loudly, mournfully, urgently, for their master.
“they are calling on me,” he roared.
and with that he ran, as he had only once before run, and the men who were
nigh to him went racing as they would not have run for their lives. they
came to the narrow place on the slope of the mountain, and they saw the
five great hounds in a circle keeping off the other dogs, and in the
middle of the ring a little boy was standing. he had long, beautiful hair,
and he was naked. he was not daunted by the terrible combat and clamour of
the hounds. he did not look at the hounds, but he stared like a young
prince at fionn and the champions as they rushed towards him scattering
the pack with the butts of their spears. when the fight was over, bran and
sceo’lan ran whining to the little boy and licked his hands.
“they do that to no one,” said a bystander. “what new master is this they
have found?”
fionn bent to the boy. “tell me, my little prince and pulse, what your
name is, and how you have come into the middle of a hunting-pack, and why
you are naked?”
but the boy did not understand the language of the men of ireland. he put
his hand into fionn’s, and the chief felt as if that little hand had been
put into his heart. he lifted the lad to his great shoulder.
“we have caught something on this hunt,” said he to caelte mac rongn. “we
must bring this treasure home. you shall be one of the fianna-finn, my
darling,” he called upwards.
the boy looked down on him, and in the noble trust and fearlessness of
that regard fionn’s heart melted away.
“my little fawn!” he said.
and he remembered that other fawn. he set the boy between his knees and
stared at him earnestly and long.
“there is surely the same look,” he said to his wakening heart; “that is
the very eye of saeve.”
the grief flooded out of his heart as at a stroke, and joy foamed into it
in one great tide. he marched back singing to the encampment, and men saw
once more the merry chief they had almost forgotten.
just as at one time he could not be parted from saeve, so now he could not
be separated from this boy. he had a thousand names for him, each one more
tender than the last: “my fawn, my pulse, my secret little treasure,” or
he would call him “my music, my blossoming branch, my store in the heart,
my soul.” and the dogs were as wild for the boy as fionn was. he could sit
in safety among a pack that would have torn any man to pieces, and the
reason was that bran and sceo’lan, with their three whelps, followed him
about like shadows. when he was with the pack these five were with him,
and woeful indeed was the eye they turned on their comrades when these
pushed too closely or were not properly humble. they thrashed the pack
severally and collectively until every hound in fionn’s kennels knew that
the little lad was their master, and that there was nothing in the world
so sacred as he was.
in no long time the five wise hounds could have given over their
guardianship, so complete was the recognition of their young lord. but
they did not so give over, for it was not love they gave the lad but
adoration.
fionn even may have been embarrassed by their too close attendance. if he
had been able to do so he might have spoken harshly to his dogs, but he
could not; it was unthinkable that he should; and the boy might have
spoken harshly to him if he had dared to do it. for this was the order of
fionn’s affection: first there was the boy; next, bran and sceo’lan with
their three whelps; then caelte mac rona’n, and from him down through the
champions. he loved them all, but it was along that precedence his
affections ran. the thorn that went into bran’s foot ran into fionn’s
also. the world knew it, and there was not a champion but admitted
sorrowfully that there was reason for his love.
little by little the boy came to understand their speech and to speak it
himself, and at last he was able to tell his story to fionn.
there were many blanks in the tale, for a young child does not remember
very well. deeds grow old in a day and are buried in a night. new memories
come crowding on old ones, and one must learn to forget as well as to
remember. a whole new life had come on this boy, a life that was instant
and memorable, so that his present memories blended into and obscured the
past, and he could not be quite sure if that which he told of had happened
in this world or in the world he had left.
“i used to live,” he said, “in a wide, beautiful place. there were hills
and valleys there, and woods and streams, but in whatever direction i went
i came always to a cliff, so tall it seemed to lean against the sky, and
so straight that even a goat would not have imagined to climb it.”
“i do not know of any such place,” fionn mused.
“there is no such place in ireland,” said caelte, “but in the shi’ there
is such a place.”
“there is in truth,” said fionn.
“i used to eat fruits and roots in the summer,” the boy continued, “but in
the winter food was left for me in a cave.”
“was there no one with you?” fionn asked.
“no one but a deer that loved me, and that i loved.”
“ah me!” cried fionn in anguish, “tell me your tale, my son.”
“a dark stern man came often after us, and he used to speak with the deer.
sometimes he talked gently and softly and coaxingly, but at times again he
would shout loudly and in a harsh, angry voice. but whatever way he talked
the deer would draw away from him in dread, and he always left her at last
furiously.”
“it is the dark magician of the men of god,” cried fionn despairingly.
“it is indeed, my soul,” said caelte.
“the last time i saw the deer,” the child continued, “the dark man was
speaking to her. he spoke for a long time. he spoke gently and angrily,
and gently and angrily, so that i thought he would never stop talking, but
in the end he struck her with a hazel rod, so that she was forced to
follow him when he went away. she was looking back at me all the time and
she was crying so bitterly that any one would pity her. i tried to follow
her also, but i could not move, and i cried after her too, with rage and
grief, until i could see her no more and hear her no more. then i fell on
the grass, my senses went away from me, and when i awoke i was on the hill
in the middle of the hounds where you found me.”
that was the boy whom the fianna called oisi’n, or the little fawn. he
grew to be a great fighter afterwards, and he was the chief maker of poems
in the world. but he was not yet finished with the shi. he was to go back
into faery when the time came, and to come thence again to tell these
tales, for it was by him these tales were told.
original size
we do not know where becfola came from. nor do we know for certain where
she went to. we do not even know her real name, for the name becfola,
“dowerless” or “small-dowered,” was given to her as a nickname. this only
is certain, that she disappeared from the world we know of, and that she
went to a realm where even conjecture may not follow her.
it happened in the days when dermod, son of the famous ae of slane, was
monarch of all ireland. he was unmarried, but he had many foster-sons,
princes from the four provinces, who were sent by their fathers as tokens
of loyalty and affection to the ard-ri, and his duties as a foster-father
were righteously acquitted. among the young princes of his household there
was one, crimthann, son of ae, king of leinster, whom the high king
preferred to the others over whom he held fatherly sway. nor was this
wonderful, for the lad loved him also, and was as eager and intelligent
and modest as becomes a prince.
the high king and crimthann would often set out from tara to hunt and
hawk, sometimes unaccompanied even by a servant; and on these excursions
the king imparted to his foster-son his own wide knowledge of forest
craft, and advised him generally as to the bearing and duties of a prince,
the conduct of a court, and the care of a people.
dermod mac ae delighted in these solitary adventures, and when he could
steal a day from policy and affairs he would send word privily to
crimthann. the boy, having donned his hunting gear, would join the king at
a place arranged between them, and then they ranged abroad as chance might
direct.
on one of these adventures, as they searched a flooded river to find the
ford, they saw a solitary woman in a chariot driving from the west.
“i wonder what that means?” the king exclaimed thoughtfully.
“why should you wonder at a woman in a chariot?” his companion inquired,
for crimthann loved and would have knowledge.
“good, my treasure,” dermod answered, “our minds are astonished when we
see a woman able to drive a cow to pasture, for it has always seemed to us
that they do not drive well.”
crimthann absorbed instruction like a sponge and digested it as rapidly.
“i think that is justly said,” he agreed.
“but,” dermod continued, “when we see a woman driving a chariot of two
horses, then we are amazed indeed.”
when the machinery of anything is explained to us we grow interested, and
crimthann became, by instruction, as astonished as the king was.
“in good truth,” said he, “the woman is driving two horses.”
“had you not observed it before?” his master asked with kindly malice.
“i had observed but not noticed,” the young man admitted.
“further,” said the king, “surmise is aroused in us when we discover a
woman far from a house; for you will have both observed and noticed that
women are home-dwellers, and that a house without a woman or a woman
without a house are imperfect objects, and although they be but half
observed, they are noticed on the double.”
“there is no doubting it,” the prince answered from a knitted and
thought-tormented brow.
“we shall ask this woman for information about herself,” said the king
decidedly.
“let us do so,” his ward agreed
“the king’s majesty uses the words ‘we’ and ‘us’ when referring to the
king’s majesty,” said dermod, “but princes who do not yet rule territories
must use another form of speech when referring to themselves.”
“i am very thoughtless,” said crimthann humbly.
the king kissed him on both cheeks.
“indeed, my dear heart and my son, we are not scolding you, but you must
try not to look so terribly thoughtful when you think. it is part of the
art of a ruler.”
“i shall never master that hard art,” lamented his fosterling.
“we must all master it,” dermod replied. “we may think with our minds and
with our tongues, but we should never think with our noses and with our
eyebrows.”
the woman in the chariot had drawn nigh to the ford by which they were
standing, and, without pause, she swung her steeds into the shallows and
came across the river in a tumult of foam and spray.
“does she not drive well?” cried crimthann admiringly.
“when you are older,” the king counselled him, “you will admire that which
is truly admirable, for although the driving is good the lady is better.”
he continued with enthusiasm.
“she is in truth a wonder of the world and an endless delight to the eye.”
she was all that and more, and, as she took the horses through the river
and lifted them up the bank, her flying hair and parted lips and all the
young strength and grace of her body went into the king’s eye and could
not easily come out again.
nevertheless, it was upon his ward that the lady’s gaze rested, and if the
king could scarcely look away from her, she could, but only with an equal
effort, look away from crimthann.
“halt there!” cried the king.
“who should i halt for?” the lady demanded, halting all the same, as is
the manner of women, who rebel against command and yet receive it.
“halt for dermod!”
“there are dermods and dermods in this world,” she quoted.
“there is yet but one ard-ri’,” the monarch answered.
she then descended from the chariot and made her reverence.
“i wish to know your name?” said he.
but at this demand the lady frowned and answered decidedly:
“i do not wish to tell it.”
“i wish to know also where you come from and to what place you are going?”
“i do not wish to tell any of these things.”
“not to the king!”
“i do not wish to tell them to any one.”
crimthann was scandalised.
“lady,” he pleaded, “you will surely not withhold information from the
ard-ri’?”
but the lady stared as royally on the high king as the high king did on
her, and, whatever it was he saw in those lovely eyes, the king did not
insist.
he drew crimthann apart, for he withheld no instruction from that lad.
“my heart,” he said, “we must always try to act wisely, and we should only
insist on receiving answers to questions in which we are personally
concerned.”
crimthann imbibed all the justice of that remark.
“thus i do not really require to know this lady’s name, nor do i care from
what direction she comes.”
“you do not?” crimthann asked.
“no, but what i do wish to know is, will she marry me?”
“by my hand that is a notable question,” his companion stammered.
“it is a question that must be answered,” the king cried triumphantly.
“but,” he continued, “to learn what woman she is, or where she comes from,
might bring us torment as well as information. who knows in what
adventures the past has engaged her!”
and he stared for a profound moment on disturbing, sinister horizons, and
crimthann meditated there with him.
“the past is hers,” he concluded, “but the future is ours, and we shall
only demand that which is pertinent to the future.”
he returned to the lady.
“we wish you to be our wife,” he said. and he gazed on her benevolently
and firmly and carefully when he said that, so that her regard could not
stray otherwhere. yet, even as he looked, a tear did well into those
lovely eyes, and behind her brow a thought moved of the beautiful boy who
was looking at her from the king’s side.
but when the high king of ireland asks us to marry him we do not refuse,
for it is not a thing that we shall be asked to do every day in the week,
and there is no woman in the world but would love to rule it in tara.
no second tear crept on the lady’s lashes, and, with her hand in the
king’s hand, they paced together towards the palace, while behind them, in
melancholy mood, crimthann mac ae led the horses and the chariot.
original size
they were married in a haste which equalled the king’s desire; and as he
did not again ask her name, and as she did not volunteer to give it, and
as she brought no dowry to her husband and received none from him, she was
called becfola, the dowerless.
time passed, and the king’s happiness was as great as his expectation of
it had promised. but on the part of becfola no similar tidings can be
given.
there are those whose happiness lies in ambition and station, and to such
a one the fact of being queen to the high king of ireland is a
satisfaction at which desire is sated. but the mind of becfola was not of
this temperate quality, and, lacking crimthann, it seemed to her that she
possessed nothing.
for to her mind he was the sunlight in the sun, the brightness in the
moonbeam; he was the savour in fruit and the taste in honey; and when she
looked from crimthann to the king she could not but consider that the
right man was in the wrong place. she thought that crowned only with his
curls crlmthann mac ae was more nobly diademed than are the masters of the
world, and she told him so.
his terror on hearing this unexpected news was so great that he meditated
immediate flight from tara; but when a thing has been uttered once it is
easier said the second time and on the third repetition it is patiently
listened to.
after no great delay crimthann mac ae agreed and arranged that he and
becfola should fly from tara, and it was part of their understanding that
they should live happily ever after.
one morning, when not even a bird was astir, the king felt that his dear
companion was rising. he looked with one eye at the light that stole
greyly through the window, and recognised that it could not in justice be
called light.
“there is not even a bird up,” he murmured.
and then to becfola.
“what is the early rising for, dear heart?”
“an engagement i have,” she replied.
“this is not a time for engagements,” said the calm monarch.
“let it be so,” she replied, and she dressed rapidly.
“and what is the engagement?” he pursued.
“raiment that i left at a certain place and must have. eight silken smocks
embroidered with gold, eight precious brooches of beaten gold, three
diadems of pure gold.”
“at this hour,” said the patient king, “the bed is better than the road.”
“let it be so,” said she.
“and moreover,” he continued, “a sunday journey brings bad luck.”
“let the luck come that will come,” she answered.
“to keep a cat from cream or a woman from her gear is not work for a
king,” said the monarch severely.
the ard-ri’ could look on all things with composure, and regard all beings
with a tranquil eye; but it should be known that there was one deed
entirely hateful to him, and he would punish its commission with the very
last rigour—this was, a transgression of the sunday. during six days
of the week all that could happen might happen, so far as dermod was
concerned, but on the seventh day nothing should happen at all if the high
king could restrain it. had it been possible he would have tethered the
birds to their own green branches on that day, and forbidden the clouds to
pack the upper world with stir and colour. these the king permitted, with
a tight lip, perhaps, but all else that came under his hand felt his
control.
it was his custom when he arose on the morn of sunday to climb to the most
elevated point of tara, and gaze thence on every side, so that he might
see if any fairies or people of the shi’ were disporting themselves in his
lordship; for he absolutely prohibited the usage of the earth to these
beings on the sunday, and woe’s worth was it for the sweet being he
discovered breaking his law.
we do not know what ill he could do to the fairies, but during dermod’s
reign the world said its prayers on sunday and the shi’ folk stayed in
their hills.
it may be imagined, therefore, with what wrath he saw his wife’s
preparations for her journey, but, although a king can do everything, what
can a husband do...? he rearranged himself for slumber.
“i am no party to this untimely journey,” he said angrily.
“let it be so,” said becfola.
she left the palace with one maid, and as she crossed the doorway
something happened to her, but by what means it happened would be hard to
tell; for in the one pace she passed out of the palace and out of the
world, and the second step she trod was in faery, but she did not know
this.
her intention was to go to cluain da chaillech to meet crimthann, but when
she left the palace she did not remember crimthann any more.
to her eye and to the eye of her maid the world was as it always had been,
and the landmarks they knew were about them. but the object for which they
were travelling was different, although unknown, and the people they
passed on the roads were unknown, and were yet people that they knew.
they set out southwards from tara into the duffry of leinster, and after
some time they came into wild country and went astray. at last becfola
halted, saying:
“i do not know where we are.”
the maid replied that she also did not know.
“yet,” said becfola, “if we continue to walk straight on we shall arrive
somewhere.”
they went on, and the maid watered the road with her tears.
night drew on them; a grey chill, a grey silence, and they were enveloped
in that chill and silence; and they began to go in expectation and terror,
for they both knew and did not know that which they were bound for.
as they toiled desolately up the rustling and whispering side of a low
hill the maid chanced to look back, and when she looked back she screamed
and pointed, and clung to becfola’s arm. becfola followed the pointing
finger, and saw below a large black mass that moved jerkily forward.
original size
“wolves!” cried the maid. “run to the trees yonder,” her mistress ordered.
“we will climb them and sit among the branches.”
they ran then, the maid moaning and lamenting all the while.
“i cannot climb a tree,” she sobbed, “i shall be eaten by the wolves.”
and that was true.
but her mistress climbed a tree, and drew by a hand’s breadth from the rap
and snap and slaver of those steel jaws. then, sitting on a branch, she
looked with angry woe at the straining and snarling horde below, seeing
many a white fang in those grinning jowls, and the smouldering, red blink
of those leaping and prowling eyes.
but after some time the moon arose and the wolves went away, for their
leader, a sagacious and crafty chief, declared that as long as they
remained where they were, the lady would remain where she was; and so,
with a hearty curse on trees, the troop departed. becfola had pains in her
legs from the way she had wrapped them about the branch, but there was no
part of her that did not ache, for a lady does not sit with any ease upon
a tree.
for some time she did not care to come down from the branch. “those wolves
may return,” she said, “for their chief is crafty and sagacious, and it is
certain, from the look i caught in his eye as he departed, that he would
rather taste of me than cat any woman he has met.”
she looked carefully in every direction to see if one might discover them
in hiding; she looked closely and lingeringly at the shadows under distant
trees to see if these shadows moved; and she listened on every wind to try
if she could distinguish a yap or a yawn or a sneeze. but she saw or heard
nothing; and little by little tranquillity crept into her mind, and she
began to consider that a danger which is past is a danger that may be
neglected.
yet ere she descended she looked again on the world of jet and silver that
dozed about her, and she spied a red glimmer among distant trees.
“there is no danger where there is light,” she said, and she thereupon
came from the tree and ran in the direction that she had noted.
in a spot between three great oaks she came upon a man who was roasting a
wild boar over a fire. she saluted this youth and sat beside him. but
after the first glance and greeting he did not look at her again, nor did
he speak.
when the boar was cooked he ate of it and she had her share. then he arose
from the fire and walked away among the trees. becfola followed, feeling
ruefully that something new to her experience had arrived; “for,” she
thought, “it is usual that young men should not speak to me now that i am
the mate of a king, but it is very unusual that young men should not look
at me.”
but if the young man did not look at her she looked well at him, and what
she saw pleased her so much that she had no time for further cogitation.
for if crimthann had been beautiful, this youth was ten times more
beautiful. the curls on crimthann’s head had been indeed as a benediction
to the queen’s eye, so that she had eaten the better and slept the sounder
for seeing him. but the sight of this youth left her without the desire to
eat, and, as for sleep, she dreaded it, for if she closed an eye she would
be robbed of the one delight in time, which was to look at this young man,
and not to cease looking at him while her eye could peer or her head could
remain upright.
they came to an inlet of the sea all sweet and calm under the round,
silver-flooding moon, and the young man, with becfola treading on his
heel, stepped into a boat and rowed to a high-jutting, pleasant island.
there they went inland towards a vast palace, in which there was no person
but themselves alone, and there the young man went to sleep, while becfola
sat staring at him until the unavoidable peace pressed down her eyelids
and she too slumbered.
she was awakened in the morning by a great shout.
“come out, flann, come out, my heart!”
the young man leaped from his couch, girded on his harness, and strode
out. three young men met him, each in battle harness, and these four
advanced to meet four other men who awaited them at a little distance on
the lawn. then these two sets of four fought togethor with every warlike
courtesy but with every warlike severity, and at the end of that combat
there was but one man standing, and the other seven lay tossed in death.
becfola spoke to the youth.
“your combat has indeed been gallant,” she said.
“alas,” he replied, “if it has been a gallant deed it has not been a good
one, for my three brothers are dead and my four nephews are dead.”
“ah me!” cried becfola, “why did you fight that fight?”
“for the lordship of this island, the isle of fedach, son of dali.”
but, although becfola was moved and horrified by this battle, it was in
another direction that her interest lay; therefore she soon asked the
question which lay next her heart:
“why would you not speak to me or look at me?”
“until i have won the kingship of this land from all claimants, i am no
match for the mate of the high king of ireland,” he replied.
and that reply was llke balm to the heart of becfola.
“what shall i do?” she inquired radiantly. “return to your home,” he
counselled. “i will escort you there with your maid, for she is not really
dead, and when i have won my lordship i will go seek you in tara.”
“you will surely come,” she insisted.
“by my hand,” quoth he, “i will come.”
these three returned then, and at the end of a day and night they saw far
off the mighty roofs of tara massed in the morning haze. the young man
left them, and with many a backward look and with dragging, reluctant
feet, becfola crossed the threshold of the palace, wondering what she
should say to dermod and how she could account for an absence of three
days’ duration.
it was so early that not even a bird was yet awake, and the dull grey
light that came from the atmosphere enlarged and made indistinct all that
one looked at, and swathed all things in a cold and livid gloom.
as she trod cautiously through dim corridors becfola was glad that, saving
the guards, no creature was astir, and that for some time yet she need
account to no person for her movements. she was glad also of a respite
which would enable her to settle into her home and draw about her the
composure which women feel when they are surrounded by the walls of their
houses, and can see about them the possessions which, by the fact of
ownership, have become almost a part of their personality. sundered from
her belongings, no woman is tranquil, her heart is not truly at ease,
however her mind may function, so that under the broad sky or in the house
of another she is not the competent, precise individual which she becomes
when she sees again her household in order and her domestic requirements
at her hand.
becfola pushed the door of the king’s sleeping chamber and entered
noiselessly. then she sat quietly in a seat gazing on the recumbent
monarch, and prepared to consider how she should advance to him when he
awakened, and with what information she might stay his inquiries or
reproaches.
“i will reproach him,” she thought. “i will call him a bad husband and
astonish him, and he will forget everything but his own alarm and
indignation.”
but at that moment the king lifted his head from the pillow and looked
kindly at her. her heart gave a great throb, and she prepared to speak at
once and in great volume before he could formulate any question. but the
king spoke first, and what he said so astonished her that the explanation
and reproach with which her tongue was thrilling fled from it at a stroke,
and she could only sit staring and bewildered and tongue-tied.
“well, my dear heart,” said the king, “have you decided not to keep that
engagement?”
“i—i—!” becfola stammered.
“it is truly not an hour for engagements,” dermod insisted, “for not a
bird of the birds has left his tree; and,” he continued maliciously, “the
light is such that you could not see an engagement even if you met one.”
“i,” becfola gasped. “i—-!”
“a sunday journey,” he went on, “is a notorious bad journey. no good can
come from it. you can get your smocks and diadems to-morrow. but at this
hour a wise person leaves engagements to the bats and the staring owls and
the round-eyed creatures that prowl and sniff in the dark. come back to
the warm bed, sweet woman, and set on your journey in the morning.”
such a load of apprehension was lifted from becfola’s heart that she
instantly did as she had been commanded, and such a bewilderment had yet
possession of her faculties that she could not think or utter a word on
any subject.
yet the thought did come into her head as she stretched in the warm gloom
that crimthann the son of ae must be now attending her at cluain da
chaillech, and she thought of that young man as of something wonderful and
very ridiculous, and the fact that he was waiting for her troubled her no
more than if a sheep had been waiting for her or a roadside bush.
she fell asleep.
in the morning as they sat at breakfast four clerics were announced, and
when they entered the king looked on them with stern disapproval.
“what is the meaning of this journey on sunday?” he demanded.
a lank-jawed, thin-browed brother, with uneasy, intertwining fingers, and
a deep-set, venomous eye, was the spokesman of those four.
“indeed,” he said, and the fingers of his right hand strangled and did to
death the fingers of his left hand, “indeed, we have transgressed by
order.”
“explain that.”
“we have been sent to you hurriedly by our master, molasius of devenish.”
“a pious, a saintly man,” the king interrupted, “and one who does not
countenance transgressions of the sunday.”
“we were ordered to tell you as follows,” said the grim cleric, and he
buried the fingers of his right hand in his left fist, so that one could
not hope to see them resurrected again. “it was the duty of one of the
brothers of devenish,” he continued, “to turn out the cattle this morning
before the dawn of day, and that brother, while in his duty, saw eight
comely young men who fought together.”
“on the morning of sunday,” dermod exploded.
the cleric nodded with savage emphasis.
“on the morning of this self-same and instant sacred day.”
“tell on,” said the king wrathfully.
but terror gripped with sudden fingers at becfola’s heart.
“do not tell horrid stories on the sunday,” she pleaded. “no good can come
to any one from such a tale.”
“nay, this must be told, sweet lady,” said the king. but the cleric stared
at her glumly, forbiddingly, and resumed his story at a gesture.
“of these eight men, seven were killed.”
“they are in hell,” the king said gloomily.
“in hell they are,” the cleric replied with enthusiasm.
“and the one that was not killed?”
“he is alive,” that cleric responded.
“he would be,” the monarch assented. “tell your tale.”
“molasius had those seven miscreants buried, and he took from their
unhallowed necks and from their lewd arms and from their unblessed weapons
the load of two men in gold and silver treasure.”
“two men’s load!” said dermod thoughtfully.
“that much,” said the lean cleric. “no more, no less. and he has sent us
to find out what part of that hellish treasure belongs to the brothers of
devenish and how much is the property of the king.”
becfola again broke in, speaking graciously, regally, hastily: “let those
brothers have the entire of the treasure, for it is sunday treasure, and
as such it will bring no luck to any one.”
the cleric again looked at her coldly, with a harsh-lidded, small-set,
grey-eyed glare, and waited for the king’s reply.
dermod pondered, shaking his head as to an argument on his left side, and
then nodding it again as to an argument on his right.
“it shall be done as this sweet queen advises. let a reliquary be formed
with cunning workmanship of that gold and silver, dated with my date and
signed with my name, to be in memory of my grandmother who gave birth to a
lamb, to a salmon, and then to my father, the ard-ri’. and, as to the
treasure that remains over, a pastoral staff may be beaten from it in
honour of molasius, the pious man.”
“the story is not ended,” said that glum, spike-chinned cleric.
the king moved with jovial impatience.
“if you continue it,” he said, “it will surely come to an end some time. a
stone on a stone makes a house, dear heart, and a word on a word tells a
tale.”
the cleric wrapped himself into himself, and became lean and menacing. he
whispered: “besides the young man, named flann, who was not slain, there
was another person present at the scene and the combat and the
transgression of sunday.”
“who was that person?” said the alarmed monarch.
the cleric spiked forward his chin, and then butted forward his brow.
“it was the wife of the king,” he shouted. “it was the woman called
becfola. it was that woman,” he roared, and he extended a lean,
inflexible, unending first finger at the queen.
“dog!” the king stammered, starting up.
“if that be in truth a woman,” the cleric screamed.
“what do you mean?” the king demanded in wrath and terror.
“either she is a woman of this world to be punished, or she is a woman of
the shi’ to be banished, but this holy morning she was in the shi’, and
her arms were about the neck of flann.”
the king sank back in his chair stupefied, gazing from one to the other,
and then turned an unseeing, fear-dimmed eye towards becfola.
“is this true, my pulse?” he murmured.
“it is true,” becfola replied, and she became suddenly to the king’s eye a
whiteness and a stare. he pointed to the door.
“go to your engagement,” he stammered. “go to that flann.”
“he is waiting for me,” said becfola with proud shame, “and the thought
that he should wait wrings my heart.”
she went out from the palace then. she went away from tara: and in all
ireland and in the world of living men she was not seen again, and she was
never heard of again.
original size
“i think,” said cairell whiteskin, “that although judgement was given
against fionn, it was fionn had the rights of it.”
“he had eleven hundred killed,” said cona’n amiably, “and you may call
that the rights of it if you like.”
“all the same—” cairell began argumentatively.
“and it was you that commenced it,” cona’n continued.
“ho! ho!” cairell cried. “why, you are as much to blame as i am.”
“no,” said cona’n, “for you hit me first.”
“and if we had not been separated—” the other growled.
“separated!” said cona’n, with a grin that made his beard poke all around
his face.
“yes, separated. if they had not come between us i still think—”
“don’t think out loud, dear heart, for you and i are at peace by law.”
“that is true,” said cairell, “and a man must stick by a judgement. come
with me, my dear, and let us see how the youngsters are shaping in the
school. one of them has rather a way with him as a swordsman.”
“no youngster is any good with a sword,” conan replied.
“you are right there,” said cairell. “it takes a good ripe man for that
weapon.”
“boys are good enough with slings,” confro continued, “but except for
eating their fill and running away from a fight, you can’t count on boys.”
the two bulky men turned towards the school of the fianna.
it happened that fionn mac uail had summoned the gentlemen of the fianna
and their wives to a banquet. everybody came, for a banquet given by fionn
was not a thing to be missed. there was goll mor mac morna and his people;
fionn’s son oisi’n and his grandson oscar. there was dermod of the gay
face, caelte mac ronan—but indeed there were too many to be told of,
for all the pillars of war and battle-torches of the gael were there.
the banquet began.
fionn sat in the chief captain’s seat in the middle of the fort; and
facing him, in the place of honour, he placed the mirthful goll mac morna;
and from these, ranging on either side, the nobles of the fianna took each
the place that fitted his degree and patrimony.
after good eating, good conversation; and after good conversation, sleep—that
is the order of a banquet: so when each person had been served with food
to the limit of desire the butlers carried in shining, and jewelled
drinking-horns, each having its tide of smooth, heady liquor. then the
young heroes grew merry and audacious, the ladies became gentle and kind,
and the poets became wonders of knowledge and prophecy. every eye beamed
in that assembly, and on fionn every eye was turned continually in the
hope of a glance from the great, mild hero.
goll spoke to him across the table enthusiastically.
“there is nothing wanting to this banquet, o chief,” said he.
and fionn smiled back into that eye which seemed a well of tenderness and
friendship.
“nothing is wanting,” he replied, “but a well-shaped poem.” a crier stood
up then, holding in one hand a length of coarse iron links and in the
other a chain of delicate, antique silver. he shook the iron chain so that
the servants and followers of the household should be silent, and he shook
the silver one so that the nobles and poets should hearken also.
fergus, called true-lips, the poet of the fianna-finn, then sang of fionn
and his ancestors and their deeds. when he had finished fionn and oisi’n
and oscar and mac lugac of the terrible hand gave him rare and costly
presents, so that every person wondered at their munificence, and even the
poet, accustomed to the liberality of kings and princes, was astonished at
his gifts.
fergus then turned to the side of goll mac morna, and he sang of the
forts, the destructions, the raids, and the wooings of clann-morna; and as
the poems succeeded each other, goll grew more and more jovial and
contented. when the songs were finished goll turned in his seat.
“where is my runner?” he cried.
he had a woman runner, a marvel for swiftness and trust. she stepped
forward.
“i am here, royal captain.”
“have you collected my tribute from denmark?”
“it is here.”
and, with help, she laid beside him the load of three men of doubly
refined gold. out of this treasure, and from the treasure of rings and
bracelets and torques that were with him, goll mac morna paid fergus for
his songs, and, much as fionn had given, goll gave twice as much.
but, as the banquet proceeded, goll gave, whether it was to harpers or
prophets or jugglers, more than any one else gave, so that fionn became
displeased, and as the banquet proceeded he grew stern and silent.
[this version of the death of uail is not correct. also cnocha is not in
lochlann but in ireland.]
the wonderful gift-giving of goll continued, and an uneasiness and
embarrassment began to creep through the great banqueting hall.
gentlemen looked at each other questioningly, and then spoke again on
indifferent matters, but only with half of their minds. the singers, the
harpers, and jugglers submitted to that constraint, so that every person
felt awkward and no one knew what should be done or what would happen, and
from that doubt dulness came, with silence following on its heels.
there is nothing more terrible than silence. shame grows in that blank, or
anger gathers there, and we must choose which of these is to be our
master.
that choice lay before fionn, who never knew shame.
“goll,” said he, “how long have you been taking tribute from the people of
lochlann?”
“a long time now,” said goll.
and he looked into an eye that was stern and unfriendly.
“i thought that my rent was the only one those people had to pay,” fionn
continued.
“your memory is at fault,” said goll.
“let it be so,” said fionn. “how did your tribute arise?”
“long ago, fionn, in the days when your father forced war on me.”
“ah!” said fionn.
“when he raised the high king against me and banished me from ireland.”
“continue,” said fionn, and he held goll’s eye under the great beetle of
his brow.
“i went into britain,” said goll, “and your father followed me there. i
went into white lochlann (norway) and took it. your father banished me
thence also.”
“i know it,” said fionn.
“i went into the land of the saxons and your father chased me out of that
land. and then, in lochlann, at the battle of cnocha your father and i met
at last, foot to foot, eye to eye, and there, fionn!”
“and there, goll?”
“and there i killed your father.”
fionn sat rigid and unmoving, his face stony and terrible as the face of a
monument carved on the side of a cliff.
“tell all your tale,” said he.
“at that battle i beat the lochlannachs. i penetrated to the hold of the
danish king, and i took out of his dungeon the men who had lain there for
a year and were awaiting their deaths. i liberated fifteen prisoners, and
one of them was fionn.”
“it is true,” said fionn.
goll’s anger fled at the word.
“do not be jealous of me, dear heart, for if i had twice the tribute i
would give it to you and to ireland.”
but at the word jealous the chief’s anger revived.
“it is an impertinence,” he cried, “to boast at this table that you killed
my father.”
“by my hand,” goll replied, “if fionn were to treat me as his father did i
would treat fionn the way i treated fionn’s father.”
fionn closed his eyes and beat away the anger that was rising within him.
he smiled grimly.
“if i were so minded, i would not let that last word go with you, goll,
for i have here an hundred men for every man of yours.”
goll laughed aloud.
“so had your father,” he said.
fionn’s brother, cairell whiteskin, broke into the conversation with a
harsh laugh.
“how many of fionn’s household has the wonderful goll put down?” he cried.
but goll’s brother, bald cona’n the swearer, turned a savage eye on
cairell.
“by my weapons,” said he, “there were never less than an hundred-and-one
men with goll, and the least of them could have put you down easily
enough.”
“ah?” cried cairell. “and are you one of the hundred-and-one, old
scaldhead?”
“one indeed, my thick-witted, thin-livered cairell, and i undertake to
prove on your hide that what my brother said was true and that what your
brother said was false.”
“you undertake that,” growled cairell, and on the word he loosed a furious
buffet at con’an, which cona’n returned with a fist so big that every part
of cairell’s face was hit with the one blow. the two then fell into grips,
and went lurching and punching about the great hall. two of oscar’s sons
could not bear to see their uncle being worsted, and they leaped at
cona’n, and two of goll’s sons rushed at them. then oscar himself leaped
up, and with a hammer in either hand he went battering into the melee.
“i thank the gods,” said cona’n, “for the chance of killing yourself,
oscar.”
these two encountered then, and oscar knocked a groan of distress out of
cona’n. he looked appealingly at his brother art og mac morna, and that
powerful champion flew to his aid and wounded oscar. oisi’n, oscar’s
father, could not abide that; he dashed in and quelled art og. then rough
hair mac morna wounded oisin and was himself tumbled by mac lugac, who was
again wounded by gara mac morna.
the banqueting hall was in tumult. in every part of it men were giving and
taking blows. here two champions with their arms round each other’s necks
were stamping round and round in a slow, sad dance. here were two
crouching against each other, looking for a soft place to hit. yonder a
big-shouldered person lifted another man in his arms and threw him at a
small group that charged him. in a retired corner a gentleman stood in a
thoughtful attitude while he tried to pull out a tooth that had been
knocked loose.
“you can’t fight,” he mumbled, “with a loose shoe or a loose tooth.”
“hurry up with that tooth,” the man in front of him grum-bled, “for i want
to knock out another one.”
pressed against the wall was a bevy of ladies, some of whom were screaming
and some laughing and all of whom were calling on the men to go back to
their seats.
only two people remained seated in the hall.
original size
goll sat twisted round watching the progress of the brawl critically, and
fionn, sitting opposite, watched goll.
just then faelan, another of fionn’s sons, stormed the hall with three
hundred of the fianna, and by this force all goll’s people were put out of
doors, where the fight continued.
goll looked then calmly on fionn.
“your people are using their weapons,” said he.
“are they?” fionn inquired as calmly, and as though addressing the air.
“in the matter of weapons—!” said goll.
and the hard-fighting pillar of battle turned to where his arms hung on
the wall behind him. he took his solid, well-balanced sword in his fist,
over his left arm his ample, bossy shield, and, with another side-look at
fionn, he left the hall and charged irresistibly into the fray.
fionn then arose. he took his accoutrements from the wall also and strode
out. then he raised the triumphant fenian shout and went into the combat.
that was no place for a sick person to be. it was not the corner which a
slender-fingered woman would choose to do up her hair; nor was it the spot
an ancient man would select to think quietly in, for the tumult of sword
on sword, of axe on shield, the roar of the contending parties, the crying
of wounded men, and the screaming of frightened women destroyed peace, and
over all was the rallying cry of goll mac morna and the great shout of
fionn.
then fergus true-lips gathered about him all the poets of the fianna, and
they surrounded the combatants. they began to chant and intone long, heavy
rhymes and incantations, until the rhythmic beating of their voices
covered even the noise of war, so that the men stopped hacking and hewing,
and let their weapons drop from their hands. these were picked up by the
poets and a reconciliation was effected between the two parties.
but fionn affirmed that he would make no peace with clann-morna until the
matter had been judged by the king, cormac mac art, and by his daughter
ailve, and by his son cairbre of ana life’ and by fintan the chief poet.
goll agreed that the affair should be submitted to that court, and a day
was appointed, a fortnight from that date, to meet at tara of the kings
for judgement. then the hall was cleansed and the banquet recommenced.
of fionn’s people eleven hundred of men and women were dead, while of
goll’s people eleven men and fifty women were dead. but it was through
fright the women died, for not one of them had a wound or a bruise or a
mark.
at the end of a fortnight fionn and goll and the chief men of the fianna
attended at tara. the king, his son and daughter, with flahri, feehal, and
fintan mac bocna sat in the place of judgement, and cormac called on the
witnesses for evidence.
fionn stood up, but the moment he did so goll mac morna arose also.
“i object to fionn giving evidence,” said he.
“why so?” the king asked.
“because in any matter that concerned me fionn would turn a lie into truth
and the truth into a lie.”
“i do not think that is so,” said fionn.
“you see, he has already commenced it,” cried goll.
“if you object to the testimony of the chief person present, in what way
are we to obtain evidence?” the king demanded.
“i,” said goll, “will trust to the evidence of fergus true-lips. he is
fionn’s poet, and will tell no lie against his master; he is a poet, and
will tell no lie against any one.”
“i agree to that,” said fionn.
“i require, nevertheless,” goll continued, “that fergus should swear
before the court, by his gods, that he will do justice between us.”
fergus was accordingly sworn, and gave his evidence. he stated that
fionn’s brother cairell struck cona’n mac morna, that goll’s two sons came
to help cona’n, that oscar went to help cairell, and with that fionn’s
people and the clann-morna rose at each other, and what had started as a
brawl ended as a battle with eleven hundred of fionn’s people and
sixty-one of goll’s people dead.
“i marvel,” said the king in a discontented voice, “that, considering the
numbers against them, the losses of clann-morna should be so small.”
fionn blushed when he heard that.
fergus replied:
“goll mac morna covered his people with his shield. all that slaughter was
done by him.”
“the press was too great,” fionn grumbled. “i could not get at him in time
or—-”
“or what?” said goll with a great laugh.
fionn shook his head sternly and said no more.
“what is your judgement?” cormac demanded of his fellow-judges.
flahri pronounced first.
“i give damages to clann-morna.”
“why?” said cormac.
“because they were attacked first.”
cormac looked at him stubbornly.
“i do not agree with your judgement,” he said.
“what is there faulty in it?” flahri asked.
“you have not considered,” the king replied, “that a soldier owes
obedience to his captain, and that, given the time and the place, fionn
was the captain and goll was only a simple soldier.”
flahri considered the king’s suggestion.
“that,” he said, “would hold good for the white-striking or blows of
fists, but not for the red-striking or sword-strokes.”
“what is your judgement?” the king asked feehal. feehal then pronounced:
“i hold that clann-morna were attacked first, and that they are to be free
from payment of damages.”
“and as regards fionn?” said cormac.
“i hold that on account of his great losses fionn is to be exempt from
payment of damages, and that his losses are to be considered as damages.”
“i agree in that judgement,” said fintan.
the king and his son also agreed, and the decision was imparted to the
fianna.
“one must abide by a judgement,” said fionn.
“do you abide by it?” goll demanded.
“i do,” said fionn.
goll and fionn then kissed each other, and thus peace was made. for,
notwithstanding the endless bicker of these two heroes, they loved each
other well.
yet, now that the years have gone by, i think the fault lay with goll and
not with fionn, and that the judgement given did not consider everything.
for at that table goll should not have given greater gifts than his master
and host did. and it was not right of goll to take by force the position
of greatest gift-giver of the fianna, for there was never in the world one
greater at giving gifts, or giving battle, or making poems than fionn was.
that side of the affair was not brought before the court. but perhaps it
was suppressed out of delicacy for fionn, for if goll could be accused of
ostentation, fionn was open to the uglier charge of jealousy. it was,
nevertheless, goll’s forward and impish temper which commenced the brawl,
and the verdict of time must be to exonerate fionn and to let the blame go
where it is merited.
there is, however, this to be added and remembered, that whenever fionn
was in a tight corner it was goll that plucked him out of it; and, later
on, when time did his worst on them all and the fianna were sent to hell
as unbelievers, it was goll mac morna who assaulted hell, with a chain in
his great fist and three iron balls swinging from it, and it was he who
attacked the hosts of great devils and brought fionn and the fianna-finn
out with him.
original size
one day something happened to fionn, the son of uail; that is, he departed
from the world of men, and was set wandering in great distress of mind
through faery. he had days and nights there and adventures there, and was
able to bring back the memory of these.
that, by itself, is wonderful, for there are few people who remember that
they have been to faery or aught of all that happened to them in that
state.
in truth we do not go to faery, we become faery, and in the beating of a
pulse we may live for a year or a thousand years. but when we return the
memory is quickly clouded, and we seem to have had a dream or seen a
vision, although we have verily been in faery.
it was wonderful, then, that fionn should have remembered all that
happened to him in that wide-spun moment, but in this tale there is yet
more to marvel at; for not only did fionn go to faery, but the great army
which he had marshalled to ben edair [the hill of howth] were translated
also, and neither he nor they were aware that they had departed from the
world until they came back to it.
fourteen battles, seven of the reserve and seven of the regular fianna,
had been taken by the chief on a great march and manoeuvre. when they
reached ben edair it was decided to pitch camp so that the troops might
rest in view of the warlike plan which fionn had imagined for the morrow.
the camp was chosen, and each squadron and company of the host were lodged
into an appropriate place, so there was no overcrowding and no halt or
interruption of the march; for where a company halted that was its place
of rest, and in that place it hindered no other company, and was at its
own ease.
when this was accomplished the leaders of battalions gathered on a level,
grassy plateau overlooking the sea, where a consultation began as to the
next day’s manoeuvres, and during this discussion they looked often on the
wide water that lay wrinkling and twinkling below them.
a roomy ship under great press of sall was bearing on ben edair from the
east.
now and again, in a lull of the discussion, a champion would look and
remark on the hurrying vessel; and it may have been during one of these
moments that the adventure happened to fionn and the fianna.
“i wonder where that ship comes from?” said cona’n idly.
but no person could surmise anything about it beyond that it was a vessel
well equipped for war.
as the ship drew by the shore the watchers observed a tall man swing from
the side by means of his spear shafts, and in a little while this
gentleman was announced to fionn, and was brought into his presence.
a sturdy, bellicose, forthright personage he was indeed. he was equipped
in a wonderful solidity of armour, with a hard, carven helmet on his head,
a splendid red-bossed shield swinging on his shoulder, a wide-grooved,
straight sword clashing along his thigh. on his shoulders under the shield
he carried a splendid scarlet mantle; over his breast was a great brooch
of burnt gold, and in his fist he gripped a pair of thick-shafted,
unburnished spears.
fionn and the champions looked on this gentleman, and they admired
exceedingly his bearing and equipment.
“of what blood are you, young gentleman?” fionn demanded, “and from which
of the four corners of the world do you come?”
“my name is cael of the iron,” the stranger answered, “and i am son to the
king of thessaly.”
“what errand has brought you here?”
“i do not go on errands,” the man replied sternly, “but on the affairs
that please me.”
“be it so. what is the pleasing affair which brings you to this land?”
“since i left my own country i have not gone from a land or an island
until it paid tribute to me and acknowledged my lordship.”
“and you have come to this realm,” cried fionn, doubting his ears.
“for tribute and sovereignty,” growled that other, and he struck the haft
of his spear violently on the ground.
“by my hand,” said cona’n, “we have never heard of a warrior, however
great, but his peer was found in ireland, and the funeral songs of all
such have been chanted by the women of this land.”
“by my hand and word,” said the harsh stranger, “your talk makes me think
of a small boy or of an idiot.”
“take heed, sir,” said fionn, “for the champions and great dragons of the
gael are standing by you, and around us there are fourteen battles of the
fianna of ireland.”
“if all the fianna who have died in the last seven years were added to all
that are now here,” the stranger asserted, “i would treat all of these and
those grievously, and would curtail their limbs and their lives.”
“it is no small boast,” cona’n murmured, staring at him.
“it is no boast at all,” said cael, “and, to show my quality and standing,
i will propose a deed to you.”
“give out your deed,” fionn commanded.
“thus,” said cael with cold savagery. “if you can find a man among your
fourteen battalions who can outrun or outwrestle or outfight me, i will
take myself off to my own country, and will trouble you no more.”
and so harshly did he speak, and with such a belligerent eye did he stare,
that dismay began to seize on the champions, and even fionn felt that his
breath had halted.
“it is spoken like a hero,” he admitted after a moment, “and if you cannot
be matched on those terms it will not be from a dearth of applicants.”
“in running alone,” fionn continued thoughtfully, “we have a notable
champion, caelte mac rona’n.”
“this son of rona’n will not long be notable,” the stranger asserted.
“he can outstrip the red deer,” said cona’n.
“he can outrun the wind,” cried fionn.
“he will not be asked to outrun the red deer or the wind,” the stranger
sneered. “he will be asked to outrun me,” he thundered. “produce this
runner, and we shall discover if he keeps as great heart in his feet as he
has made you think.”
“he is not with us,” cona’n lamented.
“these notable warriors are never with us when the call is made,” said the
grim stranger.
“by my hand,” cried fionn, “he shall be here in no great time, for i will
fetch him myself.”
“be it so,” said cael. “and during my absence,” fionn continued, “i leave
this as a compact, that you make friends with the fianna here present, and
that you observe all the conditions and ceremonies of friendship.”
cael agreed to that.
“i will not hurt any of these people until you return,” he said.
fionn then set out towards tara of the kings, for he thought caelte mac
romin would surely be there; “and if he is not there,” said the champion
to himself, “then i shall find him at cesh corran of the fianna.”
he had not gone a great distance from ben edair when he came to an
intricate, gloomy wood, where the trees grew so thickly and the
undergrowth was such a sprout and tangle that one could scarcely pass
through it. he remembered that a path had once been hacked through the
wood, and he sought for this. it was a deeply scooped, hollow way, and it
ran or wriggled through the entire length of the wood.
into this gloomy drain fionn descended and made progress, but when he had
penetrated deeply in the dank forest he heard a sound of thumping and
squelching footsteps, and he saw coming towards him a horrible,
evil-visaged being; a wild, monstrous, yellow-skinned, big-boned giant,
dressed in nothing but an ill-made, mud-plastered, drab-coloured coat,
which swaggled and clapped against the calves of his big bare legs. on his
stamping feet there were great brogues of boots that were shaped like, but
were bigger than, a boat, and each time he put a foot down it squashed and
squirted a barrelful of mud from the sunk road.
fionn had never seen the like of this vast person, and he stood gazing on
him, lost in a stare of astonishment.
the great man saluted him.
“all alone, fionn?” he cried. “how does it happen that not one fenian of
the fianna is at the side of his captain?” at this inquiry fionn got back
his wits.
“that is too long a story and it is too intricate and pressing to be told,
also i have no time to spare now.”
“yet tell it now,” the monstrous man insisted.
fionn, thus pressed, told of the coming of cael of the iron, of the
challenge the latter had issued, and that he, fionn, was off to tara of
the kings to find caelte mac rona’n.
“i know that foreigner well,” the big man commented.
“is he the champion he makes himself out to be?” fionn inquired.
“he can do twice as much as he said he would do,” the monster replied.
“he won’t outrun caelte mac rona’n,” fionn asserted. the big man jeered.
“say that he won’t outrun a hedgehog, dear heart. this cael will end the
course by the time your caelte begins to think of starting.”
“then,” said fionn, “i no longer know where to turn, or how to protect the
honour of ireland.”
“i know how to do these things,” the other man commented with a slow nod
of the head.
“if you do,” fionn pleaded, “tell it to me upon your honour.”
“i will do that,” the man replied.
“do not look any further for the rusty-kneed, slow-trotting son of
rona’n,” he continued, “but ask me to run your race, and, by this hand, i
will be first at the post.”
at this the chief began to laugh.
“my good friend, you have work enough to carry the two tons of mud that
are plastered on each of your coat-tails, to say nothing of your weighty
boots.”
“by my hand,” the man cried, “there is no person in ireland but myself can
win that race. i claim a chance.”
fionn agreed then. “be it so,” said he. “and now, tell me your name?”
“i am known as the carl of the drab coat.”
“all names are names,” fionn responded, “and that also is a name.”
they returned then to ben edair.
when they came among the host the men of ireland gathered about the vast
stranger; and there were some who hid their faces in their mantles so that
they should not be seen to laugh, and there were some who rolled along the
ground in merriment, and there were others who could only hold their
mouths open and crook their knees and hang their arms and stare
dumbfoundedly upon the stranger, as though they were utterly dazed.
cael of the iron came also on the scene, and he examined the stranger with
close and particular attention.
“what in the name of the devil is this thing?” he asked of fionn.
“dear heart,” said fionn, “this is the champion i am putting against you
in the race.”
cael of the iron grew purple in the face, and he almost swallowed his
tongue through wrath.
“until the end of eternity,” he roared, “and until the very last moment of
doom i will not move one foot in a race with this greasy, big-hoofed,
ill-assembled resemblance of a beggarman.”
but at this the carl burst into a roar of laughter, so that the eardrums
of the warriors present almost burst inside of their heads.
“be reassured, my darling, i am no beggarman, and my quality is not more
gross than is the blood of the most delicate prince in this assembly. you
will not evade your challenge in that way, my love, and you shall run with
me or you shall run to your ship with me behind you. what length of course
do you propose, dear heart?”
“i never run less than sixty miles,” cael replied sullenly.
“it is a small run,” said the carl, “but it will do. from this place to
the hill of the rushes, slieve luachra of munster, is exactly sixty miles.
will that suit you?”
“i don’t care how it is done,” cael answered.
“then,” said the carl, “we may go off to slieve luachra now, and in the
morning we can start our race there to here.”
“let it be done that way,” said cael.
these two set out then for munster, and as the sun was setting they
reached slieve luachra and prepared to spend the night there.
original size
“cael, my pulse,” said the carl, “we had better build a house or a hut to
pass the night in.”
“i’il build nothing,” cael replied, looking on the carl with great
disfavour.
“no!”
“i won’t build house or hut for the sake of passing one night here, for i
hope never to see this place again.”
“i’il build a house myself,” said the carl, “and the man who does not help
in the building can stay outside of the house.”
the carl stumped to a near-by wood, and he never rested until he had
felled and tied together twenty-four couples of big timber. he thrust
these under one arm and under the other he tucked a bundle of rushes for
his bed, and with that one load he rushed up a house, well thatched and
snug, and with the timber that remained over he made a bonfire on the
floor of the house.
his companion sat at a distance regarding the work with rage and aversion.
“now cael, my darling,” said the carl, “if you are a man help me to look
for something to eat, for there is game here.”
“help yourself,” roared cael, “for all that i want is not to be near you.”
“the tooth that does not help gets no helping,” the other replied.
in a short time the carl returned with a wild boar which he had run down.
he cooked the beast over his bonfire and ate one half of it, leaving the
other half for his breakfast. then he lay down on the rushes, and in two
turns he fell asleep.
but cael lay out on the side of the hill, and if he went to sleep that
night he slept fasting. it was he, however, who awakened the carl in the
morning.
“get up, beggarman, if you are going to run against me.”
the carl rubbed his eyes.
“i never get up until i have had my fill of sleep, and there is another
hour of it due to me. but if you are in a hurry, my delight, you can start
running now with a blessing. i will trot on your track when i waken up.”
cael began to race then, and he was glad of the start, for his antagonist
made so little account of him that he did not know what to expect when the
carl would begin to run.
“yet,” said cael to himself, “with an hour’s start the beggarman will have
to move his bones if he wants to catch on me,” and he settled down to a
good, pelting race.
original size
at the end of an hour the carl awoke. he ate the second half of the boar,
and he tied the unpicked bones in the tail of his coat. then with a great
rattling of the boar’s bones he started.
it is hard to tell how he ran or at what speed he ran, but he went forward
in great two-legged jumps, and at times he moved in immense one-legged,
mud-spattering hops, and at times again, with wide-stretched, far-flung,
terrible-tramping, space-destroying legs he ran.
he left the swallows behind as if they were asleep. he caught up on a red
deer, jumped over it, and left it standing. the wind was always behind
him, for he outran it every time; and he caught up in jumps and bounces on
cael of the iron, although cael was running well, with his fists up and
his head back and his two legs flying in and out so vigorously that you
could not see them because of that speedy movement.
trotting by the side of cael, the carl thrust a hand into the tail of his
coat and pulled out a fistfull of red bones.
“here, my heart, is a meaty bone,” said he, “for you fasted all night,
poor friend, and if you pick a bit off the bone your stomach will get a
rest.”
“keep your filth, beggarman,” the other replied, “for i would rather be
hanged than gnaw on a bone that you have browsed.”
“why don’t you run, my pulse?” said the carl earnestly; “why don’t you try
to win the race?”
cael then began to move his limbs as if they were the wings of a fly, or
the fins of a little fish, or as if they were the six legs of a terrified
spider.
“i am running,” he gasped.
“but try and run like this,” the carl admonished, and he gave a wriggling
bound and a sudden outstretching and scurrying of shanks, and he
disappeared from cael’s sight in one wild spatter of big boots.
despair fell on cael of the iron, but he had a great heart. “i will run
until i burst,” he shrieked, “and when i burst, may i burst to a great
distance, and may i trip that beggar-man up with my burstings and make him
break his leg.”
he settled then to a determined, savage, implacable trot. he caught up on
the carl at last, for the latter had stopped to eat blackberries from the
bushes on the road, and when he drew nigh, cael began to jeer and sneer
angrily at the carl.
“who lost the tails of his coat?” he roared.
“don’t ask riddles of a man that’s eating blackberries,” the carl rebuked
him.
“the dog without a tall and the coat without a tail,” cried cael.
“i give it up,” the carl mumbled.
“it’s yourself, beggarman,” jeered cael.
“i am myself,” the carl gurgled through a mouthful of blackberries, “and
as i am myself, how can it be myself? that is a silly riddle,” he burbled.
“look at your coat, tub of grease?”
the carl did so.
“my faith,” said he, “where are the two tails of my coat?” “i could smell
one of them and it wrapped around a little tree thirty miles back,” said
cael, “and the other one was dishonouring a bush ten miles behind that.”
“it is bad luck to be separated from the tails of your own coat,” the carl
grumbled. “i’ll have to go back for them. wait here, beloved, and eat
blackberries until i come back, and we’ll both start fair.”
“not half a second will i wait,” cael replied, and he began to run towards
ben edair as a lover runs to his maiden or as a bee flies to his hive.
“i haven’t had half my share of blackberries either,” the carl lamented as
he started to run backwards for his coat-tails.
he ran determinedly on that backward journey, and as the path he had
travelled was beaten out as if it had been trampled by an hundred bulls
yoked neck to neck, he was able to find the two bushes and the two
coat-tails. he sewed them on his coat.
then he sprang up, and he took to a fit and a vortex and an exasperation
of running for which no description may be found. the thumping of his big
boots grew as con-tinuous as the pattering of hailstones on a roof, and
the wind of his passage blew trees down. the beasts that were ranging
beside his path dropped dead from concussion, and the steam that snored
from his nose blew birds into bits and made great lumps of cloud fall out
of the sky.
original size
he again caught up on cael, who was running with his head down and his
toes up.
“if you won’t try to run, my treasure,” said the carl, “you will never get
your tribute.”
and with that he incensed and exploded himself into an eye-blinding,
continuous, waggle and complexity of boots that left cael behind him in a
flash.
“i will run until i burst,” sobbed cael, and he screwed agitation and
despair into his legs until he hummed and buzzed like a blue-bottle on a
window.
five miles from ben edair the carl stopped, for he had again come among
blackberries.
he ate of these until he was no more than a sack of juice, and when he
heard the humming and buzzing of cael of the iron he mourned and lamented
that he could not wait to eat his fill he took off his coat, stuffed it
full of blackberries, swung it on his shoulders, and went bounding stoutly
and nimbly for ben edair.
it would be hard to tell of the terror that was in fionn’s breast and in
the hearts of the fianna while they attended the conclusion of that race.
they discussed it unendingly, and at some moment of the day a man
upbraided fionn because he had not found caelte the son of rona’n as had
been agreed on.
“there is no one can run like caelte,” one man averred.
“he covers the ground,” said another.
“he is light as a feather.”
“swift as a stag.” “lunged like a bull.”
“legged like a wolf.”
“he runs!”
these things were said to fionn, and fionn said these things to himself.
with every passing minute a drop of lead thumped down into every heart,
and a pang of despair stabbed up to every brain.
“go,” said fionn to a hawk-eyed man, “go to the top of this hill and watch
for the coming of the racers.”
and he sent lithe men with him so that they might run back in endless
succession with the news.
the messengers began to run through his tent at minute intervals calling
“nothing,” “nothing,” “nothing,” as they paused and darted away.
and the words, “nothing, nothing, nothing,” began to drowse into the
brains of every person present.
“what can we hope from that carl?” a champion demanded savagely.
“nothing,” cried a messenger who stood and sped.
“a clump!” cried a champion.
“a hog!” said another.
“a flat-footed.”
“little-wlnded.”
“big-bellied.”
“lazy-boned.”
“pork!”
“did you think, fionn, that a whale could swim on land, or what did you
imagine that lump could do?”
“nothing,” cried a messenger, and was sped as he spoke.
rage began to gnaw in fionn’s soul, and a red haze danced and flickered
before his eyes. his hands began to twitch and a desire crept over him to
seize on champions by the neck, and to shake and worry and rage among them
like a wild dog raging among sheep.
he looked on one, and yet he seemed to look on all at once.
“be silent,” he growled. “let each man be silent as a dead man.”
and he sat forward, seeing all, seeing none, with his mouth drooping open,
and such a wildness and bristle lowering from that great glum brow that
the champions shivered as though already in the chill of death, and were
silent.
he rose and stalked to the tent-door.
“where to, o fionn?” said a champion humbly.
“to the hill-top,” said fionn, and he stalked on.
they followed him, whispering among themselves, keeping their eyes on the
ground as they climbed.
what do you see?” fionn demanded of the watcher.
“nothing,” that man replied.
“look again,” said fionn.
the eagle-eyed man lifted a face, thin and sharp as though it had been
carven on the wind, and he stared forward with an immobile intentness.
“what do you see?” said fionn.
“nothing,” the man replied.
“i will look myself,” said fionn, and his great brow bent forward and
gloomed afar.
the watcher stood beside, staring with his tense face and unwinking,
lidless eye.
“what can you see, o fionn?” said the watcher.
“i can see nothing,” said fionn, and he projected again his grim, gaunt
forehead. for it seemed as if the watcher stared with his whole face, aye,
and with his hands; but fionn brooded weightedly on distance with his
puckered and crannied brow.
they looked again.
“what can you see?” said fionn.
“i see nothing,” said the watcher.
“i do not know if i see or if i surmise, but something moves,” said fionn.
“there is a trample,” he said.
the watcher became then an eye, a rigidity, an intense out-thrusting and
ransacking of thin-spun distance. at last he spoke.
“there is a dust,” he said.
and at that the champions gazed also, straining hungrily afar, until their
eyes became filled with a blue darkness and they could no longer see even
the things that were close to them.
“i,” cried cona’n triumphantly, “i see a dust.”
“and i,” cried another.
“and i.”
“i see a man,” said the eagle-eyed watcher.
and again they stared, until their straining eyes grew dim with tears and
winks, and they saw trees that stood up and sat down, and fields that
wobbled and spun round and round in a giddily swirling world.
“there is a man,” cona’n roared.
“a man there is,” cried another.
“and he is carrying a man on his back,” said the watcher.
“it is cael of the iron carrying the carl on his back,” he groaned.
“the great pork!” a man gritted.
“the no-good!” sobbed another.
“the lean-hearted.”
“thick-thighed.”
“ramshackle.”
“muddle-headed.”
“hog!” screamed a champion.
and he beat his fists angrily against a tree.
but the eagle-eyed watcher watched until his eyes narrowed and became
pin-points, and he ceased to be a man and became an optic.
“wait,” he breathed, “wait until i screw into one other inch of sight.”
and they waited, looking no longer on that scarcely perceptible speck in
the distance, but straining upon the eye of the watcher as though they
would penetrate it and look through it.
“it is the carl,” he said, “carrying something on his back, and behind him
again there is a dust.”
“are you sure?” said fionn in a voice that rumbled and vibrated like
thunder.
“it is the carl,” said the watcher, “and the dust behind him is cael of
the iron trying to catch him up.”
then the fianna gave a roar of exultation, and each man seized his
neighbour and kissed him on both cheeks; and they gripped hands about
fionn, and they danced round and round in a great circle, roaring with
laughter and relief, in the ecstasy which only comes where grisly fear has
been and whence that bony jowl has taken itself away.
the carl of the drab coat came bumping and stumping and clumping into the
camp, and was surrounded by a multitude that adored him and hailed him
with tears.
“meal!” he bawled, “meal for the love of the stars!”
and he bawled, “meal, meal!” until he bawled everybody into silence.
fionn addressed him.
“what for the meal, dear heart?”
“for the inside of my mouth,” said the carl, “for the recesses and
crannies and deep-down profundities of my stomach. meal, meal!” he
lamented.
meal was brought.
the carl put his coat on the ground, opened it carefully, and revealed a
store of blackberries, squashed, crushed, mangled, democratic,
ill-looking.
“the meal!” he groaned, “the meal!”
it was given to him.
“what of the race, my pulse?” said fionn.
“wait, wait,” cried the carl. “i die, i die for meal and blackberries.”
into the centre of the mess of blackberries he discharged a barrel of
meal, and be mixed the two up and through, and round and down, until the
pile of white-black, red-brown slibber-slobber reached up to his
shoulders. then he commenced to paw and impel and project and cram the
mixture into his mouth, and between each mouthful he sighed a contented
sigh, and during every mouthful he gurgled an oozy gurgle.
but while fionn and the fianna stared like lost minds upon the carl, there
came a sound of buzzing, as if a hornet or a queen of the wasps or a
savage, steep-winged griffin was hovering about them, and looking away
they saw cael of the iron charging on them with a monstrous extension and
scurry of his legs. he had a sword in his hand, and there was nothing in
his face but redness and ferocity.
fear fell llke night around the fianna, and they stood with slack knees
and hanging hands waiting for death. but the carl lifted a pawful of his
oozy slop and discharged this at cael with such a smash that the man’s
head spun off his shoulders and hopped along the ground. the carl then
picked up the head and threw it at the body with such aim and force that
the neck part of the head jammed into the neck part of the body and stuck
there, as good a head as ever, you would have said, but that it bad got
twisted the wrong way round. the carl then lashed his opponent hand and
foot.
“now, dear heart, do you still claim tribute and lordship of ireland?”
 said he.
“let me go home,” groaned cael, “i want to go home.”
“swear by the sun and moon, if i let you go home, that you will send to
fionn, yearly and every year, the rent of the land of thessaly.”
“i swear that,” said cael, “and i would swear anything to get home.”
the carl lifted him then and put him sitting into his ship. then he raised
his big boot and gave the boat a kick that drove it seven leagues out into
the sea, and that was how the adventure of cael of the iron finished.
“who are you, sir?” said fionn to the carl.
but before answering the carl’s shape changed into one of splendour and
delight.
“i am ruler of the shi’ of rath cruachan,” he said.
then fionn mac uail made a feast and a banquet for the jovial god, and
with that the tale is ended of the king of thessaly’s son and the carl of
the drab coat.
original size
fionn mac uail was the most prudent chief of an army in the world, but he
was not always prudent on his own account. discipline sometimes irked him,
and he would then take any opportunity that presented for an adventure;
for he was not only a soldier, he was a poet also, that is, a man of
science, and whatever was strange or unusual had an irresistible
at-traction for him. such a soldier was he that, single-handed, he could
take the fianna out of any hole they got into, but such an inveterate poet
was he that all the fianna together could scarcely retrieve him from the
abysses into which he tumbled. it took him to keep the fianna safe, but it
took all the fianna to keep their captain out of danger. they did not
complain of this, for they loved every hair of fionn’s head more than they
loved their wives and children, and that was reasonable for there was
never in the world a person more worthy of love than fionn was.
goll mac morna did not admit so much in words, but he admitted it in all
his actions, for although he never lost an opportunity of killing a member
of fionn’s family (there was deadly feud between clann-baiscne and
clann-morna), yet a call from fionn brought goll raging to his assistance
like a lion that rages tenderly by his mate. not even a call was
necessary, for goll felt in his heart when fionn was threatened, and he
would leave fionn’s own brother only half-killed to fly where his arm was
wanted. he was never thanked, of course, for although fionn loved goll he
did not like him, and that was how goll felt towards fionn.
fionn, with cona’n the swearer and the dogs bran and sceo’lan, was sitting
on the hunting-mound at the top of cesh corran. below and around on every
side the fianna were beating the coverts in legney and brefny, ranging the
fastnesses of glen dallan, creeping in the nut and beech forests of
carbury, spying among the woods of kyle conor, and ranging the wide plain
of moy conal.
the great captain was happy: his eyes were resting on the sights he liked
best—the sunlight of a clear day, the waving trees, the pure sky,
and the lovely movement of the earth; and his ears were filled with
delectable sounds—the baying of eager dogs, the clear calling of
young men, the shrill whistling that came from every side, and each sound
of which told a definite thing about the hunt. there was also the plunge
and scurry of the deer, the yapping of badgers, and the whirr of birds
driven into reluctant flight.
now the king of the shi’ of cesh corran, conaran, son of imidel, was also
watching the hunt, but fionn did not see him, for we cannot see the people
of faery until we enter their realm, and fionn was not thinking of faery
at that moment. conaran did not like fionn, and, seeing that the great
champion was alone, save for cona’n and the two hounds bran and sceo’lan,
he thought the time had come to get fionn into his power. we do not know
what fionn had done to conaran, but it must have been bad enough, for the
king of the shi’ of cesh cotran was filled with joy at the sight of fionn
thus close to him, thus unprotected, thus unsuspicious.
this conaran had four daughters. he was fond of them and proud of them,
but if one were to search the shi’s of ireland or the land of ireland, the
equal of these four would not be found for ugliness and bad humour and
twisted temperaments.
their hair was black as ink and tough as wire: it stuck up and poked out
and hung down about their heads in bushes and spikes and tangles. their
eyes were bleary and red. their mouths were black and twisted, and in each
of these mouths there was a hedge of curved yellow fangs. they had long
scraggy necks that could turn all the way round like the neck of a hen.
their arms were long and skinny and muscular, and at the end of each
finger they had a spiked nail that was as hard as horn and as sharp as a
briar. their bodies were covered with a bristle of hair and fur and fluff,
so that they looked like dogs in some parts and like cats in others, and
in other parts again they looked like chickens. they had moustaches poking
under their noses and woolly wads growing out of their ears, so that when
you looked at them the first time you never wanted to look at them again,
and if you had to look at them a second time you were likely to die of the
sight.
they were called caevo’g, cuillen, and iaran. the fourth daughter,
iarnach, was not present at that moment, so nothing need be said of her
yet.
conaran called these three to him.
“fionn is alone,” said he. “fionn is alone, my treasures.”
“ah!” said caevo’g, and her jaw crunched upwards and stuck outwards, as
was usual with her when she was satisfied.
“when the chance comes take it,” conaran continued, and he smiled a black,
beetle-browed, unbenevolent smile.
“it’s a good word,” quoth cuillen, and she swung her jaw loose and made it
waggle up and down, for that was the way she smiled.
“and here is the chance,” her father added.
“the chance is here,” iaran echoed, with a smile that was very like her
sister’s, only that it was worse, and the wen that grew on her nose
joggled to and fro and did not get its balance again for a long time.
then they smiled a smile that was agreeable to their own eyes, but which
would have been a deadly thing for anybody else to see.
“but fionn cannot see us,” caevo’g objected, and her brow set downwards
and her chin set upwards and her mouth squeezed sidewards, so that her
face looked like a badly disappointed nut.
“and we are worth seeing,” cuillen continued, and the disappointment that
was set in her sister’s face got carved and twisted into hers, but it was
worse in her case.
“that is the truth,” said iaran in a voice of lamentation, and her face
took on a gnarl and a writhe and a solidity of ugly woe that beat the
other two and made even her father marvel.
“he cannot see us now,” conaran replied, “but he will see us in a minute.”
“won’t fionn be glad when he sees us!” said the three sisters.
and then they joined hands and danced joyfully around their father, and
they sang a song, the first line of which is:
“fionn thinks he is safe. but who knows when the sky will
fall?”
lots of the people in the shi’ learned that song by heart, and they
applied it to every kind of circumstance.
by his arts conaran changed the sight of fionn’s eyes, and he did the same
for cona’n.
in a few minutes fionn stood up from his place on the mound. everything
was about him as before, and he did not know that he had gone into faery.
he walked for a minute up and down the hillock. then, as by chance, he
stepped down the sloping end of the mound and stood with his mouth open,
staring. he cried out:
“come down here, cona’n, my darling.”
cona’n stepped down to him.
“am i dreaming?” fionn demanded, and he stretched out his finger before
him.
“if you are dreaming,” said congn, “i’m dreaming too. they weren’t here a
minute ago,” he stammered.
fionn looked up at the sky and found that it was still there. he stared to
one side and saw the trees of kyle conor waving in the distance. he bent
his ear to the wind and heard the shouting of hunters, the yapping of
dogs, and the clear whistles, which told how the hunt was going.
“well!” said fionn to himself.
“by my hand!” quoth cona’n to his own soul.
and the two men stared into the hillside as though what they were looking
at was too wonderful to be looked away from.
“who are they?” said fionn.
“what are they?” cona’n gasped. and they stared again.
for there was a great hole like a doorway in the side of the mound, and in
that doorway the daughters of conaran sat spinning. they had three crooked
sticks of holly set up before the cave, and they were reeling yarn off
these. but it was enchantment they were weaving.
“one could not call them handsome,” said cona’n.
“one could,” fionn replied, “but it would not be true.”
“i cannot see them properly,” fionn complained. “they are hiding behind
the holly.”
“i would be contented if i could not see them at all,” his companion
grumbled.
but the chief insisted.
“i want to make sure that it is whiskers they are wearing.”
“let them wear whiskers or not wear them,” cona’n counselled. “but let us
have nothing to do with them.”
“one must not be frightened of anything,” fionn stated.
“i am not frightened,” cona’n explained. “i only want to keep my good
opinion of women, and if the three yonder are women, then i feel sure i
shall begin to dislike females from this minute out.”
“come on, my love,” said fionn, “for i must find out if these whiskers are
true.”
he strode resolutely into the cave. he pushed the branches of holly aside
and marched up to conaran’s daughters, with cona’n behind him.
the instant they passed the holly a strange weakness came over the heroes.
their fists seemed to grow heavy as lead, and went dingle-dangle at the
ends of their arms; their legs became as light as straws and began to bend
in and out; their necks became too delicate to hold anything up, so that
their heads wibbled and wobbled from side to side.
“what’s wrong at all?” said cona’n, as he tumbled to the ground.
“everything is,” fionn replied, and he tumbled beside him.
the three sisters then tied the heroes with every kind of loop and twist
and knot that could be thought of.
“those are whiskers!” said fionn.
“alas!” said conan.
“what a place you must hunt whiskers in?” he mumbled savagely. “who wants
whiskers?” he groaned.
but fionn was thinking of other things.
“if there was any way of warning the fianna not to come here,” fionn
murmured.
“there is no way, my darling,” said caevo’g, and she smiled a smile that
would have killed fionn, only that he shut his eyes in time.
original size
after a moment he murmured again:
“conan, my dear love, give the warning whistle so that the fianna will
keep out of this place.”
a little whoof, like the sound that would be made by a baby and it asleep,
came from cona’n.
“fionn,” said he, “there isn’t a whistle in me. we are done for,” said he.
“you are done for, indeed,” said cuillen, and she smiled a hairy and
twisty and fangy smile that almost finished cona’n.
by that time some of the fianna had returned to the mound to see why bran
and sceo’lan were barking so outrageously. they saw the cave and went into
it, but no sooner had they passed the holly branches than their strength
went from them, and they were seized and bound by the vicious hags. little
by little all the members of the fianna returned to the hill, and each of
them was drawn into the cave, and each was bound by the sisters.
oisi’n and oscar and mac lugac came, with the nobles of clann-baiscne, and
with those of clann-corcoran and clann-smo’l; they all came, and they were
all bound.
it was a wonderful sight and a great deed this binding of the fianna, and
the three sisters laughed with a joy that was terrible to hear and was
almost death to see. as the men were captured they were carried by the
hags into dark mysterious holes and black perplexing labyrinths.
“here is another one,” cried caevo’g as she bundled a trussed champion
along.
“this one is fat,” said cuillen, and she rolled a bulky fenian along like
a wheel.
“here,” said iaran, “is a love of a man. one could eat this kind of man,”
 she murmured, and she licked a lip that had whiskers growing inside as
well as out.
and the corded champion whimpered in her arms, for he did not know but
eating might indeed be his fate, and he would have preferred to be
coffined anywhere in the world rather than to be coffined inside of that
face. so far for them.
within the cave there was silence except for the voices of the hags and
the scarcely audible moaning of the fianna-finn, but without there was a
dreadful uproar, for as each man returned from the chase his dogs came
with him, and although the men went into the cave the dogs did not.
they were too wise.
they stood outside, filled with savagery and terror, for they could scent
their masters and their masters’ danger, and perhaps they could get from
the cave smells till then unknown and full of alarm.
from the troop of dogs there arose a baying and barking, a snarling and
howling and growling, a yelping and squealing and bawling for which no
words can be found. now and again a dog nosed among a thousand smells and
scented his master; the ruff of his neck stood up like a hog’s bristles
and a netty ridge prickled along his spine. then with red eyes, with bared
fangs, with a hoarse, deep snort and growl he rushed at the cave, and then
he halted and sneaked back again with all his ruffles smoothed, his tail
between his legs, his eyes screwed sideways in miserable apology and
alarm, and a long thin whine of woe dribbling out of his nose.
the three sisters took their wide-channelled, hard-tempered swords in
their hands, and prepared to slay the fianna, but before doing so they
gave one more look from the door of the cave to see if there might be a
straggler of the fianna who was escaping death by straggling, and they saw
one coming towards them with bran and sceo’lan leaping beside him, while
all the other dogs began to burst their throats with barks and split their
noses with snorts and wag their tails off at sight of the tall, valiant,
white-toothed champion, goll mor mac morna. “we will kill that one first,”
 said caevo’g.
“there is only one of him,” said cuillen.
“and each of us three is the match for an hundred,” said iaran.
the uncanny, misbehaved, and outrageous harridans advanced then to meet
the son of morna, and when he saw these three goll whipped the sword from
his thigh, swung his buckler round, and got to them in ten great leaps.
silence fell on the world during that conflict. the wind went down; the
clouds stood still; the old hill itself held its breath; the warriors
within ceased to be men and became each an ear; and the dogs sat in a vast
circle round the combatants, with their heads all to one side, their noses
poked forward, their mouths half open, and their tails forgotten. now and
again a dog whined in a whisper and snapped a little snap on the air, but
except for that there was neither sound nor movement.
original size
it was a long fight. it was a hard and a tricky fight, and goll won it by
bravery and strategy and great good luck; for with one shrewd slice of his
blade he carved two of these mighty termagants into equal halves, so that
there were noses and whiskers to his right hand and knees and toes to his
left: and that stroke was known afterwards as one of the three great
sword-strokes of ireland. the third hag, however, had managed to get
behind goll, and she leaped on to his back with the bound of a panther,
and hung here with the skilful, many-legged, tight-twisted clutching of a
spider. but the great champion gave a twist of his hips and a swing of his
shoulders that whirled her around him like a sack. he got her on the
ground and tied her hands with the straps of a shield, and he was going to
give her the last blow when she appealed to his honour and bravery.
“i put my life under your protection,” said she. “and if you let me go
free i will lift the enchantment from the fianna-finn and will give them
all back to you again.”
“i agree to that,” said goll, and he untied her straps. the harridan did
as she had promised, and in a short time fionn and oisi’n and oscar and
cona’n were released, and after that all the fianna were released.
as each man came out of the cave he gave a jump and a shout; the courage
of the world went into him and he felt that he could fight twenty. but
while they were talking over the adventure and explaining how it had
happened, a vast figure strode over the side of the hill and descended
among them. it was conaran’s fourth daughter.
if the other three had been terrible to look on, this one was more
terrible than the three together. she was clad in iron plate, and she had
a wicked sword by her side and a knobby club in her hand she halted by the
bodies of her sisters, and bitter tears streamed down into her beard.
“alas, my sweet ones,” said she, “i am too late.”
and then she stared fiercely at fionn.
“i demand a combat,” she roared.
“it is your right,” said fionn. he turned to his son.
“oisi’n, my heart, kill me this honourable hag.” but for the only time in
his life oisi’n shrank from a combat.
“i cannot do it,” he said, “i feel too weak.”
fionn was astounded. “oscar,” he said, “will you kill me this great hag?”
oscar stammered miserably. “i would not be able to,” he said.
cona’n also refused, and so did caelte mac rona’n and mac lugac, for there
was no man there but was terrified by the sight of that mighty and valiant
harridan.
fionn rose to his feet. “i will take this combat myself,” he said sternly.
and he swung his buckler forward and stretched his right hand to the
sword. but at that terrible sight goll mae morna blushed deeply and leaped
from the ground.
“no, no,” he cried; “no, my soul, fionn, this would not be a proper combat
for you. i take this fight.”
“you have done your share, goll,” said the captain.
“i should finish the fight i began,” goll continued, “for it was i who
killed the two sisters of this valiant hag, and it is against me the feud
lies.”
“that will do for me,” said the horrible daughter of conaran. “i will kill
goll mor mac morna first, and after that i will kill fionn, and after that
i will kill every fenian of the fianna-finn.”
“you may begin, goll,” said fionn, “and i give you my blessing.”
goll then strode forward to the fight, and the hag moved against him with
equal alacrity. in a moment the heavens rang to the clash of swords on
bucklers. it was hard to with-stand the terrific blows of that mighty
female, for her sword played with the quickness of lightning and smote
like the heavy crashing of a storm. but into that din and encirclement
goll pressed and ventured, steady as a rock in water, agile as a creature
of the sea, and when one of the combatants retreated it was the hag that
gave backwards. as her foot moved a great shout of joy rose from the
fianna. a snarl went over the huge face of the monster and she leaped
forward again, but she met goll’s point in the road; it went through her,
and in another moment goll took her head from its shoulders and swung it
on high before fionn.
as the fianna turned homewards fionn spoke to his great champion and
enemy.
“goll,” he said, “i have a daughter.”
“a lovely girl, a blossom of the dawn,” said goll.
“would she please you as a wife?” the chief demanded.
“she would please me,” said goll.
“she is your wife,” said fionn.
but that did not prevent goll from killing fionn’s brother cairell later
on, nor did it prevent fionn from killing goll later on again, and the
last did not prevent goll from rescuing fionn out of hell when the
fianna-finn were sent there under the new god. nor is there any reason to
complain or to be astonished at these things, for it is a mutual world we
llve in, a give-and-take world, and there is no great harm in it.
original size
there are more worlds than one, and in many ways they are unlike each
other. but joy and sorrow, or, in other words, good and evil, are not
absent in their degree from any of the worlds, for wherever there is life
there is action, and action is but the expression of one or other of these
qualities.
after this earth there is the world of the shi’. beyond it again lies the
many-coloured land. next comes the land of wonder, and after that the land
of promise awaits us. you will cross clay to get into the shi’; you will
cross water to attain the many-coloured land; fire must be passed ere the
land of wonder is attained, but we do not know what will be crossed for
the fourth world.
this adventure of conn the hundred fighter and his son art was by the way
of water, and therefore he was more advanced in magic than fionn was, all
of whose adventures were by the path of clay and into faery only, but conn
was the high king and so the arch-magician of ireland.
a council had been called in the many-coloured land to discuss the case of
a lady named becuma cneisgel, that is, becuma of the white skin, the
daughter of eogan inver. she had run away from her husband labraid and had
taken refuge with gadiar, one of the sons of mananna’n mac lir, the god of
the sea, and the ruler, therefore, of that sphere.
it seems, then, that there is marriage in two other spheres. in the shi’ 
matrimony is recorded as being parallel in every respect with
earth-marriage, and the desire which urges to it seems to be as violent
and inconstant as it is with us; but in the many-coloured land marriage is
but a contemplation of beauty, a brooding and meditation wherein all
grosser desire is unknown and children are born to sinless parents.
in the shi’ the crime of becuma would have been lightly considered, and
would have received none or but a nominal punishment, but in the second
world a horrid gravity attaches to such a lapse, and the retribution meted
is implacable and grim. it may be dissolution by fire, and that can note a
destruction too final for the mind to contemplate; or it may be banishment
from that sphere to a lower and worse one.
this was the fate of becuma of the white skin.
one may wonder how, having attained to that sphere, she could have carried
with her so strong a memory of the earth. it is certain that she was not a
fit person to exist in the many-coloured land, and it is to be feared that
she was organised too grossly even for life in the shi’.
she was an earth-woman, and she was banished to the earth.
word was sent to the shi’s of ireland that this lady should not be
permitted to enter any of them; from which it would seem that the
ordinances of the shi come from the higher world, and, it might follow,
that the conduct of earth lies in the shi’.
in that way, the gates of her own world and the innumerable doors of faery
being closed against her, becuma was forced to appear in the world of men.
it is pleasant, however, notwithstanding her terrible crime and her woeful
punishment, to think how courageous she was. when she was told her
sentence, nay, her doom, she made no outcry, nor did she waste any time in
sorrow. she went home and put on her nicest clothes.
she wore a red satin smock, and, over this, a cloak of green silk out of
which long fringes of gold swung and sparkled, and she had light sandals
of white bronze on her thin, shapely feet. she had long soft hair that was
yellow as gold, and soft as the curling foam of the sea. her eyes were
wide and clear as water and were grey as a dove’s breast. her teeth were
white as snow and of an evenness to marvel at. her lips were thin and
beautifully curved: red lips in truth, red as winter berries and tempting
as the fruits of summer. the people who superintended her departure said
mournfully that when she was gone there would be no more beauty left in
their world.
she stepped into a coracle, it was pushed on the enchanted waters, and it
went forward, world within world, until land appeared, and her boat swung
in low tide against a rock at the foot of ben edair.
so far for her.
conn the hundred fighter, ard-ri’ of ireland, was in the lowest spirits
that can be imagined, for his wife was dead. he had been ard-ri for nine
years, and during his term the corn used to be reaped three times in each
year, and there was full and plenty of everything. there are few kings who
can boast of more kingly results than he can, but there was sore trouble
in store for him.
he had been married to eithne, the daughter of brisland binn, king of
norway, and, next to his subjects, he loved his wife more than all that
was lovable in the world. but the term of man and woman, of king or queen,
is set in the stars, and there is no escaping doom for any one; so, when
her time came, eithne died.
now there were three great burying-places in ireland—the brugh of
the boyne in ulster, over which angus og is chief and god; the shi’ mound
of cruachan ahi, where ethal anbual presides over the underworld of
connacht, and tailltin, in royal meath. it was in this last, the sacred
place of his own lordship, that conn laid his wife to rest.
her funeral games were played during nine days. her keen was sung by poets
and harpers, and a cairn ten acres wide was heaved over her clay. then the
keening ceased and the games drew to an end; the princes of the five
prov-inces returned by horse or by chariot to their own places; the
concourse of mourners melted away, and there was nothing left by the great
cairn but the sun that dozed upon it in the daytime, the heavy clouds that
brooded on it in the night, and the desolate, memoried king.
for the dead queen had been so lovely that conn could not forget her; she
had been so kind at every moment that he could not but miss her at every
moment; but it was in the council chamber and the judgement hall that he
most pondered her memory. for she had also been wise, and lack-ing her
guidance, all grave affairs seemed graver, shadowing each day and going
with him to the pillow at night.
the trouble of the king becomes the trouble of the subject, for how shall
we live if judgement is withheld, or if faulty decisions are promulgated?
therefore, with the sorrow of the king, all ireland was in grief, and it
was the wish of every person that he should marry again.
such an idea, however, did not occur to him, for he could not conceive how
any woman should fill the place his queen had vacated. he grew more and
more despondent, and less and less fitted to cope with affairs of state,
and one day he instructed his son art to take the rule during his absence,
and he set out for ben edair.
for a great wish had come upon him to walk beside the sea; to listen to
the roll and boom of long, grey breakers; to gaze on an unfruitful,
desolate wilderness of waters; and to forget in those sights all that he
could forget, and if he could not forget then to remember all that he
should remember.
he was thus gazing and brooding when one day he observed a coracle drawing
to the shore. a young girl stepped from it and walked to him among black
boulders and patches of yellow sand.
original size
being a king he had authority to ask questions. conn asked her, therefore,
all the questions that he could think of, for it is not every day that a
lady drives from the sea, and she wearing a golden-fringed cloak of green
silk through which a red satin smock peeped at the openings. she replied
to his questions, but she did not tell him all the truth; for, indeed, she
could not afford to.
she knew who he was, for she retained some of the powers proper to the
worlds she had left, and as he looked on her soft yellow hair and on her
thin red lips, conn recognised, as all men do, that one who is lovely must
also be good, and so he did not frame any inquiry on that count; for
everything is forgotten in the presence of a pretty woman, and a magician
can be bewitched also.
she told conn that the fame of his son art had reached even the
many-coloured land, and that she had fallen in love with the boy. this did
not seem unreasonable to one who had himself ventured much in faery, and
who had known so many of the people of that world leave their own land for
the love of a mortal.
“what is your name, my sweet lady?” said the king.
“i am called delvcaem (fair shape) and i am the daughter of morgan,” she
replied.
“i have heard much of morgan,” said the king. “he is a very great
magician.”
during this conversation conn had been regarding her with the minute
freedom which is right only in a king. at what precise instant he forgot
his dead consort we do not know, but it is certain that at this moment his
mind was no longer burdened with that dear and lovely memory. his voice
was melancholy when he spoke again.
“you love my son!”
“who could avoid loving him?” she murmured.
“when a woman speaks to a man about the love she feels for another man she
is not liked. and,” he continued, “when she speaks to a man who has no
wife of his own about her love for another man then she is disliked.”
“i would not be disliked by you,” becuma murmured.
“nevertheless,” said he regally, “i will not come between a woman and her
choice.”
“i did not know you lacked a wife,” said becuma, but indeed she did.
“you know it now,” the king replied sternly.
“what shall i do?” she inquired, “am i to wed you or your son?”
“you must choose,” conn answered.
“if you allow me to choose it means that you do not want me very badly,”
 said she with a smile.
“then i will not allow you to choose,” cried the king, “and it is with
myself you shall marry.”
he took her hand in his and kissed it.
“lovely is this pale thin hand. lovely is the slender foot that i see in a
small bronze shoe,” said the king.
after a suitable time she continued:
“i should not like your son to be at tara when i am there, or for a year
afterwards, for i do not wish to meet him until i have forgotten him and
have come to know you well.”
“i do not wish to banish my son,” the king protested.
“it would not really be a banishment,” she said. “a prince’s duty could be
set him, and in such an absence he would improve his knowledge both of
ireland and of men. further,” she continued with downcast eyes, “when you
remember the reason that brought me here you will see that his presence
would be an embarrassment to us both, and my presence would be unpleasant
to him if he remembers his mother.”
“nevertheless,” said conn stubbornly, “i do not wish to banish my son; it
is awkward and unnecessary.”
“for a year only,” she pleaded.
“it is yet,” he continued thoughtfully, “a reasonable reason that you give
and i will do what you ask, but by my hand and word i don’t like doing
it.”
they set out then briskly and joyfully on the homeward journey, and in due
time they reached tara of the kings.
it is part of the education of a prince to be a good chess player, and to
continually exercise his mind in view of the judgements that he will be
called upon to give and the knotty, tortuous, and perplexing matters which
will obscure the issues which he must judge. art, the son of conn, was
sitting at chess with cromdes, his father’s magician.
“be very careful about the move you are going to make,” said cromdes.
“can i be careful?” art inquired. “is the move that you are thinking of in
my power?”
“it is not,” the other admitted.
“then i need not be more careful than usual,” art replied, and he made his
move.
“it is a move of banishment,” said cromdes.
“as i will not banish myself, i suppose my father will do it, but i do not
know why he should.”
“your father will not banish you.”
“who then?” “your mother.”
“my mother is dead.”
“you have a new one,” said the magician.
“here is news,” said art. “i think i shall not love my new mother.”
“you will yet love her better than she loves you,” said cromdes, meaning
thereby that they would hate each other.
while they spoke the king and becuma entered the palace.
“i had better go to greet my father,” said the young man.
“you had better wait until he sends for you,” his companion advised, and
they returned to their game.
in due time a messenger came from the king directing art to leave tara
instantly, and to leave ireland for one full year.
he left tara that night, and for the space of a year he was not seen again
in ireland. but during that period things did not go well with the king
nor with ireland. every year before that time three crops of corn used to
be lifted off the land, but during art’s absence there was no corn in
ireland and there was no milk. the whole land went hungry.
lean people were in every house, lean cattle in every field; the bushes
did not swing out their timely berries or seasonable nuts; the bees went
abroad as busily as ever, but each night they returned languidly, with
empty pouches, and there was no honey in their hives when the honey season
came. people began to look at each other questioningly, meaningly, and
dark remarks passed between them, for they knew that a bad harvest means,
somehow, a bad king, and, although this belief can be combated, it is too
firmly rooted in wisdom to be dismissed.
the poets and magicians met to consider why this disaster should have
befallen the country and by their arts they discovered the truth about the
king’s wife, and that she was becuma of the white skin, and they
discovered also the cause of her banishment from the many-coloured land
that is beyond the sea, which is beyond even the grave.
they told the truth to the king, but he could not bear to be parted from
that slender-handed, gold-haired, thin-lipped, blithe enchantress, and he
required them to discover some means whereby he might retain his wife and
his crown. there was a way and the magicians told him of it.
“if the son of a sinless couple can be found and if his blood be mixed
with the soll of tara the blight and ruin will depart from ireland,” said
the magicians.
“if there is such a boy i will find him,” cried the hundred fighter.
at the end of a year art returned to tara. his father delivered to him the
sceptre of ireland, and he set out on a journey to find the son of a
sinless couple such as he had been told of.
original size
the high king did not know where exactly he should look for such a
saviour, but he was well educated and knew how to look for whatever was
lacking. this knowledge will be useful to those upon whom a similar duty
should ever devolve.
he went to ben edair. he stepped into a coracle and pushed out to the
deep, and he permitted the coracle to go as the winds and the waves
directed it.
in such a way he voyaged among the small islands of the sea until he lost
all knowledge of his course and was adrift far out in ocean. he was under
the guidance of the stars and the great luminaries.
he saw black seals that stared and barked and dived dancingly, with the
round turn of a bow and the forward onset of an arrow. great whales came
heaving from the green-hued void, blowing a wave of the sea high into the
air from their noses and smacking their wide flat tails thunder-ously on
the water. porpoises went snorting past in bands and clans. small fish
came sliding and flickering, and all the outlandish creatures of the deep
rose by his bobbing craft and swirled and sped away.
wild storms howled by him so that the boat climbed painfully to the sky on
a mile-high wave, balanced for a tense moment on its level top, and sped
down the glassy side as a stone goes furiously from a sling.
or, again, caught in the chop of a broken sea, it stayed shuddering and
backing, while above his head there was only a low sad sky, and around him
the lap and wash of grey waves that were never the same and were never
different.
after long staring on the hungry nothingness of air and water he would
stare on the skin-stretched fabric of his boat as on a strangeness, or he
would examine his hands and the texture of his skin and the stiff black
hairs that grew behind his knuckles and sprouted around his ring, and he
found in these things newness and wonder.
then, when days of storm had passed, the low grey clouds shivered and
cracked in a thousand places, each grim islet went scudding to the horizon
as though terrified by some great breadth, and when they had passed he
stared into vast after vast of blue infinity, in the depths of which his
eyes stayed and could not pierce, and wherefrom they could scarcely be
withdrawn. a sun beamed thence that filled the air with sparkle and the
sea with a thousand lights, and looking on these he was reminded of his
home at tara: of the columns of white and yellow bronze that blazed out
sunnily on the sun, and the red and white and yellow painted roofs that
beamed at and astonished the eye.
sailing thus, lost in a succession of days and nights, of winds and calms,
he came at last to an island.
his back was turned to it, and long before he saw it he smelled it and
wondered; for he had been sitting as in a daze, musing on a change that
had seemed to come in his changeless world; and for a long time he could
not tell what that was which made a difference on the salt-whipped wind or
why he should be excited. for suddenly he had become excited and his heart
leaped in violent expectation.
“it is an october smell,” he said.
“it is apples that i smell.”
he turned then and saw the island, fragrant with apple trees, sweet with
wells of wine; and, hearkening towards the shore, his ears, dulled yet
with the unending rhythms of the sea, distinguished and were filled with
song; for the isle was, as it were, a nest of birds, and they sang
joyously, sweetly, triumphantly.
he landed on that lovely island, and went forward under the darting birds,
under the apple boughs, skirting fragrant lakes about which were woods of
the sacred hazel and into which the nuts of knowledge fell and swam; and
he blessed the gods of his people because of the ground that did not
shiver and because of the deeply rooted trees that could not gad or budge.
having gone some distance by these pleasant ways he saw a shapely house
dozing in the sunlight.
it was thatched with the wings of birds, blue wings and yellow and white
wings, and in the centre of the house there was a door of crystal set in
posts of bronze.
the queen of this island lived there, rigru (large-eyed), the daughter of
lodan, and wife of daire degamra. she was seated on a crystal throne with
her son segda by her side, and they welcomed the high king courteously.
there were no servants in this palace; nor was there need for them. the
high king found that his hands had washed themselves, and when later on he
noticed that food had been placed before him he noticed also that it had
come without the assistance of servile hands. a cloak was laid gently
about his shoulders, and he was glad of it, for his own was soiled by
exposure to sun and wind and water, and was not worthy of a lady’s eye.
then he was invited to eat.
he noticed, however, that food had been set for no one but himself, and
this did not please him, for to eat alone was contrary to the hospitable
usage of a king, and was contrary also to his contract with the gods.
“good, my hosts,” he remonstrated, “it is geasa (taboo) for me to eat
alone.”
“but we never eat together,” the queen replied.
“i cannot violate my geasa,” said the high king.
“i will eat with you,” said segda (sweet speech), “and thus, while you are
our guest you will not do violence to your vows.”
“indeed,” said conn, “that will be a great satisfaction, for i have
already all the trouble that i can cope with and have no wish to add to it
by offending the gods.”
“what is your trouble?” the gentle queen asked. “during a year,” conn
replied, “there has been neither corn nor milk in ireland. the land is
parched, the trees are withered, the birds do not sing in ireland, and the
bees do not make honey.”
“you are certainly in trouble,” the queen assented.
“but,” she continued, “for what purpose have you come to our island?”
“i have come to ask for the loan of your son.”
“a loan of my son!”
“i have been informed,” conn explained, “that if the son of a sinless
couple is brought to tara and is bathed in the waters of ireland the land
will be delivered from those ills.”
the king of this island, daire, had not hitherto spoken, but he now did so
with astonishment and emphasis.
“we would not lend our son to any one, not even to gain the kingship of
the world,” said he.
but segda, observing that the guest’s countenance was discomposed, broke
in:
“it is not kind to refuse a thing that the ard-ri’ of ireland asks for,
and i will go with him.”
“do not go, my pulse,” his father advised.
“do not go, my one treasure,” his mother pleaded.
“i must go indeed,” the boy replied, “for it is to do good i am required,
and no person may shirk such a requirement.”
“go then,” said his father, “but i will place you under the protection of
the high king and of the four provincial kings of ireland, and under the
protection of art, the son of conn, and of fionn, the son of uail, and
under the protection of the magicians and poets and the men of art in
ireland.” and he thereupon bound these protections and safeguards on the
ard-ri’ with an oath.
“i will answer for these protections,” said conn.
he departed then from the island with segda and in three days they reached
ireland, and in due time they arrived at tara.
on reaching the palace conn called his magicians and poets to a council
and informed them that he had found the boy they sought—the son of a
virgin. these learned people consulted together, and they stated that the
young man must be killed, and that his blood should be mixed with the
earth of tara and sprinkled under the withered trees.
when segda heard this he was astonished and defiant; then, seeing that he
was alone and without prospect of succour, he grew downcast and was in
great fear for his life. but remembering the safeguards under which he had
been placed, he enumerated these to the assembly, and called on the high
king to grant him the protections that were his due.
conn was greatly perturbed, but, as in duty bound, he placed the boy under
the various protections that were in his oath, and, with the courage of
one who has no more to gain or lose, he placed segda, furthermore, under
the protection of all the men of ireland.
but the men of ireland refused to accept that bond, saying that although
the ard-ri’ was acting justly towards the boy he was not acting justly
towards ireland.
“we do not wish to slay this prince for our pleasure,” they argued, “but
for the safety of ireland he must be killed.”
angry parties were formed. art, and fionn the son of uail, and the princes
of the land were outraged at the idea that one who had been placed under
their protection should be hurt by any hand. but the men of ireland and
the magicians stated that the king had gone to faery for a special
purpose, and that his acts outside or contrary to that purpose were
illegal, and committed no person to obedience.
there were debates in the council hall, in the market-place, in the
streets of tara, some holding that national honour dissolved and absolved
all personal honour, and others protesting that no man had aught but his
personal honour, and that above it not the gods, not even ireland, could
be placed—for it is to be known that ireland is a god.
such a debate was in course, and segda, to whom both sides addressed
gentle and courteous arguments, grew more and more disconsolate.
“you shall die for ireland, dear heart,” said one of them, and he gave
segda three kisses on each cheek.
“indeed,” said segda, returning those kisses, “indeed i had not bargained
to die for ireland, but only to bathe in her waters and to remove her
pestilence.”
“but dear child and prince,” said another, kissing him likewise, “if any
one of us could save ireland by dying for her how cheerfully we would
die.”
and segda, returning his three kisses, agreed that the death was noble,
but that it was not in his undertaking.
then, observing the stricken countenances about him, and the faces of men
and women hewn thin by hunger, his resolution melted away, and he said:
“i think i must die for you,” and then he said:
“i will die for you.”
and when he had said that, all the people present touched his cheek with
their lips, and the love and peace of ireland entered into his soul, so
that he was tranquil and proud and happy.
the executioner drew his wide, thin blade and all those present covered
their eyes with their cloaks, when a wailing voice called on the
executioner to delay yet a moment. the high king uncovered his eyes and
saw that a woman had approached driving a cow before her.
“why are you killing the boy?” she demanded.
the reason for this slaying was explained to her.
“are you sure,” she asked, “that the poets and magicians really know
everything?”
“do they not?” the king inquired.
“do they?” she insisted.
and then turning to the magicians:
“let one magician of the magicians tell me what is hidden in the bags that
are lying across the back of my cow.”
but no magician could tell it, nor did they try to.
“questions are not answered thus,” they said. “there is formulae, and the
calling up of spirits, and lengthy complicated preparations in our art.”
“i am not badly learned in these arts,” said the woman, “and i say that if
you slay this cow the effect will be the same as if you had killed the
boy.”
“we would prefer to kill a cow or a thousand cows rather than harm this
young prince,” said conn, “but if we spare the boy will these evils
return?”
“they will not be banished until you have banished their cause.”
“and what is their cause?”
“becuma is the cause, and she must be banished.”
“if you must tell me what to do,” said conn, “tell me at least to do
something that i can do.”
“i will tell you certainly. you can keep becuma and your ills as long as
you want to. it does not matter to me. come, my son,” she said to segda,
for it was segda’s mother who had come to save him; and then that sinless
queen and her son went back to their home of enchantment, leaving the king
and fionn and the magicians and nobles of ireland astonished and ashamed.
there are good and evil people in this and in every other world, and the
person who goes hence will go to the good or the evil that is native to
him, while those who return come as surely to their due. the trouble which
had fallen on becuma did not leave her repentant, and the sweet lady began
to do wrong as instantly and innocently as a flower begins to grow. it was
she who was responsible for the ills which had come on ireland, and we may
wonder why she brought these plagues and droughts to what was now her own
country.
under all wrong-doing lies personal vanity or the feeling that we are
endowed and privileged beyond our fellows. it is probable that, however
courageously she had accepted fate, becuma had been sharply stricken in
her pride; in the sense of personal strength, aloofness, and identity, in
which the mind likens itself to god and will resist every domination but
its own. she had been punished, that is, she had submitted to control, and
her sense of freedom, of privilege, of very being, was outraged. the mind
flinches even from the control of natural law, and how much more from the
despotism of its own separated likenesses, for if another can control me
that other has usurped me, has become me, and how terribly i seem
diminished by the seeming addition!
this sense of separateness is vanity, and is the bed of all wrong-doing.
for we are not freedom, we are control, and we must submit to our own
function ere we can exercise it. even unconsciously we accept the rights
of others to all that we have, and if we will not share our good with
them, it is because we cannot, having none; but we will yet give what we
have, although that be evil. to insist on other people sharing in our
personal torment is the first step towards insisting that they shall share
in our joy, as we shall insist when we get it.
becuma considered that if she must suffer all else she met should suffer
also. she raged, therefore, against ireland, and in particular she raged
against young art, her husband’s son, and she left undone nothing that
could afflict ireland or the prince. she may have felt that she could not
make them suffer, and that is a maddening thought to any woman. or perhaps
she had really desired the son instead of the father, and her thwarted
desire had perpetuated itself as hate. but it is true that art regarded
his mother’s successor with intense dislike, and it is true that she
actively returned it.
one day becuma came on the lawn before the palace, and seeing that art was
at chess with cromdes she walked to the table on which the match was being
played and for some time regarded the game. but the young prince did not
take any notice of her while she stood by the board, for he knew that this
girl was the enemy of ireland, and he could not bring himself even to look
at her.
becuma, looking down on his beautiful head, smiled as much in rage as in
disdain.
“o son of a king,” said she, “i demand a game with you for stakes.”
art then raised his head and stood up courteously, but he did not look at
her.
“whatever the queen demands i will do,” said he.
“am i not your mother also?” she replied mockingly, as she took the seat
which the chief magician leaped from.
the game was set then, and her play was so skilful that art was hard put
to counter her moves. but at a point of the game becuma grew thoughtful,
and, as by a lapse of memory, she made a move which gave the victory to
her opponent. but she had intended that. she sat then, biting on her lip
with her white small teeth and staring angrily at art.
“what do you demand from me?” she asked.
“i bind you to eat no food in ireland until you find the wand of curoi,
son of dare’.”
becuma then put a cloak about her and she went from tara northward and
eastward until she came to the dewy, sparkling brugh of angus mac an og in
ulster, but she was not admitted there. she went thence to the shi’ ruled
over by eogabal, and although this lord would not admit her, his daughter
aine’, who was her foster-sister, let her into faery.
she made inquiries and was informed where the dun of curoi mac dare’ was,
and when she had received this intelligence she set out for sliev mis. by
what arts she coaxed curoi to give up his wand it matters not, enough that
she was able to return in triumph to tara. when she handed the wand to
art, she said:
“i claim my game of revenge.”
“it is due to you,” said art, and they sat on the lawn before the palace
and played.
a hard game that was, and at times each of the combatants sat for an hour
staring on the board before the next move was made, and at times they
looked from the board and for hours stared on the sky seeking as though in
heaven for advice. but becuma’s foster-sister, aine’, came from the shi’,
and, unseen by any, she interfered with art’s play, so that, suddenly,
when he looked again on the board, his face went pale, for he saw that the
game was lost.
“i didn’t move that piece,” said he sternly.
“nor did i,” becuma replied, and she called on the onlookers to confirm
that statement.
she was smiling to herself secretly, for she had seen what the mortal eyes
around could not see.
“i think the game is mine,” she insisted softly.
“i think that your friends in faery have cheated,” he replied, “but the
game is yours if you are content to win it that way.”
“i bind you,” said becuma, “to eat no food in ireland until you have found
delvcaem, the daughter of morgan.”
“where do i look for her?” said art in despair.
“she is in one of the islands of the sea,” becuma replied, “that is all i
will tell you,” and she looked at him maliciously, joyously, contentedly,
for she thought he would never return from that journey, and that morgan
would see to it.
art, as his father had done before him, set out for the many-coloured
land, but it was from inver colpa he embarked and not from ben edair.
at a certain time he passed from the rough green ridges of the sea to
enchanted waters, and he roamed from island to island asking all people
how he might come to delvcaem, the daughter of morgan. but he got no news
from any one, until he reached an island that was fragrant with wild
apples, gay with flowers, and joyous with the song of birds and the deep
mellow drumming of the bees. in this island he was met by a lady, crede’,
the truly beautiful, and when they had exchanged kisses, he told her who
he was and on what errand he was bent.
“we have been expecting you,” said crede’, “but alas, poor soul, it is a
hard, and a long, bad way that you must go; for there is sea and land,
danger and difficulty between you and the daughter of morgan.”
“yet i must go there,” he answered.
“there is a wild dark ocean to be crossed. there is a dense wood where
every thorn on every tree is sharp as a spear-point and is curved and
clutching. there is a deep gulf to be gone through,” she said, “a place of
silence and terror, full of dumb, venomous monsters. there is an immense
oak forest—dark, dense, thorny, a place to be strayed in, a place to
be utterly bewildered and lost in. there is a vast dark wilderness, and
therein is a dark house, lonely and full of echoes, and in it there are
seven gloomy hags, who are warned already of your coming and are waiting
to plunge you in a bath of molten lead.”
“it is not a choice journey,” said art, “but i have no choice and must
go.”
“should you pass those hags,” she continued, “and no one has yet passed
them, you must meet ailill of the black teeth, the son of mongan tender
blossom, and who could pass that gigantic and terrible fighter?”
“it is not easy to find the daughter of morgan,” said art in a melancholy
voice.
“it is not easy,” crede’ replied eagerly, “and if you will take my advice—”
“advise me,” he broke in, “for in truth there is no man standing in such
need of counsel as i do.”
“i would advise you,” said crede’ in a low voice, “to seek no more for the
sweet daughter of morgan, but to stay in this place where all that is
lovely is at your service.”
“but, but—” cried art in astonishment.
“am i not as sweet as the daughter of morgan?” she demanded, and she stood
before him queenly and pleadingly, and her eyes took his with imperious
tenderness.
“by my hand,” he answered, “you are sweeter and lovelier than any being
under the sun, but—”
“and with me,” she said, “you will forget ireland.”
“i am under bonds,” cried art, “i have passed my word, and i would not
forget ireland or cut myself from it for all the kingdoms of the
many-coloured land.”
crede’ urged no more at that time, but as they were parting she whispered,
“there are two girls, sisters of my own, in morgan’s palace. they will
come to you with a cup in either hand; one cup will be filled with wine
and one with poison. drink from the right-hand cup, o my dear.”
art stepped into his coracle, and then, wringing her hands, she made yet
an attempt to dissuade him from that drear journey.
“do not leave me,” she urged. “do not affront these dangers. around the
palace of morgan there is a palisade of copper spikes, and on the top of
each spike the head of a man grins and shrivels. there is one spike only
which bears no head, and it is for your head that spike is waiting. do not
go there, my love.”
“i must go indeed,” said. art earnestly.
“there is yet a danger,” she called. “beware of delvcaem’s mother, dog
head, daughter of the king of the dog heads. beware of her.”
“indeed,” said art to himself, “there is so much to beware of that i will
beware of nothing. i will go about my business,” he said to the waves,
“and i will let those beings and monsters and the people of the dog heads
go about their business.”
he went forward in his light bark, and at some moment found that he had
parted from those seas and was adrift on vaster and more turbulent
billows. from those dark-green surges there gaped at him monstrous and
cavernous jaws; and round, wicked, red-rimmed, bulging eyes stared fixedly
at the boat. a ridge of inky water rushed foaming mountainously on his
board, and behind that ridge came a vast warty head that gurgled and
groaned. but at these vile creatures he thrust with his lengthy spear or
stabbed at closer reach with a dagger.
he was not spared one of the terrors which had been foretold. thus, in the
dark thick oak forest he slew the seven hags and buried them in the molten
lead which they had heated for him. he climbed an icy mountain, the cold
breath of which seemed to slip into his body and chip off inside of his
bones, and there, until he mastered the sort of climbing on ice, for each
step that he took upwards he slipped back ten steps. almost his heart gave
way before he learned to climb that venomous hill. in a forked glen into
which he slipped at night-fall he was surrounded by giant toads, who spat
poison, and were icy as the land they lived in, and were cold and foul and
savage. at sliav saev he encountered the long-maned lions who lie in wait
for the beasts of the world, growling woefully as they squat above their
prey and crunch those terrified bones. he came on ailill of the black
teeth sitting on the bridge that spanned a torrent, and the grim giant was
grinding his teeth on a pillar stone. art drew nigh unobserved and brought
him low.
it was not for nothing that these difficulties and dangers were in his
path. these things and creatures were the invention of dog head, the wife
of morgan, for it had become known to her that she would die on the day
her daughter was wooed. therefore none of the dangers encountered by art
were real, but were magical chimeras conjured against him by the great
witch.
affronting all, conquering all, he came in time to morgan’s dun, a place
so lovely that after the miseries through which he had struggled he almost
wept to see beauty again.
delvcaem knew that he was coming. she was waiting for him, yearning for
him. to her mind art was not only love, he was freedom, for the poor girl
was a captive in her father’s home. a great pillar an hundred feet high
had been built on the roof of morgan’s palace, and on the top of this
pillar a tiny room had been constructed, and in this room delvcaem was a
prisoner.
she was lovelier in shape than any other princess of the many-coloured
land. she was wiser than all the other women of that land, and she was
skilful in music, embroidery, and chastity, and in all else that pertained
to the knowledge of a queen.
although delvcaem’s mother wished nothing but ill to art, she yet treated
him with the courtesy proper in a queen on the one hand and fitting
towards the son of the king of ireland on the other. therefore, when art
entered the palace he was met and kissed, and he was bathed and clothed
and fed. two young girls came to him then, having a cup in each of their
hands, and presented him with the kingly drink, but, remembering the
warning which credl had given him, he drank only from the right-hand cup
and escaped the poison. next he was visited by delvcaem’s mother, dog
head, daughter of the king of the dog heads, and morgan’s queen. she was
dressed in full armour, and she challenged art to fight with her.
it was a woeful combat, for there was no craft or sagacity unknown to her,
and art would infallibly have perished by her hand but that her days were
numbered, her star was out, and her time had come. it was her head that
rolled on the ground when the combat was over, and it was her head that
grinned and shrivelled on the vacant spike which she had reserved for
art’s.
then art liberated delvcaem from her prison at the top of the pillar and
they were affianced together. but the ceremony had scarcely been completed
when the tread of a single man caused the palace to quake and seemed to
jar the world.
it was morgan returning to the palace.
the gloomy king challenged him to combat also, and in his honour art put
on the battle harness which he had brought from ireland. he wore a
breastplate and helmet of gold, a mantle of blue satin swung from his
shoulders, his left hand was thrust into the grips of a purple shield,
deeply bossed with silver, and in the other hand he held the wide-grooved,
blue hilted sword which had rung so often into fights and combats, and
joyous feats and exercises.
up to this time the trials through which he had passed had seemed so great
that they could not easily be added to. but if all those trials had been
gathered into one vast calamity they would not equal one half of the rage
and catastrophe of his war with morgan.
for what he could not effect by arms morgan would endeavour by guile, so
that while art drove at him or parried a crafty blow, the shape of morgan
changed before his eyes, and the monstrous king was having at him in
another form, and from a new direction.
it was well for the son of the ard-ri’ that he had been beloved by the
poets and magicians of his land, and that they had taught him all that was
known of shape-changing and words of power.
he had need of all these.
at times, for the weapon must change with the enemy, they fought with
their foreheads as two giant stags, and the crash of their monstrous
onslaught rolled and lingered on the air long after their skulls had
parted. then as two lions, long-clawed, deep-mouthed, snarling, with rigid
mane, with red-eyed glare, with flashing, sharp-white fangs, they prowled
lithely about each other seeking for an opening. and then as two
green-ridged, white-topped, broad-swung, overwhelming, vehement billows of
the deep, they met and crashed and sunk into and rolled away from each
other; and the noise of these two waves was as the roar of all ocean when
the howl of the tempest is drowned in the league-long fury of the surge.
but when the wife’s time has come the husband is doomed. he is required
elsewhere by his beloved, and morgan went to rejoin his queen in the world
that comes after the many-coloured land, and his victor shore that
knowledgeable head away from its giant shoulders.
he did not tarry in the many-coloured land, for he had nothing further to
seek there. he gathered the things which pleased him best from among the
treasures of its grisly king, and with delvcaem by his side they stepped
into the coracle.
then, setting their minds on ireland, they went there as it were in a
flash.
the waves of all the world seemed to whirl past them in one huge, green
cataract. the sound of all these oceans boomed in their ears for one
eternal instant. nothing was for that moment but a vast roar and pour of
waters. thence they swung into a silence equally vast, and so sudden that
it was as thunderous in the comparison as was the elemental rage they
quitted. for a time they sat panting, staring at each other, holding each
other, lest not only their lives but their very souls should be swirled
away in the gusty passage of world within world; and then, looking abroad,
they saw the small bright waves creaming by the rocks of ben edair, and
they blessed the power that had guided and protected them, and they
blessed the comely land of ir.
on reaching tara, delvcaem, who was more powerful in art and magic than
becuma, ordered the latter to go away, and she did so.
she left the king’s side. she came from the midst of the counsellors and
magicians. she did not bid farewell to any one. she did not say good-bye
to the king as she set out for ben edair.
original size
where she could go to no man knew, for she had been banished from the
many-coloured land and could not return there. she was forbidden entry to
the shi’ by angus og, and she could not remain in ireland. she went to
sasana and she became a queen in that country, and it was she who fostered
the rage against the holy land which has not ceased to this day.
the abbot of the monastery of moville sent word to the story-tellers of
ireland that when they were in his neighbourhood they should call at the
monastery, for he wished to collect and write down the stories which were
in danger of being forgotten.
“these things also must be told,” said he.
in particular he wished to gather tales which told of the deeds that had
been done before the gospel came to ireland.
“for,” said he, “there are very good tales among those ones, and it would
be a pity if the people who come after us should be ignorant of what
happened long ago, and of the deeds of their fathers.”
so, whenever a story-teller chanced in that neighbourhood he was directed
to the monastery, and there he received a welcome and his fill of all that
is good for man.
the abbot’s manuscript boxes began to fill up, and he used to regard that
growing store with pride and joy. in the evenings, when the days grew
short and the light went early, he would call for some one of these
manuscripts and have it read to him by candle-light, in order that he
might satisfy himself that it was as good as he had judged it to be on the
previous hearing.
one day a story-teller came to the monastery, and, like all the others, he
was heartily welcomed and given a great deal more than his need.
he said that his name was cairide’, and that he had a story to tell which
could not be bettered among the stories of ireland.
the abbot’s eyes glistened when he heard that. he rubbed his hands
together and smiled on his guest.
“what is the name of your story?” he asked.
“it is called ‘mongan’s frenzy.’”
“i never heard of it before,” cried the abbot joyfully.
“i am the only man that knows it,” cairide’ replied.
“but how does that come about?” the abbot inquired.
“because it belongs to my family,” the story-teller answered. “there was a
cairide’ of my nation with mongan when he went into faery. this cairide’ 
listened to the story when it was first told. then he told it to his son,
and his son told it to his son, and that son’s great-great-grandson’s son
told it to his son’s son, and he told it to my father, and my father told
it to me.”
“and you shall tell it to me,” cried the abbot triumphantly.
“i will indeed,” said cairide’. vellum was then brought and quills. the
copyists sat at their tables. ale was placed beside the story-teller, and
he told this tale to the abbot.
original size
said cairide’:
mongan’s wife at that time was bro’tiarna, the flame lady. she was
passionate and fierce, and because the blood would flood suddenly to her
cheek, so that she who had seemed a lily became, while you looked upon
her, a rose, she was called flame lady. she loved mongan with ecstasy and
abandon, and for that also he called her flame lady.
but there may have been something of calculation even in her wildest
moment, for if she was delighted in her affection she was tormented in it
also, as are all those who love the great ones of life and strive to equal
themselves where equality is not possible.
for her husband was at once more than himself and less than himself. he
was less than himself because he was now mongan. he was more than himself
because he was one who had long disappeared from the world of men. his
lament had been sung and his funeral games played many, many years before,
and bro’tiarna sensed in him secrets, experiences, knowledges in which she
could have no part, and for which she was greedily envious.
so she was continually asking him little, simple questions a’ propos of
every kind of thing.
she weighed all that he said on whatever subject, and when he talked in
his sleep she listened to his dream.
the knowledge that she gleaned from those listenings tormented her far
more than it satisfied her, for the names of other women were continually
on his lips, sometimes in terms of dear affection, sometimes in accents of
anger or despair, and in his sleep he spoke familiarly of people whom the
story-tellers told of, but who had been dead for centuries. therefore she
was perplexed, and became filled with a very rage of curiosity.
among the names which her husband mentioned there was one which, because
of the frequency with which it appeared, and because of the tone of
anguish and love and longing in which it was uttered, she thought of
oftener than the others: this name was duv laca. although she questioned
and cross-questioned cairide’, her story-teller, she could discover
nothing about a lady who had been known as the black duck. but one night
when mongan seemed to speak with duv laca he mentioned her father as
fiachna duv mac demain, and the story-teller said that king had been dead
for a vast number of years.
she asked her husband then, boldly, to tell her the story of duv laca, and
under the influence of their mutual love he promised to tell it to her
some time, but each time she reminded him of his promise he became
confused, and said that he would tell it some other time.
as time went on the poor flame lady grew more and more jealous of duv
laca, and more and more certain that, if only she could know what had
happened, she would get some ease to her tormented heart and some
assuagement of her perfectly natural curiosity. therefore she lost no
opportunity of reminding mongan of his promise, and on each occasion he
renewed the promise and put it back to another time.
in the year when ciaran the son of the carpenter died, the same year when
tuathal maelgariv was killed and the year when diarmait the son of cerrbel
became king of all ireland, the year  of our era in short, it happened
that there was a great gathering of the men of ireland at the hill of
uisneach in royal meath.
in addition to the council which was being held, there were games and
tournaments and brilliant deployments of troops, and universal feastings
and enjoyments. the gathering lasted for a week, and on the last day of
the week mongan was moving through the crowd with seven guards, his
story-teller cairide’, and his wife.
it had been a beautiful day, with brilliant sunshine and great sport, but
suddenly clouds began to gather in the sky to the west, and others came
rushing blackly from the east. when these clouds met the world went dark
for a space, and there fell from the sky a shower of hailstones, so large
that each man wondered at their size, and so swift and heavy that the
women and young people of the host screamed from the pain of the blows
they received.
mongan’s men made a roof of their shields, and the hailstones battered on
the shields so terribly that even under them they were afraid. they began
to move away from the host looking for shelter, and when they had gone
apart a little way they turned the edge of a small hill and a knoll of
trees, and in the twinkling of an eye they were in fair weather.
one minute they heard the clashing and bashing of the hailstones, the
howling of the venomous wind, the screams of women and the uproar of the
crowd on the hill of uisneach, and the next minute they heard nothing more
of those sounds and saw nothing more of these sights, for they had been
permitted to go at one step out of the world of men and into the world of
faery.
there is a difference between this world and the world of faery, but it is
not immediately perceptible. everything that is here is there, but the
things that are there are better than those that are here. all things that
are bright are there brighter. there is more gold in the sun and more
silver in the moon of that land. there is more scent in the flowers, more
savour in the fruit. there is more comeliness in the men and more
tenderness in the women. everything in faery is better by this one
wonderful degree, and it is by this betterness you will know that you are
there if you should ever happen to get there.
mongan and his companions stepped from the world of storm into sunshine
and a scented world. the instant they stepped they stood, bewildered,
looking at each other silently, questioningly, and then with one accord
they turned to look back whence they had come.
there was no storm behind them. the sunlight drowsed there as it did in
front, a peaceful flooding of living gold. they saw the shapes of the
country to which their eyes were accustomed, and recognised the well-known
landmarks, but it seemed that the distant hills were a trifle higher, and
the grass which clothed them and stretched between was greener, was more
velvety: that the trees were better clothed and had more of peace as they
hung over the quiet ground.
but mongan knew what had happened, and he smiled with glee as he watched
his astonished companions, and he sniffed that balmy air as one whose
nostrils remembered it.
“you had better come with me,” he said.
“where are we?” his wife asked. “why, we are here,” cried mongan; “where
else should we be?”
he set off then, and the others followed, staring about them cautiously,
and each man keeping a hand on the hilt of his sword.
“are we in faery?” the flame lady asked.
“we are,” said mongan.
when they had gone a little distance they came to a grove of ancient
trees. mightily tail and well grown these trees were, and the trunk of
each could not have been spanned by ten broad men. as they went among
these quiet giants into the dappled obscurity and silence, their thoughts
became grave, and all the motions of their minds elevated as though they
must equal in greatness and dignity those ancient and glorious trees. when
they passed through the grove they saw a lovely house before them, built
of mellow wood and with a roof of bronze—it was like the dwelling of
a king, and over the windows of the sunny room there was a balcony. there
were ladies on this balcony, and when they saw the travellers approaching
they sent messengers to welcome them.
mongan and his companions were then brought into the house, and all was
done for them that could be done for honoured guests. everything within
the house was as excellent as all without, and it was inhabited by seven
men and seven women, and it was evident that mongan and these people were
well acquainted.
in the evening a feast was prepared, and when they had eaten well there
was a banquet. there were seven vats of wine, and as mongan loved wine he
was very happy, and he drank more on that occasion than any one had ever
noticed him to drink before.
it was while he was in this condition of glee and expansion that the flame
lady put her arms about his neck and begged he would tell her the story of
duv laca, and, being boisterous then and full of good spirits, he agreed
to her request, and he prepared to tell the tale.
the seven men and seven women of the fairy palace then took their places
about him in a half-circle; his own seven guards sat behind them; his
wife, the flame lady, sat by his side; and at the back of all cairid, his
story-teller sat, listening with all his ears, and remembering every word
that was uttered.
said mongan:
in the days of long ago and the times that have disappeared for ever,
there was one fiachna finn the son of baltan, the son of murchertach, the
son of muredach, the son of eogan, the son of neill. he went from his own
country when he was young, for he wished to see the land of lochlann, and
he knew that he would be welcomed by the king of that country, for
fiachna’s father and eolgarg’s father had done deeds in common and were
obliged to each other.
he was welcomed, and he stayed at the court of lochlann in great ease and
in the midst of pleasures.
it then happened that eolgarg mor fell sick and the doctors could not cure
him. they sent for other doctors, but they could not cure him, nor could
any one say what he was suffering from, beyond that he was wasting visibly
before their eyes, and would certainly become a shadow and disappear in
air unless he was healed and fattened and made visible.
they sent for more distant doctors, and then for others more distant
still, and at last they found a man who claimed that he could make a cure
if the king were supplied with the medicine which he would order.
“what medicine is that?” said they all.
“this is the medicine,” said the doctor. “find a perfectly white cow with
red ears, and boil it down in the lump, and if the king drinks that
rendering he will recover.”
before he had well said it messengers were going from the palace in all
directions looking for such a cow. they found lots of cows which were
nearly like what they wanted, but it was only by chance they came on the
cow which would do the work, and that beast belonged to the most notorious
and malicious and cantankerous female in lochlann, the black hag. now the
black hag was not only those things that have been said; she was also
whiskered and warty and one-eyed and obstreperous, and she was notorious
and ill-favoured in many other ways also.
they offered her a cow in the place of her own cow, but she refused to
give it. then they offered a cow for each leg of her cow, but she would
not accept that offer unless fiachna went bail for the payment. he agreed
to do so, and they drove the beast away.
on the return journey he was met by messengers who brought news from
ireland. they said that the king of ulster was dead, and that he, fiachna
finn, had been elected king in the dead king’s place. he at once took ship
for ireland, and found that all he had been told was true, and he took up
the government of ulster.
original size
a year passed, and one day as he was sitting at judgement there came a
great noise from without, and this noise was so persistent that the people
and suitors were scandalised, and fiachna at last ordered that the noisy
person should be brought before him to be judged.
it was done, and to his surprise the person turned out to be the black
hag.
she blamed him in the court before his people, and complained that he had
taken away her cow, and that she had not been paid the four cows he had
gone bail for, and she demanded judgement from him and justice.
“if you will consider it to be justice, i will give you twenty cows
myself,” said fiachna.
“i would not take all the cows in ulster,” she screamed.
“pronounce judgement yourself,” said the king, “and if i can do what you
demand i will do it.” for he did not like to be in the wrong, and he did
not wish that any person should have an unsatisfied claim upon him.
the black hag then pronounced judgement, and the king had to fulfil it.
“i have come,” said she, “from the east to the west; you must come from
the west to the east and make war for me, and revenge me on the king of
lochlann.”
fiachna had to do as she demanded, and, although it was with a heavy
heart, he set out in three days’ time for lochlann, and he brought with
him ten battalions.
he sent messengers before him to big eolgarg warning him of his coming, of
his intention, and of the number of troops he was bringing; and when he
landed eolgarg met him with an equal force, and they fought together.
in the first battle three hundred of the men of lochlann were killed, but
in the next battle eolgarg mor did not fight fair, for he let some
venomous sheep out of a tent, and these attacked the men of ulster and
killed nine hundred of them.
so vast was the slaughter made by these sheep and so great the terror they
caused, that no one could stand before them, but by great good luck there
was a wood at hand, and the men of ulster, warriors and princes and
charioteers, were forced to climb up the trees, and they roosted among the
branches like great birds, while the venomous sheep ranged below bleating
terribly and tearing up the ground.
fiachna fim was also sitting in a tree, very high up, and he was
disconsolate.
“we are disgraced,” said he.
“it is very lucky,” said the man in the branch below, “that a sheep cannot
climb a tree.”
“we are disgraced for ever,” said the king of ulster.
“if those sheep learn how to climb, we are undone surely,” said the man
below.
“i will go down and fight the sheep,” said fiachna. but the others would
not let the king go.
“it is not right,” they said, “that you should fight sheep.”
“some one must fight them,” said fiachna finn, “but no more of my men
shall die until i fight myself; for if i am fated to die, i will die and i
cannot escape it, and if it is the sheep’s fate to die, then die they
will; for there is no man can avoid destiny, and there is no sheep can
dodge it either.”
“praise be to god!” said the warrior that was higher up.
“amen!” said the man who was higher than he, and the rest of the warriors
wished good luck to the king.
he started then to climb down the tree with a heavy heart, but while he
hung from the last branch and was about to let go, he noticed a tall
warrior walking towards him. the king pulled himself up on the branch
again and sat dangle-legged on it to see what the warrior would do.
the stranger was a very tall man, dressed in a green cloak with a silver
brooch at the shoulder. he had a golden band about his hair and golden
sandals on his feet, and he was laughing heartily at the plight of the men
of ireland.
original size
it is not nice of you to laugh at us,” said fiachna finn.
“who could help laughing at a king hunkering on a branch and his army
roosting around him like hens?” said the stranger.
“nevertheless,” the king replied, “it would be courteous of you not to
laugh at misfortune.”
“we laugh when we can,” commented the stranger, “and are thankful for the
chance.”
“you may come up into the tree,” said fiachna, “for i perceive that you
are a mannerly person, and i see that some of the venomous sheep are
charging in this direction. i would rather protect you,” he continued,
“than see you killed; for,” said he lamentably, “i am getting down now to
fight the sheep.”
“they will not hurt me,” said the stranger. “who are you?” the king asked.
“i am mananna’n, the son of lir.”
fiachna knew then that the stranger could not be hurt.
“what will you give me if i deliver you from the sheep?” asked mananna’n.
“i will give you anything you ask, if i have that thing.”
“i ask the rights of your crown and of your household for one day.”
fiachna’s breath was taken away by that request, and he took a little time
to compose himself, then he said mildly:
“i will not have one man of ireland killed if i can save him. all that i
have they give me, all that i have i give to them, and if i must give this
also, then i will give this, although it would be easier for me to give my
life.” “that is agreed,” said mannana’n.
he had something wrapped in a fold of his cloak, and he unwrapped and
produced this thing.
it was a dog.
now if the sheep were venomous, this dog was more venomous still, for it
was fearful to look at. in body it was not large, but its head was of a
great size, and the mouth that was shaped in that head was able to open
like the lid of a pot. it was not teeth which were in that head, but hooks
and fangs and prongs. dreadful was that mouth to look at, terrible to look
into, woeful to think about; and from it, or from the broad, loose nose
that waggled above it, there came a sound which no word of man could
describe, for it was not a snarl, nor was it a howl, although it was both
of these. it was neither a growl nor a grunt, although it was both of
these; it was not a yowl nor a groan, although it was both of these: for
it was one sound made up of these sounds, and there was in it, too, a
whine and a yelp, and a long-drawn snoring noise, and a deep purring
noise, and a noise that was like the squeal of a rusty hinge, and there
were other noises in it also.
“the gods be praised!” said the man who was in the branch above the king.
“what for this time?” said the king.
“because that dog cannot climb a tree,” said the man.
and the man on a branch yet above him groaned out “amen!”
“there is nothing to frighten sheep like a dog,” said mananna’n, “and
there is nothing to frighten these sheep like this dog.”
he put the dog on the ground then.
“little dogeen, little treasure,” said he, “go and kill the sheep.”
and when he said that the dog put an addition and an addendum on to the
noise he had been making before, so that the men of ireland stuck their
fingers into their ears and turned the whites of their eyes upwards, and
nearly fell off their branches with the fear and the fright which that
sound put into them.
it did not take the dog long to do what he had been ordered. he went
forward, at first, with a slow waddle, and as the venomous sheep came to
meet him in bounces, he then went to meet them in wriggles; so that in a
while he went so fast that you could see nothing of him but a head and a
wriggle. he dealt with the sheep in this way, a jump and a chop for each,
and he never missed his jump and he never missed his chop. when he got his
grip he swung round on it as if it was a hinge. the swing began with the
chop, and it ended with the bit loose and the sheep giving its last kick.
at the end of ten minutes all the sheep were lying on the ground, and the
same bit was out of every sheep, and every sheep was dead.
“you can come down now,” said mananna’n.
“that dog can’t climb a tree,” said the man in the branch above the king
warningly.
“praise be to the gods!” said the man who was above him.
“amen!” said the warrior who was higher up than that. and the man in the
next tree said:
“don’t move a hand or a foot until the dog chokes himself to death on the
dead meat.”
the dog, however, did not eat a bit of the meat. he trotted to his master,
and mananna’n took him up and wrapped him in his cloak.
“now you can come down,” said he.
“i wish that dog was dead!” said the king.
but he swung himself out of the tree all the same, for he did not wish to
seem frightened before mananna’n. “you can go now and beat the men of
lochlann,” said mananna’n. “you will be king of lochlann before
nightfall.”
“i wouldn’t mind that,” said the king. “it’s no threat,” said mananna’n.
the son of lir turned then and went away in the direction of ireland to
take up his one-day rights, and fiachna continued his battle with the
lochlannachs.
he beat them before nightfall, and by that victory he became king of
lochlann and king of the saxons and the britons.
he gave the black hag seven castles with their territories, and he gave
her one hundred of every sort of cattle that he had captured. she was
satisfied.
then he went back to ireland, and after he had been there for some time
his wife gave birth to a son.
“you have not told me one word about duv laca,” said the flame lady
reproachfully.
“i am coming to that,” replied mongan.
he motioned towards one of the great vats, and wine was brought to him, of
which he drank so joyously and so deeply that all people wondered at his
thirst, his capacity, and his jovial spirits.
“now, i will begin again.”
said mongan: there was an attendant in fiachna finn’s palace who was
called an da’v, and the same night that fiachna’s wife bore a son, the
wife of an da’v gave birth to a son also. this latter child was called mac
an da’v, but the son of fiachna’s wife was named mongan.
“ah!” murmured the flame lady.
the queen was angry. she said it was unjust and presumptuous that the
servant should get a child at the same time that she got one herself, but
there was no help for it, because the child was there and could not be
obliterated.
now this also must be told.
there was a neighbouring prince called fiachna duv, and he was the ruler
of the dal fiatach. for a long time he had been at enmity and spiteful
warfare with fiachna finn; and to this fiachna duv there was born in the
same night a daughter, and this girl was named duv laca of the white hand.
“ah!” cried the flame lady.
“you see!” said mongan, and he drank anew and joyously of the fairy wine.
in order to end the trouble between fiachna finn and fiachna duv the
babies were affianced to each other in the cradle on the day after they
were born, and the men of ireland rejoiced at that deed and at that news.
but soon there came dismay and sorrow in the land, for when the little
mongan was three days old his real father, mananna’n the son of lir,
appeared in the middle of the palace. he wrapped mongan in his green cloak
and took him away to rear and train in the land of promise, which is
beyond the sea that is at the other side of the grave.
when fiachna duv heard that mongan, who was affianced to his daughter duv
laca, had disappeared, he considered that his compact of peace was at an
end, and one day he came by surprise and attacked the palace. he killed
fiachna finn in that battle, and be crowned himself king of ulster.
the men of ulster disliked him, and they petitioned mananna’n to bring
mongan back, but mananna’n would not do this until the boy was sixteen
years of age and well reared in the wisdom of the land of promise. then he
did bring mongan back, and by his means peace was made between mongan and
fiachna duv, and mongan was married to his cradle-bride, the young duv
laca.
one day mongan and duv laca were playing chess in their palace. mongan had
just made a move of skill, and he looked up from the board to see if duv
laca seemed as discontented as she had a right to be. he saw then over duv
laca’s shoulder a little black-faced, tufty-headed cleric leaning against
the door-post inside the room.
“what are you doing there?” said mongan.
“what are you doing there yourself?” said the little black-faced cleric.
“indeed, i have a right to be in my own house,” said mongan.
“indeed i do not agree with you,” said the cleric.
“where ought i be, then?” said mongan.
“you ought to be at dun fiathac avenging the murder of your father,”
 replied the cleric, “and you ought to be ashamed of yourself for not
having done it long ago. you can play chess with your wife when you have
won the right to leisure.”
“but how can i kill my wife’s father?” mongan exclaimed. “by starting
about it at once,” said the cleric. “here is a way of talking!” said
mongan.
“i know,” the cleric continued, “that duv laca will not agree with a word
i say on this subject, and that she will try to prevent you from doing
what you have a right to do, for that is a wife’s business, but a man’s
business is to do what i have just told you; so come with me now and do
not wait to think about it, and do not wait to play any more chess.
fiachna duv has only a small force with him at this moment, and we can
burn his palace as he burned your father’s palace, and kill himself as he
killed your father, and crown you king of ulster rightfully the way he
crowned himself wrongfully as a king.”
“i begin to think that you own a lucky tongue, my black-faced friend,”
 said mongan, “and i will go with you.”
he collected his forces then, and he burned fiachna duv’s fortress, and he
killed fiachna duv, and he was crowned king of ulster.
then for the first time he felt secure and at liberty to play chess. but
he did not know until afterwards that the black-faced, tufty-headed person
was his father mananna’n, although that was the fact.
there are some who say, however, that fiachna the black was killed in the
year  by the lord of the scot’s dal riada, condad cerr, at the battle
of ard carainn; but the people who say this do not know what they are
talking about, and they do not care greatly what it is they say.
“there is nothing to marvel about in this duv laca,” said the flame lady
scornfully. “she has got married, and she has been beaten at chess. it has
happened before.”
“let us keep to the story,” said mongan, and, having taken some few dozen
deep draughts of the wine, he became even more jovial than before. then he
recommenced his tale:
it happened on a day that mongan had need of treasure. he had many
presents to make, and he had not as much gold and silver and cattle as was
proper for a king. he called his nobles together and discussed what was
the best thing to be done, and it was arranged that he should visit the
provincial kings and ask boons from them.
he set out at once on his round of visits, and the first province he went
to was leinster.
the king of leinster at that time was branduv, the son of echach. he
welcomed mongan and treated him well, and that night mongan slept in his
palace.
when he awoke in the morning he looked out of a lofty window, and he saw
on the sunny lawn before the palace a herd of cows. there were fifty cows
in all, for he counted them, and each cow had a calf beside her, and each
cow and calf was pure white in colour, and each of them had red ears.
when mongan saw these cows, he fell in love with them as he had never
fallen in love with anything before.
he came down from the window and walked on the sunny lawn among the cows,
looking at each of them and speaking words of affection and endearment to
them all; and while he was thus walking and talking and looking and
loving, he noticed that some one was moving beside him. he looked from the
cows then, and saw that the king of leinster was at his side.
“are you in love with the cows?” branduv asked him.
“i am,” said mongan.
“everybody is,” said the king of leinster.
“i never saw anything like them,” said mongan.
“nobody has,” said the king of leinster.
“i never saw anything i would rather have than these cows,” said mongan.
“these,” said the king of leinster, “are the most beautiful cows in
ireland, and,” he continued thoughtfully, “duv laca is the most beautiful
woman in ireland.”
“there is no lie in what you say,” said mongan.
“is it not a queer thing,” said the king of leinster, “that i should have
what you want with all your soul, and you should have what i want with all
my heart?”
“queer indeed,” said mongan, “but what is it that you do want?”
“duv laca, of course,” said the king of leinster.
“do you mean,” said mongan, “that you would exchange this herd of fifty
pure white cows having red ears—”
“and their fifty calves,” said the king of leinster—
“for duv laca, or for any woman in the world?”
“i would,” cried the king of leinster, and he thumped his knee as he said
it.
“done,” roared mongan, and the two kings shook hands on the bargain.
mongan then called some of his own people, and before any more words could
be said and before any alteration could be made, he set his men behind the
cows and marched home with them to ulster.
duv laca wanted to know where the cows came from, and mongan told her that
the king of leinster had given them to him. she fell in love with them as
mongan had done, but there was nobody in the world could have avoided
loving those cows: such cows they were! such wonders! mongan and duv laca
used to play chess together, and then they would go out together to look
at the cows, and then they would go in together and would talk to each
other about the cows. everything they did they did together, for they
loved to be with each other.
however, a change came.
one morning a great noise of voices and trampling of horses and rattle of
armour came about the palace. mongan looked from the window.
“who is coming?” asked duv laca.
but he did not answer her.
“the noise must announce the visit of a king,” duv laca continued.
but mongan did not say a word. duv laca then went to the window.
“who is that king?” she asked.
and her husband replied to her then.
“that is the king of leinster,” said he mournfully.
“well,” said duv laca surprised, “is he not welcome?”
“he is welcome indeed,” said mongan lamentably.
“let us go out and welcome him properly,” duv laca suggested.
“let us not go near him at all,” said mongan, “for he is coming to
complete his bargain.”
“what bargain are you talking about?” duv laca asked. but mongan would not
answer that.
“let us go out,” said he, “for we must go out.”
mongan and duv laca went out then and welcomed the king of leinster. they
brought him and his chief men into the palace, and water was brought for
their baths, and rooms were appointed for them, and everything was done
that should be done for guests.
that night there was a feast, and after the feast there was a banquet, and
all through the feast and the banquet the king of leinster stared at duv
laca with joy, and sometimes his breast was delivered of great sighs, and
at times he moved as though in perturbation of spirit and mental agony.
“there is something wrong with the king of leinster,” duv laca whispered.
“i don’t care if there is,” said mongan.
“you must ask what he wants.”
“but i don’t want to know it,” said mongan. “nevertheless, you musk ask
him,” she insisted.
so mongan did ask him, and it was in a melancholy voice that he asked it.
“do you want anything?” said he to the king of leinster.
“i do indeed,” said branduv.
“if it is in ulster i will get it for you,” said mongan mournfully.
“it is in ulster,” said branduv.
mongan did not want to say anything more then, but the king of leinster
was so intent and everybody else was listening and duv laca was nudging
his arm, so he said: “what is it that you do want?” “i want duv laca.”
“i want her too,” said mongan.
“you made your bargain,” said the king of leinster, “my cows and their
calves for your duv laca, and the man that makes a bargain keeps a
bargain.”
“i never before heard,” said mongan, “of a man giving away his own wife.”
“even if you never heard of it before, you must do it now,” said duv laca,
“for honour is longer than life.”
mongan became angry when duv laca said that. his face went red as a
sunset, and the veins swelled in his neck and his forehead.
“do you say that?” he cried to duv laca.
“i do,” said duv laca.
“let the king of leinster take her,” said mongan.
duv laca and the king of leinster went apart then to speak together, and
the eye of the king seemed to be as big as a plate, so fevered was it and
so enlarged and inflamed by the look of duv laca. he was so confounded
with joy also that his words got mixed up with his teeth, and duv laca did
not know exactly what it was he was trying to say, and he did not seem to
know himself. but at last he did say something intelligible, and this is
what he said.
“i am a very happy man,” said he.
“and i,” said duv laca, “am the happiest woman in the world.”
“why should you be happy?” the astonished king demanded.
“listen to me,” she said. “if you tried to take me away from this place
against my own wish, one half of the men of ulster would be dead before
you got me and the other half would be badly wounded in my defence.”
“a bargain is a bargain,” the king of leinster began.
“but,” she continued, “they will not prevent my going away, for they all
know that i have been in love with you for ages.”
“what have you been in with me for ages?” said the amazed king.
“in love with you,” replied duv laca.
“this is news,” said the king, “and it is good news.”
“but, by my word,” said duv laca, “i will not go with you unless you grant
me a boon.”
“all that i have,” cried branduv, “and all that every-body has.”
“and you must pass your word and pledge your word that you will do what i
ask.”
“i pass it and pledge it,” cried the joyful king.
“then,” said duv laca, “this is what i bind on you.”
“light the yolk!” he cried.
“until one year is up and out you are not to pass the night in any house
that i am in.”
“by my head and hand!” branduv stammered.
“and if you come into a house where i am during the time and term of that
year, you are not to sit down in the chair that i am sitting in.”
“heavy is my doom!” he groaned.
“but,” said duv laca, “if i am sitting in a chair or a seat you are to sit
in a chair that is over against me and opposite to me and at a distance
from me.”
“alas!” said the king, and he smote his hands together, and then he beat
them on his head, and then he looked at them and at everything about, and
he could not tell what anything was or where anything was, for his mind
was clouded and his wits had gone astray.
“why do you bind these woes on me?” he pleaded.
“i wish to find out if you truly love me.”
“but i do,” said the king. “i love you madly and dearly, and with all my
faculties and members.”
“that is the way! love you,” said duv laca. “we shall have a notable year
of courtship and joy. and let us go now,” she continued, “for i am
impatient to be with you.”
“alas!” said branduv, as he followed her. “alas, alas!” said the king of
leinster.
“i think,” said the flame lady, “that whoever lost that woman had no
reason to be sad.”
mongan took her chin in his hand and kissed her lips.
“all that you say is lovely, for you are lovely,” said he, “and you are my
delight and the joy of the world.”
then the attendants brought him wine, and he drank so joyously of that and
so deeply, that those who observed him thought he would surely burst and
drown them. but he laughed loudly and with enormous delight, until the
vessels of gold and silver and bronze chimed mellowly to his peal and the
rafters of the house went creaking.
said he:
mongan loved duv laca of the white hand better than he loved his life,
better than he loved his honour. the kingdoms of the world did not weigh
with him beside the string of her shoe. he would not look at a sunset if
he could see her. he would not listen to a harp if he could hear her
speak, for she was the delight of ages, the gem of time, and the wonder of
the world till doom.
she went to leinster with the king of that country, and when she had gone
mongan fell grievously sick, so that it did not seem he could ever recover
again; and he began to waste and wither, and he began to look like a
skeleton, and a bony structure, and a misery.
now this also must be known.
duv laca had a young attendant, who was her foster-sister as well as her
servant, and on the day that she got married to mongan, her attendant was
married to mac an da’v, who was servant and foster-brother to mongan. when
duv laca went away with the king of leinster, her servant, mac an da’v’s
wife, went with her, so there were two wifeless men in ulster at that
time, namely, mongan the king and mac an da’v his servant.
one day as mongan sat in the sun, brooding lamentably on his fate, mac an
da’v came to him.
“how are things with you, master?” asked mac an da’v.
“bad,” said mongan.
“it was a poor day brought you off with mananna’n to the land of promise,”
 said his servant.
“why should you think that?” inquired mongan.
“because,” said mac an da’v, “you learned nothing in the land of promise
except how to eat a lot of food and how to do nothing in a deal of time.”
“what business is it of yours?” said mongan angrily.
“it is my business surely,” said mac an da’v, “for my wife has gone off to
leinster with your wife, and she wouldn’t have gone if you hadn’t made a
bet and a bargain with that accursed king.”
mac an da’v began to weep then.
“i didn’t make a bargain with any king,” said he, “and yet my wife has
gone away with one, and it’s all because of you.”
“there is no one sorrier for you than i am,” said mongan.
“there is indeed,” said mac an da’v, “for i am sorrier myself.”
mongan roused himself then.
“you have a claim on me truly,” said he, “and i will not have any one with
a claim on me that is not satisfied. go,” he said to mac an da’v, “to that
fairy place we both know of. you remember the baskets i left there with
the sod from ireland in one and the sod from scotland in the other; bring
me the baskets and sods.”
“tell me the why of this?” said his servant.
“the king of leinster will ask his wizards what i am doing, and this is
what i will be doing. i will get on your back with a foot in each of the
baskets, and when branduv asks the wizards where i am they will tell him
that i have one leg in ireland and one leg in scotland, and as long as
they tell him that he will think he need not bother himself about me, and
we will go into leinster that way.”
“no bad way either,” said mac an da’v.
they set out then.
it was a long, uneasy journey, for although mac an da’v was of stout heart
and goodwill, yet no man can carry another on his back from ulster to
leinster and go quick. still, if you keep on driving a pig or a story they
will get at last to where you wish them to go, and the man who continues
putting one foot in front of the other will leave his home behind, and
will come at last to the edge of the sea and the end of the world.
when they reached leinster the feast of moy life’ was being held, and they
pushed on by forced marches and long stages so as to be in time, and thus
they came to the moy of cell camain, and they mixed with the crowd that
were going to the feast.
a great and joyous concourse of people streamed about them. there were
young men and young girls, and when these were not holding each other’s
hands it was because their arms were round each other’s necks. there were
old, lusty women going by, and when these were not talking together it was
because their mouths were mutually filled with apples and meat-pies. there
were young warriors with mantles of green and purple and red flying behind
them on the breeze, and when these were not looking disdainfully on older
soldiers it was because the older soldiers happened at the moment to be
looking at them. there were old warriors with yard-long beards flying
behind their shoulders llke wisps of hay, and when these were not nursing
a broken arm or a cracked skull, it was because they were nursing wounds
in their stomachs or their legs. there were troops of young women who
giggled as long as their breaths lasted and beamed when it gave out. bands
of boys who whispered mysteriously together and pointed with their fingers
in every direction at once, and would suddenly begin to run like a herd of
stampeded horses. there were men with carts full of roasted meats. women
with little vats full of mead, and others carrying milk and beer. folk of
both sorts with towers swaying on their heads, and they dripping with
honey. children having baskets piled with red apples, and old women who
peddled shell-fish and boiled lobsters. there were people who sold twenty
kinds of bread, with butter thrown in. sellers of onions and cheese, and
others who supplied spare bits of armour, odd scabbards, spear handles,
breastplate-laces. people who cut your hair or told your fortune or gave
you a hot bath in a pot. others who put a shoe on your horse or a piece of
embroidery on your mantle; and others, again, who took stains off your
sword or dyed your finger-nails or sold you a hound.
it was a great and joyous gathering that was going to the feast.
mongan and his servant sat against a grassy hedge by the roadside and
watched the multitude streaming past.
just then mongan glanced to the right whence the people were coming. then
he pulled the hood of his cloak over his ears and over his brow.
“alas!” said he in a deep and anguished voice.
mac an da’v turned to him.
“is it a pain in your stomach, master?”
“it is not,” said mongan. “well, what made you make that brutal and
belching noise?”
“it was a sigh i gave,” said mongan.
“whatever it was,” said mac an da’v, “what was it?”
“look down the road on this side and tell me who is coming,” said his
master.
“it is a lord with his troop.”
“it is the king of leinster,” said mongan. “the man,” said mac an da’v in
a tone of great pity, “the man that took away your wife! and,” he roared
in a voice of extraordinary savagery, “the man that took away my wife into
the bargain, and she not in the bargain.”
“hush,” said mongan, for a man who heard his shout stopped to tie a
sandie, or to listen.
“master,” said mac an da’v as the troop drew abreast and moved past.
“what is it, my good friend?”
“let me throw a little small piece of a rock at the king of leinster.”
“i will not.”
“a little bit only, a small bit about twice the size of my head.”
“i will not let you,” said mongan.
when the king had gone by mac an da’v groaned a deep and dejected groan.
“oco’n!” said he. “oco’n-i’o-go-deo’!” said he.
the man who had tied his sandal said then: “are you in pain, honest man?”
“i am not in pain,” said mac an da’v.
“well, what was it that knocked a howl out of you like the yelp of a sick
dog, honest man?”
“go away,” said mac an da’v, “go away, you flat-faced, nosey person.”
 “there is no politeness left in this country,” said the stranger, and he
went away to a certain distance, and from thence he threw a stone at mac
an da’v’s nose, and hit it.
original size
the road was now not so crowded as it had been. minutes would pass and
only a few travellers would come, and minutes more would go when nobody
was in sight at all.
then two men came down the road: they were clerics.
“i never saw that kind of uniform before,” said mac an da’v.
“even if you didn’t,” said mongan, “there are plenty of them about. they
are men that don’t believe in our gods,” said he.
“do they not, indeed?” said mac an da’v. “the rascals!” said he. “what,
what would mananna’n say to that?”
“the one in front carrying the big book is tibraide’. he is the priest of
cell camain, and he is the chief of those two.”
“indeed, and indeed!” said mac an da’v. “the one behind must be his
servant, for he has a load on his back.”
the priests were reading their offices, and mac an da’v marvelled at that.
“what is it they are doing?” said he.
“they are reading.”
“indeed, and indeed they are,” said mac an da’v. “i can’t make out a word
of the language except that the man behind says amen, amen, every time the
man in front puts a grunt out of him. and they don’t like our gods at
all!” said mac an da’v.
“they do not,” said mongan.
“play a trick on them, master,” said mac an da’v. mongan agreed to play a
trick on the priests.
he looked at them hard for a minute, and then he waved his hand at them.
the two priests stopped, and they stared straight in front of them, and
then they looked at each other, and then they looked at the sky. the clerk
began to bless himself, and then tibraide’ began to bless himself, and
after that they didn’t know what to do. for where there had been a road
with hedges on each side and fields stretching beyond them, there was now
no road, no hedge, no field; but there was a great broad river sweeping
across their path; a mighty tumble of yellowy-brown waters, very swift,
very savage; churning and billowing and jockeying among rough boulders and
islands of stone. it was a water of villainous depth and of detestable
wetness; of ugly hurrying and of desolate cavernous sound. at a little to
their right there was a thin uncomely bridge that waggled across the
torrent.
tibraide’ rubbed his eyes, and then he looked again. “do you see what i
see?” said he to the clerk.
“i don’t know what you see,” said the clerk, “but what i see i never did
see before, and i wish i did not see it now.”
“i was born in this place,” said tibraide’, “my father was born here
before me, and my grandfather was born here before him, but until this day
and this minute i never saw a river here before, and i never heard of
one.”
“what will we do at all?” said the clerk. “what will we do at all?”
“we will be sensible,” said tibraide’ sternly, “and we will go about our
business,” said he. “if rivers fall out of the sky what has that to do
with you, and if there is a river here, which there is, why, thank god,
there is a bridge over it too.”
“would you put a toe on that bridge?” said the clerk. “what is the bridge
for?” said tibraide’ mongan and mac an da’v followed them.
when they got to the middle of the bridge it broke under them, and they
were precipitated into that boiling yellow flood.
mongan snatched at the book as it fell from tibraide’s hand.
“won’t you let them drown, master?” asked mac an da’v.
“no,” said mongan, “i’ll send them a mile down the stream, and then they
can come to land.”
mongan then took on himself the form of tibraide’ and he turned mac an
da’v into the shape of the clerk.
“my head has gone bald,” said the servant in a whisper.
“that is part of it,” replied mongan. “so long as we know,” said mac an
da’v.
they went on then to meet the king of leinster.
they met him near the place where the games were played.
“good my soul, tibraide’!” cried the king of leinster, and he gave mongan
a kiss. mongan kissed him back again.
“amen, amen,” said mac an da’v.
“what for?” said the king of leinster.
and then mac an da’v began to sneeze, for he didn’t know what for.
“it is a long time since i saw you, tibraide’,” said the king, “but at
this minute i am in great haste and hurry. go you on before me to the
fortress, and you can talk to the queen that you’ll find there, she that
used to be the king of ulster’s wife. kevin cochlach, my charioteer, will
go with you, and i will follow you myself in a while.”
the king of leinster went off then, and mongan and his servant went with
the charioteer and the people.
mongan read away out of the book, for he found it interesting, and he did
not want to talk to the charioteer, and mac an da’v cried amen, amen,
every time that mongan took his breath. the people who were going with
them said to one another that mac an da’v was a queer kind of clerk, and
that they had never seen any one who had such a mouthful of amens.
but in a while they came to the fortress, and they got into it without any
trouble, for kevin cochlach, the king’s charioteer, brought them in. then
they were led to the room where duv laca was, and as he went into that
room mongan shut his eyes, for he did not want to look at duv laca while
other people might be looking at him.
“let everybody leave this room, while i am talking to the queen,” said he;
and all the attendants left the room, except one, and she wouldn’t go, for
she wouldn’t leave her mistress.
then mongan opened his eyes and he saw duv laca, and he made a great bound
to her and took her in his arms, and mac an da’v made a savage and vicious
and terrible jump at the attendant, and took her in his arms, and bit her
ear and kissed her neck and wept down into her back.
“go away,” said the girl, “unhand me, villain,” said she.
“i will not,” said mac an da’v, “for i’m your own husband, i’m your own
mac, your little mac, your macky-wac-wac.” then the attendant gave a
little squeal, and she bit him on each ear and kissed his neck and wept
down into his back, and said that it wasn’t true and that it was.
original size
