it used to be so pleasant and quiet here.
sunday
pulled through. this day is getting to be more and more trying.
it was selected and set apart last november as a day of rest. i
already had six of them per week, before. this morning found the
new creature trying to clod apples out of that forbidden tree.
monday
the new creature says its name is eve. that is all right, i have
no objections. says it is to call it by when i want it to come.
i said it was superfluous, then. the word evidently raised me in
its respect; and indeed it is a large, good word, and will bear
repetition. it says it is not an it, it is a she. this is probably
doubtful; yet it is all one to me; what she is were nothing to me
if she would but go by herself and not talk.
tuesday
she has littered the whole estate with execrable names and offensive
signs:
she says this park would make a tidy summer resort, if there was
any custom for it. summer resort—another invention of hers—just
words, without any meaning. what is a summer resort? but it is
best not to ask her, she has such a rage for explaining.
friday
she has taken to beseeching me to stop going over the falls. what
harm does it do? says it makes her shudder. i wonder why. i have
always done it—always liked the plunge, and the excitement, and
the coolness. i supposed it was what the falls were for. they
have no other use that i can see, and they must have been made for
something. she says they were only made for scenery—like the
rhinoceros and the mastodon.
i went over the falls in a barrel—not satisfactory to her. went
over in a tub—still not satisfactory. swam the whirlpool and the
rapids in a fig-leaf suit. it got much damaged. hence, tedious
complaints about my extravagance. i am too much hampered here.
what i need is change of scene.
saturday
i escaped last tuesday night, and travelled two days, and built
me another shelter, in a secluded place, and obliterated my tracks
as well as i could, but she hunted me out by means of a beast which
she has tamed and calls a wolf, and came making that pitiful noise
again, and shedding that water out of the places she looks with.
i was obliged to return with her, but will presently emigrate again,
when occasion offers. she engages herself in many foolish things:
among others, trying to study out why the animals called lions and
tigers live on grass and flowers, when, as she says, the sort of
teeth they wear would indicate that they were intended to eat each
other. this is foolish, because to do that would be to kill each
other, and that would introduce what, as i understand it, is called
"death;" and death, as i have been told, has not yet entered the
park. which is a pity, on some accounts.
sunday
pulled through.
monday
i believe i see what the week is for: it is to give time to rest
up from the weariness of sunday. it seems a good idea…. she
has been climbing that tree again. clodded her out of it. she
said nobody was looking. seems to consider that a sufficient
justification for chancing any dangerous thing. told her that.
the word justification moved her admiration—and envy too, i
thought. it is a good word.
thursday
she told me she was made out of a rib taken from my body. this
is at least doubtful, if not more than that. i have not missed
any rib…. she is in much trouble about the buzzard; says
grass does not agree with it; is afraid she can't raise it; thinks
it was intended to live on decayed flesh. the buzzard must get
along the best it can with what is provided. we cannot overturn
the whole scheme to accommodate the buzzard.
saturday
she fell in the pond yesterday, when she was looking at herself
in it, which she is always doing. she nearly strangled, and said
it was most uncomfortable. this made her sorry for the creatures
which live in there, which she calls fish, for she continues to
fasten names on to things that don't need them and don't come when
they are called by them, which is a matter of no consequence to
her, as she is such a numskull anyway; so she got a lot of them
out and brought them in last night and put them in my bed to keep
warm, but i have noticed them now and then all day, and i don't
see that they are any happier there than they were before, only
quieter. when night comes i shall throw them out-doors. i will
not sleep with them again, for i find them clammy and unpleasant
to lie among when a person hasn't anything on.
sunday
pulled through.
tuesday
she has taken up with a snake now. the other animals are glad,
for she was always experimenting with them and bothering them;
and i am glad, because the snake talks, and this enables me to
get a rest.
friday
she says the snake advises her to try the fruit of that tree, and
says the result will be a great and fine and noble education. i
told her there would be another result, too—it would introduce
death into the world. that was a mistake—it had been better to
keep the remark to myself; it only gave her an idea—she could
save the sick buzzard, and furnish fresh meat to the despondent
lions and tigers. i advised her to keep away from the tree. she
said she wouldn't. i foresee trouble. will emigrate.
wednesday
i have had a variegated time. i escaped that night, and rode a
horse all night as fast as he could go, hoping to get clear out of
the park and hide in some other country before the trouble should
begin; but it was not to be. about an hour after sunup, as i was
riding through a flowery plain where thousands of animals were
grazing, slumbering, or playing with each other, according to their
wont, all of a sudden they broke into a tempest of frightful noises,
and in one moment the plain was in a frantic commotion and every
beast was destroying its neighbor. i knew what it meant—eve had
eaten that fruit, and death was come into the world…. the
tigers ate my horse, paying no attention when i ordered them to
desist, and they would even have eaten me if i had stayed—which
i didn't, but went away in much haste…. i found this place,
outside the park, and was fairly comfortable for a few days, but
she has found me out. found me out, and has named the place
tonawanda—says it looks like that. in fact, i was not sorry she
came, for there are but meagre pickings here, and she brought some
of those apples. i was obliged to eat them, i was so hungry. it
was against my principles, but i find that principles have no real
force except when one is well fed…. she came curtained in
boughs and bunches of leaves, and when i asked her what she meant
by such nonsense, and snatched them away and threw them down, she
tittered and blushed. i had never seen a person titter and blush
before, and to me it seemed unbecoming and idiotic. she said i
would soon know how it was myself. this was correct. hungry as
i was, i laid down the apple half eaten—certainly the best one i
ever saw, considering the lateness of the season—and arrayed
myself in the discarded boughs and branches, and then spoke to her
with some severity and ordered her to go and get some more and not
make such a spectacle of herself. she did it, and after this we
crept down to where the wild-beast battle had been, and collected
some skins, and i made her patch together a couple of suits proper
for public occasions. they are uncomfortable, it is true, but
stylish, and that is the main point about clothes. … i find
she is a good deal of a companion. i see i should be lonesome and
depressed without her, now that i have lost my property. another
thing, she says it is ordered that we work for our living hereafter.
she will be useful. i will superintend.
ten days later
she accuses me of being the cause of our disaster! she says, with
apparent sincerity and truth, that the serpent assured her that
the forbidden fruit was not apples, it was chestnuts. i said i
was innocent, then, for i had not eaten any chestnuts. she said
the serpent informed her that "chestnut" was a figurative term
meaning an aged and mouldy joke. i turned pale at that, for i
have made many jokes to pass the weary time, and some of them could
have been of that sort, though i had honestly supposed that they
were new when i made them. she asked me if i had made one just
at the time of the catastrophe. i was obliged to admit that i had
made one to myself, though not aloud. it was this. i was thinking
about the falls, and i said to myself, "how wonderful it is to see
that vast body of water tumble down there!" then in an instant a
bright thought flashed into my head, and i let it fly, saying, "it
would be a deal more wonderful to see it tumble up there!"—and i
was just about to kill myself with laughing at it when all nature
broke loose in war and death, and i had to flee for my life.
"there," she said, with triumph, "that is just it; the serpent
mentioned that very jest, and called it the first chestnut, and
said it was coeval with the creation." alas, i am indeed to blame.
would that i were not witty; oh, would that i had never had that
radiant thought!
next year
we have named it cain. she caught it while i was up country
trapping on the north shore of the erie; caught it in the timber
a couple of miles from our dug-out—or it might have been four,
she isn't certain which. it resembles us in some ways, and may
be a relation. that is what she thinks, but this is an error,
in my judgment. the difference in size warrants the conclusion
that it is a different and new kind of animal—a fish, perhaps,
though when i put it in the water to see, it sank, and she plunged
in and snatched it out before there was opportunity for the
experiment to determine the matter. i still think it is a fish,
but she is indifferent about what it is, and will not let me have
it to try. i do not understand this. the coming of the creature
seems to have changed her whole nature and made her unreasonable
about experiments. she thinks more of it than she does of any of
the other animals, but is not able to explain why. her mind is
disordered—everything shows it. sometimes she carries the fish
in her arms half the night when it complains and wants to get to
the water. at such times the water comes out of the places in
her face that she looks out of, and she pats the fish on the back
and makes soft sounds with her mouth to soothe it, and betrays
sorrow and solicitude in a hundred ways. i have never seen her
do like this with any other fish, and it troubles me greatly. she
used to carry the young tigers around so, and play with them,
before we lost our property; but it was only play; she never took
on about them like this when their dinner disagreed with them.
sunday
she doesn't work sundays, but lies around all tired out, and likes
to have the fish wallow over her; and she makes fool noises to
amuse it, and pretends to chew its paws, and that makes it laugh.
i have not seen a fish before that could laugh. this makes me
doubt…. i have come to like sunday myself. superintending
all the week tires a body so. there ought to be more sundays.
in the old days they were tough, but now they come handy.
wednesday
it isn't a fish. i cannot quite make out what it is. it makes
curious, devilish noises when not satisfied, and says "goo-goo"
when it is. it is not one of us, for it doesn't walk; it is not
a bird, for it doesn't fly; it is not a frog, for it doesn't hop;
it is not a snake, for it doesn't crawl; i feel sure it is not a
fish, though i cannot get a chance to find out whether it can swim
or not. it merely lies around, and mostly on its back, with its
feet up. i have not seen any other animal do that before. i said
i believed it was an enigma, but she only admired the word without
understanding it. in my judgment it is either an enigma or some
kind of a bug. if it dies, i will take it apart and see what its
arrangements are. i never had a thing perplex me so.
three months later
the perplexity augments instead of diminishing. i sleep but little.
it has ceased from lying around, and goes about on its four legs
now. yet it differs from the other four-legged animals in that
its front legs are unusually short, consequently this causes the
main part of its person to stick up uncomfortably high in the air,
and this is not attractive. it is built much as we are, but its
method of travelling shows that it is not of our breed. the short
front legs and long hind ones indicate that it is of the kangaroo
family, but it is a marked variation of the species, since the
true kangaroo hops, whereas this one never does. still, it is a
curious and interesting variety, and has not been catalogued before.
as i discovered it, i have felt justified in securing the credit
of the discovery by attaching my name to it, and hence have called
it kangaroorum adamiensis…. it must have been a young one
when it came, for it has grown exceedingly since. it must be five
times as big, now, as it was then, and when discontented is able
to make from twenty-two to thirty-eight times the noise it made
at first. coercion does not modify this, but has the contrary
effect. for this reason i discontinued the system. she reconciles
it by persuasion, and by giving it things which she had previously
told it she wouldn't give it. as already observed, i was not at
home when it first came, and she told me she found it in the woods.
it seems odd that it should be the only one, yet it must be so,
for i have worn myself out these many weeks trying to find another
one to add to my collection, and for this one to play with; for
surely then it would be quieter, and we could tame it more easily.
but i find none, nor any vestige of any; and strangest of all, no
tracks. it has to live on the ground, it cannot help itself;
therefore, how does it get about without leaving a track? i have
set a dozen traps, but they do no good. i catch all small animals
except that one; animals that merely go into the trap out of
curiosity, i think, to see what the milk is there for. they never
drink it.
three months later
the kangaroo still continues to grow, which is very strange and
perplexing. i never knew one to be so long getting its growth.
it has fur on its head now; not like kangaroo fur, but exactly
like our hair, except that it is much finer and softer, and instead
of being black is red. i am like to lose my mind over the capricious
and harassing developments of this unclassifiable zoological freak.
if i could catch another one—but that is hopeless; it is a new
variety, and the only sample; this is plain. but i caught a true
kangaroo and brought it in, thinking that this one, being lonesome,
would rather have that for company than have no kin at all, or any
animal it could feel a nearness to or get sympathy from in its
forlorn condition here among strangers who do not know its ways
or habits, or what to do to make it feel that it is among friends;
but it was a mistake—it went into such fits at the sight of the
kangaroo that i was convinced it had never seen one before. i
pity the poor noisy little animal, but there is nothing i can do
to make it happy. if i could tame it—but that is out of the
question; the more i try, the worse i seem to make it. it grieves
me to the heart to see it in its little storms of sorrow and
passion. i wanted to let it go, but she wouldn't hear of it. that
seemed cruel and not like her; and yet she may be right. it might
be lonelier than ever; for since i cannot find another one, how
could it?
five months later
it is not a kangaroo. no, for it supports itself by holding to
her finger, and thus goes a few steps on its hind legs, and then
falls down. it is probably some kind of a bear; and yet it has
no tail—as yet—and no fur, except on its head. it still keeps
on growing—that is a curious circumstance, for bears get their
growth earlier than this. bears are dangerous—since our
catastrophe—and i shall not be satisfied to have this one prowling
about the place much longer without a muzzle on. i have offered
to get her a kangaroo if she would let this one go, but it did no
good—she is determined to run us into all sorts of foolish risks,
i think. she was not like this before she lost her mind.
a fortnight later
i examined its mouth. there is no danger yet; it has only one
tooth. it has no tail yet. it makes more noise now than it ever
did before—and mainly at night. i have moved out. but i shall
go over, mornings, to breakfast, and to see if it has more teeth.
if it gets a mouthful of teeth, it will be time for it to go, tail
or no tail, for a bear does not need a tail in order to be
dangerous.
four months later
i have been off hunting and fishing a month, up in the region that
she calls buffalo; i don't know why, unless it is because there
are not any buffaloes there. meantime the bear has learned to
paddle around all by itself on its hind legs, and says "poppa"
and "momma." it is certainly a new species. this resemblance to
words may be purely accidental, of course, and may have no purpose
or meaning; but even in that case it is still extraordinary, and
is a thing which no other bear can do. this imitation of speech,
taken together with general absence of fur and entire absence of
tail, sufficiently indicates that this is a new kind of bear. the
further study of it will be exceedingly interesting. meantime i
will go off on a far expedition among the forests of the north and
make an exhaustive search. there must certainly be another one
somewhere, and this one will be less dangerous when it has company
of its own species. i will go straightway; but i will muzzle this
one first.
three months later
it has been a weary, weary hunt, yet i have had no success. in
the mean time, without stirring from the home estate, she has
caught another one! i never saw such luck. i might have hunted
these woods a hundred years, i never should have run across that
thing.
next day
i have been comparing the new one with the old one, and it is
perfectly plain that they are the same breed. i was going to stuff
one of them for my collection, but she is prejudiced against it
for some reason or other; so i have relinquished the idea, though
i think it is a mistake. it would be an irreparable loss to science
if they should get away. the old one is tamer than it was, and
can laugh and talk like the parrot, having learned this, no doubt,
from being with the parrot so much, and having the imitative faculty
in a highly developed degree. i shall be astonished if it turns
out to be a new kind of parrot, and yet i ought not to be astonished,
for it has already been everything else it could think of, since
those first days when it was a fish. the new one is as ugly now
as the old one was at first; has the same sulphur-and-raw-meat
complexion and the same singular head without any fur on it. she
calls it abel.
ten years later
they are boys; we found it out long ago. it was their coming in
that small, immature shape that puzzled us; we were not used to it.
there are some girls now. abel is a good boy, but if cain had
stayed a bear it would have improved him. after all these years,
i see that i was mistaken about eve in the beginning; it is better
to live outside the garden with her than inside it without her.
at first i thought she talked too much; but now i should be sorry
to have that voice fall silent and pass out of my life. blessed
be the chestnut that brought us near together and taught me to
know the goodness of her heart and the sweetness of her spirit!
end of the project gutenberg ebook of extracts from adam's diary
by mark twain (samuel clemens)
***** this file should be named .txt or .zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.net/////
produced by kirk pearson
updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away—you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.f.. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section . information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in , the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
