i giggled. we relaxed.
after supper, armitage played
chess with bishop while i followed
max into the control room.
"soon?" i said.
"planetfall in eighteen hours,
doctor." he said it stiffly, busying
himself at the controls. max
is a small dark man with angry
eyes and the saddest mouth i've
ever seen. he is also a fine pilot
and magnificent bacteriologist. i
wanted to slap him. i hate these
professional british types that
think a female biochemist is some
sort of freak.
"honestly," i said. "what do
you think?"
"disease," he said bitterly.
"for the first six months they
reported on schedule, remember?
a fine clean planet, no dominant
life-forms, perfect for immigration;
unique, one world in a billion.
abruptly they stopped sending.
you figure it."
i thought about it.
"i read your thematic on venusian
viruses," he said abruptly.
"good show. you should be an
asset to us, doctor."
"thanks!" i snapped. i was
so furious that i inadvertently
looked into the cabin viewplate.
bishop had warned me. it takes
years of deep-space time to enable
a person to stare at the
naked universe without screaming.
it got me. the crystal thunder
of the stars, that horrible hungry
blackness. i remember i was sort
of crying and fighting, then max
had me by the shoulders, holding
me gently. he was murmuring
and stroking my hair. after a
time, i stopped whimpering.
illustrated by stone
"thanks," i whispered.
"you'd better get some sleep,
greta," he said.
i turned in.
i think i'm falling in love.
january 
today we made planetfall.
it took max a few hours to
home in on the test colony ship.
he finally found it, on the shore
of an inland sea that gleamed like
wrinkled blue satin. for a time
we cruised in widening spirals,
trying to detect some signs of
life. there was nothing.
we finally landed. max and
armitage donned spacesuits and
went toward the colony ship.
they came back in a few hours,
very pale.
"they're dead." armitage's
voice cracked as he came out of
the airlock. "all of them."
"skeletons," max said.
"how?" bishop said.
armitage's hands were shaking
as he poured a drink. "looks like
civil war."
"but there were a hundred of
them," i whispered. "they were
dedicated—"
"i wonder," bishop said
thoughtfully. "white and brown
and yellow. russian and british
and french and german and
chinese and spanish. they were
chosen for technical background
rather than emotional stability."
"rot!" armitage said like
drums beating. "it's some alien
bug, some toxin. we've got to
isolate it, find an antibody."
he went to work.
january 
i'm scared.
it's taken three days to finalize
the atmospheric tests. oxygen,
nitrogen, helium, with trace
gases. those trace gases are
stinkers. bishop discovered a new
inert gas, heavier than xenon.
he's excited. i'm currently checking
stuff that looks like residual
organic, and am not too happy
about it. still, this atmosphere
seems pure.
armitage is chafing.
"it's in the flora," he insisted
today. "something, perhaps, that
they ate." he stood with a strained
tautness, staring feverishly at
the chronometer. "senator farragut's
due to make contact soon.
what'll i tell him?"
"that we're working on it,"
bishop said dryly. "that the
four best scientists in the galaxy
are working toward the solution."
"that's good," armitage said
seriously. "but they'll worry.
you are making progress?"
i wanted to wrap a pestle
around his neck.
we were all in the control
room an hour later. armitage
practically stood at attention
while farragut's voice boomed
from the transmitter.
it was very emetic. the senator
said the entire hemisphere
was waiting for us to announce
the planet was safe for immigration.
he said the stars were a
challenge to man. he spoke fearfully
of the coming world crisis.
epsilon was man's last chance
for survival. armitage assured
him our progress was satisfactory,
that within a few days we
would have something tangible
to report. the senator said we
were heroes.
finally it was over. max yawned.
"wonder how many voters
start field work at once."
armitage frowned. "it's not
funny, cizon. not funny at all.
inasmuch as we've checked out
the atmosphere, i suggest we
start field work at once."
taylor blinked. "we're still
testing a few residual—"
"i happen to be nominal leader
of this party." armitage stood
very tall, very determined. "obviously
the atmosphere is pure.
let's make some progress!"
february 
this is progress?
for the past ten days, we've
worked the clock around. quantitative
analysis, soil, water,
flora, fauna, cellular, microscopic.
nothing. max has discovered a
few lethal alkaloids in some
greenish tree fungus, but i doubt
if the colony were indiscriminate
fungus eaters. bishop has found
a few new unicellular types, but
nothing dangerous. there's one
tentacled thing that reminds me
of a frightened rotifer. max
named it armitagium. armitage
is pleased.
perhaps the fate of the hundred
colonists will remain one of
those forever unsolved mysteries,
like the fate of the mary celeste
or the starship prometheus.
this planet's clean.
february 
today max and i went specimen-hunting.
it must be autumn on epsilon.
everywhere the trees are a riot
of scarlet and ocher, the scrubby
bushes are shedding their leaves.
once we came upon a field of
thistlelike plants with spiny seed-pods
that opened as we watched,
the purple spores drifting afield
in an eddy of tinted mist. max
said it reminded him of scotland.
he kissed me.
on the way back to the ship
we saw two skeletons. each had
its fingers tightly locked about
the other's throat.
february 
we have, to date, analyzed
nine hundred types of plant
life for toxin content. bishop has
tested innumerable spores and
bacteria. our slide file is immense
and still growing. max has
captured several insects. there
is one tiny yellow bush-spider
with a killing bite, but the species
seem to be rare. bishop has isolated
a mold bacterium that
could cause a high fever, but its
propagation rate is far too low
to enable it to last long in the
bloodstream.
the most dangerous animal
seems to be a two-foot-tall arthropod.
they're rare and peaceable.
bishop vivisected one yesterday
and found nothing alarming.
last night i dreamed about the
first expedition. i dreamed they
all committed suicide because
epsilon was too good for them.
this is ridiculous!
we're working in a sort of
quiet madness getting no closer
to the solution.
armitage talked to senator
farragut yesterday and hinted
darkly that the first ship's hydroponics
system went haywire and
that an improper carbohydrate
imbalance killed the colony.
pretty thin. farragut's getting
impatient. bishop looks haggard.
max looks grim.
february 
our quantitative tests are
slowing down. we play a
rubber of bridge each night before
retiring. last night i trumped
max's ace and he snarled at
me. we had a fight. this morning
i found a bouquet of purple
spore-thistles at my cabin door.
max is sweet.
this afternoon, by mutual consent,
we all knocked off work and
played bridge. bishop noticed the
thistle bouquet in a vase over the
chronometer. he objected.
"they're harmless," max said.
"besides, they smell nice."
i can hardly wait for tomorrow's
rubber. our work is important,
but one does need relaxation.
february 
armitage is cheating.
yesterday he failed to score
one of my overtricks. we argued
bitterly about it. taylor, of
course, sided with him. three
hands later, armitage got the bid
in hearts. "one hundred and fifty
honors," he announced.
"that's a lie," i said.
"it was only a hundred," he
grinned. "but thank you, greta.
now i shan't try the queen finesse."
no wonder they've won the
last three evenings! max is furious
with them both.
february 
we played all day. max and i
kept losing. i always knew
armitage was a pompous toad,
but i never realized he was slimy.
this afternoon it was game all,
and armitage overcalled my
diamond opener with three
spades. bishop took him to four
and i doubled, counting on my
ace-king of hearts and diamonds.
i led out my diamond ace and
armitage trumped from his
hand. bishop laid down his dummy.
he had clubs and spades
solid, with doubleton heart and
diamonds.
"none?" max asked armitage
dangerously.
armitage tittered. i wanted to
scratch his eyes out. he drew
trump immediately and set up
clubs on board, dumping the
heart losers from his hand, and
finally sluffing—two diamonds.
"made seven," he said complacently,
"less two for the diamond
renege makes five, one
overtrick doubled. we were vulnerable,
so it's game and rubber."
i gasped. "you reneged deliberately!"
"certainly. doubleton in
hearts and diamonds in my hand.
if you get in, i'm down one. as
it was, i made an overtrick. the
only penalty for a renege is two
tricks. the rule book does not
differentiate between deliberate
and accidental reneges. sorry."
i stared at his florid throat, at
his jugular. i could feel my
mouth twitching.
on the next hand i was dummy.
i excused myself and went
into the lab. i found a scalpel. i
came up quietly behind armitage
and bishop saw what i was going
to do and shouted and i was not
nearly fast enough. armitage
ducked and bishop tackled me.
"thanks, dear," max said
thoughtfully, looking at the cards
scattered on the floor. "we would
have been set one trick. club finesse
fails."
"she's crazy!" armitage's
mouth worked. "the strain's too
much for her!"
i cried. i apologized hysterically.
after a while, i convinced
them i was all right. max gave
me a sedative. we did not play
any more bridge. over supper i
kept staring at armitage's throat.
after eating, i went for a long
walk. when i got back to the
ship, everyone was sleeping.
march 
bishop found armitage this
morning, in his cabin. he
came out, very pale, staring at
me.
"you bitch," he said. "ear to
ear. now what'll i do for a partner?"
"you can't prove it," i said.
"we'll have to confine her to
quarters," max said wearily. "i'll
tell farragut."
"and let him know the expedition
is failing?"
max sighed. "you're right.
we'll tell them armitage had an
accident."
i said seriously, "it was obviously
suicide. his mind snapped."
"oh, god," max said.
they buried armitage this
afternoon. from my cabin, i
watched them dig the grave.
cheaters never prosper.
march 
max talked with senator farragut
this morning. he said
armitage had died a hero's death.
farragut sounds worried. the
pan-asians have withdrawn their
embassy from imperial africa.
tension is mounting on the home
front. immigration must start
this week. max was very reassuring.
"just a few final tests,
senator. we want to make sure."
we puttered in our laboratories
all afternoon. bishop seemed
bored. after dinner he suggested
three-handed bridge and max
said he knew a better game, a
friendly game his grandmother
had taught him—hearts.
march 
it's a plot!
all day long bishop and max
have managed to give me the
queen of spades. it's deliberate,
of course. three times i've tried
for the moon and bishop has held
out one damned little heart at
the end. once max was slightly
ahead on points and bishop demanded
to see the score. i
thought for a moment they would
come to blows, but bishop apologized.
"it's just that i hate to lose,"
he said.
"quite," max said.
when we finally turned in,
bishop was ahead on points.
too far ahead.
march 
isuppose it's bishop's laugh.
it has a peculiar horselike
stridency that makes me want to
tear out his throat. twice today
i've broken down and cried when
he made a jackpot.
i'm not going to cry any more.
supper was the usual, beef-yeast
and vita-ale. i remember
setting bishop's plate in front of
him, and the way his pale eyes
gleamed between mouthfuls.
"three thousand points ahead,"
he gloated. "you'll never catch
me now. never, never!"
that was when he gripped his
throat and began writhing on the
floor.
max felt his pulse. he stared at
me.
"very nice," he said. "quick.
did you use a derivative of that
green fungus?"
i said nothing. max's nostrils
were white and pinched. "must i
make an autopsy?"
"why bother?" i said. "it's
obviously heart failure."
"yes, why bother?" he said.
he looked tired. "stay in your
cabin, greta. i'll bring your
meals."
"i don't trust you."
his laughter had a touch of
madness.
march 
max unlocked my cabin door
this morning. he looked
drawn. "listen," he said. "i've
checked my respiration, pulse,
saliva, temperature. all normal."
"so?"
"come here," he said. i followed
him into the lab. he indicated
a microscope. his eyes were
bright.
"well?"
"a drop of my blood," he said.
"look."
i squinted into the microscope.
i saw purple discs. oddly, they
did not attack the red blood cells.
there was no fission, no mitosis.
the leucocytes, strangely enough,
let them alone.
my hands were shaking as i
took a sterile slide and pricked
my finger. i put the slide under
the microscope. i adjusted the
lens and stared.
purple discs, swimming in my
bloodstream. thriving. minding
their own business.
"me, too," i said.
"they're inert," max said
hoarsely. "they don't affect metabolism,
cause fever, or interfere
with the body chemistry in
any way. do they remind you of
anything?"
i thought about it. then i went
to the slide file that was marked
flora—negative.
"right," max said. "the purple
thistle. spores! the atmosphere
is clogged with them.
greta, my sweet, we're infected."
"i feel fine," i said.
all day long we ran tests. negative
tests. we seem to be disgustingly
healthy. "symbiosis,"
max said finally. "live and let
live. apparently we're hosts."
only one thing disturbs me.
most symbiotes do something
for their host. something to enhance
the host's survival potential.
we played chess this evening.
i won. max is furious. he's such
a poor sport.
march 
max talked with senator farragut
this morning. he gave
epsilon a clean bill of health and
the senator thanked god. "the
first starship will leave tonight,"
the senator said. "right on
schedule, with ten thousand colonists
aboard. you're world heroes!"
max and i played chess the
rest of the day. max won consistently.
he utilizes a fianchetto
that is utterly impregnable. if he
wins tomorrow, i shall have to
kill him.
march 
it was, of course, necessary for
me to destroy armitage and
bishop. they won far too often.
but i am sorry about greta. yet
i had to strangle her.
if she hadn't started that infernal
queen's pawn opening it
would have been different. she
beat me six times running, and
on the last game i pulled a superb
orang-outang, but it was too
late. she saw mate in four and
gave me that serpent smirk i
know so well.
how could i have ever been in
love with her?
march 
frightfully boring to be
alone. i have a thought.
chess. right hand against left.
white and black. jolly good.
march 
ihaven't much time.
left was black this morning
and i beat him, four out of five.
we're in the lab now. he's watching
me scribble this. his thumb
and forefinger are twitching in
fury. he looks like some great
white spider about to spring.
he sees the scalpel, by the microscope.
now his fingers are
inching toward it. treacherous
beast. i'm stronger. if he tries
to amputate ...
transcriber's note:
this etext was produced from galaxy science fiction may .
extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s.
copyright on this publication was renewed. minor spelling and
typographical errors have been corrected without note.
end of the project gutenberg ebook of competition, by james causey
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by greg weeks, stephen blundell and the online
distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
