 every day. her foot is as light as a sparrow's, and her voice as sweet as
 a minstrel's dulcimer; but give me nathless the lady anne,” cried
 philibert; “give me the peerless lady anne! as soon as ever i have won
 spurs, i will ride all christendom through, and proclaim her the queen of
 beauty. ho, lady anne! lady anne!” and so saying—but evidently
 wishing to disguise some emotion, or conceal some tale his friend could
 ill brook to hear—the reckless damoiseau galloped wildly forward.
 but swift as was his courser's pace, that of his companion's enormous
 charger was swifter. “boy,” said the elder, “thou hast ill tidings. i know
 it by thy glance. speak: shall he who hath bearded grim death in a
 thousand fields shame to face truth from a friend? speak, in the name of
 heaven and good saint botibol. romane de clos-vougeot will bear your
 tidings like a man!”
 “fatima is well,” answered philibert once again; “she hath had no measles:
 she lives and is still fair.”
 “fair, ay, peerless fair; but what more, philibert? not false? by saint
 botibol, say not false,” groaned the elder warrior.
 “a month syne,” philibert replied, “she married the baron de barbazure.”
 with that scream which is so terrible in a strong man in agony, the brave
 knight romane de clos-vougeot sank back at the words, and fell from his
 charger to the ground, a lifeless mass of steel.
 like many another fabric of feudal war and splendor, the once vast and
 magnificent castle of barbazure is now a moss-grown ruin. the traveller of
 the present day, who wanders by the banks of the silvery loire, and climbs
 the steep on which the magnificent edifice stood, can scarcely trace,
 among the shattered masses of ivy-covered masonry which lie among the
 lonely crags, even the skeleton of the proud and majestic palace
 stronghold of the barons of barbazure.
 in the days of our tale its turrets and pinnacles rose as stately, and
 seemed (to the pride of sinful man!) as strong as the eternal rocks on
 which they stood. the three mullets on a gules wavy reversed, surmounted
 by the sinople couchant or; the well-known cognizance of the house, blazed
 in gorgeous heraldry on a hundred banners, surmounting as many towers. the
 long lines of battlemented walls spread down the mountain to the loire,
 and were defended by thousands of steel-clad serving-men. four hundred
 knights and six times as many archers fought round the banner of barbazure
 at bouvines, malplaquet, and azincour. for his services at fontenoy
 against the english, the heroic charles martel appointed the fourteenth
 baron hereditary grand bootjack of the kingdom of france; and for wealth,
 and for splendor, and for skill and fame in war, raoul, the twenty-eighth
 baron, was in no-wise inferior to his noble ancestors.
 that the baron raoul levied toll upon the river and mail upon the shore;
 that he now and then ransomed a burgher, plundered a neighbor, or drew the
 fangs of a jew; that he burned an enemy's castle with the wife and
 children within;—these were points for which the country knew and
 respected the stout baron. when he returned from victory, he was sure to
 endow the church with a part of his spoil, so that when he went forth to
 battle he was always accompanied by her blessing. thus lived the baron
 raoul, the pride of the country in which he dwelt, an ornament to the
 court, the church, and his neighbors.
 but in the midst of all his power and splendor there was a domestic grief
 which deeply afflicted the princely barbazure. his lovely ladies died one
 after the other. no sooner was he married than he was a widower; in the
 course of eighteen years no less than nine bereavements had befallen the
 chieftain. so true it is, that if fortune is a parasite, grief is a
 republican, and visits the hall of the great and wealthy as it does the
 humbler tenements of the poor.
 “leave off deploring thy faithless, gad-about lover,” said the lady of
 chacabacque to her daughter, the lovely fatima, “and think how the noble
 barbazure loves thee! of all the damsels at the ball last night, he had
 eyes for thee and thy cousin only.”
 “i am sure my cousin hath no good looks to be proud of!” the admirable
 fatima exclaimed, bridling up. “not that i care for my lord of barbazure's
 looks. my heart, dearest mother, is with him who is far away!”
 “he danced with thee four galliards, nine quadrilles, and twenty-three
 corantoes, i think, child,” the mother said, eluding her daughter's
 remark.
 “twenty-five,” said lovely fatima, casting her beautiful eyes to the
 ground. “heigh-ho! but romane danced them very well!”
 “he had not the court air,” the mother suggested.
 “i don't wish to deny the beauty of the lord of burbazure's dancing,
 mamma,” fatima replied. “for a short, lusty man, 'tis wondrous how active
 he is; and in dignity the king's grace himself could not surpass him.”
 “you were the noblest couple in the room, love,” the lady cried.
 “that pea-green doublet, slashed with orange-tawny, those ostrich plumes,
 blue, red, and yellow, those party-colored hose and pink shoon, became the
 noble baron wondrous well,” fatima acknowledged. “it must be confessed
 that, though middle-aged, he hath all the agility of youth. but alas,
 madam! the noble baron hath had nine wives already.”
 “and your cousin would give her eyes to become the tenth,” the mother
 replied.
 “my cousin give her eyes!” fatima exclaimed. “it's not much, i'm sure, for
 she squints abominably.” and thus the ladies prattled, as they rode home
 at night after the great ball at the house of the baron of barbazure.
 the gentle reader, who has overheard their talk, will understand the
 doubts which pervaded the mind of the lovely fatima, and the well-nurtured
 english maiden will participate in the divided feelings which rent her
 bosom. 'tis true, that on his departure for the holy wars, romane and
 fatima were plighted to each other; but the folly of long engagements is
 proverbial; and though for many months the faithful and affectionate girl
 had looked in vain for news from him, her admirable parents had long
 spoken with repugnance of a match which must bring inevitable poverty to
 both parties. they had suffered, 'tis true, the engagement to subside,
 hostile as they ever were to it; but when on the death of the ninth lady
 of barbazure, the noble baron remarked fatima at the funeral, and rode
 home with her after the ceremony, her prudent parents saw how much wiser,
 better, happier for their child it would be to have for life a partner
 like the baron, than to wait the doubtful return of the penniless wanderer
 to whom she was plighted.
 ah! how beautiful and pure a being! how regardless of self! how true to
 duty! how obedient to parental command, is that earthly angel, a well-bred
 woman of genteel family! instead of indulging in splenetic refusals or
 vain regrets for her absent lover, the exemplary fatima at once signified
 to her excellent parents her willingness to obey their orders; though she
 had sorrows (and she declared them to be tremendous), the admirable being
 disguised them so well, that none knew they oppressed her. she said she
 would try to forget former ties, and (so strong in her mind was duty above
 every other feeling!—so strong may it be in every british maiden!)
 the lovely girl kept her promise. “my former engagements,” she said,
 packing up romane's letters and presents, (which, as the good knight was
 mortal poor, were in sooth of no great price)—“my former engagements
 i look upon as childish follies;—my affections are fixed where my
 dear parents graft them—on the noble, the princely, the polite
 barbazure. 'tis true he is not comely in feature, but the chaste and
 well-bred female knows how to despise the fleeting charms of form. 'tis
 true he is old; but can woman be better employed than in tending her aged
 and sickly companion? that he has been married is likewise certain—but
 ah, my mother! who knows not that he must be a good and tender husband,
 who, nine times wedded, owns that, he cannot be happy without another
 partner?”
 it was with these admirable sentiments the lovely fatima proposed
 obedience to her parents' will, and consented to receive the magnificent
 marriage-gift presented to her by her gallant bridegroom.
 the old countess of chacabacque had made a score of vain attempts to see
 her hapless daughter. ever, when she came, the porters grinned at her
 savagely through the grating of the portcullis of the vast embattled gate
 of the castle of barbazure, and rudely bade her begone. “the lady of
 barbazure sees nobody but her confessor, and keeps her chamber,” was the
 invariable reply of the dogged functionaries to the entreaties of the
 agonized mother. and at length, so furious was he at her perpetual calls
 at his gate, that the angry lord of barbazure himself, who chanced to be
 at the postern, armed a cross-bow, and let fly an arblast at the crupper
 of the lady's palfrey, whereon she fled finally, screaming, and in terror.
 “i will aim at the rider next time!” howled the ferocious baron, “and not
 at the horse!” and those who knew his savage nature and his unrivalled
 skill as a bowman, knew that he would neither break his knightly promise
 nor miss his aim.
 since the fatal day when the grand duke of burgundy gave his famous
 passage of arms at nantes, and all the nobles of france were present at
 the joustings, it was remarked that the barbazure's heart was changed
 towards his gentle and virtuous lady.
 for the three first days of that famous festival, the redoubted baron of
 barbazure had kept the field against all the knights who entered. his
 lance bore everything down before it. the most famous champions of europe,
 assembled at these joustings, had dropped, one by one, before this
 tremendous warrior. the prize of the tourney was destined to be his, and
 he was to be proclaimed bravest of the brave, as his lady was the fairest
 of the fair.
 on the third day, however, as the sun was declining over the vosges, and
 the shadows were lengthening over the plain where the warrior had obtained
 such triumphs;—after having overcome two hundred and thirteen
 knights of different nations, including the fiery dunois, the intrepid
 walter manny, the spotless bayard, and the undaunted dugueselin, as the
 conqueror sat still erect on his charger, and the multitudes doubted
 whether ever another champion could be found to face him, three blasts of
 a trumpet were heard, faint at first, but at every moment ringing more
 clearly, until a knight in pink armor rode into the lists with his visor
 down, and riding a tremendous dun charger, which he managed to the
 admiration of all present.
 the heralds asked him his name and quality.
 “call me,” said he, in a hollow voice, “the jilted knight.” what was it
 made the lady of barbazure tremble at his accents.
 the knight refused to tell his name and qualities; but the companion who
 rode with him, the young and noble philibert de coquelicot, who was known
 and respected universally through the neighborhood, gave a warranty for
 the birth and noble degree of the jilted knight—and raoul de
 barbazure, yelling hoarsely for a two-hundred-and-fourteenth lance, shook
 the huge weapon in the air as though it were a reed, and prepared to
 encounter the intruder.
 according to the wont of chivalry, and to keep the point of the spear from
 harm, the top of the unknown knight's lance was shielded with a bung,
 which the warrior removed; and galloping up to barbazure's pavilion, over
 which his shield hung, touched that noble cognizance with the sharpened
 steel. a thrill of excitement ran through the assembly at this daring
 challenge to a combat a l'outrance. “hast thou confessed, sir knight?”
 roared the barbazure; “take thy ground, and look to thyself; for by heaven
 thy last hour is come!” “poor youth, poor youth!” sighed the spectators;
 “he has called down his own fate.” the next minute the signal was given,
 and as the simoom across the desert, the cataract down the rock, the shell
 from the howitzer, each warrior rushed from his goal.
 “thou wilt not slay so good a champion?” said the grand duke, as at the
 end of that terrific combat the knight in rose armor stood over his
 prostrate foe, whose helmet had rolled off when he was at length unhorsed,
 and whose bloodshot eyes glared unutterable hate and ferocity on his
 conqueror.
 “take thy life,” said he who had styled himself the jilted knight; “thou
 hast taken all that was dear to me.” and the sun setting, and no other
 warrior appearing to do battle against him, he was proclaimed the
 conqueror, and rode up to the duchess's balcony to receive the gold chain
 which was the reward of the victor. he raised his visor as the smiling
 princess guerdoned him—raised it, and gave one sad look towards the
 lady fatima at her side!
 “romane de clos-vougeot!” shrieked she, and fainted. the baron of
 barbazure heard the name as he writhed on the ground with his wound, and
 by his slighted honor, by his broken ribs, by his roused fury, he swore
 revenge; and the lady fatima, who had come to the tourney as a queen,
 returned to her castle as a prisoner.
 (as it is impossible to give the whole of this remarkable novel, let it
 suffice to say briefly here, that in about a volume and a half, in which
 the descriptions of scenery, the account of the agonies of the baroness,
 kept on bread and water in her dungeon, and the general tone of morality,
 are all excellently worked out, the baron de barbazure resolves upon
 putting his wife to death by the hands of the public executioner.)
 two minutes before the clock struck noon, the savage baron was on the
 platform to inspect the preparation for the frightful ceremony of mid-day.
 the block was laid forth—the hideous minister of vengeance, masked
 and in black, with the flaming glaive in his hand, was ready. the baron
 tried the edge of the blade with his finger, and asked the dreadful
 swordsman if his hand was sure? a nod was the reply of the man of blood.
 the weeping garrison and domestics shuddered and shrank from him. there
 was not one there but loved and pitied the gentle lady.
 pale, pale as a stone, she was brought from her dungeon. to all her lord's
 savage interrogatories, her reply had been, “i am innocent.” to his
 threats of death, her answer was, “you are my lord; my life is in your
 hands, to take or to give.” how few are the wives, in our day, who show
 such angelic meekness! it touched all hearts around her, save that of the
 implacable barbazure! even the lady blanche, (fatima's cousin), whom he
 had promised to marry upon his faithless wife's demise, besought for her
 kinswoman's life, and a divorce; but barbazure had vowed her death.
 “is there no pity, sir?” asked the chaplain who had attended her.
 “no pity?” echoed the weeping serving-maid.
 “did i not aye say i would die for my lord?” said the gentle lady, and
 placed herself at the block.
 sir raoul de barbazure seized up the long ringlets of her raven hair.
 “now!” shouted he to the executioner, with a stamp of his foot—“now
 strike!”
 the man (who knew his trade) advanced at once, and poised himself to
 deliver his blow: and making his flashing sword sing in the air, with one
 irresistible, rapid stroke, it sheared clean off the head of the furious,
 the bloodthirsty, the implacable baron de barbazure!
 thus he fell a victim to his own jealousy: and the agitation of the lady
 fatima may be imagined, when the executioner, flinging off his mask, knelt
 gracefully at her feet, and revealed to her the well-known features of
 romane de clos-vougeot.
 “corbleu! what a lovely creature that was in the fitzbattleaxe box
 to-night,” said one of a group of young dandies who were leaning over the
 velvet-cushioned balconies of the “coventry club,” smoking their
 full-flavored cubas (from hudson's) after the opera.
 everybody stared at such an exclamation of enthusiasm from the lips of the
 young earl of bagnigge, who was never heard to admire anything except a
 coulis de dindonneau a la st. menehould, or a supreme de cochon en
 torticolis a la piffarde; such as champollion, the chef of the
 “traveller's,” only knows how to dress; or the bouquet of a flask of
 medoc, of carbonell's best quality; or a goutte of marasquin, from the
 cellars of briggs and hobson.
 alured de pentonville, eighteenth earl of bagnigge, viscount paon of
 islington, baron pancras, kingscross, and a baronet, was, like too many of
 our young men of ton, utterly blase, although only in his twenty-fourth
 year. blest, luckily, with a mother of excellent principles (who had
 imbued his young mind with that morality which is so superior to all the
 vain pomps of the world!) it had not been always the young earl's lot to
 wear the coronet for which he now in sooth cared so little. his father, a
 captain of britain's navy, struck down by the side of the gallant
 collingwood in the bay of fundy, left little but his sword and spotless
 name to his young, lovely, and inconsolable widow, who passed the first
 years of her mourning in educating her child in an elegant though small
 cottage in one of the romantic marine villages of beautiful devonshire.
 her child! what a gush of consolation filled the widow's heart as she
 pressed him to it! how faithfully did she instil into his young bosom
 those principles which had been the pole-star of the existence of his
 gallant father!
 in this secluded retreat, rank and wealth almost boundless found the widow
 and her boy. the seventeenth earl—gallant and ardent, and in the
 prime of youth—went forth one day from the eternal city to a
 steeple-chase in the campagna. a mutilated corpse was brought back to his
 hotel in the piazza di spagna. death, alas! is no respecter of the
 nobility. that shattered form was all that remained of the fiery, the
 haughty, the wild, but the generous altamont de pentonville! such, such is
 fate!
 the admirable emily de pentonville trembled with all a mother's solicitude
 at the distinctions and honors which thus suddenly descended on her boy.
 she engaged an excellent clergyman of the church of england to superintend
 his studies; to accompany him on foreign travel when the proper season
 arrived; to ward from him those dangers which dissipation always throws in
 the way of the noble, the idle, and the wealthy. but the reverend cyril
 delaval died of the measles at naples, and henceforth the young earl of
 bagnigge was without a guardian.
 what was the consequence? that, at three-and-twenty, he was a cynic and an
 epicure. he had drained the cup of pleasure till it had palled in his
 unnerved hand. he had looked at the pyramids without awe, at the alps
 without reverence. he was unmoved by the sandy solitudes of the desert as
 by the placid depths of mediterranean's sea of blue. bitter, bitter tears
 did emily de pentonville weep, when, on alured's return from the
 continent, she beheld the awful change that dissipation had wrought in her
 beautiful, her blue-eyed, her perverted, her still beloved boy!
 “corpo di bacco,” he said, pitching the end of his cigar on to the red
 nose of the countess of delawaddymore's coachman—who, having
 deposited her fat ladyship at no.  piccadilly, was driving the carriage
 to the stables, before commencing his evening at the “fortune of war”
 public-house—“what a lovely creature that was! what eyes! what hair!
 who knows her? do you, mon cher prince?”
 “e bellissima, certamente,” said the duca de montepulciano, and stroked
 down his jetty moustache.
 “ein gar schones madchen,” said the hereditary grand duke of
 eulenschreckenstein, and turned up his carroty one.
 “elle n'est pas mal, ma foi!” said the prince de borodino, with a scowl on
 his darkling brows. “mon dieu, que ces cigarres sont mauvais!” he added as
 he too cast away his cuba.
 “try one of my pickwicks,” said franklin fox, with a sneer, offering his
 gold etui to the young frenchman; “they are some of pontet's best, prince.
 what, do you bear malice? come, let us be friends,” said the gay and
 careless young patrician; but a scowl on the part of the frenchman was the
 only reply.
 “want to know who she is? borodino knows who she is, bagnigge,” the wag
 went on.
 everybody crowded around monsieur de borodino thus apostrophized. the
 marquis of alicompayne, young de boots of the lifeguards, tom protocol of
 the foreign office; the gay young peers, farintosh, poldoody, and the
 rest; and bagnigge, for a wonder, not less eager than any one present.
 “no, he will tell you nothing about her. don't you see he has gone off in
 a fury!” franklin fox continued. “he has his reasons, ce cher prince: he
 will tell you nothing; but i will. you know that i am au mieux with the
 dear old duchess.”
 “they say frank and she are engaged after the duke's death,” cried
 poldoody.
 “i always thought fwank was the duke's illicit gweatgwandson,” drawled out
 de boots.
 “i heard that he doctored her blenheim, and used to bring her wigs from
 paris,” cried that malicious tom protocol, whose mots are known in every
 diplomatic salon from petersburg to palermo.
 “burn her wigs and hang her poodle!” said bagnigge. “tell me about this
 girl, franklin fox.”
 “in the first place, she has five hundred thousand acres, in a ring fence
 in norfolk; a county in scotland, a castle in wales, a villa at richmond,
 a corner house in belgrave square, and eighty thousand a year in the
 three-per-cents.”
 “apres?” said bagnigge, still yawning.
 “secondly, borodino lui fait la cour. they are cousins, her mother was an
 armagnac of the emigration; the old marshal, his father, married another
 sister. i believe he was footman in the family, before napoleon princified
 him.”
 “no, no, he was second coachman,” tom protocol good-naturedly interposed—“a
 cavalry officer, frank, not an infantry man.”
 “'faith you should have seen his fury (the young one's, i mean) when he
 found me in the duchess's room this evening, tete-a-tete with the heiress,
 who deigned to receive a bouquet from this hand.”
 “it cost me three guineas,” poor frank said, with a shrug and a sigh, “and
 that covent garden scoundrel gives no credit: but she took the flowers;—eh,
 bagnigge?”
 “and flung them to alboni,” the peer replied, with a haughty sneer. and
 poor little franklin fox was compelled to own that she had.
 the maitre d'hotel here announced that supper was served. it was remarked
 that even the coulis de dindonneau made no impression on bagnigge that
 night.
 the sensation produced by the debut of amethyst pimlico at the court of
 the sovereign, and in the salons of the beau-monde, was such as has seldom
 been created by the appearance of any other beauty. the men were raving
 with love, and the women with jealousy. her eyes, her beauty, her wit, her
 grace, her ton, caused a perfect fureur of admiration or envy.
 introduced by the duchess of fitzbattleaxe, along with her grace's
 daughters, the ladies gwendoline and gwinever portcullis, the heiress's
 regal beauty quite flung her cousins' simple charms into the shade, and
 blazed with a splendor which caused all “minor lights” to twinkle faintly.
 before a day the beau-monde, before a week even the vulgarians of the rest
 of the town, rang with the fame of her charms; and while the dandies and
 the beauties were raving about her, or tearing her to pieces in may fair,
 even mrs. dobbs (who had been to the pit of the “hoperer” in a green
 turban and a crumpled yellow satin) talked about the great hairess to her
 d. in bloomsbury square.
 crowds went to squab and lynch's, in long acre, to examine the carriages
 building for her, so faultless, so splendid, so quiet, so odiously
 unostentatious and provokingly simple! besides the ancestral services of
 argenterie and vaisselle plate, contained in a hundred and seventy-six
 plate-chests at messrs. childs', rumble and briggs prepared a gold
 service, and garraway, of the haymarket, a service of the benvenuto
 cellini pattern, which were the admiration of all london. before a month
 it is a fact that the wretched haberdashers in the city exhibited the blue
 stocks, called “heiress-killers, very chaste, two-and-six:” long before
 that, the monde had rushed to madame crinoline's, or sent couriers to
 madame marabou, at paris, so as to have copies of her dresses; but, as the
 mantuan bard observes, “non cuivis contigit,”—every foot cannot
 accommodate itself to the chaussure of cinderella.
 with all this splendor, this worship, this beauty; with these cheers
 following her, and these crowds at her feet, was amethyst happy? ah, no!
 it is not under the necklace the most brilliant that briggs and rumble can
 supply, it is not in lynch's best cushioned chariot that the heart is most
 at ease. “que je me ruinerai,” says fronsac in a letter to bossuet, “si je
 savais ou acheter le bonheur!”
 with all her riches, with all her splendor, amethyst was wretched—wretched,
 because lonely; wretched, because her loving heart had nothing to cling
 to. her splendid mansion was a convent; no male person even entered it,
 except franklin fox, (who counted for nothing,) and the duchess's family,
 her kinsman old lord humpington, his friend old sir john fogey, and her
 cousin, the odious, odious borodino.
 the prince de borodino declared openly that amethyst was engaged to him.
 crible de dettes, it is no wonder that he should choose such an
 opportunity to refaire sa fortune. he gave out that he would kill any man
 who should cast an eye on the heiress, and the monster kept his word.
 major grigg, of the lifeguards, had already fallen by his hand at ostend.
 the o'toole, who had met her on the rhine, had received a ball in his
 shoulder at coblentz, and did not care to resume so dangerous a courtship.
 borodino could snuff a bougie at a hundred and fifty yards. he could beat
 bertrand or alexander dumas himself with the small-sword: he was the
 dragon that watched this pomme d'or, and very few persons were now
 inclined to face a champion si redoutable.
 over a salmi d'escargot at the “coventry,” the dandies whom we introduced
 in our last volume were assembled, there talking of the heiress; and her
 story was told by franklin fox to lord bagnigge, who, for a wonder, was
 interested in the tale. borodino's pretensions were discussed, and the way
 in which the fair amethyst was confined. fitzbattleaxe house, in belgrave
 square, is—as everybody knows—the next mansion to that
 occupied by amethyst. a communication was made between the two houses. she
 never went out except accompanied by the duchess's guard, which it was
 impossible to overcome.
 “impossible! nothing's impossible,” said lord bagnigge.
 “i bet you what you like you don't get in,” said the young marquis of
 martingale.
 “i bet you a thousand ponies i stop a week in the heiress's house before
 the season's over,” lord bagnigge replied with a yawn; and the bet was
 registered with shouts of applause.
 but it seemed as if the fates had determined against lord bagnigge, for
 the very next day, riding in the park, his horse fell with him; he was
 carried home to his house with a fractured limb and a dislocated shoulder;
 and the doctor's bulletins pronounced him to be in the most dangerous
 state.
 martingale was a married man, and there was no danger of his riding by the
 fitzbattleaxe carriage. a fortnight after the above events, his lordship
 was prancing by her grace's great family coach, and chattering with lady
 gwinever about the strange wager.
 “do you know what a pony is, lady gwinever?” he asked. her ladyship said
 yes: she had a cream-colored one at castle barbican; and stared when lord
 martingale announced that he should soon have a thousand ponies, worth
 five-and-twenty pounds each, which were all now kept at coutts's. then he
 explained the circumstances of the bet with bagnigge. parliament was to
 adjourn in ten days; the season would be over! bagnigge was lying ill chez
 lui; and the five-and-twenty thousand were irrecoverably his. and he vowed
 he would buy lord binnacle's yacht—crew, captain, guns and all.
 on returning home that night from lady polkimore's, martingale found among
 the many billets upon the gold plateau in his antichambre, the following
 brief one, which made him start—
 “dear martingale.—don't be too sure of binnacle's yacht. there are
 still ten days before the season is over; and my ponies may lie at
 coutts's for some time to come.
 “yours,
 “p. s.—i write with my left hand; for my right is still splintered
 up from that confounded fall.”
 the tall footman, number four, who had come in the place of john,
 cashiered, (for want of proper mollets, and because his hair did not take
 powder well,) had given great satisfaction to the under-butler, who
 reported well of him to his chief, who had mentioned his name with praise
 to the house-steward. he was so good-looking and well-spoken a young man,
 that the ladies in the housekeeper's room deigned to notice him more than
 once; nor was his popularity diminished on account of a quarrel in which
 he engaged with monsieur anatole, the enormous walloon chasseur, who was
 one day found embracing miss flouncy, who waited on amethyst's own maid.
 the very instant miss flouncy saw mr. jeames entering the servants' hall,
 where monsieur anatole was engaged in “aggravating” her, miss flouncy
 screamed: at the next moment the belgian giant lay sprawling upon the
 carpet; and jeames, standing over him, assumed so terrible a look, that
 the chasseur declined any further combat. the victory was made known to
 the house-steward himself, who, being a little partial to miss flouncy
 herself, complimented jeames on his valor, and poured out a glass of
 madeira in his own room.
 who was jeames? he had come recommended by the bagnigge people. he had
 lived, he said, in that family two years. “but where there was no ladies,”
 he said, “a gentleman's hand was spiled for service;” and jeames's was a
 very delicate hand; miss flouncy admired it very much, and of course he
 did not defile it by menial service: he had in a young man who called him
 sir, and did all the coarse work; and jeames read the morning paper to the
 ladies; not spellingly and with hesitation, as many gentlemen do, but
 easily and elegantly, speaking off the longest words without a moment's
 difficulty. he could speak french, too, miss flouncy found, who was
 studying it under mademoiselle grande fille-de-chambre de confiance; for
 when she said to him, “polly voo fransy, munseer jeames?” he replied
 readily, “we, mademaselle, j'ay passay boco de tong a parry. commong voo
 potty voo?” how miss flouncy admired him as he stood before her, the day
 after he had saved miss amethyst when the horses had run away with her in
 the park!
 poor flouncy, poor flouncy! jeames had been but a week in amethyst's
 service, and already the gentle heart of the washing-girl was
 irrecoverably gone! poor flouncy! poor flouncy! he thought not of thee.
 it happened thus. miss amethyst being engaged to drive with her cousin the
 prince in his phaeton, her own carriage was sent into the park simply with
 her companion, who had charge of her little fido, the dearest little
 spaniel in the world. jeames and frederick were behind the carriage with
 their long sticks and neat dark liveries; the horses were worth a thousand
 guineas each, the coachman a late lieutenant-colonel of cavalry: the whole
 ring could not boast a more elegant turn-out.
 the prince drove his curricle, and had charge of his belle cousine. it may
 have been the red fezzes in the carriage of the turkish ambassador which
 frightened the prince's grays, or mrs. champignon's new yellow liveries,
 which were flaunting in the park, or hideous lady gorgon's preternatural
 ugliness, who passed in a low pony-carriage at the time, or the prince's
 own want of skill, finally; but certain it is that the horses took fright,
 dashed wildly along the mile, scattered equipages, pietons, dandies' cabs,
 and snobs' pheaytons. amethyst was screaming; and the prince, deadly pale,
 had lost all presence of mind, as the curricle came rushing by the spot
 where miss amethyst's carriage stood.
 “i'm blest,” frederick exclaimed to his companion, “if it ain't the prince
 a-drivin our missis! they'll be in the serpingtine, or dashed to pieces,
 if they don't mind.” and the runaway steeds at this instant came upon them
 as a whirlwind.
 but if those steeds ran at a whirlwind pace, jeames was swifter. to jump
 from behind, to bound after the rocking, reeling curricle, to jump into
 it, aided by the long stick which he carried and used as a leaping-pole,
 and to seize the reins out of the hands of the miserable borodino, who
 shrieked piteously as the dauntless valet leapt on his toes and into his
 seat, was the work of an instant. in a few minutes the mad, swaying rush
 of the horses was reduced to a swift but steady gallop; presently into a
 canter, then a trot; until finally they pulled up smoking and trembling,
 but quite quiet, by the side of amethyst's carriage, which came up at a
 rapid pace.
 “give me the reins, malappris! tu m'ecrases le corps, manant!” yelled the
 frantic nobleman, writhing underneath the intrepid charioteer.
 “tant pis pour toi, nigaud,” was the reply. the lovely amethyst of course
 had fainted; but she recovered as she was placed in her carriage, and
 rewarded her preserver with a celestial smile.
 the rage, the fury, the maledictions of borodino, as he saw the latter—a
 liveried menial—stoop gracefully forward and kiss amethyst's hand,
 may be imagined rather than described. but jeames heeded not his curses.
 having placed his adored mistress in the carriage, he calmly resumed his
 station behind. passion or danger seemed to have no impression upon that
 pale marble face.
 borodino went home furious; nor was his rage diminished, when, on coming
 to dinner that day, a recherche banquet served in the frangipane best
 style, and requesting a supply of a puree a la bisque aux ecrevisses, the
 clumsy attendant who served him let fall the assiette of vermeille cisele,
 with its scalding contents, over the prince's chin, his mechlin jabot, and
 the grand cordon of the legion of honor which he wore.
 “infame,” howled borodino, “tu l'as fait expres!”
 “oui, je l'ai fait expres,” said the man, with the most perfect parisian
 accent. it was jeames.
 such insolence of course could not be passed unnoticed even after the
 morning's service, and he was chassed on the spot. he had been but a week
 in the house.
 the next month the newspapers contained a paragraph which may possibly
 elucidate the above mystery, and to the following effect:—
 “singular wager.—one night, at the end of last season, the young and
 eccentric earl of b-gn-gge laid a wager of twenty-five thousand pounds
 with a broken sporting patrician, the dashing marquis of m-rt-ng-le, that
 he would pass a week under the roof of a celebrated and lovely young
 heiress, who lives not a hundred miles from b-lgr-ve squ-re. the bet
 having been made, the earl pretended an illness, and having taken lessons
 from one of his lordship's own footmen (mr. james plush, whose name he
 also borrowed) in 'the mysteries of the profession,' actually succeeded in
 making an entry into miss p-ml-co's mansion, where he stopped one week
 exactly; having time to win his bet, and to save the life of the lady,
 whom we hear he is about to lead to the altar. he disarmed the prince of
 borodino in a duel fought on calais sands—and, it is said, appeared
 at the c—— club wearing his plush costume under a cloak, and
 displaying it as a proof that he had won his wager.”
 such, indeed, were the circumstances. the young couple have not more than
 nine hundred thousand a year, but they live cheerfully, and manage to do
 good; and emily de pentonville, who adores her daughter-in-law and her
 little grandchildren, is blest in seeing her darling son enfin un homme
 range.
 i'm not at libbaty to divulj the reel names of the  eroes of the
 igstrawny tail which i am abowt to relait to those unlightnd paytrons of
 letarature and true connyshures of merrit—the great brittish public—but
 i pledj my varacity that this singlar story of rewmantic love, absobbing
 pashn, and likewise of genteel life, is, in the main fax, trew. the
 suckmstanzas i elude to, ocurd in the rain of our presnt gratious madjisty
 and her beluvd and roil concert prince halbert.
 welthen. some time in the seazen of — (mor i dar not rewheel)
 there arrived in this metropulus, per seknd class of the london and dover
 railway, an ellygant young foring gentleman, whom i shall danomminate
 munseer jools de chacabac.
 having read through “the vicker of wackfield” in the same oridganal
 english tung in which this very harticle i write is wrote too, and halways
 been remarkyble, both at collidge and in the estamminy, for his aytred and
 orror of perfidgus halbion, munseer jools was considered by the
 prapriretors of the newspaper in which he wrote, at parris, the very man
 to come to this country, igsamin its manners and customs, cast an i upon
 the politticle and finalshle stat of the hempire, and igspose the
 mackynations of the infyamous palmerston, and the ebomminable sir pill—both
 enemies of france; as is every other britten of that great, gloarus,
 libberal, and peasable country. in one word, jools de chacabac was a
 penny-a-liner.
 “i will go see with my own i's,” he said, “that infimus hiland of which
 the innabitants are shopkeepers, gorged with roast beef and treason. i
 will go and see the murderers of the hirish, the pisoners of the chynese,
 the villians who put the hemperor to death in saintyleany, the artful
 dodges who wish to smother europe with their cotton, and can't sleep or
 rest heasy for henvy and hatred of the great inwinsable french nation. i
 will igsammin, face to face, these hotty insularies; i will pennytrate
 into the secrets of their jessywhittickle cabinet, and beard palmerston in
 his denn.” when he jumpt on shor at foaxton (after having been
 tremenguously sick in the fourcabbing), he exclaimed, “enfin je te tiens,
 ile maudite! je te crache a la figure, vieille angleterre! je te foule a
 mes pieds an nom du monde outrage,” and so proseaded to inwade the
 metropulus.
 as he wisht to micks with the very chicest sosiaty, and git the best of
 infamation about this country, munseer jools of coarse went and lodgd in
 lester square—lester squarr, as he calls it—which, as he was
 infommed in the printed suckular presented to him by a very greasy but
 polite comishner at the custumus stares, was in the scenter of the town,
 contiggus to the ouses of parlyment, the prinsple theayters, the parx, st.
 jams pallice, and the corts of lor. “i can surwhey them all at one cut of
 the eye,” jools thought; “the sovring, the infamus ministers plotting the
 destruction of my immortial country; the business and pleasure of these
 pusprond londoners and aristoxy; i can look round and see all.” so he took
 a three-pair back in a french hotel, the “hotel de l'ail,” kep by monsieur
 gigotot, cranbourne street, lester squarr, london.
 in this otell there's a billiard-room on the first floor, and a
 tabble-doat at eighteenpence peredd at  o'clock; and the landlord, who
 kem into jools's room smoaking a segar, told the young gent that the house
 was friquented by all the brittish nobillaty, who reglar took their
 dinners there. “they can't ebide their own quiseen,” he said. “you'll see
 what a dinner we'll serve you to-day.” jools wrote off to his paper—
 “the members of the haughty and luxurious english aristocracy, like all
 the rest of the world, are obliged to fly to france for the indulgence of
 their luxuries. the nobles of england, quitting their homes, their wives,
 miladies and mistriss, so fair but so cold, dine universally at the
 tavern. that from which i write is frequented by peel and palmerston. i
 fremis to think that i may meet them at the board to-day.”
 singlar to say, peel and palmerston didn't dine at the “hotel de l'ail” on
 that evening. “it's quite igstronnary they don't come,” said munseer de
 l'ail.
 “peraps they're ingaged at some boxing-match or some combaw de cock,”
 munseer jools sejested; and the landlord egreed that was very likely.
 instedd of english there was, however, plenty of foring sociaty, of every
 nation under the sun. most of the noblemen were great hamatures of hale
 and porter. the tablecloth was marked over with brown suckles, made by the
 pewter-pots on that and the previous days.
 “it is the usage here,” wrote jools to his newspaper, “among the anglais
 of the fashonne to absorb immense quantities of ale and porter during
 their meals. these stupefying, but cheap, and not unpalatable liquors are
 served in shining pewter vessels. a mug of foaming hafanaf (so a certain
 sort of beer is called) was placed by the side of most of the convives. i
 was disappointed of seeing sir peel: he was engaged to a combat of cocks
 which occurs at windsor.”
 not one word of english was spoke during this dinner, excep when the
 gentlemen said “garsong de l'afanaf,” but jool was very much pleased to
 meet the eleet of the foringers in town, and ask their opinion about the
 reel state of thinx. was it likely that the bishops were to be turned out
 of the chambre des communes? was it true that lor palmerston had boxed
 with lor broghamm in the house of lords, until they were sepparayted by
 the lor maire? who was the lor maire? wasn't he premier minister? and
 wasn't the archeveque de cantorbery a quaker? he got answers to these
 questions from the various gents round about during the dinner—which,
 he remarked, was very much like a french dinner, only dirtier. and he
 wrote off all the infamation he got to his newspaper.
 “the lord maire, lord lansdowne, is premier ministre. his grace has his
 dwelling in the city. the archbishop of cantabery is not turned quaker, as
 some people stated. quakers may not marry, nor sit in the chamber of
 peers. the minor bishops have seats in the house of commons, where they
 are attacked by the bitter pleasantries of lord brougham. a boxer is in
 the house; he taught palmerston the science of the pugilate, who conferred
 upon him the seat,” &c. &c.
 his writing hover, jools came down and ad a gaym at pool with two poles, a
 bulgian, and  of his own countrymen. this being done amidst more hafanaf,
 without which nothink is done in england, and as there was no french play
 that night, he & the two french gents walked round and round lester
 squarr smoking segaws in the faces of other french gents who were smoaking
 . and they talked about the granjer of france and the perfidgusness of
 england, and looked at the aluminated pictur of madame wharton as
 haryadney till bedtime. but befor he slep, he finished his letter you may
 be sure, and called it his “fust imprestiuns of anglyterre.”
 “mind and wake me early,” he said to boots, the ony brittish subject in
 the “hotel de l'ail,” and who therefore didn't understand him. “i wish to
 be at smithfield at  hours to see the men sell their wives.” and the
 young roag fell asleep, thinking what sort of a one he'd buy.
 this was the way jools passed his days, and got infamation about hengland
 and the henglish—walking round and round lester squarr all day, and
 every day with the same company, occasionally dewussified by an oprer
 chorus-singer or a jew or two, and every afternoon in the quadrant
 admiring the genteal sosiaty there. munseer jools was not over well
 funnisht with pocket-money, and so his pleasure was of the gratis sort
 cheafly.
 well, one day as he and a friend was taking their turn among the aristoxy
 under the quadrant—they were struck all of a heap by seeing—but,
 stop! who was jools's friend? here you have pictures of both—but the
 istory of jools's friend must be kep for another innings.
 not fur from that knowble and cheerflie squear which munseer jools de
 chacabac had selacted for his eboad in london—not fur, i say, from
 lester squarr, is a rainje of bildings called pipping's buildings, leading
 to blue lion court, leading to st. martin's lane. you know pipping's
 buildings by its greatest ornament, an am and beefouce (where jools has
 often stood admiring the degstaraty of the carver a-cuttin the varous
 jints), and by the little fishmungur's, where you remark the mouldy
 lobsters, the fly-blown picklesammon, the playbills, and the gingybear
 bottles in the window—above all, by the “constantinople” divan, kep
 by the misses mordeky, and well known to every lover of “a prime sigaw and
 an exlent cup of reel moky coffy for d.”
 the constantinople divann is greatly used by the foring gents of lester
 squar. i never ad the good fortn to pass down pipping's buildings without
 seeing a haf a duzen of 'em on the threshole of the extablishment, giving
 the street an oppertunity of testing the odar of the misses mordeky's
 prime avannas. two or three mor may be visable inside, settn on the
 counter or the chestis, indulging in their fav'rit whead, the rich and
 spisy pickwhick, the ripe manilly, or the flagrant and arheumatic qby.
 “these divanns are, as is very well known, the knightly resott of the
 young henglish nobillaty. it is ear a young pier, after an arjus day at
 the house of commons, solazes himself with a glas of gin-and-water (the
 national beveridge), with cheerful conversation on the ewents of the day,
 or with an armless gaym of baggytell in the back-parlor.”
 so wrote at least our friend jools to his newspaper, the horriflam; and of
 this back-parlor and baggytell-bord, of this counter, of this
 “constantinople” divan, he became almost as reglar a frequenter as the
 plaster of parish turk who sits smoking a hookey between the two blue
 coffee-cups in the winder.
 i have oftin, smokin my own shroot in silents in a corner of the diwann,
 listened to jools and his friends inwaying aginst hingland, and boastin of
 their own immortial country. how they did go on about wellintun, and what
 an arty contamp they ad for him!—how they used to prove that france
 was the light, the scenter-pint, the igsample and hadmiration of the whole
 world! and though i scarcely take a french paper now-a-days (i lived in
 early days as groom in a french famly three years, and therefore knows the
 languidg), though, i say, you can't take up jools's paper, the orriflam,
 without readin that a minister has committed bribery and perjury, or that
 a littery man has committed perjury and murder, or that a duke has stabbed
 his wife in fifty places, or some story equally horrible; yet for all that
 it's admiral to see how the french gents will swagger—how they will
 be the scenters of civilization—how they will be the igsamples of
 europ, and nothink shall prevent 'em—knowing they will have it, i
 say i listen, smokin my pip in silence. but to our tail.
 reglar every evening there came to the “constantanople” a young gent
 etired in the igth of fashn; and indead presenting by the cleanlyness of
 his appearants and linning (which was generally a pink or blew shurt, with
 a cricketer or a dansuse pattern) rather a contrast to the dinjy and
 whistkcard sosaity of the diwann. as for wiskars, this young mann had none
 beyond a little yallow tought to his chin, which you woodn notas, only he
 was always pulling at it. his statue was diminnative, but his coschume
 supubb, for he had the tippiest jane boots, the ivoryheadest canes, the
 most gawjus scarlick jonville ties, and the most scotch-plaidest trowseys,
 of any customer of that establishment. he was univusaly called milord.
 “que est ce jeune seigneur? who is this young hurl who comes knightly to
 the 'constantanople,' who is so proddigl of his gold (for indeed the young
 gent would frequinly propoase gininwater to the company), and who drinks
 so much gin?” asked munseer chacabac of a friend from the “hotel de
 l'ail.”
 “his name is lord yardham,” answered that friend. “he never comes here but
 at night—and why?”
 “y?” igsclaimed jools, istonisht.
 “why? because he is engaygd all day—and do you know where he is
 engaygd all day?”
 “where?” asked jools.
 “at the foring office—now do you begin to understand?”—jools
 trembled.
 he speaks of his uncle, the head of that office.—“who is the head of
 that offis?—palmerston.”
 “the nephew of palmerston!” said jools, almost in a fit.
 “lor yardham pretends not to speak french,” the other went on. “he
 pretends he can only say wee and commong porty voo. shallow humbug!—i
 have marked him during our conversations.—when we have spoken of the
 glory of france among the nations, i have seen his eye kindle, and his
 perfidious lip curl with rage. when they have discussed before him, the
 imprudents! the affairs of europe, and raggybritchovich has shown us the
 next circassian campaign, or sapousne has laid hare the plan of the
 calabrian patriots for the next insurrection, i have marked this stranger—this
 lor yardham. he smokes, 'tis to conceal his countenance; he drinks gin,
 'tis to hide his face in the goblet. and be sure, he carries every word of
 our conversation to the perfidious palmerston, his uncle.”
 “i will beard him in his den,” thought jools. “i will meet him
 corps-a-corps—the tyrant of europe shall suffer through his nephew,
 and i will shoot him as dead as dujarrier.”
 when lor yardham came to the “constantanople” that night, jools i'd him
 savidgely from edd to foot, while lord yardham replied the same. it wasn't
 much for either to do—neyther being more than  foot ten hi—jools
 was a grannydear in his company of the nashnal gard, and was as brayv as a
 lion.
 “ah, l'angleterre, l'angleterre, tu nous dois une revanche,” said jools,
 crossing his arms and grinding his teeth at lord yardham.
 “wee,” said lord yardham; “wee.”
 “delenda est carthago!” howled out jools.
 “oh, wee,” said the erl of yardham, and at the same moment his glas of
 ginawater coming in, he took a drink, saying, “a voternsanty, munseer:”
 and then he offered it like a man of fashn to jools.
 a light broak on jools's mind as he igsepted the refreshmint. “sapoase,”
 he said, “instedd of slaughtering this nephew of the infamous palmerston,
 i extract his secrets from him; suppose i pump him—suppose i unveil
 his schemes and send them to my paper? la france may hear the name of
 jools de chacabac, and the star of honor may glitter on my bosom.”
 so axepting lord yardham's cortasy, he returned it by ordering another
 glass of gin at his own expence, and they both drank it on the counter,
 where jools talked of the affaers of europ all night. to everything he
 said, the earl of yardham answered, “wee, wee;” except at the end of the
 evening, when he squeeged his & and said, “bong swore.”
 “there's nothing like goin amongst 'em to equire the reel pronounciation,”
 his lordship said, as he let himself into his lodgings with his latch-key.
 “that was a very eloquent young gent at the 'constantinople,' and i'll
 patronize him.”
 “ah, perfide, je te demasquerai!” jools remarked to himself as he went to
 bed in his “hotel de l'ail.” and they met the next night, and from that
 heavning the young men were continyually together.
 well, one day, as they were walking in the quadrant, jools talking, and
 lord yardham saying, “wee, wee,” they were struck all of a heap by seeing—
 but my paper is igshosted, and i must dixcribe what they sor in the nex
 number.
 the travler who pesews his dalitefle coarse through the fair rellum of
 franse (as a great romantic landskippist and neamsack of mind would say)
 never chaumed his i's within a site more lovely, or vu'd a pallis more
 magniffiznt than that which was the buthplace of the eroing of this trew
 tale. phansy a country through whose werdant planes the selvery garonne
 wines, like—like a benevvolent sarpent. in its plasid busum antient
 cassles, picturask willidges, and waving woods are reflected. purple
 hills, crownd with inteak ruings; rivvilets babbling through gentle
 greenwoods; wight farm ouses, hevvy with hoverhanging vines, and from
 which the appy and peaseful okupier can cast his glans over goolden waving
 cornfealds, and m. herald meddows in which the lazy cattle are graysinn;
 while the sheppard, tending his snoughy flox, wiles away the leisure
 mominx on his loot—these hoffer but a phaint pictur of the rurial
 felissaty in the midst of widge crinoline and hesteria de viddlers were
 bawn.
 their par, the marcus de viddlers, shavilear of the legend of honor and of
 the lion of bulgum, the golden flease, grand cross of the eflant and
 castle, and of the catinbagpipes of hostria, grand chamberleng of the
 crownd, and major-genaril of hoss-mareens, &c. &c. &c.—is
 the twenty-foth or fith marquis that has bawn the tittle; is disended
 lenyally from king pipping, and has almost as antient a paddygree as any
 which the ollywell street frends of the member of buckinumsheer can
 supply.
 his marchyniss, the lovely & ecomplisht emily de st. cornichon,
 quitted this mortial spear very soon after she had presented her lord with
 the two little dawling cherrybins above dixcribed, in whomb, after the
 loss of that angle his wife, the disconslit widderer found his only jy on
 huth. in all his emusemints they ecumpanied him; their edjacation was his
 sole bisniss; he atcheaved it with the assistnce of the ugliest and most
 lernid masters, and the most hidjus and egsimplary governices which money
 could procure. r, how must his peturnle art have bet, as these budds,
 which he had nurrisht, bust into buty, and twined in blooming flagrance
 round his pirentle busm!
 the villidges all round his hancestral alls blessed the marcus and his
 lovely hoffsprig. not one villidge in their naybrood but was edawned by
 their elygint benifisns, and where the inhabitnts wern't rendered appy. it
 was a pattern pheasantry. all the old men in the districk were wertuous
 & tockative, ad red stockins and i-eeled drab shoes, and beautiful
 snowy air. all the old women had peaked ats, and crooked cains, and chince
 gowns tucked into the pockits of their quiltid petticoats; they sat in
 pictarask porches, pretendin to spinn, while the lads and lassis of the
 villidges danst under the hellums. o, tis a noble sight to whitniss that
 of an appy pheasantry! not one of those rustic wassals of the ouse of
 widdlers, but ad his air curled and his shirt-sheaves tied up with pink
 ribbing as he led to the macy dance some appy country gal, with a black
 velvit boddice and a redd or yaller petticoat, a hormylu cross on her
 neck, and a silver harrow in her air!
 when the marcus & ther young ladies came to the villidge it would have
 done the i's of the flanthropist good to see how all reseaved 'em! the
 little children scattered calico flowers on their path, the snowy-aired
 old men with red faces and rinkles took off their brown paper ats to slewt
 the noble marcus. young and old led them to a woodn bank painted to look
 like a bower of roses, and when they were sett down danst ballys before
 them. o 'twas a noble site to see the marcus too, smilin ellygint with
 fethers in his edd and all his stars on, and the young marchynisses with
 their ploomes, and trains, and little coronicks!
 they lived in tremenjus splendor at home in their pyturnle alls, and had
 no end of pallises, willers, and town and country resadences; but their
 fayvorit resadence was called the castle of the island of fogo.
 add i the penn of the hawther of a codlingsby himself, i coodnt dixcribe
 the gawjusness of their aboad. they add twenty-four footmen in livery,
 besides a boy in codroys for the knives & shoes. they had nine meels
 aday—shampayne and pineapples were served to each of the young
 ladies in bed before they got up. was it prawns, sherry-cobblers,
 lobster-salids, or maids of honor, they had but to ring the bell and call
 for what they chose. they had two new dresses every day—one to ride
 out in the open carriage, and another to appear in the gardens of the
 castle of the island of fogo, which were illuminated every night like
 voxhall. the young noblemen of france were there ready to dance with them,
 and festif suppers concludid the jawyus night.
 thus they lived in ellygant ratirement until missfortune bust upon this
 happy fammaly. etached to his princes and abommanating the ojus lewyphlip,
 the marcus was conspiring for the benefick of the helder branch of the
 borebones—and what was the consquince?—one night a fleat
 presented itself round the castle of the island of fogo—and
 skewering only a couple of chests of jewils, the marcus and the two young
 ladies in disgyise, fled from that island of bliss. and whither fled they?—to
 england!—england the ome of the brave, the refuge of the world,
 where the pore slave never setts his foot but he is free!
 such was the ramantic tail which was told to  friends of ours by the
 marcus de viddlers himself, whose daughters, walking with their page from
 ungerford market (where they had been to purchis a paper of srimps for the
 umble supper of their noble father), yardham and his equaintnce, munseer
 jools, had remarked and admired.
 but how had those two young erows become equainted with the noble marcus?—that
 is a mistry we must elucydate in a futur vollam.
 the king of france was walking on the terrace of versailles; the fairest,
 not only of queens, but of women, hung fondly on the royal arm; while the
 children of france were indulging in their infantile hilarity in the
 alleys of the magnificent garden of le notre (from which niblo's garden
 has been copied in our own empire city of new york), and playing at
 leap-frog with their uncle, the count of provence; gaudy courtiers,
 emlazoned with orders, glittered in the groves, and murmured frivolous
 talk in the ears of high-bred beauty.
 “marie, my beloved,” said the ruler of france, taking out his watch, “'tis
 time that the minister of america should be here.”
 “your majesty should know the time,” replied marie antoinette, archly, and
 in an austrian accent; “is not my royal louis the first watchmaker in his
 empire?”
 the king cast a pleased glance at his repeater, and kissed with courtly
 grace the fair hand of her who had made him the compliment. “my lord
 bishop of autun,” said he to monsieur de talleyrand perigord, who followed
 the royal pair, in his quality of arch-chamberlain of the empire, “i pray
 you look through the gardens, and tell his excellency doctor franklin that
 the king waits.” the bishop ran off, with more than youthful agility, to
 seek the united states' minister. “these republicans,” he added,
 confidentially, and with something of a supercilious look, “are but rude
 courtiers, methinks.”
 “nay,” interposed the lovely antoinette, “rude courtiers, sire, they may
 be; but the world boasts not of more accomplished gentlemen. i have seen
 no grandee of versailles that has the noble bearing of this american envoy
 and his suite. they have the refinement of the old world, with all the
 simple elegance of the new. though they have perfect dignity of manner,
 they have an engaging modesty which i have never seen equalled by the best
 of the proud english nobles with whom they wage war. i am told they speak
 their very language with a grace which the haughty islanders who oppress
 them never attained. they are independent, yet never insolent; elegant,
 yet always respectful; and brave, but not in the least boastful.”
 “what! savages and all, marie?” exclaimed louis, laughing, and chucking
 the lovely queen playfully under the royal chin. “but here comes doctor
 franklin, and your friend the cacique with him.” in fact, as the monarch
 spoke, the minister of the united states made his appearance, followed by
 a gigantic warrior in the garb of his native woods.
 knowing his place as minister of a sovereign state, (yielding even then in
 dignity to none, as it surpasses all now in dignity, in valor, in honesty,
 in strength, and civilization,) the doctor nodded to the queen of france,
 but kept his hat on as he faced the french monarch, and did not cease
 whittling the cane he carried in his hand.
 “i was waiting for you, sir,” the king said, peevishly, in spite of the
 alarmed pressure which the queen gave his royal arm.
 “the business of the republic, sire, must take precedence even of your
 majesty's wishes,” replied dr. franklin. “when i was a poor printer's boy
 and ran errands, no lad could be more punctual than poor ben franklin; but
 all other things must yield to the service of the united states of north
 america. i have done. what would you, sire?” and the intrepid republican
 eyed the monarch with a serene and easy dignity, which made the descendant
 of st. louis feel ill at ease.
 “i wished to—to say farewell to tatua before his departure,” said
 louis xvi., looking rather awkward. “approach, tatua.” and the gigantic
 indian strode up, and stood undaunted before the first magistrate of the
 french nation: again the feeble monarch quailed before the terrible
 simplicity of the glance of the denizen of the primaeval forests.
 the redoubted chief of the nose-ring indians was decorated in his
 war-paint, and in his top-knot was a peacock's feather, which had been
 given him out of the head-dress of the beautiful princess of lamballe. his
 nose, from which hung the ornament from which his ferocious tribe took its
 designation, was painted a light-blue, a circle of green and orange was
 drawn round each eye, while serpentine stripes of black, white, and
 vermilion alternately were smeared on his forehead, and descended over his
 cheek-bones to his chin. his manly chest was similarly tattooed and
 painted, and round his brawny neck and arms hung innumerable bracelets and
 necklaces of human teeth, extracted (one only from each skull) from the
 jaws of those who had fallen by the terrible tomahawk at his girdle. his
 moccasins, and his blanket, which was draped on his arm and fell in
 picturesque folds to his feet, were fringed with tufts of hair—the
 black, the gray, the auburn, the golden ringlet of beauty, the red lock
 from the forehead of the scottish or the northern soldier, the snowy tress
 of extreme old age, the flaxen down of infancy—all were there,
 dreadful reminiscences of the chief's triumphs in war. the warrior leaned
 on his enormous rifle, and faced the king.
 “and it was with that carabine that you shot wolfe in '?” said louis,
 eying the warrior and his weapon. “'tis a clumsy lock, and methinks i
 could mend it,” he added mentally.
 “the chief of the french pale-faces speaks truth,” tatua said. “tatua was
 a boy when he went first on the war-path with montcalm.”
 “and shot a wolfe at the first fire!” said the king.
 “the english are braves, though their faces are white,” replied the
 indian. “tatua shot the raging wolfe of the english; but the other wolves
 caused the foxes to go to earth.” a smile played round dr. franklin's
 lips, as he whittled his cane with more vigor than ever.
 “i believe, your excellency, tatua has done good service elsewhere than at
 quebec,” the king said, appealing to the american envoy: “at bunker's
 hill, at brandywine, at york island? now that lafayette and my brave
 frenchmen are among you, your excellency need have no fear but that the
 war will finish quickly—yes, yes, it will finish quickly. they will
 teach you discipline, and the way to conquer.”
 “king louis of france,” said the envoy, clapping his hat down over his
 head, and putting his arms a-kimbo, “we have learned that from the
 british, to whom we are superior in everything: and i'd have your majesty
 to know that in the art of whipping the world we have no need of any
 french lessons. if your reglars jine general washington, 'tis to larn from
 him how britishers are licked; for i'm blest if yu know the way yet.”
 tatua said, “ugh,” and gave a rattle with the butt of his carabine, which
 made the timid monarch start; the eyes of the lovely antoinette flashed
 fire, but it played round the head of the dauntless american envoy
 harmless as the lightning which he knew how to conjure away.
 the king fumbled in his pocket, and pulled out a cross of the order of the
 bath. “your excellency wears no honor,” the monarch said; “but tatua, who
 is not a subject, only an ally, of the united states, may. noble tatua, i
 appoint you knight companion of my noble order of the bath. wear this
 cross upon your breast in memory of louis of france;” and the king held
 out the decoration to the chief.
 up to that moment the chief's countenance had been impassible. no look
 either of admiration or dislike had appeared upon that grim and
 war-painted visage. but now, as louis spoke, tatua's face assumed a glance
 of ineffable scorn, as, bending his head, he took the bauble.
 “i will give it to one of my squaws,” he said. “the papooses in my lodge
 will play with it. come, medecine, tatua will go and drink fire-water;”
 and, shouldering his carabine, he turned his broad back without ceremony
 upon the monarch and his train, and disappeared down one of the walks of
 the garden. franklin found him when his own interview with the french
 chief magistrate was over; being attracted to the spot where the chief
 was, by the crack of his well-known rifle. he was laughing in his quiet
 way. he had shot the colonel of the swiss guards through his cockade.
 three days afterwards, as the gallant frigate, the “repudiator,” was
 sailing out of brest harbor, the gigantic form of an indian might be seen
 standing on the binnacle in conversation with commodore bowie, the
 commander of the noble ship. it was tatua, the chief of the nose-rings.
 leatherlegs and tom coxswain did not accompany tatua when he went to the
 parisian metropolis on a visit to the father of the french pale-faces.
 neither the legs nor the sailor cared for the gayety and the crowd of
 cities; the stout mariner's home was in the puttock-shrouds of the old
 “repudiator.” the stern and simple trapper loved the sound of the waters
 better than the jargon of the french of the old country. “i can follow the
 talk of a pawnee,” he said, “or wag my jaw, if so be necessity bids me to
 speak, by a sioux's council-fire and i can patter canadian french with the
 hunters who come for peltries to nachitoches or thichimuchimachy; but from
 the tongue of a frenchwoman, with white flour on her head, and war-paint
 on her face, the lord deliver poor natty pumpo.”
 “amen and amen!” said tom coxswain. “there was a woman in our aft-scuppers
 when i went a-whalin in the little 'grampus'—and lord love you,
 pumpo, you poor land-swab, she was as pretty a craft as ever dowsed a
 tarpauling—there was a woman on board the 'grampus,' who before we'd
 struck our first fish, or biled our first blubber, set the whole crew in a
 mutiny. i mind me of her now, natty,—her eye was sich a piercer that
 you could see to steer by it in a newfoundland fog; her nose stood out
 like the 'grampus's' jibboom, and her woice, lord love you, her woice
 sings in my ears even now:—it set the captain a-quarrelin with the
 mate, who was hanged in boston harbor for harpoonin of his officer in
 baffin's bay;—it set me and bob bunting a-pouring broadsides into
 each other's old timbers, whereas me and bob was worth all the women that
 ever shipped a hawser. it cost me three years' pay as i'd stowed away for
 the old mother, and might have cost me ever so much more, only bad luck to
 me, she went and married a little tailor out of nantucket; and i've hated
 women and tailors ever since!” as he spoke, the hardy tar dashed a drop of
 brine from his tawny cheek, and once more betook himself to splice the
 taffrail.
 though the brave frigate lay off havre de grace, she was not idle. the
 gallant bowie and his intrepid crew made repeated descents upon the
 enemy's seaboard. the coasts of rutland and merry leicestershire have
 still many a legend of fear to tell; and the children of the british
 fishermen tremble even now when they speak of the terrible “repudiator.”
 she was the first of the mighty american war-ships that have taught the
 domineering briton to respect the valor of the republic.
 the novelist ever and anon finds himself forced to adopt the sterner tone
 of the historian, when describing deeds connected with his country's
 triumphs. it is well known that during the two months in which she lay off
 havre, the “repudiator” had brought more prizes into that port than had
 ever before been seen in the astonished french waters. her actions with
 the “dettingen” and the “elector” frigates form part of our country's
 history; their defence—it may be said without prejudice to national
 vanity—was worthy of britons and of the audacious foe they had to
 encounter; and it must be owned, that but for a happy fortune which
 presided on that day over the destinies of our country, the chance of the
 combat might have been in favor of the british vessels. it was not until
 the “elector” blew up, at a quarter past three p.m., by a lucky shot which
 fell into her caboose, and communicated with the powder-magazine, that
 commodore bowie was enabled to lay himself on board the “dettingen,” which
 he carried sword in hand. even when the american boarders had made their
 lodgment on the “dettingen's” binnacle, it is possible that the battle
 would still have gone against us. the british were still seven to one;
 their carronades, loaded with marline-spikes, swept the gun-deck, of which
 we had possession, and decimated our little force; when a rifle-ball from
 the shrouds of the “repudiator” shot captain mumford under the star of the
 guelphic order which he wore, and the americans, with a shout, rushed up
 the companion to the quarter-deck, upon the astonished foe. pike and
 cutlass did the rest of the bloody work. rumford, the gigantic
 first-lieutenant of the “dettingen,” was cut down by commodore bowie's own
 sword, as they engaged hand to hand; and it was tom coxswain who tore down
 the british flag, after having slain the englishman at the wheel. peace be
 to the souls of the brave! the combat was honorable alike to the victor
 and the vanquished; and it never can be said that an american warrior
 depreciated a gallant foe. the bitterness of defeat was enough to the
 haughty islanders who had to suffer. the people of herne bay were lining
 the shore, near which the combat took place, and cruel must have been the
 pang to them when they saw the stars and stripes rise over the old flag of
 the union, and the “dettingen” fall down the river in tow of the
 republican frigate.
 another action bowie contemplated: the boldest and most daring perhaps
 ever imagined by seaman. it is this which has been so wrongly described by
 european annalists, and of which the british until now have maintained the
 most jealous secrecy.
 portsmouth harbor was badly defended. our intelligence in that town and
 arsenal gave us precise knowledge of the disposition of the troops, the
 forts, and the ships there; and it was determined to strike a blow which
 should shake the british power in its centre.
 that a frigate of the size of the “repudiator” should enter the harbor
 unnoticed, or could escape its guns unscathed, passed the notions of even
 american temerity. but upon the memorable th of june, , the
 “repudiator” sailed out of havre roads in a thick fog, under cover of
 which she entered and cast anchor in bonchurch bay, in the isle of wight.
 to surprise the martello tower and take the feeble garrison thereunder,
 was the work of tom coxswain and a few of his blue-jackets. the surprised
 garrison laid down their arms before him.
 it was midnight before the boats of the ship, commanded by lieutenant
 bunker, pulled off from bonchurch with muffled oars, and in another hour
 were off the common hard of portsmouth, having passed the challenges of
 the “thetis” and the “amphion” frigates, and the “polyanthus” brig.
 there had been on that day great feasting and merriment on board the
 flag-ship lying in the harbor. a banquet had been given in honor of the
 birthday of one of the princes of the royal line of the guelphs—the
 reader knows the propensity of britons when liquor is in plenty. all on
 board that royal ship were more or less overcome. the flag-ship was
 plunged in a deathlike and drunken sleep. the very officer of the watch
 was intoxicated: he could not see the “repudiator's” boats as they shot
 swiftly through the waters; nor had he time to challenge her seamen as
 they swarmed up the huge sides of the ship.
 at the next moment tom coxswain stood at the wheel of the “royal george”—the
 briton who had guarded, a corpse at his feet. the hatches were down. the
 ship was in possession of the “repudiator's” crew. they were busy in her
 rigging, bending her sails to carry her out of the harbor. the well-known
 heave of the men at the windlass woke up kempenfelt in his state-cabin. we
 know, or rather do not know, the result; for who can tell by whom the
 lower-deck ports of the brave ship were opened, and how the haughty
 prisoners below sunk the ship and its conquerors rather than yield her as
 a prize to the republic!
 only tom coxswain escaped of victors and vanquished. his tale was told to
 his captain and to congress, but washington forbade its publication; and
 it was but lately that the faithful seaman told it to me, his grandson, on
 his hundred-and-fifteenth birthday.
 “my dear snooks,—i am on the look-out here for materials for
 original comedies such as those lately produced at your theatre; and, in
 the course of my studies, i have found something, my dear snooks, which i
 think will suit your book. you are bringing, i see, your admirable novel,
 'the mysteries of may fair,' to an end—(by the way, the scene, in
 the th number, between the duke, his grandmother, and the jesuit
 butler, is one of the most harrowing and exciting i ever read)—and,
 of course, you must turn your real genius to some other channel; and we
 may expect that your pen shall not be idle.
 “the original plan i have to propose to you, then, is taken from the
 french, just like the original dramas above mentioned; and, indeed, i
 found it in the law report of the national newspaper, and a french
 literary gentleman, m. emanuel gonzales, has the credit of the invention.
 he and an advertisement agent fell out about a question of money, the
 affair was brought before the courts, and the little plot so got wind. but
 there is no reason why you should not take the plot and act on it
 yourself. you are a known man; the public relishes your works; anything
 bearing the name of snooks is eagerly read by the masses; and though
 messrs. hookey, of holywell street, pay you handsomely, i make no doubt
 you would like to be rewarded at a still higher figure.
 “unless he writes with a purpose, you know, a novelist in our days is good
 for nothing. this one writes with a socialist purpose; that with a
 conservative purpose: this author or authoress with the most delicate
 skill insinuates catholicism into you, and you find yourself all but a
 papist in the third volume: another doctors you with low church remedies
 to work inwardly upon you, and which you swallow down unsuspiciously, as
 children do calomel in jelly. fiction advocates all sorts of truth and
 causes—doesn't the delightful bard of the minories find moses in
 everything? m. gonzales's plan, and the one which i recommend to my dear
 snooks, simply was to write an advertisement novel. look over the times or
 the 'directory,' walk down regent street or fleet street any day—see
 what houses advertise most, and put yourself into communication with their
 proprietors. with your rings, your chains, your studs, and the tip on your
 chin, i don't know any greater swell than bob snooks. walk into the shops,
 i say, ask for the principal, and introduce yourself, saying, 'i am the
 great snooks; i am the author of the “mysteries of may fair;” my weekly
 sale is ,; i am about to produce a new work called “the palaces of
 pimlico, or the curse of the court,” describing and lashing fearlessly the
 vices of the aristocracy; this book will have a sale of at least ,;
 it will be on every table—in the boudoir of the pampered duke, as in
 the chamber of the honest artisan. the myriads of foreigners who are
 coming to london, and are anxious to know about our national manners, will
 purchase my book, and carry it to their distant homes. so, mr. taylor, or
 mr. haberdasher, or mr. jeweller, how much will you stand if i recommend
 you in my forthcoming novel?' you may make a noble income in this way,
 snooks.
 “for instance, suppose it is an upholsterer. what more easy, what more
 delightful, than the description of upholstery? as thus:—
 “'lady emily was reclining on one of down and eider's voluptuous ottomans,
 the only couch on which belgravian beauty now reposes, when lord
 bathershins entered, stepping noiselessly over one of tomkins's elastic
 axminster carpets. “good heavens, my lord!” she said—and the lovely
 creature fainted. the earl rushed to the mantel-piece, where he saw a
 flacon of otto's eau-de-cologne, and,' &c.
 “or say it's a cheap furniture-shop, and it may be brought in just as
 easily, as thus:—
 “'we are poor, eliza,' said harry hardhand, looking affectionately at his
 wife, 'but we have enough, love, have we not, for our humble wants? the
 rich and luxurious may go to dillow's or gobiggin's, but we can get our
 rooms comfortably furnished at timmonson's for l.' and putting on her
 bonnet, and hanging affectionately on her husband, the stoker's pretty
 bride tripped gayly to the well-known mart, where timmonson, within his
 usual affability, was ready to receive them.
 “then you might have a touch at the wine-merchant and purveyor. 'where did
 you get this delicious claret, or pate de fois gras, or what you please?'
 said count blagowski to the gay young sir horace swellmore. the voluptuous
 bart answered, 'at so-and-so's, or so-and-so's.' the answer is obvious.
 you may furnish your cellar or your larder in this way. begad, snooks! i
 lick my lips at the very idea.
 “then, as to tailors, milliners, bootmakers, &c., how easy to get a
 word for them! amranson, the tailor, waited upon lord paddington with an
 assortment of his unrivalled waistcoats, or clad in that simple but
 aristocratic style of which schneider alone has the secret. parvy newcome
 really looked like a gentleman, and though corpulent and crooked,
 schneider had managed to give him, &c. don't you see what a stroke of
 business you might do in this way.
 “the shoemaker.—lady fanny flew, rather than danced, across the
 ball-room; only a sylphide, or taglioni, or a lady chausseed by chevillett
 of bond street could move in that fairy way; and
 “the hairdresser.—'count barbarossa is seventy years of age,' said
 the earl. 'i remember him at the congress of vienna, and he has not a
 single gray hair.' wiggins laughed. 'my good lord baldock,' said the old
 wag, 'i saw barbarossa's hair coming out of ducroissant's shop, and under
 his valet's arm—ho! ho! ho!'—and the two bon-vivans chuckled
 as the count passed by, talking with, &c. &c.
 “the gunmaker.—'the antagonists faced each other; and undismayed
 before his gigantic enemy, kilconnel raised his pistol. it was one of
 clicker's manufacture, and sir marmaduke knew he could trust the maker and
 the weapon. “one, two, three,” cried o'tool, and the two pistols went off
 at that instant, and uttering a terrific curse, the lifeguardsman,' &c.—a
 sentence of this nature from your pen, my dear snooks, would, i should
 think, bring a case of pistols and a double-barrelled gun to your
 lodgings; and, though heaven forbid you should use such weapons, you might
 sell them, you know, and we could make merry with the proceeds.
 “if my hint is of any use to you, it is quite at your service, dear
 snooks; and should anything come of it, i hope you will remember your
 friend.”
 “considerable sensation has been excited in the upper and lower circles in
 the west end, by a startling piece of good fortune which has befallen
 james plush, esq., lately footman in a respected family in berkeley
 square.
 “one day last week, mr. james waited upon his master, who is a banker in
 the city; and after a little blushing and hesitation, said he had saved a
 little money in service, was anxious to retire, and to invest his savings
 to advantage.
 “his master (we believe we may mention, without offending delicacy, the
 well-known name of sir george flimsy, of the house of flimsy, diddler, and
 flash,) smilingly asked mr. james what was the amount of his savings,
 wondering considerably how, out of an income of thirty guineas—the
 main part of which he spent in bouquets, silk stockings, and perfumery—mr.
 plush could have managed to lay by anything.
 “mr. plush, with some hesitation, said he had been speculating in
 railroads, and stated his winnings to have been thirty thousand pounds. he
 had commenced his speculations with twenty, borrowed from a
 fellow-servant. he had dated his letters from the house in berkeley
 square, and humbly begged pardon of his master for not having instructed
 the railway secretaries who answered his applications to apply at the
 area-bell.
 “sir george, who was at breakfast, instantly rose, and shook mr. p. by the
 hand; lady flimsy begged him to be seated, and partake of the breakfast
 which he had laid on the table; and has subsequently invited him to her
 grand dejeuner at richmond, where it was observed that miss emily flimsy,
 her beautiful and accomplished seventh daughter, paid the lucky gentleman
 “we hear it stated that mr. p. is of a very ancient family (hugo de la
 pluche came over with the conqueror); and the new brougham which he has
 started bears the ancient coat of his race.
 “he has taken apartments in the albany, and is a director of thirty-three
 railroads. he proposes to stand for parliament at the next general
 election on decidedly conservative principles, which have always been the
 politics of his family.
 “report says, that even in his humble capacity miss emily flimsy had
 remarked his high demeanor. well, 'none but the brave,' say we, 'deserve
 the fair.'”—morning paper.
 this announcement will explain the following lines, which have been put
 into our box* with a west end post-mark. if, as we believe, they are
 written by the young woman from whom the millionnaire borrowed the sum on
 which he raised his fortune, what heart will not melt with sympathy at her
 tale, and pity the sorrows which she expresses in such artless language?
 if it be not too late; if wealth have not rendered its possessor callous;
 if poor maryanne be still alive; we trust, we trust, mr. plush will do her
 justice.
 * the letter-box of mr. punch, in whose columns these papers
 were first published.
 “come all ye gents vot cleans the plate,
 come all ye ladies maids so fair— vile i a story
 vill relate
 of cruel jeames of buckley square.
 a tighter lad, it is confest,
 neer valked with powder in his air,
 or vore a nosegay in his breast,
 than andsum jeames of buckley square.
 “o evns! it vas the best of sights,
 behind his master's coach and pair,
 to see our jeames in red plush tights,
 a driving hoff from buckley square.
 he vel became his hagwilletts,
 he cocked his at with such a hair;
 his calves and viskers vas such pets,
 that hall loved jeames of buckley square.
 “he pleased the hup-stairs folks as vell,
 and o! i vithered vith despair,
 missis vould ring the parler bell,
 and call up jeames in buckley square.
 both beer and sperrits he abhord,
 (sperrits and beer i can't a bear,)
 you would have thought he vas a lord
 down in our all in buckley square.
 “last year he visper'd 'mary ann,
 ven i've an under'd pound to spare,
 to take a public is my plan,
 and leave this hojous buckley square.'
 o how my gentle heart did bound,
 to think that i his name should bear.
 'dear jeames.' says i, 'i've twenty pound;
 and gev them him in buckley square.
 “our master vas a city gent,
 his name's in railroads everywhere,
 and lord, vot lots of letters vent
 betwigst his brokers and buckley square:
 my jeames it was the letters took,
 and read them all, (i think it's fair,)
 and took a leaf from master's book,
 as hothers do in buckley square.
 encouraged with my twenty pound,
 of which poor i was unavare,
 he wrote the companies all round,
 and signed hisself from buckley square.
 and how john porter used to grin,
 as day by day, share after share,
 came railvay letters pouring in,
 'j. plush, esquire, in buckley square.'
 “our servants' all was in a rage—
 scrip, stock,
 curves, gradients, bull and bear,
 vith butler, coachman, groom and page,
 vas all the talk in buckley square.
 but o! imagine vot i felt
 last vensday veek as ever were;
 i gits a letter, which i spelt
 'miss m. a. hoggins, buckley square.'
 “he sent me back my money true—
 he sent me back my lock of air,
 and said, 'my dear, i bid ajew
 to mary hann and buckley square.
 think not to marry, foolish hann,
 with people who your betters are;
 james plush is now a gentleman,
 and you—a cook in buckley square.
 “'i've thirty thousand guineas won,
 in six short months, by genus rare;
 you little thought what jeames was on,
 poor mary hann, in buckley square.
 i've thirty thousand guineas net,
 powder and plush i scorn to vear;
 and so, miss mary hann, forget
 for hever jeames, of buckley square.'”
 the rest of the ms. is illegible, being literally washed away in a flood
 of tears.
 “albany, letter x. august , .
 “sir,—has a reglar suscriber to your emusing paper, i beg leaf to
 state that i should never have done so, had i supposed that it was your
 abbit to igspose the mistaries of privit life, and to hinjer the delligit
 feelings of umble individyouals like myself, who have no ideer of being
 made the subject of newspaper criticism.
 “i elude, sir, to the unjustafiable use which has been made of my name in
 your journal, where both my muccantile speclations and the hinmost pashsn
 of my art have been brot forrards in a ridicklus way for the public
 emusemint.
 “what call, sir, has the public to inquire into the suckmstansies of my
 engagements with miss mary hann oggins, or to meddle with their rupsher?
 why am i to be maid the hobjick of your redicule in a doggril ballit
 impewted to her? i say impewted, because, in my time at least, mary hann
 could only sign her + mark (has i've hoften witnist it for her when she
 paid hin at the savings bank), and has for sacrificing to the mewses and
 making poatry, she was as hincapible as mr. wakley himself.
 “with respect to the ballit, my baleaf is, that it is wrote by a footman
 in a low famly, a pore retch who attempted to rivle me in my affections to
 mary hann—a feller not five foot six, and with no more calves to his
 legs than a donkey—who was always a-ritin (having been a doctor's
 boy) and who i nockt down with a pint of porter (as he well recklex) at
 the  tuns jerming street, for daring to try to make a but of me. he has
 signed miss h's name to his nonsince and lies: and you lay yourself hopen
 to a haction for libel for insutting them in your paper.
 “it is false that i have treated miss h. hill in hany way. that i borrowed
 lb of her is trew. but she confesses i paid it back. can hall people say
 as much of the money they've lent or borrowed? no. and i not only paid it
 back, but giv her the andsomest pres'nts: which i never should have
 alluded to, but for this attack. fust, a silver thimble (which i found in
 missus's work-box); secknd, a vollom of byrom's poems; third, i halways
 brought her a glas of curasore, when we ad a party, of which she was
 remarkable fond. i treated her to hashley's twice, (and halways a srimp or
 a hoyster by the way,) and a thowsnd deligit attentions, which i sapose
 count for nothink.
 “has for marridge. haltered suckmstancies rendered it himpossable. i was
 gone into a new spear of life—mingling with my native aristoxy. i
 breathe no sallible of blame against miss h., but his a hilliterit
 cookmaid fit to set at a fashnable table? do young fellers of rank
 genrally marry out of the kitching? if we cast our i's upon a low-born
 gal, i needn say it's only a tempory distraction, pore passy le tong. so
 much for her claims upon me. has for that beest of a doctor's boy he's
 unwuthy the notas of a gentleman.
 “that i've one thirty thousand lb, and praps more, i dont deny. ow much
 has the kilossus of railroads one, i should like to know, and what was his
 cappitle? i hentered the market with lb, specklated jewdicious, and ham
 what i ham. so may you be (if you have lb, and praps you haven't)—so
 may you be: if you choose to go in & win.
 “i for my part am jusly prowd of my suxess, and could give you a hundred
 instances of my gratatude. for igsample, the fust pair of hosses i bought
 (and a better pair of steppers i dafy you to see in hany curracle,) i
 crisn'd hull and selby, in grateful elusion to my transackshns in that
 railroad. my riding cob i called very unhaptly my dublin and galway. he
 came down with me the other day, and i've jest sold him at / discount.
 “at fust with prudence and modration i only kep two grooms for my stables,
 one of whom lickwise waited on me at table. i have now a confidenshle
 servant, a vally de shamber—he curls my air; inspex my accounts, and
 hansers my hinvitations to dinner. i call this vally my trent vally, for
 it was the prophit i got from that exlent line, which injuiced me to
 ingage him.
 “besides my north british plate and breakfast equipidge—i have two
 handsom suvvices for dinner—the goold plate for sundays, and the
 silver for common use. when i ave a great party, 'trent,' i say to my man,
 'we will have the london and bummingham plate to-day (the goold), or else
 the manchester and leeds (the silver).' i bought them after realizing on
 the abuf lines, and if people suppose that the companys made me a presnt
 of the plate, how can i help it?
 “in the sam way i say, 'trent, bring us a bottle of bristol amid hexeter!'
 or, 'put some heastern counties in hice!' he knows what i mean: it's the
 wines i bought upon the hospicious tummination of my connexshn with those
 two railroads.
 “so strong, indeed, as this abbit become, that being asked to stand
 godfather to the youngest miss diddle last weak, i had her christened
 (provisionally) rosamell—from the french line of which i am
 director; and only the other day, finding myself rayther unwell, 'doctor,'
 says i to sir jeames clark, 'i've sent to consult you because my midlands
 are out of horder; and i want you to send them up to a premium.' the
 doctor lafd, and i beleave told the story subsquintly at buckinum p-ll-s.
 “but i will trouble you no father. my sole objict in writing has been to
 clear my carrater—to show that i came by my money in a honrable way:
 that i'm not ashaymd of the manner in which i gayned it, and ham indeed
 grateful for my good fortune.
 “to conclude, i have ad my podigree maid out at the erald hoffis (i don't
 mean the morning erald), and have took for my arms a stagg. you are
 corrict in stating that i am of hancient normin famly. this is more than
 peal can say, to whomb i applied for a barnetcy; but the primmier being of
 low igstraction, natrally stickles for his horder. consurvative though i
 be, i may change my opinions before the next election, when i intend to
 hoffer myself as a candydick for parlymint.
 “meanwhile, i have the honor to be, sir,
 “your most obeajnt survnt,
 one day in the panic week, our friend jeames called at our office,
 evidently in great perturbation of mind and disorder of dress. he had no
 flower in his button-hole; his yellow kid gloves were certainly two days
 old. he had not above three of the ten chains he usually sports, and his
 great coarse knotty-knuckled old hands were deprived of some dozen of the
 rubies, emeralds, and other cameos with which, since his elevation to
 fortune, the poor fellow has thought fit to adorn himself.
 “how's scrip, mr. jeames?” said we pleasantly, greeting our esteemed
 contributor.
 “scrip be ——,” replied he, with an expression we cannot
 repeat, and a look of agony it is impossible to describe in print, and
 walked about the parlor whistling, humming, rattling his keys and coppers,
 and showing other signs of agitation. at last, “mr. punch,” says he, after
 a moment's hesitation, “i wish to speak to you on a pint of businiss. i
 wish to be paid for my contribewtions to your paper. suckmstances is
 altered with me. i—i—in a word, can you lend me —l. for
 the account?”
 he named the sum. it was one so great that we don't care to mention it
 here; but on receiving a cheque for the amount (on messrs. pump and
 aldgate, our bankers,) tears came into the honest fellow's eyes. he
 squeezed our hand until he nearly wrung it off, and shouting to a cab, he
 plunged into it at our office-door, and was off to the city.
 returning to our study, we found he had left on our table an open
 pocket-book, of the contents of which (for the sake of safety) we took an
 inventory. it contained—three tavern-bills, paid; a tailor's ditto,
 unsettled; forty-nine allotments in different companies, twenty-six
 thousand seven hundred shares in all, of which the market value we take,
 on an average, to be / discount; and in an old bit of paper tied with
 pink ribbon a lock of chestnut hair, with the initials m. a. h.
 in the diary of the pocket-book was a journal, jotted down by the
 proprietor from time to time. at first the entries are insignificant: as,
 for instance:—“rd january—our beer in the suvnts' hall so
 precious small at this christmas time that i reely muss give warning,
 & wood, but for my dear mary hann. february —that broot screw,
 the butler, wanted to kis her, but my dear mary hann boxt his hold hears,
 & served him right. i datest screw,”—and so forth. then the
 diary relates to stock exchange operations, until we come to the time
 when, having achieved his successes, mr. james quitted berkeley square and
 his livery, and began his life as a speculator and a gentleman upon town.
 it is from the latter part of his diary that we make the following
 “wen i anounced in the servnts all my axeshn of forting, and that by the
 exasize of my own talince and ingianiuty i had reerlized a summ of ,
 lb. (it was only , but what's the use of a mann depreshiating the qualaty
 of his own mackyrel?)—wen i enounced my abrup intention to cut—you
 should have sean the sensation among hall the people! cook wanted to know
 whether i woodn like a sweatbred, or the slise of the breast of a cold
 tucky. screw, the butler, (womb i always detested as a hinsalant
 hoverbaring beest,) begged me to walk into the hupper servnts all, and try
 a glass of shuperior shatto margo. heven visp, the coachmin, eld out his
 and, & said, 'jeames, i hopes theres no quarraling betwigst you &
 me, & i'll stand a pot of beer with pleasure.'
 “the sickofnts!—that wery cook had split on me to the housekeeper
 ony last week (catchin me priggin some cold tuttle soop, of which i'm
 remarkable fond). has for the butler, i always ebomminated him for his
 precious snears and imperence to all us gents who woar livry (he never
 would sit in our parlor, fasooth, nor drink out of our mugs); and in
 regard of visp—why, it was ony the day before the wulgar beest
 hoffered to fite me, and thretnd to give me a good iding if i refused.
 gentlemen and ladies,' says i, as haughty as may be, 'there's nothink that
 i want for that i can't go for to buy with my hown money, and take at my
 lodgins in halbany, letter hex; if i'm ungry i've no need to refresh
 myself in the kitching.' and so saying, i took a dignified ajew of these
 minnial domestics; and ascending to my epartment in the  pair back,
 brushed the powder out of my air, and taking off those hojous livries for
 hever, put on a new soot, made for me by cullin of st. jeames street, and
 which fitted my manly figger as tight as whacks.
 “there was one pusson in the house with womb i was rayther anxious to
 evoid a persnal leave-taking—mary hann oggins, i mean—for my
 art is natural tender, and i can't abide seeing a pore gal in pane. i'd
 given her previous the infamation of my departure—doing the ansom
 thing by her at the same time—paying her back  lb., which she'd
 lent me  months before: and paying her back not only the interest, but i
 gave her an andsome pair of scissars and a silver thimbil, by way of
 boanus. 'mary hann,' says i, 'suckimstancies has haltered our rellatif
 positions in life. i quit the servnts hall for ever, (for has for your
 marrying a person in my rank, that, my dear, is hall gammin,) and so i
 wish you a good-by, my good gal, and if you want to better yourself,
 halways refer to me.'
 “mary hann didn't hanser my speech (which i think was remarkable kind),
 but looked at me in the face quite wild like, and bust into somethink
 betwigst a laugh & a cry, and fell down with her ed on the kitching
 dresser, where she lay until her young missis rang the dressing-room bell.
 would you bleave it? she left the thimbil & things, & my check for
 lb. s., on the tabil when she went to hanser the bell. and now i heard
 her sobbing and vimpering in her own room nex but one to mine, vith the
 dore open, peraps expecting i should come in and say good-by. but, as soon
 as i was dressed, i cut down stairs, hony desiring frederick my
 fellow-servnt, to fetch me a cabb, and requesting permission to take leaf
 of my lady & the famly before my departure.”
 “how miss hemly did hogle me to be sure! her ladyship told me what a sweet
 gal she was—hamiable, fond of poetry, plays the gitter. then she
 hasked me if i liked blond bewties and haubin hair. haubin, indeed! i
 don't like carrits! as it must be confest miss hemly's his—and has
 for a blond buty, she has pink i's like a halbino, and her face looks as
 if it were dipt in a brann mash. how she squeeged my & as she went
 away!
 “mary hann now has haubin air, and a cumplexion like roses and hivory, and
 i's as blew as evin.
 “i gev frederick two and six for fetchin the cabb—been resolved to
 hact the gentleman in hall things. how he stared!”
 “th.—i am now director of forty-seven hadvantageous lines, and
 have past hall day in the citty. although i've hate or nine new soots of
 close, and mr. cullin fits me heligant, yet i fansy they hall reckonise
 me. conshns whispers to me, 'jeams, you'r hony a footman in disguise
 hafter all.'”
 “th.—been to the hopra. music tol lol. that lablash is a wopper at
 singing. i coodn make out why some people called out 'bravo,' some
 'bravar,' and some 'bravee.' 'bravee, lablash,' says i, at which
 heverybody laft.
 “i'm in my new stall. i've had new cushings put in, and my harms in goold
 on the back. i'm dressed hall in black, excep a gold waistcoat and dimind
 studds in the embriderd busom of my shameese. i wear a camallia jiponiky
 in my button-ole, and have a double-barreld opera-glas, so big, that i
 make timmins, my secnd man, bring it in the other cabb.
 “what an igstronry exabishn that pawdy carter is! if those four gals are
 faries, tellioni is sutnly the fairy queend. she can do all that they can
 do, and somethink they can't. there's an indiscrible grace about her, and
 carlotty, my sweet carlotty, she sets my art in flams.
 “ow that miss hemly was noddin and winkin at me out of their box on the
 fourth tear?
 “what linx i's she must av. as if i could mount up there!
 “p.s.—talking of mounting hup! the st. helena's walked up  per cent
 this very day.”
 “nd july.—rode my bay oss desperation in the park. there was me,
 lord george ringwood (lord cinqbar's son), lord ballybunnion, honorable
 capting trap, & sevral hother young swells. sir john's carridge there
 in coarse. miss hemly lets fall her booky as i pass, and i'm obleged to
 get hoff and pick it hup, & get splashed up to the his. the gettin on
 hossback agin is halways the juice & hall. just as i was on,
 desperation begins a porring the hair with his  feet, and sinks down so
 on his anches, that i'm blest if i didn't slip hoff agin over his tail, at
 which ballybunnion & the hother chaps rord with lafter.
 “as bally has istates in queen's county, i've put him on the st. helena
 direction. we call it the 'great st. helena napoleon junction,' from
 jamestown to longwood. the french are taking it hup heagerly.”
 “th july.—dined to-day at the london tavin with one of the welsh
 bords of direction i'm hon. the cwrwmwrw & plmwyddlywm, with tunnils
 through snowding and plinlimming.
 “great nashnallity of course. ap shinkin in the chair, ap llwydd in the
 vice; welsh mutton for dinner; welsh iron knives & forks; welsh rabbit
 after dinner; and a welsh harper, be hanged to him: he went strummint on
 his hojous hinstrument, and played a toon piguliarly disagreeble to me.
 “it was pore mary hann. the clarrit holmost choaked me as i tried it, and
 i very nearly wep myself as i thought of her bewtifle blue i's. why ham i
 always thinking about that gal? sasiety is sasiety, it's lors is
 irresistabl. has a man of rank i can't marry a serving-made. what would
 cinqbar and ballybunnion say?
 “p.s.—i don't like the way that cinqbars has of borroing money,
 & halways making me pay the bill. seven pound six at the 'shipp,'
 grinnidge, which i don't grudge it, for derbyshire's brown ock is the best
 in urup; nine pound three at the 'trafflygar,' and seventeen pound sixteen
 and nine at the 'star and garter,' richmond, with the countess st. emilion
 & the baroness frontignac. not one word of french could i speak, and
 in consquince had nothink to do but to make myself halmost sick with
 heating hices and desert, while the hothers were chattering and
 parlyvooing.
 “ha! i remember going to grinnidge once with mary hann, when we were more
 happy (after a walk in the park, where we ad one gingy-beer betwigst us),
 more appy with tea and a simple srimp than with hall this splender!”—
 “july .—my first-floor apartmince in halbiny is now kimpletely and
 chasely furnished—the droring-room with yellow satting and silver
 for the chairs and sophies—hemrall green tabbinet curtings with pink
 velvet & goold borders and fringes; a light blue haxminster carpit,
 embroydered with tulips; tables, secritaires, cunsoles, &c., as
 handsome as goold can make them, and candle-sticks and shandalers of the
 purest hormolew.
 “the dining-room furniture is all hoak, british hoak; round igspanding
 table, like a trick in a pantimime, iccommadating any number from  to —to
 which it is my wish to restrict my parties. curtings crimsing damask,
 chairs crimsing myrocky. portricks of my favorite great men decorats the
 wall—namely, the duke of wellington. there's four of his grace. for
 i've remarked that if you wish to pass for a man of weight and
 considdration you should holways praise and quote him. i have a valluble
 one lickwise of my queend, and  of prince halbert—has a field
 martial and halso as a privat gent. i despise the vulgar snears that are
 daily hullered aginst that igsolted pottentat. betwigxt the prins &
 the duke hangs me, in the uniform of the cinqbar malitia, of which
 cinqbars has made me capting.
 “the libery is not yet done.
 “but the bedd-roomb is the jem of the whole. if you could but see it! such
 a bedworr! ive a shyval dressing glass festooned with walanseens lace, and
 lighted up of evenings with rose-colored tapers. goold dressing-case and
 twilet of dresding cheny. my bed white and gold with curtings of pink and
 silver brocayd held up a top by a goold qpid who seems always a smilin
 angillicly hon me, has i lay with my ed on my piller hall sarounded with
 the finest mechlin. i have a own man, a yuth under him,  groombs, and a
 fimmale for the house. i've  osses: in cors if i hunt this winter i must
 increase my ixtablishment.
 “n.b. heverythink looking well in the city. st. helenas,  pm.;
 madagascars,  /; saffron hill and rookery junction, ; and the new
 lines in prospick equily incouraging.
 “people phansy it's hall gaiety and pleasure the life of us fashnabble
 gents about townd—but i can tell 'em it's not hall goold that
 glitters. they don't know our momints of hagony, hour ours of studdy and
 reflecshun. they little think when they see jeames de la pluche, exquire,
 worling round in a walce at halmax with lady hann, or lazaly stepping a
 kidrill with lady jane, poring helegant nothinx into the countess's hear
 at dinner, or gallopin his hoss desperation hover the exorcisin ground in
 the park,—they little think that leader of the tong, seaminkly so
 reckliss, is a careworn mann! and yet so it is.
 “imprymus. i've been ableged to get up all the ecomplishments at double
 quick, & to apply myself with treemenjuous energy.
 “first,—in horder to give myself a hideer of what a gentleman reely
 is, i've read the novvle of 'pelham' six times, and am to go through it 
 times mor.
 “i practis ridin and the acquirement of 'a steady and & a sure seat
 across country' assijuously  times a week, at the hippydrum riding
 grounds. many's the tumbil i've ad, and the aking boans i've suffered
 from, though i was grinnin in the park or laffin at the opra.
 “every morning from  till , the innabitance of halbany may have been
 surprised to hear the sounds of music ishuing from the apartmince of
 jeames de la pluche, exquire, letter hex. it's my dancing-master. from six
 to nine we have walces and polkies—at nine, 'mangtiang &
 depotment,' as he calls it & the manner of hentering a room,
 complimenting the ost and ostess & compotting yourself at table. at
 nine i henter from my dressing-room (has to a party), i make my bow—my
 master (he's a marquis in france, and ad misfortins, being connected with
 young lewy nepoleum) reseaves me—i hadwance—speak abowt the
 weather & the toppix of the day in an elegant & cussory manner.
 brekfst is enounced by fitzwarren, my mann—we precede to the festive
 bord—complimence is igschanged with the manner of drinking wind,
 addressing your neighbor, employing your napking & finger-glas, &c.
 and then we fall to brekfst, when i prommiss you the marquis don't eat
 like a commoner. he says i'm gettn on very well—soon i shall be able
 to inwite people to brekfst, like mr. mills, my rivle in halbany; mr.
 macauly, (who wrote that sweet book of ballets, 'the lays of hancient
 rum;') & the great mr. rodgers himself.
 “the above was wrote some weeks back. i have given brekfst sins then,
 reglar deshunys. i have ad earls and ycounts—barnits as many as i
 chose: and the pick of the railway world, of which i form a member. last
 sunday was a grand fate. i had the eleet of my friends: the display was
 sumptious; the company reshershy. everything that dellixy could suggest
 was provided by gunter. i had a countiss on my right & (the countess
 of wigglesbury, that loveliest and most dashing of staggs, who may be
 called the railway queend, as my friend george h—— is the
 railway king,) on my left the lady blanche bluenose, prince towrowski, the
 great sir huddlestone fuddlestone from the north, and a skoar of the fust
 of the fashn. i was in my gloary—the dear countess and lady blanche
 was dying with lauffing at my joax and fun—i was keeping the whole
 table in a roar—when there came a ring at my door-bell, and sudnly
 fitzwarren, my man, henters with an air of constanation. 'theres somebody
 at the door,' says he in a visper.
 “'oh, it's that dear lady hemily,' says i, 'and that lazy raskle of a
 husband of hers. trot them in, fitzwarren,' (for you see by this time i
 had adopted quite the manners and hease of the arristoxy.)—and so,
 going out, with a look of wonder he returned presently, enouncing mr.
 & mrs. blodder.
 “i turned gashly pail. the table—the guests—the countiss—towrouski,
 and the rest, weald round & round before my hagitated i's. it was my
 grandmother and huncle bill. she is a washerwoman at healing common, and
 he—he keeps a wegetable donkey-cart.
 “y, y hadn't john, the tiger, igscluded them? he had tried. but the
 unconscious, though worthy creeters, adwanced in spite of him, huncle bill
 bringing in the old lady grinning on his harm!
 “phansy my feelinx.”
 “immagin when these unfortnat members of my famly hentered the room: you
 may phansy the ixtonnishment of the nobil company presnt. old grann looked
 round the room quite estounded by its horiental splender, and huncle bill
 (pulling off his phantail, & seluting the company as respeckfly as his
 wulgar natur would alow) says—'crikey, jeames, you've got a better
 birth here than you ad where you were in the plush and powder line.' 'try
 a few of them plovers hegs, sir,' i says, whishing, i'm asheamed to say,
 that somethink would choke huncle b—-; 'and i hope, mam, now you've
 ad the kindniss to wisit me, a little refreshment won't be out of your
 way.'
 “this i said, detummind to put a good fase on the matter: and because in
 herly times i'd reseaved a great deal of kindniss from the hold lady,
 which i should be a roag to forgit. she paid for my schooling; she got up
 my fine linning gratis; shes given me many & many a lb; and manys the
 time in appy appy days when me and maryhann has taken tea. but never mind
 that. 'mam,' says i, 'you must be tired hafter your walk.'
 “'walk? nonsince, jeames,' says she; 'it's saturday, & i came in, in
 the cart.' 'black or green tea, maam?' says fitzwarren, intarupting her.
 and i will say the feller showed his nouce & good breeding in this
 difficklt momink; for he'd halready silenced huncle bill, whose mouth was
 now full of muffinx, am, blowny sausag, perrigole pie, and other
 dellixies.
 “'wouldn't you like a little somethink in your tea, mam,' says that sly
 wagg cinqbars. 'he knows what i likes,' replies the hawfle hold lady,
 pinting to me, (which i knew it very well, having often seen her take a
 glass of hojous gin along with her bohee), and so i was ableeged to horder
 fitzwarren to bring round the licures, and to help my unfortnit rellatif
 to a bumper of ollands. she tost it hoff to the elth of the company,
 giving a smack with her lipps after she'd emtied the glas, which very
 nearly caused me to phaint with hagny. but, luckaly for me, she didn't
 igspose herself much farther: for when cinqbars was pressing her to take
 another glas, i cried out, 'don't, my lord,' on which old grann hearing
 him edressed by his title, cried out, 'a lord! o law!' and got up and made
 him a cutsy, and coodnt be peswaded to speak another word. the presents of
 the noble gent heavidently made her uneezy.
 “the countiss on my right and had shownt symtms of ixtream disgust at the
 beayvior of my relations, and having called for her carridg, got up to
 leave the room, with the most dignified hair. i, of coarse, rose to
 conduct her to her weakle. ah, what a contrast it was! there it stood,
 with stars and garters hall hover the pannels; the footmin in
 peach-colored tites; the hosses worth  hundred apiece;—and there
 stood the horrid linnen-cart, with 'mary blodder, laundress, ealing,
 middlesex,' wrote on the bord, and waiting till my abandind old parint
 should come out.
 “cinqbars insisted upon helping her in. sir huddlestone fuddlestone, the
 great barnet from the north, who, great as he is, is as stewpid as a howl,
 looked on, hardly trusting his goggle i's as they witnessed the sean. but
 little lively good naterd lady kitty quickset, who was going away with the
 countiss, held her little & out of the carridge to me and said, 'mr.
 de la pluche, you are a much better man than i took you to be. though her
 ladyship is horrified, & though your grandmother did take gin for
 breakfast, don't give her up. no one ever came to harm yet for honoring
 their father & mother.'
 “and this was a sort of consolation to me, and i observed that all the
 good fellers thought none the wuss of me. cinqbars said i was a trump for
 sticking up for the old washerwoman; lord george gills said she should
 have his linning; and so they cut their joax, and i let them. but it was a
 great releaf to my mind when the cart drove hoff.
 “there was one pint which my grandmother observed, and which, i muss say,
 i thought lickwise: 'ho, jeames,' says she, 'hall those fine ladies in
 sattns and velvets is very well, but there's not one of em can hold a
 candle to mary hann.'”
 “railway spec is going on phamusly. you should see how polite they har at
 my bankers now! sir paul pump aldgate, & company. they bow me out of
 the back parlor as if i was a nybobb. every body says i'm worth half a
 millium. the number of lines they're putting me upon is inkumseavable.
 i've put fitzwarren, my man, upon several. reginald fitzwarren, esquire,
 looks splendid in a perspectus; and the raskle owns that he has made two
 thowsnd.
 “how the ladies, & men too, foller and flatter me! if i go into lady
 binsis hopra box, she makes room for me, who ever is there, and cries out,
 'o do make room for that dear creature!' and she complyments me on my
 taste in musick, or my new broom-oss, or the phansy of my weskit, and
 always ends by asking me for some shares. old lord bareacres, as stiff as
 a poaker, as prowd as loosyfer, as poor as joab—even he condysends
 to be sivvle to the great de la pluche, and begged me at harthur's,
 lately, in his sollom, pompus way, 'to faver him with five minutes'
 conversation.' i knew what was coming—application for shares—put
 him down on my private list. would'nt mind the scrag end junction passing
 through bareacres—hoped i'd come down and shoot there.
 “i gave the old humbugg a few shares out of my own pocket. 'there, old
 pride,' says i, 'i like to see you down on your knees to a footman. there,
 old pompossaty! take fifty pound; i like to see you come cringing and
 begging for it.' whenever i see him in a very public place, i take my
 change for my money. i digg him in the ribbs, or slap his padded old
 shoulders. i call him, 'bareacres, my old buck!' and i see him wince. it
 does my art good.
 “i'm in low sperits. a disagreeable insadent has just occurred. lady pump,
 the banker's wife, asked me to dinner. i sat on her right, of course, with
 an uncommon gal ner me, with whom i was getting on in my fassanating way—full
 of lacy ally (as the marquis says) and easy plesntry. old pump, from the
 end of the table, asked me to drink shampane; and on turning to tak the
 glass i saw charles wackles (with womb i'd been imployed at colonel
 spurriers' house) grinning over his shoulder at the butler.
 “the beest reckonised me. has i was putting on my palto in the hall, he
 came up again: 'how dy doo, jeames?' says he, in a findish visper. 'just
 come out here, chawles,' says i, 'i've a word for you, my old boy.' so i
 beckoned him into portland place, with my pus in my hand, as if i was
 going to give him a sovaring.
 “'i think you said “jeames,” chawles,' says i, 'and grind at me at
 dinner?'
 “'why, sir.' says he, 'we're old friends, you know.'
 “'take that for old friendship then,' says i, and i gave him just one on
 the noas, which sent him down on the pavemint as if he'd been shot. and
 mounting myjesticly into my cabb, i left the rest of the grinning
 scoundrills to pick him up, & droav to the clubb.”
 “have this day kimpleated a little efair with my friend george, earl
 bareacres, which i trust will be to the advantidge both of self & that
 noble gent. adjining the bareacre proppaty is a small piece of land of
 about  acres, called squallop hill, igseeding advantageous for the
 cultivation of sheep, which have been found to have a pickewlear fine
 flaviour from the natur of the grass, tyme, heather, and other hodarefarus
 plants which grows on that mounting in the places where the rox and stones
 don't prevent them. thistles here is also remarkable fine, and the land is
 also devided hoff by luxurient stone hedges—much more usefle and
 ickonomicle than your quickset or any of that rubbishing sort of timber:
 indeed the sile is of that fine natur, that timber refuses to grow there
 altogether. i gave bareacres l. an acre for this land (the igsact
 premium of my st. helena shares)—a very handsom price for land which
 never yielded two shillings an acre; and very convenient to his lordship i
 know, who had a bill coming due at his bankers which he had given them.
 james de la pluche, esquire, is thus for the fust time a landed propriator—or
 rayther, i should say, is about to reshume the rank & dignity in the
 country which his hancestors so long occupied.
 “i have caused one of our inginears to make me a plann of the squallop
 estate, diddlesexshire, the property of &c. &c., bordered on the
 north by lord bareacres' country; on the west by sir granby growler; on
 the south by the hotion. an arkytect & survare, a young feller of
 great emagination, womb we have employed to make a survey of the great
 caffranan line, has built me a beautiful villar (on paper), plushton hall,
 diddlesex, the seat of i de la p., esquire. the house is reprasented a
 handsome itallian structer, imbusmd in woods, and circumwented by
 beautiful gardings. theres a lake in front with boatsful of nobillaty and
 musitions floting on its placid sufface—and a curricle is a driving
 up to the grand hentrance, and me in it, with mrs., or perhaps lady
 hangelana de la pluche. i speak adwisedly. i may be going to form a noble
 kinexion. i may be (by marridge) going to unight my family once more with
 harrystoxy, from which misfortn has for some sentries separated us. i have
 dreams of that sort.
 “i've sean sevral times in a dalitifle vishn a serting erl, standing in a
 hattitude of bennydiction, and rattafying my union with a serting butifle
 young lady, his daughter. phansy mr. or sir jeames and lady hangelina de
 la pluche! ho! what will the old washywoman, my grandmother, say? she may
 sell her mangle then, and shall too by my honor as a gent.”
 “as for squallop hill, its not to be emadgind that i was going to give
  lb. for a bleak mounting like that, unless i had some ideer in vew.
 ham i not a director of the grand diddlesex? don't squallop lie amediately
 betwigst old bone house, single gloster, and scrag end, through which
 cities our line passes? i will have , lb. for that mounting, or my
 name is not jeames. i have arranged a little barging too for my friend the
 erl. the line will pass through a hangle of bareacre park. he shall have a
 good compensation i promis you; and then i shall get back the  i lent
 him. his banker's acount, i fear, is in a horrid state.”
 [the diary now for several days contains particulars of no interest to the
 public:—memoranda of city dinners—meetings of directors—fashionable
 parties in which mr. jeames figures, and nearly always by the side of his
 new friend, lord bareacres, whose “pompossaty,” as previously described,
 seems to have almost entirely subsided.]
 we then come to the following:—
 “with a prowd and thankfle art, i copy off this morning's gayzett the
 following news:—
 “'commission signed by the lord lieutenant of the county of diddlesex.
 “'james augustus de la pluche, esquire, to be deputy lieutenant.'”
 “'north diddlesex regiment of yeomanry cavalry.
 “'james augustus de la pluche, esquire, to be captain, vice blowhard,
 promoted.”'
 “and his it so? ham i indeed a landed propriator—a deppaty leftnant—a
 capting? may i hatend the cort of my sovring? and dror a sayber in my
 country's defens? i wish the french wood land, and me at the head of my
 squadring on my hoss desparation. how i'd extonish 'em! how the gals will
 stare when they see me in youniform! how mary hann would—but
 nonsince! i'm halways thinking of that pore gal. she's left sir john's.
 she couldn't abear to stay after i went, i've heerd say. i hope she's got
 a good place. any sumn of money that would sett her up in bisniss, or make
 her comfarable, i'd come down with like a mann. i told my granmother so,
 who sees her, and rode down to healing on porpose on desparation to leave
 a five lb. noat in an anvylope. but she's sent it back, sealed with a
 thimbill.”
 tuesday.—reseaved the folloing letter from lord b——,
 rellatiff to my presntation at cort and the youniform i shall wear on that
 hospicious seramony:—
 “'my dear de la pluche,—i think you had better be presented as a
 deputy lieutenant. as for the diddlesex yeomanry, i hardly know what the
 uniform is now. the last time we were out was in , when the prince of
 wales reviewed us, and when we wore french gray jackets, leathers, red
 morocco boots, crimson pelisses, brass helmets with leopard-skin and a
 white plume, and the regulation pig-tail of eighteen inches. that dress
 will hardly answer at present, and must be modified, of coarse. we were
 called the white feathers, in those days. for my part, i decidedly
 recommend the deputy lieutenant.
 “'i shall be happy to present you at the levee and at the drawing-room.
 lady bareacres will be in town for the th, with angelina, who will be
 presented on that day. my wife has heard much of you, and is anxious to
 make your acquaintance.
 “'all my people are backward with their rents: for heaven's sake, my dear
 fellow, lend me five hundred and oblige
 “'yours, very gratefully,
 “note.—bareacres may press me about the depity leftnant; but i'm for
 the cavvlery.”
 “jewly will always be a sacrid anniwussary with me. it was in that month
 that i became persnally ecquaintid with my prins and my gracious sovarink.
 “long before the hospitious event acurd, you may imadgin that my busm was
 in no triffling flutter. sleaplis of nights, i past them thinking of the
 great ewent—or if igsosted natur did clothes my highlids—the
 eyedear of my waking thoughts pevaded my slummers. corts, erls,
 presntations, goldstix, gracious sovarinx mengling in my dreembs
 unceasnly. i blush to say it (for humin prisumpshn never surely igseeded
 that of my wicked wickid vishn), one night i actially dremt that her r. h.
 the princess hallis was grown up, and that there was a cabinit counsel to
 detummin whether her & was to be bestoad on me or the prins of
 sax-muffinhausen-pumpenstein, a young prooshn or germing zion of
 nobillaty. i ask umly parding for this hordacious ideer.
 “i said, in my fommer remarx, that i had detummined to be presented to the
 notus of my reveared sovaring in a melintary coschewm. the court-shoots in
 which sivillians attend a levy are so uncomming like the—the—livries
 (ojous wud! i  to put it down) i used to wear before entering sosiaty,
 that i couldn't abide the notium of wearing one. my detummination was
 fumly fixt to apeer as a yominry cavilry hoffiser, in the galleant
 youniform of the north diddlesex huzzas.
 “has that redgmint had not been out sins , i thought myself quite
 hotherized to make such halterations in the youniform as shuited the
 presnt time and my metured and elygint taste. pig-tales was out of the
 question. tites i was detummind to mintain. my legg is praps the finist
 pint about me, and i was risolved not to hide it under a booshle.
 “i phixt on scarlit tites, then, imbridered with goold, as i have seen
 widdicomb wear them at hashleys when me and mary hann used to go there.
 ninety-six guineas worth of rich goold lace and cord did i have
 myhandering hall hover those shoperb inagspressables.
 “yellow marocky heshn boots, red eels, goold spurs and goold tassels as
 bigg as belpulls.
 “jackit—french gray and silver oringe fasings & cuphs, according
 to the old patn; belt, green and goold, tight round my pusn, & settin
 hoff the cemetry of my figgar not disadvintajusly.
 “a huzza paleese of pupple velvit & sable fir. a sayber of demaskus
 steal, and a sabertash (in which i kep my odiclone and imbridered pocket
 ankercher), kimpleat my acooterments, which, without vannaty, was, i
 flatter myself, uneak.
 “but the crownding triumph was my hat. i couldnt wear a cock at. the
 huzzahs dont use 'em. i wouldnt wear the hojous old brass elmet &
 leppardskin. i choas a hat which is dear to the memry of hevery brittn; an
 at which was inwented by my feeld marshle and adord prins; an at which
 vulgar prejidis & joaking has in vane etempted to run down. i chose
 the halbert at. i didn't tell bareacres of this egsabishn of loilty,
 intending to surprise him. the white ploom of the west diddlesex yomingry
 i fixt on the topp of this shacko, where it spread hout like a
 shaving-brush.
 “you may be sure that befor the fatle day arrived, i didnt niglect to
 practus my part well; and had sevral rehustles, as they say.
 “this was the way. i used to dress myself in my full togs. i made
 fitzwarren, my boddy servnt, stand at the dor, and figger as the lord in
 waiting. i put mrs. bloker, my laundress, in my grand harm chair to
 reprasent the horgust pusn of my sovring; frederick, my secknd man,
 standing on her left, in the hattatude of an illustrus prins consort. hall
 the candles were lighted. 'captain de la pluche, presented by herl
 bareacres,' fitzwarren, my man, igsclaimed, as adwancing i made obasins to
 the thrown. nealin on one nee, i cast a glans of unhuttarable loilty
 towards the british crownd, then stepping gracefully hup, (my dimascus
 simiter would git betwigst my ligs, in so doink, which at fust was wery
 disagreeble)—rising hup grasefly, i say, i flung a look of manly but
 respeckfl hommitch tords my prins, and then ellygntly ritreated backards
 out of the roil presents. i kep my  suvnts hup for  hours at this gaym
 the night before my presntation, and yet i was the fust to be hup with the
 sunrice. i coodnt sleep that night. by abowt six o'clock in the morning i
 was drest in my full uniform; and i didnt know how to pass the
 interveaning hours.
 “'my granmother hasnt seen me in full phigg,' says i. 'it will rejoice
 that pore old sole to behold one of her race so suxesfle in life. has i
 ave read in the novle of “kennleworth,” that the herl goes down in cort
 dress and extoneshes hamy robsart, i will go down in all my splender and
 astownd my old washywoman of a granmother.' to make this detummination; to
 horder my broom; to knock down frederick the groomb for delaying to bring
 it; was with me the wuck of a momint. the next sor as galliant a cavyleer
 as hever rode in a cabb, skowering the road to healing.
 “i arrived at the well-known cottitch. my huncle was habsent with the
 cart; but the dor of the humble eboad stood hopen, and i passed through
 the little garding where the close was hanging out to dry. my snowy ploom
 was ableeged to bend under the lowly porch, as i hentered the apartmint.
 “there was a smell of tea there—there's always a smell of tea there—the
 old lady was at her bohee as usual. i advanced tords her; but ha! phansy
 my extonishment when i sor mary hann!
 “i halmost faintid with himotion. 'ho, jeames!' (she has said to me
 subsquintly) 'mortial mann never looked so bewtifle as you did when you
 arrived on the day of the levy. you were no longer mortial, you were
 diwine!'
 “r! what little justas the hartist has done to my mannly etractions in the
 groce carriketure he's made of me.” *
 * this refers to an illustrated edition of the work.
 “nothing, perhaps, ever created so great a sensashun as my hentrance to
 st. jeames's, on the day of the levy. the tuckish hambasdor himself was
 not so much remarked as my shuperb turn out.
 “as a millentary man, and a north diddlesex huzza, i was resolved to come
 to the ground on hossback. i had desparation phigd out as a charger, and
 got  melentery dresses from ollywell street, in which i drest my  men
 (fitzwarren, hout of livry, woodnt stand it,) and  fellers from rimles,
 where my hosses stand at livry. i rode up st. jeames's street, with my 
 hadycongs—the people huzzaying—the gals waving their
 hankerchers, as if i were a foring prins—hall the winders crowdid to
 see me pass.
 “the guard must have taken me for a hempror at least, when i came, for the
 drums beat, and the guard turned out and seluted me with presented harms.
 “what a momink of triumth it was! i sprung myjestickly from desperation. i
 gav the rains to one of my horderlies, and, salewting the crowd, i past
 into the presnts of my most gracious mrs.
 “you, peraps, may igspect that i should narrait at lenth the suckmstanzas
 of my hawjince with the british crown. but i am not one who would gratafy
 imputtnint curaiosaty. rispect for our reckonized instatewtions is my fust
 quallaty. i, for one, will dye rallying round my thrown.
 “suffise it to say, when i stood in the horgust presnts,—when i sor
 on the right & of my himperial sovring that most gracious prins, to
 admire womb has been the chief objick of my life, my busum was seased with
 an imotium which my penn rifewses to dixcribe—my trembling knees
 halmost rifused their hoffis—i reckleck nothing mor until i was
 found phainting in the harms of the lord chamberling. sir robert peal apnd
 to be standing by (i knew our wuthy primmier by punch's picturs of him,
 igspecially his ligs), and he was conwussing with a man of womb i shall
 say nothink, but that he is a hero of  fites, and hevery fite he fit he
 one. nead i say that i elude to harthur of wellingting? i introjuiced
 myself to these jents, and intend to improve the equaintance, and peraps
 ast guvmint for a barnetcy.
 “but there was another pusn womb on this droring-room i fust had the
 inagspressable dalite to beold. this was that star of fashing, that
 sinecure of neighboring i's, as milting observes, the ecomplisht lady
 hangelina thistlewood, daughter of my exlent frend, john george godfrey de
 bullion thistlewood, earl of bareacres, baron southdown, in the peeridge
 of the united kingdom, baron haggismore, in scotland, k.t., lord leftnant
 of the county of diddlesex, &c. &c. this young lady was with her
 noble ma, when i was kinducted tords her. and surely never lighted on this
 hearth a more delightfle vishn. in that gallixy of bewty the lady
 hangelina was the fairest star—in that reath of loveliness the
 sweetest rosebud! pore mary hann, my art's young affeckshns had been
 senterd on thee; but like water through a sivv, her immidge disappeared in
 a momink, and left me intransd in the presnts of hangelina.
 “lady bareacres made me a myjestick bow—a grand and hawfle pusnage
 her ladyship is, with a roming nose, and an enawmus ploom of hostridge
 phethers; the fare hangelina smiled with a sweetness perfickly
 bewhildring, and said, 'o, mr. de la pluche, i'm so delighted to make your
 acquaintance. i have often heard of you.'
 “'who,' says i, 'has mentioned my insiggnificknt igsistance to the fair
 lady hangelina? kel bonure igstrame poor mwaw!' (for you see i've not
 studdied 'pelham' for nothink, and have lunt a few french phraces, without
 which no gent of fashn speaks now.)
 “'o,' replies my lady, 'it was papa first; and then a very, very old
 friend of yours.'
 “'whose name is,' says i, pusht on by my stoopid curawsaty—
 “'hoggins—mary ann hoggins'—ansurred my lady (laffing phit to
 splitt her little sides). 'she is my maid, mr. de la pluche, and i'm
 afraid you are a very sad, sad person.'
 “'a mere baggytell,' says i. 'in fommer days i was equainted with that
 young woman; but haltered suckmstancies have sepparated us for hever, and
 mong cure is irratreevably perdew elsewhere.'
 “'do tell me all about it. who is it? when was it? we are all dying to
 know.”
 “'since about two minnits, and the ladys name begins with a ha,' says i,
 looking her tendarly in the face, and conjring up hall the fassanations of
 my smile.
 “'mr. de la pluche,' here said a gentleman in whiskers and mistashes
 standing by, 'hadn't you better take your spurs out of the countess of
 bareacres' train?'—'never mind mamma's train' (said lady hangelina):
 'this is the great mr. de la pluche, who is to make all our fortunes—yours
 too. mr. de la pluche, let me present you to captain george silvertop,'—the
 capting bent just one jint of his back very slitely; i retund his stare
 with equill hottiness. 'go and see for lady bareacres' carridge, george,'
 says his lordship; and vispers to me, 'a cousin of ours—a poor
 relation.' so i took no notis of the feller when he came back, nor in my
 subsquint visits to hill street, where it seems a knife and fork was laid
 reglar for this shabby capting.”
 “thusday night.—o hangelina, hangelina, my pashn for you hogments
 daily! i've bean with her two the hopra. i sent her a bewtifle camellia
 jyponiky from covn garding, with a request she would wear it in her raving
 air. i woar another in my butnole. evns, what was my sattusfackshn as i
 leant hover her chair, and igsammined the house with my glas!
 “she was as sulky and silent as pawsble, however—would scarcely
 speek; although i kijoled her with a thowsnd little plesntries. i spose it
 was because that wulgar raskle silvertop wood stay in the box. as if he
 didn't know (lady b.'s as deaf as a poast and counts for nothink) that
 people sometimes like a tatytaty.”
 “friday.—i was sleeples all night. i gave went to my feelings in the
 folloring lines—there's a hair out of balfe's hopera that she's fond
 of. i edapted them to that mellady.
 “she was in the droring-room alone with lady b. she was wobbling at the
 pyanna as i hentered. i flung the convasation upon mewsick; said i sung
 myself (i've ad lesns lately of signor twankydillo); and, on her
 rekwesting me to faver her with somethink, i bust out with my pom:
 “'when moonlike ore the hazure seas
 in soft effulgence swells,
 when silver jews and balmy breaze
 bend down the lily's bells;
 when calm and deap, the rosy sleap
 has lapt your soal in dreems,
 r hangeline! r lady mine!
 dost thou remember jeames?
 “'i mark thee in the marble all,
 where englands loveliest shine—
 i say the fairest of them hall
 is lady hangeline.
 my soul, in desolate eclipse,
 with recollection teems—
 and then i hask, with weeping lips
 dost thou remember jeames?
 “'away! i may not tell thee hall
 this soughring heart endures—
 there is a lonely sperrit-call
 that sorrow never cures;
 there is a little, little star,
 that still above me beams;
 it is the star of hope—but ar!
 dost thou remember jeames?'
 “when i came to the last words, 'dost thou remember je-e-e-ams?' i threw
 such an igspresshn of unuttrable tenderniss into the shake at the hend,
 that hangelina could bare it no more. a bust of uncumtrollable emotium
 seized her. she put her ankercher to her face and left the room. i heard
 her laffing and sobbing histerickly in the bedwor.
 “o hangelina—my adord one, my arts joy!” . . .
 “bareacres, me, the ladies of the famly, with their sweet southdown, b's
 eldest son, and george silvertop, the shabby capting (who seems to git
 leaf from his ridgmint whenhever he likes,) have beene down into diddlesex
 for a few days, enjying the spawts of the feald there.
 “never having done much in the gunning line (since when a hinnasent boy,
 me and jim cox used to go out at healing, and shoot sparrers in the edges
 with a pistle)—i was reyther dowtfle as to my suxes as a shot, and
 practusd for some days at a stoughd bird in a shooting gallery, which a
 chap histed up and down with a string. i sugseaded in itting the hannimle
 pretty well. i bought awker's 'shooting-guide,' two double-guns at
 mantings, and salected from the french prints of fashn the most gawjus and
 ellygant sportting ebillyment. a lite blue velvet and goold cap, woar very
 much on one hear, a cravatt of yaller & green imbroidered satting, a
 weskit of the mcgrigger plaid, & a jacket of the mcwhirter tartn,
 (with large, motherapurl butns, engraved with coaches & osses, and
 sporting subjix,) high leather gayters, and marocky shooting shoes, was
 the simple hellymence of my costewm, and i flatter myself set hoff my
 figger in rayther a fayverable way. i took down none of my own pusnal
 istablishmint except fitzwarren, my hone mann, and my grooms, with
 desparation and my curricle osses, and the fourgong containing my
 dressing-case and close.
 “i was heverywhere introjuiced in the county as the great railroad
 cappitlist, who was to make diddlesex the most prawsperous districk of the
 hempire. the squires prest forrards to welcome the new comer amongst 'em;
 and we had a hagricultural meating of the bareacres tenantry, where i made
 a speech droring tears from heavery i. it was in compliment to a layborer
 who had brought up sixteen children, and lived sixty years on the istate
 on seven bobb a week. i am not prowd, though i know my station. i shook
 hands with that mann in lavinder kidd gloves. i told him that the purshuit
 of hagriculture wos the noblist hockupations of humannaty: i spoke of the
 yoming of hengland, who (under the command of my hancisters) had conquered
 at hadjincourt & cressy; and i gave him a pair of new velveteen
 inagspressables, with two and six in each pocket, as a reward for three
 score years of labor. fitzwarren, my man, brought them forrards on a
 satting cushing. has i sat down defning chears selewted the horator; the
 band struck up 'the good old english gentleman.' i looked to the ladies
 galry; my hangelina waived her ankasher and kissd her &; and i sor in
 the distans that pore mary hann efected evidently to tears by my
 ellaquints.”
 “what an adwance that gal has made since she's been in lady hangelina's
 company! sins she wears her young lady's igsploded gownds and retired caps
 and ribbings, there's an ellygance abowt her which is puffickly admarable;
 and which, haddid to her own natral bewty & sweetniss, creates in my
 boozum serting sensatiums . . . shor! i mustn't give way to fealinx
 unwuthy of a member of the aristoxy. what can she be to me but a mear
 recklection—a vishn of former ears?
 “i'm blest if i didn mistake her for hangelina herself yesterday. i met
 her in the grand collydore of bareacres castle. i sor a lady in a
 melumcolly hattatude gacing outawinder at the setting sun, which was
 eluminating the fair parx and gardings of the ancient demean.
 “'bewchus lady hangelina,' says i—'a penny for your ladyship's
 thought,' says i.
 “'ho, jeames! ho, mr. de la pluche!' hansered a well-known vice, with a
 haxnt of sadnis which went to my art. 'you know what my thoughts are, well
 enough. i was thinking of happy, happy old times, when both of us were poo—poo—oor,'
 says mary hann, busting out in a phit of crying, a thing i can't ebide. i
 took her and tried to cumft her: i pinted out the diffrents of our
 sitawashns; igsplained to her that proppaty has its jewties as well as its
 previletches, and that my juty clearly was to marry into a noble famly. i
 kep on talking to her (she sobbing and going hon hall the time) till lady
 hangelina herself came up—'the real siming pewer,' as they say in
 the play.
 “there they stood together—them two young women. i don't know which
 is the ansamest. i coodn help comparing them; and i coodnt help comparing
 myself to a certing hannimle i've read of, that found it difficklt to make
 a choice betwigst  bundles of a.”
 “that ungrateful beest fitzwarren—my oan man—a feller i've
 maid a fortune for—a feller i give  lb. per hannum to!—a
 low bred wallydyshamber! he must be thinking of falling in love too! and
 treating me to his imperence.
 “he's a great big athlatic feller—six foot i, with a pair of black
 whiskers like air-brushes—with a look of a colonel in the harmy—a
 dangerous pawmpus-spoken raskle i warrunt you. i was coming ome from
 shuiting this hafternoon—and passing through lady hangelina's
 flour-garding, who should i see in the summerouse, but mary hann
 pretending to em an ankyshr and mr. fitzwarren paying his cort to her?
 “'you may as well have me, mary hann,' says he. 'i've saved money. we'll
 take a public-house and i'll make a lady of you. i'm not a purse-proud
 ungrateful fellow like jeames—who's such a snob ('such a snob' was
 his very words!) that i'm ashamed to wait on him—who's the laughing
 stock of all the gentry and the housekeeper's room too—try a man,'
 says he—'don't be taking on about such a humbug as jeames.'
 “here young joe the keaper's sun, who was carrying my bagg, bust out a
 laffing thereby causing mr. fitwarren to turn round and intarupt this
 polite convasation.
 “i was in such a rayge. 'quit the building, mary hann,' says i to the
 young woman—and you, mr. fitzwarren, have the goodness to remain.'
 “'i give you warning,' roars he, looking black, blue, yaller—all the
 colors of the ranebo.
 “'take off your coat, you imperent, hungrateful scoundrl,' says i.
 “'it's not your livery,' says he.
 “'peraps you'll understand me, when i take off my own,' says i,
 unbuttoning the motherapurls of the macwhirter tartn. 'take my jackit,
 joe,' says i to the boy,—and put myself in a hattitude about which
 there was no mistayk.
 “he's  stone heavier than me—and knows the use of his ands as well
 as most men; but in a fite, blood's everythink: the snobb can't stand
 before the gentleman; and i should have killed him, i've little doubt, but
 they came and stopt the fite betwigst us before we'd had more than 
 rounds.
 “i punisht the raskle tremenjusly in that time, though; and i'm writing
 this in my own sittn-room, not being able to come down to dinner on
 account of a black-eye i've got, which is sweld up and disfiggrs me
 dreadfl.”
 “on account of the hoffle black i which i reseaved in my rangcounter with
 the hinfimus fitzwarren, i kep my roomb for sevral days, with the
 rose-colored curtings of the apartmint closed, so as to form an agreeable
 twilike; and a light-bloo sattin shayd over the injard pheacher. my woons
 was thus made to become me as much as pawsable; and (has the poick well
 observes 'nun but the brayv desuvs the fare') i cumsoled myself in the
 sasiaty of the ladies for my tempory disfiggarment.
 “it was mary hann who summind the house and put an end to my phisticoughs
 with fitzwarren. i licked him and bare him no mallis: but of corse i
 dismist the imperent scoundrill from my suvvis, apinting adolphus, my
 page, to his post of confidenshle valley.
 “mary hann and her young and lovely mrs. kep paying me continyoul visits
 during my retiremint. lady hangelina was halways sending me messidges by
 her: while my exlent friend, lady bareacres (on the contry) was always
 sending me toakns of affeckshn by hangelina. now it was a coolin
 hi-lotium, inwented by herself, that her ladyship would perscribe—then,
 agin, it would be a booky of flowers (my favrit polly hanthuses,
 pellagoniums, and jyponikys), which none but the fair &s of hangelina
 could dispose about the chamber of the hinvyleed. ho! those dear mothers!
 when they wish to find a chans for a galliant young feller, or to
 ixtablish their dear gals in life, what awpertunities they will give a
 man! you'd have phansied i was so hill (on account of my black hi), that i
 couldnt live exsep upon chicking and spoon-meat, and jellies, and
 blemonges, and that i coudnt eat the latter dellixies (which i ebomminate
 onternoo, prefurring a cut of beaf or muttn to hall the kickpshaws of
 france), unless hangelina brought them. i et 'em, and sacrafised myself
 for her dear sayk.
 “i may stayt here that in privit convasations with old lord b. and his
 son, i had mayd my proposals for hangelina, and was axepted, and hoped
 soon to be made the appiest gent in hengland.
 “'you must break the matter gently to her,' said her hexlent father. 'you
 have my warmest wishes, my dear mr. de la pluche, and those of my lady
 bareacres; but i am not—not quite certain about lady angelina's
 feelings. girls are wild and romantic. they do not see the necessity of
 prudent establishments, and i have never yet been able to make angelina
 understand the embarrassments of her family. these silly creatures prate
 about love and a cottage, and despise advantages which wiser heads than
 theirs know how to estimate.'
 “'do you mean that she aint fassanated by me?' says i, bursting out at
 this outrayjus ideer.
 “'she will be, my dear sir. you have already pleased her,—your
 admirable manners must succeed in captivating her, and a fond father's
 wishes will be crowned on the day in which you enter our family.'
 “'recklect, gents,' says i to the  lords,—'a barging's a barging—i'll
 pay hoff southdown's jews, when i'm his brother. as a straynger'—(this
 i said in a sarcastickle toan)—'i wouldn't take such a libbaty. when
 i'm your suninlor i'll treble the valyou of your estayt. i'll make your
 incumbrinces as right as a trivit, and restor the ouse of bareacres to its
 herly splender. but a pig in a poak is not the way of transacting bisniss
 imployed by jeames de la pluche, esquire.'
 “and i had a right to speak in this way. i was one of the greatest
 scrip-holders in hengland; and calclated on a kilossle fortune. all my
 shares was rising immence. every poast brot me noose that i was sevral
 thowsands richer than the day befor. i was detummind not to reerlize till
 the proper time, and then to buy istates; to found a new family of
 delapluches, and to alie myself with the aristoxy of my country.
 “these pints i reprasented to pore mary hann hover and hover agin. 'if
 you'd been lady hangelina, my dear gal,' says i, 'i would have married
 you: and why don't i? because my dooty prewents me. i'm a marter to dooty;
 and you, my pore gal, must cumsole yorself with that ideer.'
 “there seemed to be a consperracy, too, between that silvertop and lady
 hangelina to drive me to the same pint. 'what a plucky fellow you were,
 pluche,' says he (he was rayther more familiar than i liked), 'in your
 fight with fitzwarren—to engage a man of twice your strength and
 science, though you were sure to be beaten' (this is an etroashous
 folsood: i should have finnisht fitz in  minnits), 'for the sake of poor
 mary hann! that's a generous fellow. i like to see a man risen to eminence
 like you, having his heart in the right place. when is to be the marriage,
 my boy?'
 “'capting s.' says i, 'my marridge consunns your most umble servnt a
 precious sight more than you;'—and i gev him to understand i didn't
 want him to put in his ore—i wasn't afrayd of his whiskers, i
 prommis you, capting as he was. i'm a british lion, i am as brayv as
 bonypert, hannible, or holiver crummle, and would face bagnits as well as
 any evy drigoon of 'em all.
 “lady hangelina, too, igspawstulated in her hartfl way. 'mr. de la pluche
 (seshee), why, why press this point? you can't suppose that you will be
 happy with a person like me?'
 “'i adoar you, charming gal!' says i. 'never, never go to say any such
 thing.'
 “'you adored mary ann first,' answers her ladyship; 'you can't keep your
 eyes off her now. if any man courts her you grow so jealous that you begin
 beating him. you will break the girl's heart if you don't marry her, and
 perhaps some one else's—but you don't mind that.'
 “'break yours, you adoarible creature! i'd die first! and as for mary
 hann, she will git over it; people's arts aint broakn so easy. once for
 all, suckmstances is changed betwigst me and er. it's a pang to part with
 her' (says i, my fine hi's filling with tears), 'but part from her i
 must.'
 “it was curius to remark abowt that singlar gal, lady hangelina, that
 melumcolly as she was when she was talking to me, and ever so disml—yet
 she kep on laffing every minute like the juice and all.
 “'what a sacrifice!' says she; 'it's like napoleon giving up josephine.
 what anguish it must cause to your susceptible heart!'
 “'it does,' says i—'hagnies!' (another laff.)
 “'and if—if i don't accept you—you will invade the states of
 the emperor, my papa, and i am to be made the sacrifice and the occasion
 of peace between you!'
 “'i don't know what you're eluding to about joseyfeen and hemperors your
 pas; but i know that your pa's estate is over hedaneers morgidged; that if
 some one don't elp him, he's no better than an old pawper; that he owes me
 a lot of money; and that i'm the man that can sell him up hoss & foot;
 or set him up agen—that's what i know, lady hangelina,' says i, with
 a hair as much as to say, 'put that in your ladyship's pipe and smoke it.'
 “and so i left her, and nex day a serting fashnable paper enounced—
 “'marriage in high life.—we hear that a matrimonial union is on the
 tapis between a gentleman who has made a colossal fortune in the railway
 world, and the only daughter of a noble earl, whose estates are situated
 in d-ddles-x. an early day is fixed for this interesting event.'”
 “contry to my expigtations (but when or ow can we reckn upon the fealinx
 of wimming?) mary hann didn't seem to be much efected by the hideer of my
 marridge with hangelinar. i was rayther disapinted peraps that the fickle
 young gal reckumsiled herself so easy to give me hup, for we gents are
 creechers of vannaty after all, as well as those of the hopsit secks; and
 betwigst you and me there was mominx, when i almost wisht that i'd been
 borne a myommidn or turk, when the lor would have permitted me to marry
 both these sweet beinx, wherehas i was now condemd to be appy with ony
 one.
 “meanwild everythink went on very agreeable betwigst me and my defianced
 bride. when we came back to town i kemishnd mr. showery the great
 hoctionear to look out for a town maushing sootable for a gent of my
 qualaty. i got from the erald hoffis (not the mawning erald—no, no,
 i'm not such a mough as to go there for ackrit infamation) an account of
 my famly, my harms and pedigry.
 “i hordered in long hacre, three splendid equipidges, on which my arms and
 my adord wife's was drawn & quartered; and i got portricks of me and
 her paynted by the sellabrated mr. shalloon, being resolved to be the
 gentleman in all things, and knowing that my character as a man of fashn
 wasn't compleat unless i sat to that dixtinguished hartist. my likenis i
 presented to hangelina. it's not considered flattring—and though she
 parted with it, as you will hear, mighty willingly, there's one young lady
 (a thousand times handsomer) that values it as the happle of her hi.
 “would any man beleave that this picture was soald at my sale for about a
 twenty-fifth part of what it cost me? it was bought in by maryhann,
 though: 'o dear jeames,' says she, often (kissing of it & pressing it
 to her art), 'it isn't ansum enough for you, and hasn't got your angellick
 smile and the igspreshn of your dear dear i's.'
 “hangelina's pictur was kindly presented to me by countess b., her mamma,
 though of coarse i paid for it. it was engraved for the 'book of bewty'
 the same year.
 “with such a perfusion of ringlits i should scarcely have known her—but
 the ands, feat, and i's, was very like. she was painted in a gitar
 supposed to be singing one of my little melladies; and her brother
 southdown, who is one of the new england poits, wrote the follering
 stanzys about her:—
 “the castle towers of bareacres are fair upon the lea,
 where the cliffs of bonny diddlesex rise up from out the sea:
 i stood upon the donjon keep and view'd the country o'er,
 i saw the lands of bareacres for fifty miles or more.
 i stood upon the donjon keep—it is a sacred place,—where
 floated for eight hundred years the banner of my race;
 argent, a dexter sinople, and gules an azure field,
 there ne'er was nobler cognizance on knightly warrior's shield.
 “the first time england saw the shield 'twas round a norman neck,
 on board a ship from valery, king william was on deck.
 a norman lance the colors wore, in hastings' fatal fray—st.
 willibald for bareacres! 'twas double gules that day!
 o heaven and sweet st. willibald! in many a battle since
 a loyal-hearted bareacres has ridden by his prince!
 at acre with plantagenet, with edward at poitiers,
 the pennon of the bareacres was foremost on the spears!
 “'twas pleasant in the battle-shock to hear our war-cry ringing:
 o grant me, sweet st. willibald, to listen to such singing!
 three hundred steel-clad gentlemen, we drove the foe before us,
 and thirty score of british bows kept twanging to the chorus!
 o knights, my noble ancestors! and shall i never hear
 saint willibald for bareacres through battle ringing clear?
 i'd cut me off this strong right hand a single hour to ride,
 and strike a blow for bareacres, my fathers, at your side!
 “dash down, dash down, yon mandolin, beloved sister mine!
 those blushing lips may never sing the glories of our line:
 our ancient castles echo to the clumsy feet of churls,
 the spinning jenny houses in the mansion of our earls.
 sing not, sing not, my angeline! in days so base and vile,
 'twere sinful to be happy, 'twere sacrilege to smile.
 i'll hie me to my lonely hall, and by its cheerless hob
 i'll muse on other days, and wish—and wish i were.—a snob.”
 “all young hengland, i'm told, considers the poim bewtifle. they're always
 writing about battleaxis and shivvlery, these young chaps; but the ideer
 of southdown in a shoot of armer, and his cuttin hoff his 'strong right
 hand,' is rayther too good; the feller is about  fit hi,—as
 ricketty as a babby, with a vaist like a gal; and though he may have the
 art and curridge of a bengal tyger, i'd back my smallest cab-boy to lick
 him,—that is, if i ad a cab-boy. but io! my cab-days is over.
 “be still my hagnizing art! i now am about to hunfoald the dark payges of
 the istry of my life!”
 “my friends! you've seen me ither in the full kerear of fortn, prawsprus
 but not hover prowd of my prawsperraty; not dizzy though mounted on the
 haypix of good luck—feasting hall the great (like the good old
 henglish gent in the song, which he has been my moddle and igsample
 through life), but not forgitting the small—no, my beayvior to my
 granmother at healing shows that. i bot her a new donkey cart (what the
 french call a cart-blansh) and a handsome set of peggs for anging up her
 linning, and treated huncle bill to a new shoot of close, which he ordered
 in st. jeames's street, much to the estonishment of my snyder there,
 namely an olliffgreen velvyteen jackit and smalclose, and a crimsn plush
 weskoat with glas-buttns. these pints of genarawsaty in my disposishn i
 never should have eluded to, but to show that i am naturally of a noble
 sort, and have that kind of galliant carridge which is equel to either
 good or bad forting.
 “what was the substns of my last chapter? in that everythink was prepayred
 for my marridge—the consent of the parents of my hangelina was
 gaynd, the lovely gal herself was ready (as i thought) to be led to
 himing's halter—the trooso was hordered—the wedding dressis
 were being phitted hon—a weddinkake weighing half a tunn was a gettn
 reddy by mesurs gunter of buckley square; there was such an account for
 shantilly and honiton laces as would have staggerd hennyboddy (i know they
 did the commissioner when i came hup for my stiffikit), and has for
 injar-shawls i bawt a dozen sich fine ones as never was given away—no
 not by hiss iness the injan prins juggernaut tygore. the juils (a pearl
 and dimind shoot) were from the establishmint of mysurs storr and
 mortimer. the honey-moon i intended to pass in a continentle excussion,
 and was in treaty for the ouse at halberd-gate (hopsit mr. hudson's) as my
 town-house. i waited to cumclude the putchis untle the share-markit which
 was rayther deprest (oing i think not so much to the atax of the misrable
 times as to the prodidjus flams of the morning erald) was restored to its
 elthy toan. i wasn't goin to part with scrip which was  primmium at  or
 : and bein confidnt that the markit would rally, had bought very largely
 for the two or three new accounts.
 “this will explane to those unfortnight traydsmen to womb i gayv orders
 for a large igstent ow it was that i couldn't pay their accounts. i am the
 soal of onour—but no gent can pay when he has no money—it's
 not my fault if that old screw lady bareacres cabbidged three hundred
 yards of lace, and kep back  of the biggest diminds and seven of the
 largist injar shawls—it's not my fault if the tradespeople didn git
 their goods back, and that lady b. declared they were lost. i began the
 world afresh with the close on my back, and thirteen and six in money,
 concealing nothink, giving up heverythink, onist and undismayed, and
 though beat, with pluck in me still, and ready to begin agin.
 “well—it was the day before that apinted for my unium. the
 'ringdove' steamer was lying at dover ready to carry us hoff. the bridle
 apartmince had been hordered at salt hill, and subsquintly at balong sur
 mare—the very table cloth was laid for the weddn brexfst in ill
 street, and the bride's right reverend huncle, the lord bishop of
 bullocksmithy, had arrived to sellabrayt our unium. all the papers were
 full of it. crowds of the fashnable world went to see the trooso, and
 admire the carridges in long hacre. our travleng charrat (light bloo lined
 with pink satting, and vermillium and goold weals) was the hadmaration of
 all for quiet ellygns. we were to travel only , viz. me, my lady, my
 vally, and mary hann as famdyshamber to my hangelina. far from oposing our
 match, this worthy gal had quite givn into it of late, and laught and
 joakt, and enjoyd our plans for the fewter igseedinkly.
 “i'd left my lovely bride very gay the night before—aving a
 multachewd of bisniss on, and stockbrokers' and bankers' accounts to
 settle: atsettrey atsettrey. it was layt before i got these in horder: my
 sleap was feavrish, as most mens is when they are going to be marrid or to
 be hanged. i took my chocklit in bed about one: tride on my wedding close,
 and found as ushle that they became me exeedingly.
 “one thing distubbed my mind—two weskts had been sent home. a
 blush-white satting and gold, and a kinary colored tabbinet imbridered in
 silver: which should i wear on the hospicious day? this hadgitated and
 perplext me a good deal. i detummined to go down to hill street and
 cumsult the lady whose wishis were henceforth to be my hallinall; and wear
 whichever she phixt on.
 “there was a great bussel and distubbans in the hall in ill street: which
 i etribyouted to the eproaching event. the old porter stared meost
 uncommon when i kem in—the footman who was to enounce me laft i
 thought—i was going up stairs—
 “'her ladyship's not—not at home,' says the man; 'and my lady's hill
 in bed.'
 “'git lunch,' says i, 'i'll wait till lady hangelina returns.'
 “at this the feller loox at me for a momint with his cheex blown out like
 a bladder, and then busts out in a reglar guffau! the porter jined in it,
 the impident old raskle: and thomas says, slapping his and on his thy,
 without the least respect—i say, huffy, old boy! isn't this a good
 un?'
 “'wadyermean, you infunnle scoundrel,' says i, 'hollaring and laffing at
 me?'
 “'oh, here's miss mary hann coming up,' says thomas, 'ask her'—and
 indeed there came my little mary hann tripping down the stairs—her
 &s in her pockits; and when she saw me, she began to blush and look
 hod & then to grin too.
 “'in the name of imperence,' says i, rushing on thomas, and collaring him
 fit to throttle him—'no raskle of a flunky shall insult me,' and i
 sent him staggerin up aginst the porter, and both of 'em into the
 hall-chair with a flopp—when mary hann, jumping down, says, 'o
 james! o mr. plush! read this'—and she pulled out a billy doo.
 “i reckanized the and-writing of hangelina.”
 “deseatful hangelina's billy ran as follows:—
 “'i had all along hoped that you would have relinquished pretensions which
 you must have seen were so disagreeable to me; and have spared me the
 painful necessity of the step which i am compelled to take. for a long
 time i could not believe my parents were serious in wishing to sacrifice
 me, but have in vain entreated them to spare me. i cannot undergo the
 shame and misery of a union with you. to the very last hour i remonstrated
 in vain, and only now anticipate by a few hours, my departure from a home
 from which they themselves were about to expel me.
 “'when you receive this, i shall be united to the person to whom, as you
 are aware, my heart was given long ago. my parents are already informed of
 the step i have taken. and i have my own honor to consult, even before
 their benefit: they will forgive me, i hope and feel, before long.
 “'as for yourself, may i not hope that time will calm your exquisite
 feelings too? i leave mary ann behind me to console you. she admires you
 as you deserve to be admired, and with a constancy which i entreat you to
 try and imitate. do, my dear mr. plush, try—for the sake of your
 sincere friend and admirer, a.
 “'p.s. i leave the wedding-dresses behind for her: the diamonds are
 beautiful, and will become mrs. plush admirably.'
 “this was hall!—confewshn! and there stood the footmen sniggerin,
 and that hojus mary hann half a cryin, half a laffing at me! 'who has she
 gone hoff with?' rors i; and mary hann (smiling with one hi) just touched
 the top of one of the johns' canes who was goin out with the noats to put
 hoff the brekfst. it was silvertop then!
 “i bust out of the house in a stayt of diamoniacal igsitement!
 “the stoary of that ilorpmint i have no art to tell. here it is from the
 morning tatler newspaper:—
 “the neighborhood of berkeley square, and the whole fashionable world, has
 been thrown into a state of the most painful excitement by an event which
 has just placed a noble family in great perplexity and affliction.
 “it has long been known among the select nobility and gentry that a
 marriage was on the tapis between the only daughter of a noble earl, and a
 gentleman whose rapid fortunes in the railway world have been the theme of
 general remark. yesterday's paper, it was supposed, in all human
 probability would have contained an account of the marriage of james de la
 pl-che, esq., and the lady angelina ——, daughter of the right
 honorable the earl of b-re-cres. the preparations for this ceremony were
 complete: we had the pleasure of inspecting the rich trousseau (prepared
 by miss twiddler, of pall mall); the magnificent jewels from the
 establishment of messrs. storr and mortimer; the elegant marriage cake,
 which, already cut up and portioned, is, alas! not destined to be eaten by
 the friends of mr. de la pl-che; the superb carriages, and magnificent
 liveries, which had been provided in a style of the most lavish yet
 tasteful sumptuosity. the right reverend the lord bishop of bullocksmithy
 had arrived in town to celebrate the nuptials, and is staying at mivart's.
 what must have been the feelings of that venerable prelate, what those of
 the agonized and noble parents of the lady angelina—when it was
 discovered, on the day previous to the wedding, that her ladyship had fled
 the paternal mansion! to the venerable bishop the news of his noble
 niece's departure might have been fatal: we have it from the waiters of
 mivart's that his lordship was about to indulge in the refreshment of
 turtle soup when the news was brought to him; immediate apoplexy was
 apprehended; but mr. macann, the celebrated surgeon of westminster, was
 luckily passing through bond street at the time, and being promptly called
 in, bled and relieved the exemplary patient. his lordship will return to
 the palace, bullocksmithy, tomorrow.
 “the frantic agonies of the right honorable the earl of bareacres can be
 imagined by every paternal heart. far be it from us to disturb—impossible
 is it for us to describe their noble sorrow. our reporters have made
 inquiries every ten minutes at the earl's mansion in hill street,
 regarding the health of the noble peer and his incomparable countess. they
 have been received with a rudeness which we deplore but pardon. one was
 threatened with a cane; another, in the pursuit of his official inquiries,
 was saluted with a pail of water; a third gentleman was menaced in a
 pugilistic manner by his lordship's porter; but being of an irish nation,
 a man of spirit and sinew, and master of arts of trinity college, dublin,
 the gentleman of our establishment confronted the menial, and having
 severely beaten him, retired to a neighboring hotel much frequented by the
 domestics of the surrounding nobility, and there obtained what we believe
 to be the most accurate particulars of this extraordinary occurrence.
 “george frederick jennings, third footman in the establishment of lord
 bareacres, stated to our employe as follows:—lady angelina had been
 promised to mr. de la pluche for near six weeks. she never could abide
 that gentleman. he was the laughter of all the servants' hall. previous to
 his elevation he had himself been engaged in a domestic capacity. at that
 period he had offered marriage to mary ann hoggins, who was living in the
 quality of ladies'-maid in the family where mr. de la p. was employed.
 miss hoggins became subsequently lady's-maid to lady angelina—the
 elopement was arranged between those two. it was miss hoggins who
 delivered the note which informed the bereaved mr. plush of his loss.
 “samuel buttons, page to the right honorable the earl of bareacres, was
 ordered on friday afternoon at eleven o'clock to fetch a cabriolet from
 the stand in davies street. he selected the cab no. ,, driven by
 george gregory macarty, a one-eyed man from clonakilty, in the
 neighborhood of cork, ireland (of whom more anon), and waited, according
 to his instructions, at the corner of berkeley square with his vehicle.
 his young lady, accompanied by her maid, miss mary ann hoggins, carrying a
 band-box, presently arrived, and entered the cab with the box: what were
 the contents of that box we have never been able to ascertain. on asking
 her ladyship whether he should order the cab to drive in any particular
 direction, he was told to drive to madame crinoline's, the eminent
 milliner in cavendish square. on requesting to know whether he should
 accompany her ladyship, buttons was peremptorily ordered by miss hoggins
 to go about his business.
 “having now his clue, our reporter instantly went in search of cab ,,
 or rather the driver of that vehicle, who was discovered with no small
 difficulty at his residence, whetstone park, lincoln's inn fields, where
 he lives with his family of nine children. having received two sovereigns,
 instead doubtless of two shillings (his regular fare, by the way, would
 have been only one-and-eightpence), macarty had not gone out with the cab
 for the two last days, passing them in a state of almost ceaseless
 intoxication. his replies were very incoherent in answer to the queries of
 our reporter; and, had not that gentleman himself been a compatriot, it is
 probable he would have refused altogether to satisfy the curiosity of the
 public.
 “at madame crinoline's, miss hoggins quitted the carriage, and a gentleman
 entered it. macarty describes him as a very clever gentleman (meaning
 tall) with black moustaches, oxford-gray trousers, and black hat and a
 pea-coat. he drove the couple to the euston square station, and there left
 them. how he employed his time subsequently we have stated.
 “at the euston square station, the gentleman of our establishment learned
 from frederick corduroy, a porter there, that a gentleman answering the
 above description had taken places to derby. we have despatched a
 confidential gentleman thither, by a special train, and shall give his
 report in a second edition.
 “(from our reporter.)
 “newcastle, monday.
 “i am just arrived at this ancient town, at the 'elephant and cucumber
 hotel.' a party travelling under the name of mr. and mrs. jones, the
 gentleman wearing moustaches, and having with them a blue band-box,
 arrived by the train two hours before me, and have posted onwards to
 scotland. i have ordered four horses, and write this on the hind boot, as
 they are putting to.
 “gretna green, monday evening.
 “the mystery is at length solved. this afternoon, at four o'clock, the
 hymeneal blacksmith, of gretna green, celebrated the marriage between
 george granby silvertop, esq., a lieutenant in the th hussars, third
 son of general john silvertop, of silvertop hall, yorkshire, and lady
 emily silvertop, daughter of the late sister of the present earl of
 bareacres, and the lady angelina amelia arethusa anaconda alexandrina
 alicompania annemaria antoinetta, daughter of the last-named earl
 bareacres.
 (here follows a long extract from the marriage service in the book of
 common prayer, which was not read on the occasion, and need not be
 repeated here.)
 “after the ceremony, the young couple partook of a slight refreshment of
 sherry and water—the former the captain pronounced to be execrable;
 and, having myself tasted some glasses from the very same bottle with
 which the young and noble pair were served, i must say i think the captain
 was rather hard upon mine host of the 'bagpipes hotel and posting-house,'
 whence they instantly proceeded. i follow them as soon as the horses have
 fed.
 “whistlebinkie, n. b. monday, midnight.
 “i arrived at this romantic little villa about two hours after the newly
 married couple, whose progress i have the honor to trace, reached
 whistlebinkie. they have taken up their residence at the 'cairngorm arms'—mine
 is at the other hostelry, the 'clachan of whistlebinkie.'
 “on driving up to the 'cairngorm arms,' i found a gentleman of military
 appearance standing at the doer, and occupied seemingly in smoking a
 cigar. it was very dark as i descended from my carriage, and the gentleman
 in question exclaimed, 'is it you, southdown my boy? you have come too
 late; unless you are come to have some supper;' or words to that effect. i
 explained that i was not the lord viscount southdown, and politely
 apprised captain silvertop (for i justly concluded the individual before
 me could be no other) of his mistake.
 “'who the deuce' (the captain used a stronger term) 'are you, then?' said
 mr. silvertop. 'are you baggs and tapewell, my uncle's attorneys? if you
 are, you have come too late for the fair.'
 “i briefly explained that i was not baggs and tapewell, but that my name
 was j—ms, and that i was a gentleman connected with the
 establishment of the morning tatler newspaper.
 “'and what has brought you here, mr. morning tatler?' asked my
 interlocutor, rather roughly. my answer was frank—that the
 disappearance of a noble lady from the house of her friends had caused the
 greatest excitement in the metropolis, and that my employers were anxious
 to give the public every particular regarding an event so singular.
 “'and do you mean to say, sir, that you have dogged me all the way from
 london, and that my family affairs are to be published for the readers of
 the morning tatler newspaper? the morning tatter be ——(the
 captain here gave utterance to an oath which i shall not repeat) and you
 too, sir; you unpudent meddling scoundrel.'
 “'scoundrel, sir!' said i. 'yes,' replied the irate gentleman, seizing me
 rudely by the collar—and he would have choked me, but that my blue
 satin stock and false collar gave way, and were left in the hands of this
 gentleman. 'help, landlord!' i loudly exclaimed, adding, i believe,
 'murder,' and other exclamations of alarm. in vain i appealed to the
 crowd, which by this time was pretty considerable; they and the unfeeling
 post-boys only burst into laughter, and called out, 'give it him,
 captain.' a struggle ensued, in which i have no doubt i should have had
 the better, but that the captain, joining suddenly in the general and
 indecent hilarity, which was doubled when i fell down, stopped and said,
 'well, jims, i won't fight on my marriage-day. go into the tap, jims, and
 order a glass of brandy-and-water at my expense—and mind i don't see
 your face to-morrow morning, or i'll make it more ugly than it is.'
 “with these gross expressions and a cheer from the crowd, mr. silvertop
 entered the inn. i need not say that i did not partake of his hospitality,
 and that personally i despise his insults. i make them known that they may
 call down the indignation of the body of which i am a member, and throw
 myself on the sympathy of the public, as a gentleman shamefully assaulted
 and insulted in the discharge of a public duty.”
 “thus you've sean how the flower of my affeckshns was tawn out of my busm,
 and my art was left bleading. hangelina! i forgive thee. mace thou be
 appy! if ever artfelt prayer for others wheel awailed on i, the beink on
 womb you trampled addresses those subblygations to evn in your be/!
 “i went home like a maniack, after hearing the announcement of hangelina's
 departur. she'd been gone twenty hours when i heard the fatle noose.
 purshoot was vain. suppose i did kitch her up, they were married, and what
 could we do? this sensable remark i made to earl bareacres, when that
 distragted nobleman igspawstulated with me. er who was to have been my
 mother-in-lor, the countiss, i never from that momink sor agin. my
 presnts, troosoes, juels, &c., were sent back—with the igsepshn
 of the diminds and cashmear shawl, which her ladyship coodn't find. ony it
 was whispered that at the nex buthday she was seen with a shawl igsackly
 of the same pattn. let er keep it.
 “southdown was phurius. he came to me hafter the ewent, and wanted me
 adwance  lb., so that he might purshew his fewgitif sister—but i
 wasn't to be ad with that sort of chaugh—there was no more money for
 that famly. so he went away, and gave huttrance to his feelinx in a poem,
 which appeared (price  guineas) in the bel assombly.
 “all the juilers, manchumakers, lacemen, coch bilders, apolstrers, hors
 dealers, and weddencake makers came pawring in with their bills,
 haggravating feelings already woondid beyond enjurants. that madniss
 didn't seaze me that night was a mussy. fever, fewry, and rayge rack'd my
 hagnized braind, and drove sleap from my throbbink ilids. hall night i
 follered hangelinar in imadganation along the north road. i wented cusses
 & mallydickshuns on the hinfamus silvertop. i kickd and rord in my
 unhuttarable whoe! i seazed my pillar: i pitcht into it: pummld it,
 strangled it. ha har! i thought it was silvertop writhing in my jint
 grasp; and taw the hordayshis villing lim from lim in the terrible strenth
 of my despare! . . . let me drop a cutting over the memries of that night.
 when my boddy-suvnt came with my ot water in the mawning, the livid copse
 in the charnill was not payler than the gashly de la pluche!
 “'give me the share-list, mandeville,' i micanickly igsclaimed. i had not
 perused it for the past  days, my etention being engayged elseware. hevns
 & huth!—what was it i red there? what was it that made me spring
 outabed as if sumbady had given me cold pig?—i red rewin in that
 share-list—the pannick was in full hoparation!
 “shall i describe that kitastrafy with which hall hengland is familliar?
 my & rifewses to cronnicle the misfortns which lassarated my bleeding
 art in hoctober last. on the fust of hawgust where was i? director of
 twenty-three companies; older of scrip hall at a primmium, and worth at
 least a quarter of a millium. on lord mare's day my saint helenas quotid
 at  pm, were down at / discount; my central ichaboes at / discount;
 my table mounting & hottentot grand trunk, no where; my bathershins
 and derrynane beg, of which i'd bought  for the account at 
 primmium, down to nix; my juan fernandez, my great central oregons,
 prostrit. there was a momint when i thought i shouldn't be alive to write
 my own tail!”
 (here follow in mr. plush's ms. about twenty-four pages of railroad
 calculations, which we pretermit.)
 “those beests, pump & aldgate, once so cringing and umble, wrote me a
 threatnen letter because i overdrew my account three-and-sixpence: woodn't
 advance me five thousand on , worth of scrip; kep me waiting  hours
 when i asked to see the house; and then sent out spout, the jewnior
 partner, saying they wouldn't discount my paper, and implawed me to
 clothes my account. i did: i paid the three-and-six balliance, and never
 sor 'em mor.
 “the market fell daily. the rewin grew wusser and wusser. hagnies,
 hagnies! it wasn't in the city aloan my misfortns came upon me. they
 beerded me in my own ome. the biddle who kips watch at the halbany wodn
 keep misfortn out of my chambers; and mrs. twiddler, of pall mall, and mr.
 hunx, of long acre, put egsicution into my apartmince, and swep off every
 stick of my furniture. 'wardrobe & furniture of a man of fashion.'
 what an adwertisement george robins did make of it; and what a crowd was
 collected to laff at the prospick of my ruing! my chice plait; my seller
 of wine; my picturs—that of myself included (it was maryhann, bless
 her! that bought it, unbeknown to me); all—all went to the ammer.
 that brootle fitzwarren, my ex-vally, womb i met, fimilliarly slapt me on
 the sholder, and said, 'jeames, my boy, you'd best go into suvvis aginn.'
 “i did go into suvvis—the wust of all suvvices—i went into the
 queen's bench prison, and lay there a misrabble captif for  mortial
 weeks. misrabble shall i say? no, not misrabble altogether; there was
 sunlike in the dunjing of the pore prisner. i had visitors. a cart used to
 drive hup to the prizn gates of saturdays; a washywoman's cart, with a fat
 old lady in it, and a young one. who was that young one? every one who has
 an art can gess, it was my blue-eyed blushing hangel of a mary hann!
 'shall we take him out in the linnen-basket, grandmamma?' mary hann said.
 bless her, she'd already learned to say grandmamma quite natral: but i
 didn't go out that way; i went out by the door a whitewashed man. ho, what
 a feast there was at healing the day i came out! i'd thirteen shillings
 left when i'd bought the gold ring. i wasn't prowd. i turned the mangle
 for three weeks; and then uncle bill said, 'well, there is some good in
 the feller;' and it was agreed that we should marry.”
 the plush manuscript finishes here: it is many weeks since we saw the
 accomplished writer, and we have only just learned his fate. we are happy
 to state that it is a comfortable and almost a prosperous one.
 the honorable and right reverend lionel thistlewood, lord bishop of
 bullocksmithy, was mentioned as the uncle of lady angelina silvertop. her
 elopement with her cousin caused deep emotion to the venerable prelate: he
 returned to the palace at bullocksmithy, of which he had been for thirty
 years the episcopal ornament, and where he married three wives, who lie
 buried in his cathedral church of st. boniface, bullocksmithy.
 the admirable man has rejoined those whom he loved. as he was preparing a
 charge to his clergy in his study after dinner, the lord bishop fell
 suddenly down in a fit of apoplexy; his butler, bringing in his accustomed
 dish of devilled kidneys for supper, discovered the venerable form
 extended on the turkey carpet with a glass of madeira in his hand; but
 life was extinct: and surgical aid was therefore not particularly useful.
 all the late prelate's wives had fortunes, which the admirable man
 increased by thrift, the judicious sale of leases which fell in during his
 episcopacy, &c. he left three hundred thousand pounds—divided
 between his nephew and niece—not a greater sum than has been left by
 several deceased irish prelates.
 what lord southdown has done with his share we are not called upon to
 state. he has composed an epitaph to the martyr of bullocksmithy, which
 does him infinite credit. but we are happy to state that lady angelina
 silvertop presented five hundred pounds to her faithful and affectionate
 servant, mary ann hoggins, on her marriage with mr. james plush, to whom
 her ladyship also made a handsome present—namely, the lease,
 good-will, and fixtures of the “wheel of fortune” public-house, near
 shepherd's market, may fair: a house greatly frequented by all the
 nobility's footmen, doing a genteel stroke of business in the
 neighborhood, and where, as we have heard, the “butlers' club” is held.
 here mr. plush lives happy in a blooming and interesting wife: reconciled
 to a middle sphere of life, as he was to a humbler and a higher one
 before. he has shaved off his whiskers, and accommodates himself to an
 apron with perfect good humor. a gentleman connected with this
 establishment dined at the “wheel of fortune” the other day, and collected
 the above particulars. mr. plush blushed rather, as he brought in the
 first dish, and told his story very modestly over a pint of excellent
 port. he had only one thing in life to complain of, he said—that a
 witless version of his adventures had been produced at the princess's
 theatre, “without with your leaf or by your leaf,” as he expressed it.
 “has for the rest,” the worthy fellow said, “i'm appy—praps betwixt
 you and me i'm in my proper spear. i enjy my glass of beer or port (with
 your elth & my suvvice to you, sir,) quite as much as my clarrit in my
 prawsprus days. i've a good busniss, which is likely to be better. if a
 man can't be appy with such a wife as my mary hann, he's a beest: and when
 a christening takes place in our famly, will you give my complments to mr.
 punch, and ask him to be godfather.”
 “peraps at this present momink of railway hagetation and unsafety the
 follying little istory of a young friend of mine may hact as an olesome
 warning to hother week and hirresolute young gents.
 “young frederick timmins was the horphan son of a respectable cludgyman in
 the west of hengland. hadopted by his uncle, colonel t——, of
 the hoss-mareens, and regardless of expence, this young man was sent to
 heaton collidge, and subsiquintly to hoxford, where he was very nearly
 being senior rangler. he came to london to study for the lor. his prospix
 was bright indead; and he lived in a secknd flore in jerming street,
 having a ginteal inkum of two hundred lbs. per hannum.
 “with this andsum enuity it may be supposed that frederick wanted for
 nothink. nor did he. he was a moral and well-educated young man, who took
 care of his close; pollisht his hone tea-party boots; cleaned his
 kidd-gloves with injer rubber; and, when not invited to dine out, took his
 meals reglar at the hoxford and cambridge club—where (unless
 somebody treated him) he was never known to igseed his alf-pint of
 marsally wine.
 “merrits and vuttues such as his coodnt long pass unperseavd in the world.
 admitted to the most fashnabble parties, it wasn't long befor sevral of
 the young ladies viewed him with a favorable i; one, ixpecially, the
 lovely miss hemily mulligatawney, daughter of the heast-injar derector of
 that name. as she was the richest gal of all the season, of corse
 frederick fell in love with her. his haspirations were on the pint of
 being crowndid with success; and it was agreed that as soon as he was
 called to the bar, when he would sutnly be apinted a judge, or a revising
 barrister, or lord chanslor, he should lead her to the halter.
 “what life could be more desirable than frederick's? he gave up his
 mornings to perfeshnl studdy, under mr. bluebag, the heminent pleader; he
 devoted his hevenings to helegant sosiaty at his clubb, or with his hadord
 hemily. he had no cares; no detts; no egstravigancies; he never was known
 to ride in a cabb, unless one of his tip-top friends lent it him; to go to
 a theayter unless he got a horder; or to henter a tavern or smoke a cigar.
 if prosperraty was hever chocked out, it was for that young man.
 “but suckmstances arose. fatle suckmstances for pore frederick timmins.
 the railway hoperations began.
 “for some time, immerst in lor and love, in the hardent hoccupations of
 his cheembers, or the sweet sosiaty of his hemily, frederick took no note
 of railroads. he did not reckonize the jigantic revalution which with
 hiron strides was a walkin over the country. but they began to be talked
 of even in his quiat haunts. heven in the hoxford and cambridge clubb,
 fellers were a speculatin. tom thumper (of brasen nose) cleared four
 thousand lb.; bob bullock (of hexeter), who had lost all his proppaty
 gambling, had set himself up again; and jack deuceace, who had won it, had
 won a small istate besides by lucky specklations in the share markit.
 “hevery body won. 'why shouldn't i?' thought pore fred; and having saved
  lb., he began a writin for shares—using, like an ickonominicle
 feller as he was, the clubb paper to a prodigious igstent. all the
 railroad directors, his friends, helped him to shares—the
 allottments came tumbling in—he took the primmiums by fifties and
 hundreds a day. his desk was cramd full of bank notes: his brane world
 with igsitement.
 “he gave up going to the temple, and might now be seen hall day about
 capel court. he took no more hinterest in lor; but his whole talk was of
 railroad lines. his desk at mr. bluebag's was filled full of
 prospectisises, and that legal gent wrote to fred's uncle, to say he
 feared he was neglectin his bisniss.
 “alass! he was neglectin it, and all his sober and industerous habits. he
 begann to give dinners, and thought nothin of partys to greenwich or
 richmond. he didn't see his hemily near so often: although the hawdacious
 and misguided young man might have done so much more heasily now than
 before: for now he kep a broom!
 “but there's a tumminus to hevery railway. fred's was approachin: in an
 evil hour he began making time-bargings. let this be a warning to all
 young fellers, and fred's huntimely hend hoperate on them in a moral pint
 of vu!
 “you all know under what favrabble suckemstanses the great hafrican line,
 the grand niger junction, or gold coast and timbuctoo (provishnal)
 hatmospheric railway came out four weeks ago: deposit ninepence per share
 of l. (six elephant's teeth, twelve tons of palm-oil, or four healthy
 niggers, african currency)—the shares of this helegeble investment
 rose to , , , in the markit. a happy man was fred when, after paying
 down  ninepences (l. s.), he sold his shares for l. he gave a
 dinner at the 'star and garter' that very day. i promise you there was no
 marsally there.
 “nex day they were up at  /. this put fred in a rage: they rose to ,
 he was in a fewry. 'what an ass i was to sell,' said he, 'when all this
 money was to be won!'
 “'and so you were an ass,' said his partiklar friend, colonel claw,
 k.x.r., a director of the line, 'a double-eared ass. my dear fellow, the
 shares will be at  next week. will you give me your solemn word of honor
 not to breathe to mortal man what i am going to tell you?'
 “'honor bright,' says fred.
 “'hudson has joined the line.' fred didn't say a word more, but went
 tumbling down to the city in his broom. you know the state of the streets.
 claw went by water.
 “'buy me one thousand hafricans for the th,' cries fred, busting into
 his broker's; and they were done for him at  /.
 “can't you guess the rest? haven't you seen the share list? which says:—
 “'great africans, paid d.; price / par.'
 “and that's what came of my pore dear friend timmins's time-barging.
 “what'll become of him i can't say; for nobody has seen him since. his
 lodgins in jerming street is to let. his brokers in vain deplores his
 absence. his uncle has declared his marriage with his housekeeper; and the
 morning erald (that emusing print) has a paragraf yesterday in the
 fashnabble news, headed 'marriage in high life.—the rich and
 beautiful miss mulligatawney, of portland place, is to be speedily united
 to colonel claw, k.x.r.'
 “you will scarcely praps reckonize in this little skitch* the haltered
 linimints of , with woos face the reders of your valluble mislny were
 once fimiliar,—the unfortnt jeames de la pluche, fomly so selabrated
 in the fashnabble suckles, now the pore jeames plush, landlord of the
 'wheel of fortune' public house. yes, that is me; that is my haypun which
 i wear as becomes a publican—those is the checkers which hornyment
 the pillows of my dor. i am like the romin genral, st. cenatus, equal to
 any emudgency of fortun. i, who have drunk shampang in my time, aint now
 abov droring a pint of small bier. as for my wife—that angel—i've
 not ventured to depigt her. fansy her a sittn in the bar, smiling like a
 sunflower and, ho, dear punch! happy in nussing a deer little darlint
 totsywotsy of a jeames, with my air to a curl, and my i's to a t!
 * this refers to an illustrated edition of the work.
 “i never thought i should have been injuiced to write anything but a bill
 agin, much less to edress you on railway subjix—which with all my
 sole i abaw. railway letters, obbligations to pay hup, ginteal inquirys as
 to my salissator's name, &c. &c., i dispize and scorn artily. but
 as a man, an usbnd, a father, and a freebon brittn, my jewty compels me to
 come forwoods, and igspress my opinion upon that nashnal newsance—the
 break of gage.
 “an interesting ewent in a noble family with which i once very nearly had
 the honor of being kinected, acurd a few weex sins, when the lady angelina
 s——, daughter of the earl of b——cres, presented
 the gallant capting, her usband, with a son & hair. nothink would
 satasfy her ladyship but that her old and attacht famdyshamber, my wife
 mary hann plush, should be presnt upon this hospicious occasion. captain s——
 was not jellus of me on account of my former attachment to his lady. i
 cunsented that my mary hann should attend her, and me, my wife, and our
 dear babby acawdingly set out for our noable frend's residence, honeymoon
 lodge, near cheltenham.
 “sick of all railroads myself, i wisht to poast it in a chay and , but
 mary hann, with the hobstenacy of her sex, was bent upon railroad
 travelling, and i yealded, like all husbinds. we set out by the great
 westn, in an eavle hour.
 “we didnt take much luggitch—my wife's things in the ushal bandboxes—mine
 in a potmancho. our dear little james angelo's (called so in complament to
 his noble godmamma) craddle, and a small supply of a few  weight of
 topsanbawtems, farinashious food, and lady's fingers, for that dear child,
 who is now  months old, with a perdidgus appatite. likewise we were
 charged with a bran new medsan chest for my lady, from skivary &
 morris, containing enough rewbub, daffy's alixir, godfrey's cawdle, with a
 few score of parsles for lady hangelina's family and owsehold: about 
 spessymins of babby linning from mrs. flummary's in regent street, a
 chayny cresning bowl from old lady bareacres (big enough to immus a
 halderman), & a case marked 'glass,' from her ladyship's meddicle man,
 which were stowed away together; had to this an ormylew cradle, with
 rose-colored satting & pink lace hangings, held up by a gold
 tuttle-dove, &c. we had, ingluding james hangelo's rattle & my
 umbrellow,  packidges in all.
 “we got on very well as far as swindon, where, in the splendid refreshment
 room, there was a galaxy of lovely gals in cottn velvet spencers, who
 serves out the soop, and  of whom maid an impresshn upon this art which i
 shoodn't like mary hann to know—and here, to our infanit disgust, we
 changed carridges. i forgot to say that we were in the seeknd class,
 having with us james hangelo, and  other light harticles.
 “fust inconveniance: and almost as bad as break of gage. i cast my hi upon
 the gal in cottn velvet, and wanted some soop, of coarse; but seasing up
 james hangelo (who was layin his dear little pors on an am sangwidg) and
 seeing my igspresshn of hi—'james,' says mary hann, 'instead of
 looking at that young lady—and not so very young neither—be
 pleased to look to our packidges, & place them in the other carridge.'
 i did so with an evy art. i eranged them  articles in the opsit carridg,
 only missing my umberella & baby's rattle; and jest as i came back for
 my baysn of soop, the beast of a bell rings, the whizzling injians
 proclayms the time of our departure,—& farewell soop and cottn
 velvet. mary hann was sulky. she said it was my losing the umberella. if
 it had been a cotton velvet umberella i could have understood. james
 hangelo sittn on my knee was evidently unwell; without his coral: &
 for  miles that blessid babby kep up a rawring, which caused all the
 passingers to simpithize with him igseedingly.
 “we arrive at gloster, and there fansy my disgust at bein ableeged to
 undergo another change of carridges! fansy me holding up moughs, tippits,
 cloaks, and baskits, and james hangelo rawring still like mad, and
 pretending to shuperintend the carrying over of our luggage from the broad
 gage to the narrow gage. 'mary hann,' says i, rot to desperation, 'i shall
 throttle this darling if he goes on.' 'do,' says she—'and go into
 the refreshment room,' says she—a snatchin the babby out of my arms.
 do go,' says she, youre not fit to look after luggage,' and she began
 lulling james hangelo to sleep with one hi, while she looked after the
 packets with the other. now, sir! if you please, mind that packet!—pretty
 darling—easy with that box, sir, its glass—pooooty poppet—where's
 the deal case, marked arrowroot, no. ?' she cried, reading out of a list
 she had.—and poor little james went to sleep. the porters were
 bundling and carting the various harticles with no more ceremony than if
 each package had been of cannonball.
 “at last—bang goes a package marked 'glass,' and containing the
 chayny bowl and lady bareacres' mixture, into a large white bandbox, with
 a crash and a smash. 'it's my lady's box from crinoline's!' cries mary
 hann; and she puts down the child on the bench, and rushes forward to
 inspect the dammidge. you could hear the chayny bowls clinking inside; and
 lady b.'s mixture (which had the igsack smell of cherry brandy) was
 dribbling out over the smashed bandbox containing a white child's cloak,
 trimmed with blown lace and lined with white satting.
 “as james was asleep, and i was by this time uncommon hungry, i thought i
 would go into the refreshment room and just take a little soup; so i
 wrapped him up in his cloak and laid him by his mamma, and went off.
 there's not near such good attendance as at swindon.
 “we took our places in the carriage in the dark, both of us covered with a
 pile of packages, and mary hann so sulky that she would not speak for some
 minutes. at last she spoke out—
 “'have you all the small parcels?'
 “'twenty-three in all,' says i.
 “'then give me baby.'
 “'give you what?' says i.
 “'give me baby.'
 “'what, haven't y-y-yoooo got him?' says i.
 “o mussy! you should have heard her sreak! we'd left him on the ledge at
 “it all came of the break of gage.”
 “dear mr. punch,—as newmarus inquiries have been maid both at my
 privit ressddence, 'the wheel of fortune otel,' and at your hoffis,
 regarding the fate of that dear babby, james hangelo, whose primmiture
 dissappearnts caused such hagnies to his distracted parents, i must begg,
 dear sir, the permission to ockupy a part of your valuble collams once
 more, and hease the public mind about my blessid boy.
 “wictims of that nashnal cuss, the broken gage, me and mrs. plush was left
 in the train to cheltenham, soughring from that most disgreeble of
 complaints, a halmost broken art. the skreems of mrs. jeames might be said
 almost to out-y the squeel of the dying, as we rusht into that fashnable
 spaw, and my pore mary hann found it was not baby, but bundles i had in my
 lapp.
 “when the old dowidger lady bareacres, who was waiting heagerly at the
 train, herd that owing to that abawminable brake of gage the luggitch, her
 ladyship's cherrybrandy box, the cradle for lady hangelina's baby, the
 lace, crockary and chany, was rejuiced to one immortial smash; the old cat
 howld at me and pore dear mary hann, as if it was huss, and not the
 infunnle brake of gage, was to blame; and as if we ad no misfortns of our
 hown to deplaw. she bust out about my stupid imparence; called mary hann a
 good for nothink creecher, and wep, and abewsd, and took on about her
 broken chayny bowl, a great deal mor than she did about a dear little
 christian child. 'don't talk to me abowt your bratt of a babby' (seshe);
 'where's my bowl?—where's my medsan?—where's my bewtiffle pint
 lace?—all in rewing through your stupiddaty, you brute, you!'
 “'bring your haction aginst the great western, maam,' says i, quite riled
 by this crewel and unfealing hold wixen. 'ask the pawters at gloster, why
 your goods is spiled—it's not the fust time they've been asked the
 question. git the gage haltered aginst the nex time you send for medsan
 and meanwild buy some at the “plow”—they keep it very good and
 strong there, i'll be bound. has for us, we're a going back to the cussid
 station at gloster, in such of our blessid child.'
 “'you don't mean to say, young woman,' seshe, 'that you're not going to
 lady hangelina: what's her dear boy to do? who's to nuss it?'
 “'you nuss it, maam,' says i. 'me and mary hann return this momint by the
 fly.' and so (whishing her a suckastic ajew) mrs. jeames and i lep into a
 one oss weakle, and told the driver to go like mad back to gloster.
 “i can't describe my pore gals hagny juring our ride. she sat in the
 carridge as silent as a milestone, and as madd as a march air. when we got
 to gloster she sprang hout of it as wild as a tigris, and rusht to the
 station, up to the fatle bench.
 “'my child, my child,' shreex she, in a hoss, hot voice. 'where's my
 infant? a little bewtifle child, with blue eyes,—dear mr. policeman,
 give it me—a thousand guineas for it.'
 “'faix, mam,' says the man, a hirishman, 'and the divvle a babby have i
 seen this day except thirteen of my own—and you're welcome to any
 one of them, and kindly.'
 “'as if his babby was equal to ours,' as my darling mary hann said,
 afterwards. all the station was scrouging round us by this time—pawters
 & clarx and refreshmint people and all. 'what's this year row about
 that there babby?' at last says the inspector, stepping hup. i thought my
 wife was going to jump into his harms. 'have you got him?' says she.
 “'was it a child in a blue cloak?' says he.
 “'and blue eyse!' says my wife.
 “'i put a label on him and sent him on to bristol; he's there by this
 time. the guard of the mail took him and put him into a letter-box,' says
 he: 'he went  minutes ago. we found him on the broad gauge line, and
 sent him on by it, in course,' says he. 'and it'll be a caution to you,
 young woman, for the future, to label your children along with the rest of
 your luggage.'
 “if my piguniary means had been such as once they was, you may emadgine
 i'd have ad a speshle train and been hoff like smoak. as it was, we was
 obliged to wait  mortial hours for the next train ( ears they seemed to
 us), and then away we went.
 “'my boy! my little boy!' says poor choking mary hann, when we got there.
 'a parcel in a blue cloak?' says the man. 'no body claimed him here, and
 so we sent him back by the mail. an irish nurse here gave him some supper,
 and he's at paddington by this time. yes,' says he, looking at the clock,
 'he's been there these ten minutes.'
 “but seeing my poor wife's distracted histarricle state, this good-naterd
 man says, 'i think, my dear, there's a way to ease your mind. we'll know
 in five minutes how he is.'
 “'sir,' says she, 'don't make sport of me.'
 “'no, my dear, we'll telegraph him.'
 “and he began hopparating on that singlar and ingenus elecktricle
 inwention, which aniliates time, and carries intellagence in the twinkling
 of a peg-post.
 “'i'll ask,' says he, 'for child marked g. w. .'
 “back comes the telegraph with the sign, 'all right.'
 “'ask what he's doing, sir,' says my wife, quite amazed. back comes the
 answer in a jiffy—
 “this caused all the bystanders to laugh excep my pore mary hann, who
 pull'd a very sad face.
 “the good-naterd feller presently said, 'he'd have another trile;' and
 what d'ye think was the answer? i'm blest if it wasn't—
 “he was eating pap! there's for you—there's a rogue for you—there's
 a march of intaleck! mary hann smiled now for the fust time. 'he'll sleep
 now,' says she. and she sat down with a full hart.
 “if hever that good-naterd shooperintendent comes to london, he need never
 ask for his skore at the 'wheel of fortune otel,' i promise you—where
 me and my wife and james hangelo now is; and where only yesterday a gent
 came in and drew this pictur* of us in our bar.
 * this refers to an illustrated edition of the work.
 “and if they go on breaking gages; and if the child, the most precious
 luggidge of the henglishman, is to be bundled about this year way, why it
 won't be for want of warning, both from professor harris, the commission,
 and from
 “my dear mr. punch's obeajent servant,
 i think it but right that in making my appearance before the public i
 should at once acquaint them with my titles and name. my card, as i leave
 it at the houses of the nobility, my friends, is as follows:—
 commanding battalion of irregular horse,
 seeing, i say, this simple visiting ticket, the world will avoid any of
 those awkward mistakes as to my person, which have been so frequent of
 late. there has been no end to the blunders regarding this humble title of
 mine, and the confusion thereby created. when i published my volume of
 poems, for instance, the morning post newspaper remarked “that the lyrics
 of the heart, by miss gahagan, may be ranked among the sweetest flowrets
 of the present spring season.” the quarterly review, commenting upon my
 observations on the “pons asinorum” (to. london, ), called me “doctor
 gahagan,” and so on. it was time to put an end to these mistakes, and i
 have taken the above simple remedy.
 i was urged to it by a very exalted personage. dining in august last at
 the palace of the t-lr-es at paris, the lovely young duch-ss of orl—ns
 (who, though she does not speak english, understands it as well as i do,)
 said to me in the softest teutonic, “lieber herr major, haben sie den
 ahmednuggarischen-jager-battalion gelassen?” “warum denn?” said i, quite
 astonished at her r—-l h——-ss's question. the p—-cess
 then spoke of some trifle from my pen, which was simply signed goliah
 gahagan.
 there was, unluckily, a dead silence as h. r. h. put this question.
 “comment donc?” said h. m. lo-is ph-l-ppe, looking gravely at count mole;
 “le cher major a quitte l'armee! nicolas donc sera maitre de l'inde!” h. m——
 and the pr. m-n-ster pursued their conversation in a low tone, and left
 me, as may be imagined in a dreadful state of confusion. i blushed and
 stuttered, and murmured out a few incoherent words to explain—but it
 would not do—i could not recover my equanimity during the course of
 the dinner and while endeavoring to help an english duke, my neighbor, to
 poulet a l'austerlitz, fairly sent seven mushrooms and three large greasy
 croutes over his whiskers and shirt-frill. another laugh at my expense.
 “ah! m. le major,” said the q—— of the b-lg—ns, archly,
 “vous n'aurez jamais votre brevet de colonel.” her m——y's joke
 will be better understood when i state that his grace is the brother of a
 minister.
 i am not at liberty to violate the sanctity of private life, by mentioning
 the names of the parties concerned in this little anecdote. i only wish to
 have it understood that i am a gentleman, and live at least in decent
 society. verbum sat.
 but to be serious. i am obliged always to write the name of goliah in
 full, to distinguish me from my brother, gregory gahagan, who was also a
 major (in the king's service), and whom i killed in a duel, as the public
 most likely knows. poor greg! a very trivial dispute was the cause of our
 quarrel, which never would have originated but for the similarity of our
 names. the circumstance was this: i had been lucky enough to render the
 nawaub of lucknow some trifling service (in the notorious affair of
 choprasjee muckjee), and his highness sent down a gold toothpick-case
 directed to captain g. gahagan, which i of course thought was for me: my
 brother madly claimed it; we fought, and the consequence was, that in
 about three minutes he received a slash in the right side (cut ), which
 effectually did his business:—he was a good swordsman enough—i
 was the best in the universe. the most ridiculous part of the affair is,
 that the toothpick-case was his, after all—he had left it on the
 nawaub's table at tiffin. i can't conceive what madness prompted him to
 fight about such a paltry bauble; he had much better have yielded it at
 once, when he saw i was determined to have it. from this slight specimen
 of my adventures, the reader will perceive that my life has been one of no
 ordinary interest; and, in fact, i may say that i have led a more
 remarkable life than any man in the service—i have been at more
 pitched battles, led more forlorn hopes, had more success among the fair
 sex, drunk harder, read more, and been a handsomer man than any officer
 now serving her majesty.
 when i at first went to india in , i was a raw cornet of seventeen,
 with blazing red hair, six feet four in height, athletic at all kinds of
 exercises, owing money to my tailor and everybody else who would trust me,
 possessing an irish brogue, and my full pay of l. a year. i need not
 say that with all these advantages i did that which a number of clever
 fellows have done before me—i fell in love, and proposed to marry
 immediately.
 but how to overcome the difficulty?—it is true that i loved julia
 jowler—loved her to madness; but her father intended her for a
 member of council at least, and not for a beggarly irish ensign. it was,
 however, my fate to make the passage to india (on board of the “samuel
 snob” east indiaman, captain duffy,) with this lovely creature, and my
 misfortune instantaneously to fall in love with her. we were not out of
 the channel before i adored her, worshipped the deck which she trod upon,
 kissed a thousand times the cuddy-chair on which she used to sit. the same
 madness fell on every man in the ship. the two mates fought about her at
 the cape; the surgeon, a sober, pious scotchman, from disappointed
 affection, took so dreadfully to drinking as to threaten spontaneous
 combustion; and old colonel lilywhite, carrying his wife and seven
 daughters to bengal, swore that he would have a divorce from mrs. l., and
 made an attempt at suicide; the captain himself told me, with tears in his
 eyes, that he hated his hitherto-adored mrs. duffy, although he had had
 nineteen children by her.
 we used to call her the witch—there was magic in her beauty and in
 her voice. i was spell-bound when i looked at her, and stark staring mad
 when she looked at me! o lustrous black eyes!—o glossy night-black
 ringlets!—o lips!—o dainty frocks of white muslin!—o
 tiny kid slippers!—though old and gouty, gahagan sees you still! i
 recollect, off ascension, she looked at me in her particular way one day
 at dinner, just as i happened to be blowing on a piece of scalding hot
 green fat. i was stupefied at once—i thrust the entire morsel (about
 half a pound) into my mouth. i made no attempt to swallow, or to masticate
 it, but left it there for many minutes, burning, burning! i had no skin to
 my palate for seven weeks after, and lived on rice-water during the rest
 of the voyage. the anecdote is trivial, but it shows the power of julia
 jowler over me.
 the writers of marine novels have so exhausted the subject of storms,
 shipwrecks, mutinies, engagements, sea-sickness, and so forth, that
 (although i have experienced each of these in many varieties) i think it
 quite unnecessary to recount such trifling adventures; suffice it to say,
 that during our five months' trajet, my mad passion for julia daily
 increased; so did the captain's and the surgeon's; so did colonel
 lilywhite's; so did the doctor's, the mate's—that of most part of
 the passengers, and a considerable number of the crew. for myself, i swore—ensign
 as i was—i would win her for my wife; i vowed that i would make her
 glorious with my sword—that as soon as i had made a favorable
 impression on my commanding officer (which i did not doubt to create), i
 would lay open to him the state of my affections, and demand his
 daughter's hand. with such sentimental outpourings did our voyage continue
 and conclude.
 we landed at the sunderbunds on a grilling hot day in december, , and
 then for the moment julia and i separated. she was carried off to her
 papa's arms in a palanquin, surrounded by at least forty hookahbadars;
 whilst the poor cornet, attended but by two dandies and a solitary beasty
 (by which unnatural name these blackamoors are called), made his way
 humbly to join the regiment at head-quarters.
 the —th regiment of bengal cavalry, then under the command of
 lieut.-colonel julius jowler, c.b., was known throughout asia and europe
 by the proud title of the bundelcund invincibles—so great was its
 character for bravery, so remarkable were its services in that delightful
 district of india. major sir george gutch was next in command, and tom
 thrupp, as kind a fellow as ever ran a mahratta through the body, was
 second major. we were on the eve of that remarkable war which was speedily
 to spread throughout the whole of india, to call forth the valor of a
 wellesley, and the indomitable gallantry of a gahagan; which was
 illustrated by our victories at ahmednuggar (where i was the first over
 the barricade at the storming of the pettah); at argaum, where i slew with
 my own sword twenty-three matchlock-men, and cut a dromedary in two; and
 by that terrible day of assaye, where wellesley would have been beaten but
 for me—me alone: i headed nineteen charges of cavalry, took (aided
 by only four men of my own troop) seventeen field-pieces, killing the
 scoundrelly french artillerymen; on that day i had eleven elephants shot
 under me, and carried away scindiah's nose-ring with a pistol-ball.
 wellesley is a duke and a marshal, i but a simple major of irregulars.
 such is fortune and war! but my feelings carry me away from my narrative,
 which had better proceed with more order.
 on arriving, i say, at our barracks at dum dum, i for the first time put
 on the beautiful uniform of the invincibles: a light blue swallow-tailed
 jacket with silver lace and wings, ornamented with about , sugar-loaf
 buttons, rhubarb-colored leather inexpressibles (tights), and red morocco
 boots with silver spurs and tassels, set off to admiration the handsome
 persons of the officers of our corps. we wore powder in those days; and a
 regulation pigtail of seventeen inches, a brass helmet surrounded by
 leopard-skin with a bearskin top and a horsetail feather, gave the head a
 fierce and chivalrous appearance, which is far more easily imagined than
 described.
 attired in this magnificent costume, i first presented myself before
 colonel jowler. he was habited in a manner precisely similar, but not
 being more than five feet in height, and weighing at least fifteen stone,
 the dress he wore did not become him quite so much as slimmer and taller
 men. flanked by his tall majors, thrupp and gutch, he looked like a stumpy
 skittle-ball between two attenuated skittles. the plump little colonel
 received me with vast cordiality, and i speedily became a prime favorite
 with himself and the other officers of the corps. jowler was the most
 hospitable of men; and gratifying my appetite and my love together, i
 continually partook of his dinners, and feasted on the sweet presence of
 julia.
 i can see now, what i would not and could not perceive in those early
 days, that this miss jowler—on whom i had lavished my first and
 warmest love, whom i had endowed with all perfection and purity—was
 no better than a little impudent flirt, who played with my feelings,
 because during the monotony of a sea-voyage she had no other toy to play
 with; and who deserted others for me, and me for others, just as her whim
 or her interest might guide her. she had not been three weeks at
 head-quarters when half the regiment was in love with her. each and all of
 the candidates had some favor to boast of, or some encouraging hopes on
 which to build. it was the scene of the “samuel snob” over again, only
 heightened in interest by a number of duels. the following list will give
 the reader a notion of some of them:—
 . cornet gahagan . . ensign hicks, of the sappers and miners. hicks
 received a ball in his jaw, and was half choked by a quantity of carroty
 whisker forced down his throat with the ball.
 . capt. macgillicuddy, b.n.i., . . cornet gahagan. i was run through the
 body, but the sword passed between the ribs, and injured me very slightly.
 . capt. macgillicuddy, b.n.i., . . mr. mulligatawny, b.c.s.,
 deputy-assistant vice sub-controller of the boggleywollah indigo grounds,
 ramgolly branch.
 macgillicuddy should have stuck to sword's-play, and he might have come
 off in his second duel as well as in his first; as it was, the civilian
 placed a ball and a part of mac's gold repeater in his stomach. a
 remarkable circumstance attended this shot, an account of which i sent
 home to the “philosophical transactions:” the surgeon had extracted the
 ball, and was going off, thinking that all was well, when the gold
 repeater struck thirteen in poor macgillicuddy's abdomen. i suppose that
 the works must have been disarranged in some way by the bullet, for the
 repeater was one of barraud's, never known to fail before, and the
 circumstance occurred at seven o'clock.*
 * so admirable are the performances of these watches, which
 will stand in any climate, that i repeatedly heard poor
 macgillicuddy relate the following fact. the hours, as it
 is known, count in italy from one to twenty-four: the day
 mac landed at naples his repeater rung the italian hours,
 from one to twenty-four; as soon as he crossed the alps it
 only sounded as usual.—g. o'g. g.
 i could continue, almost ad infinitum, an account of the wars which this
 helen occasioned, but the above three specimens will, i should think,
 satisfy the peaceful reader. i delight not in scenes of blood, heaven
 knows, but i was compelled in the course of a few weeks, and for the sake
 of this one woman, to fight nine duels myself, and i know that four times
 as many more took place concerning her.
 i forgot to say that jowler's wife was a half-caste woman, who had been
 born and bred entirely in india, and whom the colonel had married from the
 house of her mother, a native. there were some singular rumors abroad
 regarding this latter lady's history: it was reported that she was the
 daughter of a native rajah, and had been carried off by a poor english
 subaltern in lord clive's time. the young man was killed very soon after,
 and left his child with its mother. the black prince forgave his daughter
 and bequeathed to her a handsome sum of money. i suppose that it was on
 this account that jowler married mrs. j., a creature who had not, i do
 believe, a christian name, or a single christian quality: she was a
 hideous, bloated, yellow creature, with a beard, black teeth, and red
 eyes: she was fat, lying, ugly, and stingy—she hated and was hated
 by all the world, and by her jolly husband as devoutly as by any other.
 she did not pass a month in the year with him, but spent most of her time
 with her native friends. i wonder how she could have given birth to so
 lovely a creature as her daughter. this woman was of course with the
 colonel when julia arrived, and the spice of the devil in her daughter's
 composition was most carefully nourished and fed by her. if julia had been
 a flirt before, she was a downright jilt now; she set the whole cantonment
 by the ears; she made wives jealous and husbands miserable; she caused all
 those duels of which i have discoursed already, and yet such was the
 fascination of the witch that i still thought her an angel. i made court
 to the nasty mother in order to be near the daughter; and i listened
 untiringly to jowler's interminable dull stories, because i was occupied
 all the time in watching the graceful movements of miss julia.
 but the trumpet of war was soon ringing in our ears; and on the
 battle-field gahagan is a man! the bundelcund invincibles received orders
 to march, and jowler, hector-like, donned his helmet and prepared to part
 from his andromache. and now arose his perplexity: what must be done with
 his daughter, his julia? he knew his wife's peculiarities of living, and
 did not much care to trust his daughter to her keeping; but in vain he
 tried to find her an asylum among the respectable ladies of his regiment.
 lady gutch offered to receive her, but would have nothing to do with mrs.
 jowler; the surgeon's wife, mrs. sawbone, would have neither mother nor
 daughter; there was no help for it, julia and her mother must have a house
 together, and jowler knew that his wife would fill it with her odious
 blackamoor friends.
 i could not, however, go forth satisfied to the campaign until i learned
 from julia my fate. i watched twenty opportunities to see her alone, and
 wandered about the colonel's bungalow as an informer does about a
 public-house, marking the incomings and the outgoings of the family, and
 longing to seize the moment when miss jowler, unbiassed by her mother or
 her papa, might listen, perhaps, to my eloquence, and melt at the tale of
 my love.
 but it would not do—old jowler seemed to have taken all of a sudden
 to such a fit of domesticity, that there was no finding him out of doors,
 and his rhubarb-colored wife (i believe that her skin gave the first idea
 of our regimental breeches), who before had been gadding ceaselessly
 abroad, and poking her broad nose into every menage in the cantonment,
 stopped faithfully at home with her spouse. my only chance was to beard
 the old couple in their den, and ask them at once for their cub.
 so i called one day at tiffin:—old jowler was always happy to have
 my company at this meal; it amused him, he said, to see me drink hodgson's
 pale ale (i drank two hundred and thirty-four dozen the first year i was
 in bengal)—and it was no small piece of fun, certainly, to see old
 mrs. jowler attack the currie-bhaut;—she was exactly the color of
 it, as i have had already the honor to remark, and she swallowed the
 mixture with a gusto which was never equalled, except by my poor friend
 dando apropos d'huitres. she consumed the first three platefuls with a
 fork and spoon, like a christian; but as she warmed to her work, the old
 hag would throw away her silver implements, and dragging the dishes
 towards her, go to work with her hands, flip the rice into her mouth with
 her fingers, and stow away a quantity of eatables sufficient for a sepoy
 company. but why do i diverge from the main point of my story?
 julia, then, jowler, and mrs. j. were at luncheon: the dear girl was in
 the act to sabler a glass of hodgson as i entered. “how do you do, mr.
 gagin?” said the old hag, leeringly. “eat a bit o' currie-bhaut,”—and
 she thrust the dish towards me, securing a heap as it passed. “what! gagy
 my boy, how do, how do?” said the fat colonel. “what! run through the
 body?—got well again—have some hodgson—run through your
 body too!”—and at this, i may say, coarse joke (alluding to the fact
 that in these hot climates the ale oozes out as it were from the pores of
 the skin) old jowler laughed: a host of swarthy chobdars, kitmatgars,
 sices, consomahs, and bobbychies laughed too, as they provided me,
 unasked, with the grateful fluid. swallowing six tumblers of it, i paused
 nervously for a moment, and then said—
 “bobbachy, consomah, ballybaloo hoga.”
 the black ruffians took the hint and retired.
 “colonel and mrs. jowler,” said i solemnly, “we are alone; and you, miss
 jowler, you are alone too; that is—i mean—i take this
 opportunity to—(another glass of ale, if you please)—to
 express, once for all, before departing on a dangerous campaign”—(julia
 turned pale)—“before entering, i say, upon a war which may stretch
 in the dust my high-raised hopes and me, to express my hopes while life
 still remains to me, and to declare in the face of heaven, earth, and
 colonel jowler, that i love you, julia!” the colonel, astonished, let fall
 a steel fork, which stuck quivering for some minutes in the calf of my
 leg; but i heeded not the paltry interruption. “yes, by yon bright
 heaven,” continued i, “i love you, julia! i respect my commander, i esteem
 your excellent and beauteous mother; tell me, before i leave you, if i may
 hope for a return of my affection. say that you love me, and i will do
 such deeds in this coming war as shall make you proud of the name of your
 gahagan.”
 the old woman, as i delivered these touching words, stared, snapped, and
 ground her teeth, like an enraged monkey. julia was now red, now white;
 the colonel stretched forward, took the fork out of the calf of my leg,
 wiped it, and then seized a bundle of letters which i had remarked by his
 side.
 “a cornet!” said he, in a voice choking with emotion; “a pitiful, beggarly
 irish cornet aspire to the hand of julia jowler! gag, gahagan, are you
 mad, or laughing at us? look at these letters, young man—at these
 letters, i say—one hundred and twenty-four epistles from every part
 of india (not including one from the governor-general, and six from his
 brother, colonel wellesley,)—one hundred and twenty-four proposals
 for the hand of miss jowler! cornet gahagan,” he continued, “i wish to
 think well of you: you are the bravest, the most modest, and, perhaps, the
 handsomest man in our corps; but you have not got a single rupee. you ask
 me for julia, and you do not possess even an anna!”—(here the old
 rogue grinned, as if he had made a capital pun).—“no, no,” said he,
 waxing good-natured; “gagy, my boy, it is nonsense! julia, love, retire
 with your mamma; this silly young gentleman will remain and smoke a pipe
 with me.”
 i took one; it was the bitterest chillum i ever smoked in my life.
 i am not going to give here an account of my military services; they will
 appear in my great national autobiography, in forty volumes, which i am
 now preparing for the press. i was with my regiment in all wellesley's
 brilliant campaigns; then taking dawk, i travelled across the country
 north-eastward, and had the honor of fighting by the side of lord lake at
 laswaree, deeg, furruckabad, futtyghur, and bhurtpore: but i will not
 boast of my actions—the military man knows them, my sovereign
 appreciates them. if asked who was the bravest man of the indian army,
 there is not an officer belonging to it who would not cry at once,
 gahagan. the fact is, i was desperate: i cared not for life, deprived of
 julia jowler.
 with julia's stony looks ever before my eyes, her father's stern refusal
 in my ears, i did not care, at the close of the campaign, again to seek
 her company or to press my suit. we were eighteen months on service,
 marching and countermarching, and fighting almost every other day: to the
 world i did not seem altered; but the world only saw the face, and not the
 seared and blighted heart within me. my valor, always desperate, now
 reached to a pitch of cruelty; i tortured my grooms and grass-cutters for
 the most trifling offence or error,—i never in action spared a man,—i
 sheared off three hundred and nine heads in the course of that single
 campaign.
 some influence, equally melancholy, seemed to have fallen upon poor old
 jowler. about six months after we had left dum dum, he received a parcel
 of letters from benares (whither his wife had retired with her daughter),
 and so deeply did they seem to weigh upon his spirits, that he ordered
 eleven men of his regiment to be flogged within two days; but it was
 against the blacks that he chiefly turned his wrath. our fellows, in the
 heat and hurry of the campaign, were in the habit of dealing rather
 roughly with their prisoners, to extract treasure from them: they used to
 pull their nails out by the root, to boil them in kedgeree pots, to flog
 them and dress their wounds with cayenne pepper, and so on. jowler, when
 he heard of these proceedings, which before had always justly exasperated
 him (he was a humane and kind little man), used now to smile fiercely and
 say, “d—- the black scoundrels! serve them right, serve them right!”
 one day, about a couple of miles in advance of the column, i had been on a
 foraging-party with a few dragoons, and was returning peaceably to camp,
 when of a sudden a troop of mahrattas burst on us from a neighboring
 mango-tope, in which they had been hidden: in an instant three of my men's
 saddles were empty, and i was left with but seven more to make head
 against at least thirty of these vagabond black horsemen. i never saw in
 my life a nobler figure than the leader of the troop—mounted on a
 splendid black arab: he was as tall, very nearly, as myself; he wore a
 steel cap and a shirt of mail, and carried a beautiful french carbine,
 which had already done execution upon two of my men. i saw that our only
 chance of safety lay in the destruction of this man. i shouted to him in a
 voice of thunder (in the hindustanee tongue of course), “stop, dog, if you
 dare, and encounter a man!”
 in reply his lance came whirling in the air over my head, and mortally
 transfixed poor foggarty of ours, who was behind me. grinding my teeth and
 swearing horribly, i drew that scimitar which never yet failed its blow,*
 and rushed at the indian. he came down at full gallop, his own sword
 making ten thousand gleaming circles in the air, shrieking his cry of
 battle.
 * in my affair with macgillicuddy, i was fool enough to go
 out with small-swords—miserable weapons only fit for
 tailors.—g. o'g. g.
 the contest did not last an instant. with my first blow i cut off his
 sword-arm at the wrist; my second i levelled at his head. i said that he
 wore a steel cap, with a gilt iron spike of six inches, and a hood of
 chain mail. i rose in my stirrups and delivered “st. george;” my sword
 caught the spike exactly on the point, split it sheer in two, cut crashing
 through the steel cap and hood, and was only stopped by a ruby which he
 wore in his back-plate. his head, cut clean in two between the eyebrows
 and nostrils, even between the two front teeth, fell one side on each
 shoulder, and he galloped on till his horse was stopped by my men, who
 were not a little amused at the feat.
 as i had expected, the remaining ruffians fled on seeing their leader's
 fate. i took home his helmet by way of curiosity, and we made a single
 prisoner, who was instantly carried before old jowler.
 we asked the prisoner the name of the leader of the troop; he said it was
 chowder loll.
 “chowder loll!” shrieked colonel jowler. “o fate! thy hand is here!” he
 rushed wildly into his tent—the next day applied for leave of
 absence. gutch took the command of the regiment, and i saw him no more for
 some time.
 as i had distinguished myself not a little during the war, general lake
 sent me up with despatches to calcutta, where lord wellesley received me
 with the greatest distinction. fancy my surprise, on going to a ball at
 government house, to meet my old friend jowler; my trembling, blushing,
 thrilling delight, when i saw julia by his side!
 jowler seemed to blush too when he beheld me. i thought of my former
 passages with his daughter. “gagy my boy,” says he, shaking hands, “glad
 to see you. old friend, julia—come to tiffin—hodgson's pale—brave
 fellow gagy.” julia did not speak, but she turned ashy pale, and fixed
 upon me her awful eyes! i fainted almost, and uttered some incoherent
 words. julia took my hand, gazed at me still, and said, “come!” need i say
 i went?
 i will not go over the pale ale and currie-bhaut again; but this i know,
 that in half an hour i was as much in love as i ever had been: and that in
 three weeks i—yes, i—was the accepted lover of julia! i did
 not pause to ask where were the one hundred and twenty-four offers? why i,
 refused before, should be accepted now? i only felt that i loved her, and
 was happy!
 one night, one memorable night, i could not sleep, and, with a lover's
 pardonable passion, wandered solitary through the city of palaces until i
 came to the house which contained my julia. i peeped into the compound—all
 was still; i looked into the veranda—all was dark, except a light—yes,
 one light—and it was in julia's chamber! my heart throbbed almost to
 stilling. i would—i would advance, if but to gaze upon her for a
 moment, and to bless her as she slept. i did look, i did advance; and, o
 heaven! i saw a lamp burning, mrs. jow. in a nightdress, with a very dark
 baby in her arms, and julia looking tenderly at an ayah, who was nursing
 another.
 “oh, mamma,” said julia, “what would that fool gahagan say if he knew
 all?”
 “he does know all!” shouted i, springing forward, and tearing down the
 tatties from the window. mrs. jow. ran shrieking out of the room, julia
 fainted, the cursed black children squalled, and their d——d
 nurse fell on her knees, gabbling some infernal jargon of hindustanee. old
 jowler at this juncture entered with a candle and a drawn sword.
 “liar! scoundrel! deceiver!” shouted i. “turn, ruffian, and defend
 yourself!” but old jowler, when he saw me, only whistled, looked at his
 lifeless daughter, and slowly left the room.
 why continue the tale? i need not now account for jowler's gloom on
 receiving his letters from benares—for his exclamation upon the
 death of the indian chief—for his desire to marry his daughter: the
 woman i was wooing was no longer miss julia jowler, she was mrs. chowder
 loll!
 i sat down to write gravely and sadly, for (since the appearance of some
 of my adventures in a monthly magazine) unprincipled men have endeavored
 to rob me of the only good i possess, to question the statements that i
 make, and, themselves without a spark of honor or good feeling, to steal
 from me that which is my sole wealth—my character as a teller of the
 the reader will understand that it is to the illiberal strictures of a
 profligate press i now allude; among the london journalists, none (luckily
 for themselves) have dared to question the veracity of my statements: they
 know me, and they know that i am in london. if i can use the pen, i can
 also wield a more manly and terrible weapon, and would answer their
 contradictions with my sword! no gold or gems adorn the hilt of that
 war-worn scimitar; but there is blood upon the blade—the blood of
 the enemies of my country, and the maligners of my honest fame. there are
 others, however—the disgrace of a disgraceful trade—who,
 borrowing from distance a despicable courage, have ventured to assail me.
 the infamous editors of the kelso champion, the bungay beacon, the
 tipperary argus, and the stoke pogis sentinel, and other dastardly organs
 of the provincial press, have, although differing in politics, agreed upon
 this one point, and with a scoundrelly unanimity, vented a flood of abuse
 upon the revelations made by me.
 they say that i have assailed private characters, and wilfully perverted
 history to blacken the reputation of public men. i ask, was any one of
 these men in bengal in the year ? was any single conductor of any one
 of these paltry prints ever in bundelcund or the rohilla country? does
 this exquisite tipperary scribe know the difference between hurrygurrybang
 and burrumtollah? not he! and because, forsooth, in those strange and
 distant lands strange circumstances have taken place, it is insinuated
 that the relater is a liar: nay, that the very places themselves have no
 existence but in my imagination. fools!—but i will not waste my
 anger upon them, and proceed to recount some other portions of my personal
 history.
 it is, i presume, a fact which even these scribbling assassins will not
 venture to deny, that before the commencement of the campaign against
 scindiah, the english general formed a camp at kanouge on the jumna, where
 he exercised that brilliant little army which was speedily to perform such
 wonders in the dooab. it will be as well to give a slight account of the
 causes of a war which was speedily to rage through some of the fairest
 portions of the indian continent.
 shah allum, the son of shah lollum, the descendant by the female line of
 nadir shah (that celebrated toorkomaun adventurer, who had wellnigh hurled
 bajazet and selim the second from the throne of bagdad)—shah allum,
 i say, although nominally the emperor of delhi, was in reality the slave
 of the various warlike chieftains who lorded it by turns over the country
 and the sovereign, until conquered and slain by some more successful
 rebel. chowder loll masolgee, zubberdust khan, dowsunt row scindiah, and
 the celebrated bobbachy jung bahawder, had held for a time complete
 mastery in delhi. the second of these, a ruthless afghan soldier, had
 abruptly entered the capital; nor was he ejected from it until he had
 seized upon the principal jewels, and likewise put out the eyes of the
 last of the unfortunate family of afrasiab. scindiah came to the rescue of
 the sightless shah allum, and though he destroyed his oppressor, only
 increased his slavery; holding him in as painful a bondage as he had
 suffered under the tyrannous afghan.
 as long as these heroes were battling among themselves, or as long rather
 as it appeared that they had any strength to fight a battle, the british
 government, ever anxious to see its enemies by the ears, by no means
 interfered in the contest. but the french revolution broke out, and a host
 of starving sans-culottes appeared among the various indian states,
 seeking for military service, and inflaming the minds of the various
 native princes against the british east india company. a number of these
 entered into scindiah's ranks: one of them, perron, was commander of his
 army; and though that chief was as yet quite engaged in his hereditary
 quarrel with jeswunt row holkar, and never thought of an invasion of the
 british territory, the company all of a sudden discovered that shah allum,
 his sovereign, was shamefully ill-used, and determined to re-establish the
 ancient splendor of his throne.
 of course it was sheer benevolence for poor shah allum that prompted our
 governors to take these kindly measures in his favor. i don't know how it
 happened that, at the end of the war, the poor shah was not a whit better
 off than at the beginning; and that though holkar was beaten, and scindiah
 annihilated, shah allum was much such a puppet as before. somehow, in the
 hurry and confusion of this struggle, the oyster remained with the british
 government, who had so kindly offered to dress it for the emperor, while
 his majesty was obliged to be contented with the shell.
 the force encamped at kanouge bore the title of the grand army of the
 ganges and the jumna; it consisted of eleven regiments of cavalry and
 twelve battalions of infantry, and was commanded by general lake in
 person.
 well, on the st of september we stormed perron's camp at allyghur; on the
 fourth we took that fortress by assault; and as my name was mentioned in
 general orders, i may as well quote the commander-in-chief's words
 regarding me—they will spare me the trouble of composing my own
 eulogium:—
 “the commander-in-chief is proud thus publicly to declare his high sense
 of the gallantry of lieutenant gahagan, of the —— cavalry. in
 the storming of the fortress, although unprovided with a single ladder,
 and accompanied but by a few brave men, lieutenant gahagan succeeded in
 escalading the inner and fourteenth wall of the place. fourteen ditches
 lined with sword-blades and poisoned chevaux-de-frise, fourteen walls
 bristling with innumerable artillery and as smooth as looking-glasses,
 were in turn triumphantly passed by that enterprising officer. his course
 was to be traced by the heaps of slaughtered enemies lying thick upon the
 platforms; and alas! by the corpses of most of the gallant men who
 followed him!—when at length he effected his lodgment, and the
 dastardly enemy, who dared not to confront him with arms, let loose upon
 him the tigers and lions of scindiah's menagerie. this meritorious officer
 destroyed, with his own hand, four of the largest and most ferocious
 animals, and the rest, awed by the indomitable majesty of british valor,
 shrank back to their dens. thomas higgory, a private, and runty goss,
 havildar, were the only two who remained out of the nine hundred who
 followed lieutenant gahagan. honor to them! honor and tears for the brave
 men who perished on that awful day!”
 i have copied this, word for word, from the bengal hurkaru of september
 , : and anybody who has the slightest doubt as to the statement, may
 refer to the paper itself.
 and here i must pause to give thanks to fortune, which so marvellously
 preserved me, sergeant-major higgory, and runty goss. were i to say that
 any valor of ours had carried us unhurt through this tremendous combat,
 the reader would laugh me to scorn. no: though my narrative is
 extraordinary, it is nevertheless authentic; and never, never would i
 sacrifice truth for the mere sake of effect. the fact is this:—the
 citadel of allyghur is situated upon a rock, about a thousand feet above
 the level of the sea, and is surrounded by fourteen walls, as his
 excellency was good enough to remark in his despatch. a man who would
 mount these without scaling-ladders, is an ass; he who would say he
 mounted them without such assistance, is a liar and a knave. we had
 scaling-ladders at the commencement of the assault, although it was quite
 impossible to carry them beyond the first line of batteries. mounted on
 them, however, as our troops were falling thick about me, i saw that we
 must ignominiously retreat, unless some other help could be found for our
 brave fellows to escalade the next wall. it was about seventy feet high. i
 instantly turned the guns of wall a on wall b, and peppered the latter so
 as to make, not a breach, but a scaling place; the men mounting in the
 holes made by the shot. by this simple stratagem, i managed to pass each
 successive barrier—for to ascend a wall which the general was
 pleased to call “as smooth as glass” is an absurd impossibility: i seek to
 achieve none such:—
 “i dare do all that may become a man,
 who dares do more, is neither more nor less.”
 of course, had the enemy's guns been commonly well served, not one of us
 would ever have been alive out of the three; but whether it was owing to
 fright, or to the excessive smoke caused by so many pieces of artillery,
 arrive we did. on the platforms, too, our work was not quite so difficult
 as might be imagined—killing these fellows was sheer butchery. as
 soon as we appeared, they all turned and fled helter-skelter, and the
 reader may judge of their courage by the fact that out of about seven
 hundred men killed by us, only forty had wounds in front, the rest being
 bayoneted as they ran.
 and beyond all other pieces of good fortune was the very letting out of
 these tigers; which was the dernier ressort of bournonville, the second
 commandant of the fort. i had observed this man (conspicuous for a
 tri-colored scarf which he wore) upon every one of the walls as we stormed
 them, and running away the very first among the fugitives. he had all the
 keys of the gates; and in his tremor, as he opened the menagerie portal,
 left the whole bunch in the door, which i seized when the animals were
 overcome. runty goss then opened them one by one, our troops entered, and
 the victorious standard of my country floated on the walls of allyghur!
 when the general, accompanied by his staff; entered the last line of
 fortifications, the brave old man raised me from the dead rhinoceros on
 which i was seated, and pressed me to his breast. but the excitement which
 had borne me through the fatigues and perils of that fearful day failed
 all of a sudden, and i wept like a child upon his shoulder.
 promotion, in our army, goes unluckily by seniority; nor is it in the
 power of the general-in-chief to advance a caesar, if he finds him in the
 capacity of a subaltern: my reward for the above exploit was, therefore,
 not very rich. his excellency had a favorite horn snuff-box (for, though
 exalted in station, he was in his habits most simple): of this, and about
 a quarter of an ounce of high-dried welsh, which he always took, he made
 me a present, saying, in front of the line, “accept this, mr. gahagan, as
 a token of respect from the first to the bravest officer in the army.”
 calculating the snuff to be worth a halfpenny, i should say that fourpence
 was about the value of this gift: but it has at least this good effect—it
 serves to convince any person who doubts my story, that the facts of it
 are really true. i have left it at the office of my publisher, along with
 the extract from the bengal hurkaru, and anybody may examine both by
 applying in the counting-house of mr. cunningham.* that once popular
 expression, or proverb, “are you up to snuff?” arose out of the above
 circumstance; for the officers of my corps, none of whom, except myself,
 had ventured on the storming-party, used to twit me about this modest
 reward for my labors. never mind! when they want me to storm a fort again,
 i shall know better.
 * the major certainly offered to leave an old snuff-box at
 mr. cunningham's office; but it contained no extract from a
 newspaper, and does not quite prove that he killed a
 rhinoceros and stormed fourteen intrenchments at the siege
 of allyghur.
 well, immediately after the capture of this important fortress, perron,
 who had been the life and soul of scindiah's army, came in to us, with his
 family and treasure, and was passed over to the french settlements at
 chandernagur. bourquien took his command, and against him we now moved.
 the morning of the th of september found us upon the plains of delhi.
 it was a burning hot day, and we were all refreshing ourselves after the
 morning's march, when i, who was on the advanced piquet along with
 o'gawler of the king's dragoons, was made aware of the enemy's
 neighborhood in a very singular manner. o'gawler and i were seated under a
 little canopy of horse-cloths, which we had formed to shelter us from the
 intolerable heat of the sun, and were discussing with great delight a few
 manilla cheroots, and a stone jar of the most exquisite, cool, weak,
 refreshing sangaree. we had been playing cards the night before, and
 o'gawler had lost to me seven hundred rupees. i emptied the last of the
 sangaree into the two pint tumblers out of which we were drinking, and
 holding mine up, said, “here's better luck to you next time, o'gawler!”
 as i spoke the words—whish!—a cannon-ball cut the tumbler
 clean out of my hand, and plumped into poor o'gawler's stomach. it settled
 him completely, and of course i never got my seven hundred rupees. such
 are the uncertainties of war!
 to strap on my sabre and my accoutrements—to mount my arab charger—to
 drink off what o'gawler had left of the sangaree—and to gallop to
 the general, was the work of a moment. i found him as comfortably at
 tiffin as if he were at his own house in london.
 “general,” said i, as soon as i got into his paijamahs (or tent), “you
 must leave your lunch if you want to fight the enemy.”
 “the enemy—psha! mr. gahagan, the enemy is on the other side of the
 river.”
 “i can only tell your excellency that the enemy's guns will hardly carry
 five miles, and that cornet o'gawler was this moment shot dead at my side
 with a cannon-ball.”
 “ha! is it so?” said his excellency, rising, and laying down the drumstick
 of a grilled chicken. “gentlemen, remember that the eyes of europe are
 upon us, and follow me!”
 each aide-de-camp started from table and seized his cocked hat; each
 british heart beat high at the thoughts of the coming melee. we mounted
 our horses and galloped swiftly after the brave old general; i not the
 last in the train, upon my famous black charger.
 it was perfectly true, the enemy were posted in force within three miles
 of our camp, and from a hillock in the advance to which we galloped, we
 were enabled with our telescopes to see the whole of his imposing line.
 nothing can better describe it than this:—
 —a is the enemy, and the dots represent the hundred and twenty
 pieces of artillery which defended his line. he was, moreover, intrenched;
 and a wide morass in his front gave him an additional security.
 his excellency for a moment surveyed the line, and then said, turning
 round to one of his aides-de-camp, “order up major-general tinkler and the
 cavalry.”
 “here, does your excellency mean?” said the aide-de-camp, surprised, for
 the enemy had perceived us, and the cannon-balls were flying about as
 thick as peas.
 “here, sir!” said the old general, stamping with his foot in a passion,
 and the a.d.c. shrugged his shoulders and galloped away. in five minutes
 we heard the trumpets in our camp, and in twenty more the greater part of
 the cavalry had joined us.
 up they came, five thousand men, their standards flapping in the air,
 their long line of polished jack-boots gleaming in the golden sunlight.
 “and now we are here,” said major-general sir theophilus tinkler, “what
 next?” “oh, d—- it,” said the commander-in-chief, “charge, charge—nothing
 like charging—galloping—guns—rascally black scoundrels—charge,
 charge!” and then turning round to me (perhaps he was glad to change the
 conversation), he said, “lieutenant gahagan, you will stay with me.”
 and well for him i did, for i do not hesitate to say that the battle was
 gained by me. i do not mean to insult the reader by pretending that any
 personal exertions of mine turned the day,—that i killed, for
 instance, a regiment of cavalry or swallowed a battery of guns,—such
 absurd tales would disgrace both the hearer and the teller. i, as is well
 known, never say a single word which cannot be proved, and hate more than
 all other vices the absurd sin of egotism; i simply mean that my advice to
 the general, at a quarter past two o'clock in the afternoon of that day,
 won this great triumph for the british army.
 gleig, mill, and thorn have all told the tale of this war, though somehow
 they have omitted all mention of the hero of it. general lake, for the
 victory of that day, became lord lake of laswaree. laswaree! and who,
 forsooth, was the real conqueror of laswaree? i can lay my hand upon my
 heart and say that i was. if any proof is wanting of the fact, let me give
 it at once, and from the highest military testimony in the world—i
 mean that of the emperor napoleon.
 in the month of march, , i was passenger on board the “prince regent,”
 captain harris, which touched at st. helena on its passage from calcutta
 to england. in company with the other officers on board the ship, i paid
 my respects to the illustrious exile of longwood, who received us in his
 garden, where he was walking about, in a nankeen dress and a large
 broad-brimmed straw-hat, with general montholon, count las casas, and his
 son emanuel, then a little boy; who i dare say does not recollect me, but
 who nevertheless played with my sword-knot and the tassels of my hessian
 boots during the whole of our interview with his imperial majesty.
 our names were read out (in a pretty accent, by the way!) by general
 montholon, and the emperor, as each was pronounced, made a bow to the
 owner of it, but did not vouchsafe a word. at last montholon came to mine.
 the emperor looked me at once in the face, took his hands out of his
 pockets, put them behind his back, and coming up to me smiling, pronounced
 the following words:—
 “assaye, delhi, deeg, futtyghur?”
 i blushed, and taking off my hat with a bow, said—“sire, c'est moi.”
 “parbleu! je le savais bien,” said the emperor, holding out his snuff-box.
 “en usez-vous, major?” i took a large pinch (which, with the honor of
 speaking to so great a man, brought the tears into my eyes), and he
 continued as nearly as possible in the following words:—
 “sir, you are known; you come of an heroic nation. your third brother, the
 chef de bataillon, count godfrey gahagan, was in my irish brigade.”
 gahagan.—“sire, it is true. he and my countrymen in your majesty's
 service stood under the green flag in the breach of burgos, and beat
 wellington back. it was the only time, as your majesty knows, that
 irishmen and englishmen were beaten in that war.”
 napoleon (looking as if he would say, “d—- your candor, major
 gahagan”).—“well, well; it was so. your brother was a count, and
 died a general in my service.”
 gahagan.—“he was found lying upon the bodies of nine-and-twenty
 cossacks at borodino. they were all dead, and bore the gahagan mark.”
 napoleon (to montholon).—“c'est vrai, montholon: je vous donne ma
 parole d'honneur la plus sacree, que c'est vrai. ils ne sont pas d'autres,
 ces terribles ga'gans. you must know that monsieur gained the battle of
 delhi as certainly as i did that of austerlitz. in this way:—ce
 belitre de lor lake, after calling up his cavalry, and placing them in
 front of holkar's batteries, qui balayaient la plaine, was for charging
 the enemy's batteries with his horse, who would have been ecrases,
 mitrailles, foudroyes to a man but for the cunning of ce grand rogue que
 vous voyez.”
 montholon.—“coquin de major, va!”
 napoleon.—“montholon! tais-toi. when lord lake, with his great
 bull-headed english obstinacy, saw the facheuse position into which he had
 brought his troops, he was for dying on the spot, and would infallibly
 have done so—and the loss of his army would have been the ruin of
 the east india company—and the ruin of the english east india
 company would have established my empire (bah! it was a republic then!) in
 the east—but that the man before us, lieutenant goliah gahagan, was
 riding at the side of general lake.”
 montholon (with an accent of despair and fury).—“gredin! cent mille
 tonnerres de dieu!”
 napoleon (benignantly).—“calme-toi, mon fidele ami. what will you?
 it was fate. gahagan, at the critical period of the battle, or rather
 slaughter (for the english had not slain a man of the enemy), advised a
 retreat.”
 montholon. “le lache! un francais meurt, mais il ne recule jamais.”
 napoleon.—“stupide! don't you see why the retreat was ordered?—don't
 you know that it was a feint on the part of gahagan to draw holkar from
 his impregnable intrenchments? don't you know that the ignorant indian
 fell into the snare, and issuing from behind the cover of his guns, came
 down with his cavalry on the plains in pursuit of lake and his dragoons?
 then it was that the englishmen turned upon him; the hardy children of the
 north swept down his feeble horsemen, bore them back to their guns, which
 were useless, entered holkar's intrenchments along with his troops, sabred
 the artillerymen at their pieces, and won the battle of delhi!”
 as the emperor spoke, his pale cheek glowed red, his eye flashed fire, his
 deep clear voice rung as of old when he pointed out the enemy from beneath
 the shadow of the pyramids, or rallied his regiments to the charge upon
 the death-strewn plain of wagram. i have had many a proud moment in my
 life, but never such a proud one as this; and i would readily pardon the
 word “coward,” as applied to me by montholon, in consideration of the
 testimony which his master bore in my favor.
 “major,” said the emperor to me in conclusion, “why had i not such a man
 as you in my service? i would have made you a prince and a marshal!” and
 here he fell into a reverie, of which i knew and respected the purport. he
 was thinking, doubtless, that i might have retrieved his fortunes; and
 indeed i have very little doubt that i might.
 very soon after, coffee was brought by monsieur marchand, napoleon's
 valet-de-chambre, and after partaking of that beverage, and talking upon
 the politics of the day, the emperor withdrew, leaving me deeply impressed
 by the condescension he had shown in this remarkable interview.
 head quarters, morella, sept. , .
 i have been here for some months, along with my young friend cabrera: and
 in the hurry and bustle of war—daily on guard and in the batteries
 for sixteen hours out of the twenty-four, with fourteen severe wounds and
 seven musket-balls in my body—it may be imagined that i have had
 little time to think about the publication of my memoirs. inter arma
 silent leges—in the midst of fighting be hanged to writing! as the
 poet says; and i never would have bothered myself with a pen, had not
 common gratitude incited me to throw off a few pages.
 along with oraa's troops, who have of late been beleaguering this place,
 there was a young milesian gentleman, mr. toone o'connor emmett fitzgerald
 sheeny, by name, a law student, and member of gray's inn, and what he
 called bay ah of trinity college, dublin. mr. sheeny was with the queen's
 people, not in a military capacity, but as representative of an english
 journal; to which, for a trifling weekly remuneration, he was in the habit
 of transmitting accounts of the movements of the belligerents, and his own
 opinion of the politics of spain. receiving, for the discharge of his
 duty, a couple of guineas a week from the proprietors of the journal in
 question, he was enabled, as i need scarcely say, to make such a show in
 oraa's camp as only a christino general officer, or at the very least a
 colonel of a regiment, can afford to keep up.
 in the famous sortie which we made upon the twenty-third, i was of course
 among the foremost in the melee, and found myself, after a good deal of
 slaughtering (which it would be as disagreeable as useless to describe
 here), in the court of a small inn or podesta, which had been made the
 head-quarters of several queenite officers during the siege. the pesatero
 or landlord of the inn had been despatched by my brave chapel-churies,
 with his fine family of children—the officers quartered in the
 podesta had of course bolted; but one man remained, and my fellows were on
 the point of cutting him into ten thousand pieces with their borachios,
 when i arrived in the room time enough to prevent the catastrophe. seeing
 before me an individual in the costume of a civilian—a white hat, a
 light blue satin cravat, embroidered with butterflies and other
 quadrupeds, a green coat and brass buttons, and a pair of blue plaid
 trousers, i recognized at once a countryman, and interposed to save his
 life.
 in an agonized brogue the unhappy young man was saying all that he could
 to induce the chapel-churies to give up their intention of slaughtering
 him; but it is very little likely that his protestations would have had
 any effect upon them, had not i appeared in the room, and shouted to the
 ruffians to hold their hand.
 seeing a general officer before them (i have the honor to hold that rank
 in the service of his catholic majesty), and moreover one six feet four in
 height, and armed with that terrible cabecilla (a sword so called, because
 it is five feet long) which is so well known among the spanish armies—seeing,
 i say, this figure, the fellows retired, exclaiming, “adios, corpo di
 bacco, nosotros,” and so on, clearly proving (by their words) that they
 would, if they dared, have immolated the victim whom i had thus rescued
 from their fury. “villains!” shouted i, hearing them grumble, “away! quit
 the apartment!” each man, sulkily sheathing his sombrero, obeyed, and
 quitted the camarilla.
 it was then that mr. sheeny detailed to me the particulars to which i have
 briefly adverted; and, informing me at the same time that he had a family
 in england who would feel obliged to me for his release, and that his most
 intimate friend the english ambassador would move heaven and earth to
 revenge his fall, he directed my attention to a portmanteau passably well
 filled, which he hoped would satisfy the cupidity of my troops. i said,
 though with much regret, that i must subject his person to a search; and
 hence arose the circumstance which has called for what i fear you will
 consider a somewhat tedious explanation. i found upon mr. sheeny's person
 three sovereigns in english money (which i have to this day), and
 singularly enough a copy of the new monthly magazine, containing a portion
 of my adventures. it was a toss-up whether i should let the poor young man
 be shot or no, but this little circumstance saved his life. the gratified
 vanity of authorship induced me to accept his portmanteau and valuables,
 and to allow the poor wretch to go free. i put the magazine in my
 coat-pocket, and left him and the podesta.
 the men, to my surprise, had quitted the building, and it was full time
 for me to follow; for i found our sallying party, after committing
 dreadful ravages in oraa's lines, were in full retreat upon the fort,
 hotly pressed by a superior force of the enemy. i am pretty well known and
 respected by the men of both parties in spain (indeed i served for some
 months on the queen's side before i came over to don carlos); and, as it
 is my maxim never to give quarter, i never expect to receive it when taken
 myself. on issuing from the podesta with sheeny's portmanteau and my sword
 in my hand, i was a little disgusted and annoyed to see our own men in a
 pretty good column retreating at double-quick, and about four hundred
 yards beyond me, up the hill leading to the fort; while on my left hand,
 and at only a hundred yards, a troop of the queenite lancers were
 clattering along the road.
 i had got into the very middle of the road before i made this discovery,
 so that the fellows had a full sight of me, and whiz! came a bullet by my
 left whisker before i could say jack robinson. i looked round—there
 were seventy of the accursed malvados at the least, and within, as i said,
 a hundred yards. were i to say that i stopped to fight seventy men, you
 would write me down a fool or a liar: no, sir, i did not fight, i ran
 away.
 i am six feet four—my figure is as well known in the spanish army as
 that of the count de luchana, or my fierce little friend cabrera himself.
 “gahagan!” shouted out half a dozen scoundrelly voices, and fifty more
 shots came rattling after me. i was running—running as the brave
 stag before the hounds—running as i have done a great number of
 times before in my life, when there was no help for it but a race.
 after i had run about five hundred yards, i saw that i had gained nearly
 three upon our column in front, and that likewise the christino horsemen
 were left behind some hundred yards more; with the exception of three, who
 were fearfully near me. the first was an officer without a lance; he had
 fired both his pistols at me, and was twenty yards in advance of his
 comrades; there was a similar distance between the two lancers who rode
 behind him. i determined then to wait for no. , and as he came up
 delivered cut  at his horse's near leg—off it flew, and down, as i
 expected, went horse and man. i had hardly time to pass my sword through
 my prostrate enemy, when no.  was upon me. if i could but get that
 fellow's horse, thought i, i am safe; and i executed at once the plan
 which i hoped was to effect my rescue.
 i had, as i said, left the podesta with sheeny's portmanteau, and,
 unwilling to part with some of the articles it contained—some
 shirts, a bottle of whiskey, a few cakes of windsor soap, &c. &c.,—i
 had carried it thus far on my shoulders, but now was compelled to
 sacrifice it malgre moi. as the lancer came up, i dropped my sword from my
 right hand, and hurled the portmanteau at his head, with aim so true, that
 he fell back on his saddle like a sack, and thus when the horse galloped
 up to me, i had no difficulty in dismounting the rider: the whiskey-bottle
 struck him over his right eye, and he was completely stunned. to dash him
 from the saddle and spring myself into it, was the work of a moment;
 indeed, the two combats had taken place in about a fifth part of the time
 which it has taken the reader to peruse the description. but in the
 rapidity of the last encounter, and the mounting of my enemy's horse, i
 had committed a very absurd oversight—i was scampering away without
 my sword! what was i to do?—to scamper on, to be sure, and trust to
 the legs of my horse for safety!
 the lancer behind me gained on me every moment, and i could hear his
 horrid laugh as he neared me. i leaned forward jockey-fashion in my
 saddle, and kicked, and urged, and flogged with my hand, but all in vain.
 closer—closer—the point of his lance was within two feet of my
 back. ah! ah! he delivered the point, and fancy my agony when i felt it
 enter—through exactly fifty-nine pages of the new monthly magazine.
 had it not been for that magazine, i should have been impaled without a
 shadow of a doubt. was i wrong in feeling gratitude? had i not cause to
 continue my contributions to that periodical?
 when i got safe into morella, along with the tail of the sallying party, i
 was for the first time made acquainted with the ridiculous result of the
 lancer's thrust (as he delivered his lance, i must tell you that a ball
 came whiz over my head from our fellows, and entering at his nose, put a
 stop to his lancing for the future). i hastened to cabrera's quarter, and
 related to him some of my adventures during the day.
 “but, general,” said he, “you are standing. i beg you chiudete l'uscio
 (take a chair).”
 i did so, and then for the first time was aware that there was some
 foreign substance in the tail of my coat, which prevented my sitting at
 ease. i drew out the magazine which i had seized, and there, to my wonder,
 discovered the christino lance twisted up like a fish-hook, or a pastoral
 crook.
 “ha! ha! ha!” said cabrera (who is a notorious wag).
 “valdepenas madrilenos,” growled out tristany.
 “by my cachuca di caballero (upon my honor as a gentleman),” shrieked out
 ros d'eroles, convulsed with laughter, “i will send it to the bishop of
 leon for a crozier.”
 “gahagan has consecrated it,” giggled out ramon cabrera; and so they went
 on with their muchacas for an hour or more. but, when they heard that the
 means of my salvation from the lance of the scoundrelly christino had been
 the magazine containing my own history, their laugh was changed into
 wonder. i read them (speaking spanish more fluently than english) every
 word of my story. “but how is this?” said cabrera. “you surely have other
 adventures to relate?”
 “excellent sir,” said i, “i have;” and that very evening, as we sat over
 our cups of tertullia (sangaree), i continued my narrative in nearly the
 following words:—
 “i left off in the very middle of the battle of delhi, which ended, as
 everybody knows, in the complete triumph of the british arms. but who
 gained the battle? lord lake is called viscount lake of delhi and
 laswaree, while major gaha—nonsense, never mind him, never mind the
 charge he executed when, sabre in hand, he leaped the six-foot wall in the
 mouth of the roaring cannon, over the heads of the gleaming pikes; when,
 with one hand seizing the sacred peishcush, or fish—which was the
 banner always borne before scindiah,—he, with his good sword, cut
 off the trunk of the famous white elephant, which, shrieking with agony,
 plunged madly into the mahratta ranks, followed by his giant brethren,
 tossing, like chaff before the wind, the affrighted kitmatgars. he,
 meanwhile, now plunging into the midst of a battalion of consomahs, now
 cleaving to the chine a screaming and ferocious bobbachee,* rushed on,
 like the simoom across the red zaharan plain, killing with his own hand, a
 hundred and forty-thr—but never mind—'alone he did it;'
 sufficient be it for him, however, that the victory was won: he cares not
 for the empty honors which were awarded to more fortunate men!
 * the double-jointed camel of bactria, which the classic
 reader may recollect is mentioned by suidas (in his
 commentary on the flight of darius), is so called by the
 mahrattas.
 “we marched after the battle to delhi, where poor blind old shah allum
 received us, and bestowed all kinds of honors and titles on our general.
 as each of the officers passed before him, the shah did not fail to remark
 my person,* and was told my name.
 * there is some trifling inconsistency on the major's part.
 shah allum was notoriously blind: how, then, could he have
 seen gahagan? the thing is manifestly impossible.
 “lord lake whispered to him my exploits, and the old man was so delighted
 with the account of my victory over the elephant (whose trunk i use to
 this day), that he said, 'let him be called gujputi,' or the lord of
 elephants; and gujputi was the name by which i was afterwards familiarly
 known among the natives,—the men, that is. the women had a softer
 appellation for me, and called me 'mushook,' or charmer.
 “well, i shall not describe delhi, which is doubtless well known to the
 reader; nor the siege of agra, to which place we went from delhi; nor the
 terrible day at laswaree, which went nigh to finish the war. suffice it to
 say that we were victorious, and that i was wounded; as i have invariably
 been in the two hundred and four occasions when i have found myself in
 action. one point, however, became in the course of this campaign quite
 evident—that something must be done for gahagan. the country cried
 shame, the king's troops grumbled, the sepoys openly murmured that their
 gujputi was only a lieutenant, when he had performed such signal services.
 what was to be done? lord wellesley was in an evident quandary. 'gahagan,'
 wrote he, 'to be a subaltern is evidently not your fate—you were
 born for command; but lake and general wellesley are good officers, they
 cannot be turned out—i must make a post for you. what say you, my
 dear fellow, to a corps of irregular horse?'
 “it was thus that the famous corps of ahmednuggar irregulars had its
 origin; a guerilla force, it is true, but one which will long be
 remembered in the annals of our indian campaigns.
 “as the commander of this regiment, i was allowed to settle the uniform of
 the corps, as well as to select recruits. these were not wanting as soon
 as my appointment was made known, but came flocking to my standard a great
 deal faster than to the regular corps in the company's service. i had
 european officers, of course, to command them, and a few of my countrymen
 as sergeants; the rest were all natives, whom i chose of the strongest and
 bravest men in india; chiefly pitans, afghans, hurrumzadehs, and
 calliawns: for these are well known to be the most warlike districts of
 our indian territory.
 “when on parade and in full uniform we made a singular and noble
 appearance. i was always fond of dress; and, in this instance, gave a
 carte blanche to my taste, and invented the most splendid costume that
 ever perhaps decorated a soldier. i am, as i have stated already, six feet
 four inches in height, and of matchless symmetry and proportion. my hair
 and beard are of the most brilliant auburn, so bright as scarcely to be
 distinguished at a distance from scarlet. my eyes are bright blue,
 overshadowed by bushy eyebrows of the color of my hair, and a terrific
 gash of the deepest purple, which goes over the forehead, the eyelid, and
 the cheek, and finishes at the ear, gives my face a more strictly military
 appearance than can be conceived. when i have been drinking (as is pretty
 often the case) this gash becomes ruby bright, and as i have another which
 took off a piece of my under-lip, and shows five of my front teeth, i
 leave you to imagine that 'seldom lighted on the earth' (as the monster
 burke remarked of one of his unhappy victims), 'a more extraordinary
 vision.' i improved these natural advantages; and, while in cantonment
 during the hot winds at chittybobbary, allowed my hair to grow very long,
 as did my beard, which reached to my waist. it took me two hours daily to
 curl my hair in ten thousand little cork-screw ringlets, which waved over
 my shoulders, and to get my moustaches well round to the corners of my
 eyelids. i dressed in loose scarlet trousers and red morocco boots, a
 scarlet jacket, and a shawl of the same color round my waist; a scarlet
 turban three feet high, and decorated with a tuft of the scarlet feathers
 of the flamingo, formed my head-dress, and i did not allow myself a single
 ornament, except a small silver skull and crossbones in front of my
 turban. two brace of pistols, a malay creese, and a tulwar, sharp on both
 sides, and very nearly six feet in length, completed this elegant costume.
 my two flags were each surmounted with a red skull and cross-bones, and
 ornamented, one with a black, and the other with a red beard (of enormous
 length, taken from men slain in battle by me). on one flag were of course
 the arms of john company; on the other, an image of myself bestriding a
 prostrate elephant, with the simple word, 'gujputi' written underneath in
 the nagaree, persian, and sanscrit characters. i rode my black horse, and
 looked, by the immortal gods, like mars. to me might be applied the words
 which were written concerning handsome general webb, in marlborough's
 time:—
 “'to noble danger he conducts the way,
 his great example all his troop obey,
 before the front the major sternly rides,
 with such an air as mars to battle strides.
 propitious heaven must sure a hero save
 like paris handsome, and like hector brave!'
 “my officers (captains biggs and mackanulty, lieutenants glogger,
 pappendick, stuffle, &c., &c.) were dressed exactly in the same
 way, but in yellow; and the men were similarly equipped, but in black. i
 have seen many regiments since, and many ferocious-looking men, but the
 ahmednuggar irregulars were more dreadful to the view than any set of
 ruffians on which i ever set eyes. i would to heaven that the czar of
 muscovy had passed through cabool and lahore, and that i with my old
 ahmednuggars stood on a fair field to meet him! bless you, bless you, my
 swart companions in victory! through the mist of twenty years i hear the
 booming of your war-cry, and mark the glitter of your scimitars as ye rage
 in the thickest of the battle!*
 * i do not wish to brag of my style of writing, or to
 pretend that my genius as a writer has not been equalled in
 former times; but if, in the works of byron, scott, goethe,
 or victor hugo, the reader can find a more beautiful
 sentence than the above, i will be obliged to him, that is
 all—i simply say, i will be obliged to him.——g. o'g. g.,
 “but away with melancholy reminiscences. you may fancy what a figure the
 irregulars cut on a field-day—a line of five hundred black-faced,
 black-dressed, black-horsed, black-bearded men—biggs, glogger, and
 the other officers in yellow, galloping about the field like flashes of
 lightning; myself enlightening them, red, solitary, and majestic, like yon
 glorious orb in heaven.
 “there are very few men, i presume, who have not heard of holkar's sudden
 and gallant incursion into the dooab, in the year , when we thought
 that the victory of laswaree and the brilliant success at deeg had
 completely finished him. taking ten thousand horse he broke up his camp at
 palimbang; and the first thing general lake heard of him was, that he was
 at putna, then at rumpooge, then at doncaradam—he was, in fact, in
 the very heart of our territory.
 “the unfortunate part of the affair was this:—his excellency,
 despising the mahratta chieftain, had allowed him to advance about two
 thousand miles in his front, and knew not in the slightest degree where to
 lay hold on him. was he at hazarubaug? was he at bogly gunge? nobody knew,
 and for a considerable period the movements of lake's cavalry were quite
 ambiguous, uncertain, promiscuous, and undetermined.
 “such, briefly, was the state of affairs in october, . at the
 beginning of that month i had been wounded (a trifling scratch, cutting
 off my left upper eyelid, a bit of my cheek, and my under lip), and i was
 obliged to leave biggs in command of my irregulars, whilst i retired for
 my wounds to an english station at furruckabad, alias futtyghur—it
 is, as every twopenny postman knows, at the apex of the dooab. we have
 there a cantonment, and thither i went for the mere sake of the surgeon
 and the sticking-plaster.
 “furruckabad, then, is divided into two districts or towns: the lower
 cotwal, inhabited by the natives, and the upper (which is fortified
 slightly, and has all along been called futtyghur, meaning in hindoostanee
 'the-favorite-resort-of-the-white-faced-feringhees-near
 the-mango-tope-consecrated-to ram') occupied by europeans. (it is
 astonishing, by the way, how comprehensive that language is, and how much
 can be conveyed in one or two of the commonest phrases.)
 “biggs, then, and my men were playing all sorts of wondrous pranks with
 lord lake's army, whilst i was detained an unwilling prisoner of health at
 futtyghur.
 “an unwilling prisoner, however, i should not say. the cantonment at
 futtyghur contained that which would have made any man a happy slave.
 woman, lovely woman, was there in abundance and variety! the fact is, that
 when the campaign commenced in , the ladies of the army all
 congregated to this place, where they were left, as it was supposed, in
 safety. i might, like homer, relate the names and qualities of all. i may
 at least mention some whose memory is still most dear to me. there was—
 “mrs. major-general bulcher, wife of bulcher of the infantry.
 “miss bulcher.
 “miss belinda bulcher (whose name i beg the printer to place in large
 capitals.)
 “mrs. colonel vandegobbleschroy.
 “mrs. major macan and the four misses macan.
 “the honorable mrs. burgoo, mrs. flix, hicks, wicks, and many more too
 numerous to mention. the flower of our camp was, however, collected there,
 and the last words of lord lake to me, as i left him, were, 'gahagan, i
 commit those women to your charge. guard them with your life, watch over
 them with your honor, defend them with the matchless power of your
 indomitable arm.'
 “futtyghur is, as i have said, a european station, and the pretty air of
 the bungalows, amid the clustering topes of mango-trees, has often ere
 this excited the admiration of the tourist and sketcher. on the brow of a
 hill—the burrumpooter river rolls majestically at its base; and no
 spot, in a word, can be conceived more exquisitely arranged, both by art
 and nature, as a favorite residence of the british fair. mrs. bulcher,
 mrs. vandegobbleschroy, and the other married ladies above mentioned, had
 each of them delightful bungalows and gardens in the place, and between
 one cottage and another my time passed as delightfully as can the hours of
 any man who is away from his darling occupation of war.
 “i was the commandant of the fort. it is a little insignificant pettah,
 defended simply by a couple of gabions, a very ordinary counterscarp, and
 a bomb-proof embrasure. on the top of this my flag was planted, and the
 small garrison of forty men only were comfortably barracked off in the
 case-mates within. a surgeon and two chaplains (there were besides three
 reverend gentlemen of amateur missions, who lived in the town,) completed,
 as i may say, the garrison of our little fortalice, which i was left to
 defend and to command.
 “on the night of the first of november, in the year , i had invited
 mrs. major-general bulcher and her daughters, mrs. vandegobbleschroy, and,
 indeed, all the ladies in the cantonment, to a little festival in honor of
 the recovery of my health, of the commencement of the shooting season, and
 indeed as a farewell visit, for it was my intention to take dawk the very
 next morning and return to my regiment. the three amateur missionaries
 whom i have mentioned, and some ladies in the cantonment of very rigid
 religious principles, refused to appear at my little party. they had
 better never have been born than have done as they did: as you shall hear.
 “we had been dancing merrily all night, and the supper (chiefly of the
 delicate condor, the luscious adjutant, and other birds of a similar kind,
 which i had shot in the course of the day) had been duly feted by every
 lady and gentleman present; when i took an opportunity to retire on the
 ramparts, with the interesting and lovely belinda bulcher. i was occupied,
 as the french say, in conter-ing fleurettes to this sweet young creature,
 when, all of a sudden, a rocket was seen whizzing through the air, and a
 strong light was visible in the valley below the little fort.
 “'what, fireworks! captain gahagan,' said belinda; 'this is too gallant.'
 “'indeed, my dear miss bulcher,' said i, 'they are fireworks of which i
 have no idea: perhaps our friends the missionaries—'
 “'look, look!' said belinda, trembling, and clutching tightly hold of my
 arm: 'what do i see? yes—no—yes! it is—our bungalow is
 “it was true, the spacious bungalow occupied by mrs. major-general was at
 that moment seen a prey to the devouring element—another and another
 succeeded it—seven bungalows, before i could almost ejaculate the
 name of jack robinson, were seen blazing brightly in the black midnight
 air!
 “i seized my night-glass, and looking towards the spot where the
 conflagration raged, what was my astonishment to see thousands of black
 forms dancing round the fires; whilst by their lights i could observe
 columns after columns of indian horse, arriving and taking up their ground
 in the very middle of the open square or tank, round which the bungalows
 were built!
 “'ho, warder!' shouted i (while the frightened and trembling belinda clung
 closer to my side, and pressed the stalwart arm that encircled her waist),
 'down with the drawbridge! see that your masolgees' (small tumbrels which
 are used in place of large artillery) 'be well loaded: you, sepoys, hasten
 and man the ravelin! you, choprasees, put out the lights in the
 embrasures! we shall have warm work of it to-night, or my name is not
 goliah gahagan.'
 “the ladies, the guests (to the number of eighty-three), the sepoys,
 choprasees, masolgees, and so on, had all crowded on the platform at the
 sound of my shouting, and dreadful was the consternation, shrill the
 screaming, occasioned by my words. the men stood irresolute and mute with
 terror! the women, trembling, knew scarcely whither to fly for refuge.
 'who are yonder ruffians?' said i. a hundred voices yelped in reply—some
 said the pindarees, some said the mahrattas, some vowed it was scindiah,
 and others declared it was holkar—no one knew.
 “'is there any one here,' said i, 'who will venture to reconnoitre yonder
 troops?' there was a dead pause.
 “'a thousand tomauns to the man who will bring me news of yonder army!'
 again i repeated. still a dead silence. the fact was that scindiah and
 holkar both were so notorious for their cruelty, that no one dared venture
 to face the danger. oh for fifty of my brave abmednuggarees!' thought i.
 “'gentlemen,' said i, 'i see it—you are cowards—none of you
 dare encounter the chance even of death. it is an encouraging prospect:
 know you not that the ruffian holkar, if it be he, will with the morrow's
 dawn beleaguer our little fort, and throw thousands of men against our
 walls? know you not that, if we are taken, there is no quarter, no hope;
 death for us—and worse than death for these lovely ones assembled
 here?' here the ladies shrieked and raised a howl as i have heard the
 jackals on a summer's evening. belinda, my dear belinda! flung both her
 arms round me, and sobbed on my shoulder (or in my waistcoat-pocket
 rather, for the little witch could reach no higher).
 “'captain gahagan,' sobbed she, 'go—go—goggle—iah!'
 “'my soul's adored!' replied i.
 “'swear to me one thing.'
 “'i swear.'
 “'that if—that if—the nasty, horrid, odious black
 mah-ra-a-a-attahs take the fort, you will put me out of their power.'
 “i clasped the dear girl to my heart, and swore upon my sword that, rather
 than she should incur the risk of dishonors she should perish by my own
 hand. this comforted her; and her mother, mrs. major-general bulcher, and
 her elder sister, who had not until now known a word of our attachment,
 (indeed, but for these extraordinary circumstances, it is probable that we
 ourselves should never have discovered it,) were under these painful
 circumstances made aware of my beloved belinda's partiality for me. having
 communicated thus her wish of self-destruction, i thought her example a
 touching and excellent one, and proposed to all the ladies that they
 should follow it, and that at the entry of the enemy into the fort, and at
 a signal given by me, they should one and all make away with themselves.
 fancy my disgust when, after making this proposition, not one of the
 ladies chose to accede to it, and received it with the same chilling
 denial that my former proposal to the garrison had met with.
 “in the midst of this hurry and confusion, as if purposely to add to it, a
 trumpet was heard at the gate of the fort, and one of the sentinels came
 running to me, saying that a mahratta soldier was before the gate with a
 flag of truce!
 “i went down, rightly conjecturing, as it turned out, that the party,
 whoever they might be, had no artillery; and received at the point of my
 sword a scroll, of which the following is a translation:—
 “'lord of elephants, sir,—i have the honor to inform you that i
 arrived before this place at eight o'clock p.m. with ten thousand cavalry
 under my orders. i have burned, since my arrival, seventeen bungalows in
 furruckabad and futtyghur, and have likewise been under the painful
 necessity of putting to death three clergymen (mollahs), and seven english
 officers, whom i found in the village; the women have been transferred to
 safe keeping in the harems of my officers and myself.
 “'as i know your courage and talents, i shall be very happy if you will
 surrender the fortress, and take service as a major-general (hookahbadar)
 in my army. should my proposal not meet with your assent, i beg leave to
 state that to-morrow i shall storm the fort, and on taking it, shall put
 to death every male in the garrison, and every female above twenty years
 of age. for yourself i shall reserve a punishment, which for novelty and
 exquisite torture has, i flatter myself, hardly ever been exceeded.
 awaiting the favor of a reply, i am, sir,
 “'your very obedient servant,
 “'camp before futtyghur, sept. , .
 “the officer who had brought this precious epistle (it is astonishing how
 holkar had aped the forms of english correspondence), an enormous pitan
 soldier, with a shirt of mail, and a steel cap and cape, round which his
 turban wound, was leaning against the gate on his matchlock, and whistling
 a national melody. i read the letter, and saw at once there was no time to
 be lost. that man, thought i, must never go back to holkar. were he to
 attack us now before we were prepared, the fort would be his in half an
 hour.
 “tying my white pocket-handkerchief to a stick, i flung open the gate and
 advanced to the officer; he was standing, i said, on the little bridge
 across the moat. i made him a low salaam, after the fashion of the
 country, and, as he bent forward to return the compliment, i am sorry to
 say, i plunged forward, gave him a violent blow on the head, which
 deprived him of all sensation, and then dragged him within the wall,
 raising the drawbridge after me.
 “i bore the body into my own apartment: there, swift as thought, i
 stripped him of his turban, cammerbund, peijammahs, and papooshes, and,
 putting them on myself, determined to go forth and reconnoitre the enemy.”
 here i was obliged to stop, for cabrera, ros d'eroles, and the rest of the
 staff, were sound asleep! what i did in my reconnaisance, and how i
 defended the fort of futtyghur, i shall have the honor of telling on
 another occasion.
 head-quarters, morella, oct. , .
 it is a balmy night. i hear the merry jingle of the tambourine, and the
 cheery voices of the girls and peasants, as they dance beneath my
 casement, under the shadow of the clustering vines. the laugh and song
 pass gayly round, and even at this distance i can distinguish the elegant
 form of ramon cabrera, as he whispers gay nothings in the ears of the
 andalusian girls, or joins in the thrilling chorus of riego's hymn, which
 is ever and anon vociferated by the enthusiastic soldiery of carlos
 quinto. i am alone, in the most inaccessible and most bomb-proof tower of
 our little fortalice; the large casements are open—the wind, as it
 enters, whispers in my ear its odorous recollections of the orange grove
 and the myrtle bower. my torch (a branch of the fragrant cedar-tree)
 flares and flickers in the midnight breeze, and disperses its scent and
 burning splinters on my scroll and the desk where i write—meet
 implements for a soldier's authorship!—it is cartridge paper over
 which my pen runs so glibly, and a yawning barrel of gunpowder forms my
 rough writing-table. around me, below me, above me, all—all is
 peace! i think, as i sit here so lonely, on my country, england! and muse
 over the sweet and bitter recollections of my early days! let me resume my
 narrative, at the point where (interrupted by the authoritative summons of
 war) i paused on the last occasion.
 i left off, i think—(for i am a thousand miles away from
 proof-sheets as i write, and, were i not writing the simple truth, must
 contradict myself a thousand times in the course of my tale)—i
 think, i say, that i left off at that period of my story, when, holkar
 being before futtyghur, and i in command of that fortress, i had just been
 compelled to make away with his messenger; and, dressed in the fallen
 indian's accoutrements, went forth to reconnoitre the force, and, if
 possible, to learn the intentions of the enemy. however much my figure
 might have resembled that of the pitan, and, disguised in his armor, might
 have deceived the lynx-eyed mahrattas, into whose camp i was about to
 plunge, it was evident that a single glance at my fair face and auburn
 beard would have undeceived the dullest blockhead in holkar's army.
 seizing, then, a bottle of burgess's walnut catsup, i dyed my face and my
 hands, and, with the simple aid of a flask of warren's jet, i made my hair
 and beard as black as ebony. the indian's helmet and chain hood covered
 likewise a great part of my face and i hoped thus, with luck, impudence,
 and a complete command of all the eastern dialects and languages, from
 burmah to afghanistan, to pass scot-free through this somewhat dangerous
 ordeal.
 i had not the word of the night, it is true—but i trusted to good
 fortune for that, and passed boldly out of the fortress, bearing the flag
 of truce as before; i had scarcely passed on a couple of hundred yards,
 when lo! a party of indian horsemen, armed like him i had just overcome,
 trotted towards me. one was leading a noble white charger, and no sooner
 did he see me than, dismounting from his own horse, and giving the rein to
 a companion, he advanced to meet me with the charger; a second fellow
 likewise dismounted and followed the first; one held the bridle of the
 horse, while the other (with a multitude of salaams, aleikums, and other
 genuflexions), held the jewelled stirrup, and kneeling, waited until i
 should mount.
 i took the hint at once: the indian who had come up to the fort was a
 great man—that was evident; i walked on with a majestic air,
 gathered up the velvet reins, and sprung into the magnificent high-peaked
 saddle. “buk, buk,” said i. “it is good. in the name of the forty-nine
 imaums, let us ride on.” and the whole party set off at a brisk trot, i
 keeping silence, and thinking with no little trepidation of what i was
 about to encounter.
 as we rode along, i heard two of the men commenting upon my unusual
 silence (for i suppose, i—that is the indian—was a talkative
 officer). “the lips of the bahawder are closed,” said one. “where are
 those birds of paradise, his long-tailed words? they are imprisoned
 between the golden bars of his teeth!”
 “kush,” said his companion, “be quiet! bobbachy bahawder has seen the
 dreadful feringhee, gahagan khan gujputi, the elephant-lord, whose sword
 reaps the harvest of death; there is but one champion who can wear the
 papooshes of the elephant-slayer—it is bobbachy bahawder!”
 “you speak truly, puneeree muckun, the bahawder ruminates on the words of
 the unbeliever: he is an ostrich, and hatches the eggs of his thoughts.”
 “bekhusm! on my nose be it! may the young birds, his actions, be strong
 and swift in flight.”
 “may they digest iron!” said puneeree muckun, who was evidently a wag in
 his way.
 “o-ho!” thought i, as suddenly the light flashed upon me. “it was, then,
 the famous bobbachy bahawder, whom i overcame just now! and he is the man
 destined to stand in my slippers, is he?” and i was at that very moment
 standing in his own! such are the chances and changes that fall to the lot
 of the soldier!
 i suppose everybody—everybody who has been in india, at least—has
 heard the name of bobbachy bahawder: it is derived from the two
 hindustanee words—bobbachy, general; bahawder, artilleryman. he had
 entered into holkar's service in the latter capacity, and had, by his
 merit and his undaunted bravery in action, attained the dignity of the
 peacock's feather, which is only granted to noblemen of the first class;
 he was married, moreover, to one of holkar's innumerable daughters: a
 match which, according to the chronique scandaleuse, brought more of honor
 than of pleasure to the poor bobbachy. gallant as he was in the field, it
 was said that in the harem he was the veriest craven alive, completely
 subjugated by his ugly and odious wife. in all matters of importance the
 late bahawder had been consulted by his prince, who had, as it appears,
 (knowing my character, and not caring to do anything rash in his attack
 upon so formidable an enemy,) sent forward the unfortunate pitan to
 reconnoitre the fort; he was to have done yet more, as i learned from the
 attendant puneeree muckun, who was, i soon found out, an old favorite with
 the bobbachy—doubtless on account of his honesty and love of
 repartee.
 “the bahawder's lips are closed,” said he, at last, trotting up to me;
 “has he not a word for old puneeree muckun?”
 “bismillah, mashallah, barikallah,” said i; which means, “my good friend,
 what i have seen is not worth the trouble of relation, and fills my bosom
 with the darkest forebodings.”
 “you could not then see the gujputi alone, and stab him with your dagger?”
 [here was a pretty conspiracy!] “no, i saw him, but not alone; his people
 were always with him.”
 “hurrumzadeh! it is a pity; we waited but the sound of your jogree
 (whistle), and straightway would have galloped up and seized upon every
 man, woman, and child in the fort: however, there are but a dozen men in
 the garrison, and they have not provision for two days—they must
 yield; and then hurrah for the moon-faces! mashallah! i am told the
 soldiers who first get in are to have their pick. how my old woman, rotee
 muckun, will be surprised when i bring home a couple of feringhee wives,—ha!
 ha!”
 “fool!” said i, “be still!—twelve men in the garrison! there are
 twelve hundred! gahagan himself is as good as a thousand men; and as for
 food, i saw with my own eyes five hundred bullocks grazing in the
 court-yard as i entered.” this was a bouncer, i confess; but my object was
 to deceive puneeree muckun, and give him as high a notion as possible of
 the capabilities of defence which the besieged had.
 “pooch, pooch,” murmured the men; “it is a wonder of a fortress: we shall
 never be able to take it until our guns come up.”
 there was hope then! they had no battering-train. ere this arrived, i
 trusted that lord lake would hear of our plight, and march down to rescue
 us. thus occupied in thought and conversation, we rode on until the
 advanced sentinel challenged us, when old puneeree gave the word, and we
 passed on into the centre of holkar's camp.
 it was a strange—a stirring sight! the camp-fires were lighted; and
 round them—eating, reposing, talking, looking at the merry steps of
 the dancing-girls, or listening to the stories of some dhol baut (or
 indian improvisatore) were thousands of dusky soldiery. the camels and
 horses were picketed under the banyan-trees, on which the ripe mango fruit
 was growing, and offered them an excellent food. towards the spot which
 the golden fish and royal purdahs, floating in the wind, designated as the
 tent of holkar, led an immense avenue—of elephants! the finest
 street, indeed, i ever saw. each of the monstrous animals had a castle on
 its back, armed with mauritanian archers and the celebrated persian
 matchlock-men: it was the feeding time of these royal brutes, and the
 grooms were observed bringing immense toffungs, or baskets, filled with
 pine-apples, plantains, bandannas, indian corn, and cocoa-nuts, which grow
 luxuriantly at all seasons of the year. we passed down this extraordinary
 avenue—no less than three hundred and eighty-eight tails did i count
 on each side—each tail appertaining to an elephant twenty-five feet
 high—each elephant having a two-storied castle on its back—each
 castle containing sleeping and eating rooms for the twelve men that formed
 its garrison, and were keeping watch on the roof—each roof bearing a
 flag-staff twenty feet long on its top, the crescent glittering with a
 thousand gems, and round it the imperial standard,—each standard of
 silk velvet and cloth-of-gold, bearing the well-known device of holkar,
 argent an or gules, between a sinople of the first, a chevron, truncated,
 wavy. i took nine of these myself in the course of a very short time
 after, and shall be happy, when i come to england, to show them to any
 gentleman who has a curiosity that way. through this gorgeous scene our
 little cavalcade passed, and at last we arrived at the quarters occupied
 by holkar.
 that celebrated chieftain's tents and followers were gathered round one of
 the british bungalows which had escaped the flames, and which he occupied
 during the siege. when i entered the large room where he sat, i found him
 in the midst of a council of war; his chief generals and viziers seated
 round him, each smoking his hookah, as is the common way with these black
 fellows, before, at, and after breakfast, dinner, supper, and bedtime.
 there was such a cloud raised by their smoke you could hardly see a yard
 before you—another piece of good luck for me—as it diminished
 the chances of my detection. when, with the ordinary ceremonies, the
 kitmatgars and consomahs had explained to the prince that bobbachy
 bahawder, the right eye of the sun of the universe (as the ignorant
 heathens called me), had arrived from his mission, holkar immediately
 summoned me to the maidaun, or elevated platform, on which he was seated
 in a luxurious easy-chair, and i, instantly taking off my slippers,
 falling on my knees, and beating my head against the ground ninety-nine
 times, proceeded, still on my knees, a hundred and twenty feet through the
 room, and then up the twenty steps which led to his maidaun—a silly,
 painful, and disgusting ceremony, which can only be considered as a relic
 of barbarian darkness, which tears the knees and shins to pieces, let
 alone the pantaloons. i recommend anybody who goes to india, with the
 prospect of entering the service of the native rajahs, to recollect my
 advice and have them well-wadded.
 well, the right eye of the sun of the universe scrambled as well as he
 could up the steps of the maidaun (on which in rows, smoking, as i have
 said, the musnuds or general officers were seated), and i arrived within
 speaking-distance of holkar, who instantly asked me the success of my
 mission. the impetuous old man thereon poured out a multitude of
 questions: “how many men are there in the fort?” said he; “how many women?
 is it victualled? have they ammunition? did you see gahagan sahib, the
 commander? did you kill him?”
 all these questions jeswunt row holkar puffed out with so many whiffs of
 tobacco.
 taking a chillum myself, and raising about me such a cloud that, upon my
 honor as a gentleman, no man at three yards' distance could perceive
 anything of me except the pillar of smoke in which i was encompassed, i
 told holkar, in oriental language of course, the best tale i could with
 regard to the fort.
 “sir” said i, “to answer your last question first—that dreadful
 gujputi i have seen—and he is alive: he is eight feet, nearly, in
 height; he can eat a bullock daily (of which he has seven hundred at
 present in the compound, and swears that during the siege he will content
 himself with only three a week): he has lost in battle his left eye; and
 what is the consequence? o ram gunge” (o
 thou-with-the-eye-as-bright-as-morning and-with-beard-as-black-as-night),
 “goliah gujputi—never sleeps!”
 “ah, you ghorumsaug (you thief of the world),” said the prince vizier,
 saadut alee beg bimbukchee—“it's joking you are;”—and there
 was a universal buzz through the room at the announcement of this bouncer.
 “by the hundred and eleven incarnations of vishnu,” said i, solemnly, (an
 oath which no indian was ever known to break,) “i swear that so it is: so
 at least he told me, and i have good cause to know his power. gujputi is
 an enchanter: he is leagued with devils; he is invulnerable. look,” said
 i, unsheathing my dagger—and every eye turned instantly towards me—“thrice
 did i stab him with this steel—in the back, once—twice right
 through the heart; but he only laughed me to scorn, and bade me tell
 holkar that the steel was not yet forged which was to inflict an injury
 upon him.”
 i never saw a man in such a rage as holkar was when i gave him this
 somewhat imprudent message.
 “ah, lily-livered rogue!” shouted he out to me, “milk-blooded unbeliever!
 pale-faced miscreant! lives he after insulting thy master in thy presence!
 in the name of the prophet, i spit on thee, defy thee, abhor thee, degrade
 thee! take that, thou liar of the universe! and that—and that—and
 that!”
 such are the frightful excesses of barbaric minds! every time this old man
 said, “take that,” he flung some article near him at the head of the
 undaunted gahagan—his dagger, his sword, his carbine, his richly
 ornamented pistols, his turban covered with jewels, worth a hundred
 thousand crores of rupees—finally, his hookah, snake mouthpiece,
 silver-bell, chillum and all—which went hissing over my head, and
 flattening into a jelly the nose of the grand vizier.
 “yock muzzee! my nose is off;” said the old man, mildly. “will you have my
 life, o holkar? it is thine likewise!” and no other word of complaint
 escaped his lips.
 of all these missiles, though a pistol and carbine had gone off as the
 ferocious indian flung them at my head, and the naked scimitar fiercely
 but unadroitly thrown, had lopped off the limbs of one or two of the
 musnuds as they sat trembling on their omrahs, yet, strange to say, not a
 single weapon had hurt me. when the hubbub ceased, and the unlucky
 wretches who had been the victims of this fit of rage had been removed,
 holkar's good humor somewhat returned, and he allowed me to continue my
 account of the fort; which i did, not taking the slightest notice of his
 burst of impatience: as indeed it would have been the height of
 impoliteness to have done for such accidents happened many times in the
 day.
 “it is well that the bobbachy has returned,” snuffled out the poor grand
 vizier, after i had explained to the council the extraordinary means of
 defence possessed by the garrison. “your star is bright, o bahawder! for
 this very night we had resolved upon an escalade of the fort, and we had
 sworn to put every one of the infidel garrison to the edge of the sword.”
 “but you have no battering train,” said i.
 “bah! we have a couple of ninety-six pounders, quite sufficient to blow
 the gates open; and then, hey for a charge!” said loll mahommed, a general
 of cavalry, who was a rival of bobbachy's, and contradicted, therefore,
 every word i said. “in the name of juggernaut, why wait for the heavy
 artillery? have we not swords? have we not hearts? mashallah! let cravens
 stay with bobbachy, all true men will follow loll mahommed!
 allahhumdillah, bismillah, barikallah?” * and drawing his scimitar, he
 waved it over his head, and shouted out his cry of battle. it was repeated
 by many of the other omrahs; the sound of their cheers was carried into
 the camp, and caught up by the men; the camels began to cry, the horses to
 prance and neigh, the eight hundred elephants set up a scream, the
 trumpeters and drummers clanged away at their instruments. i never heard
 such a din before or after. how i trembled for my little garrison when i
 heard the enthusiastic cries of this innumerable host!
 * the major has put the most approved language into the
 mouths of his indian characters. bismillah, barikallah, and
 so on, according to the novelists, form the very essence of
 eastern conversation.
 there was but one way for it. “sir,” said i, addressing holkar, “go out
 to-night and you go to certain death. loll mahommed has not seen the fort
 as i have. pass the gate if you please, and for what? to fall before the
 fire of a hundred pieces of artillery; to storm another gate, and then
 another, and then to be blown up, with gahagan's garrison in the citadel.
 who talks of courage? were i not in your august presence, o star of the
 faithful, i would crop loll mahommed's nose from his face, and wear his
 ears as an ornament in my own pugree! who is there here that knows not the
 difference between yonder yellow-skinned coward and gahagan khan guj—i
 mean bobbachy bahawder? i am ready to fight one, two, three, or twenty of
 them, at broad-sword, small-sword, single-stick, with fists if you please.
 by the holy piper, fighting is like mate and dthrink to ga—to
 bobbachy, i mane—whoop! come on, you divvle, and i'll bate the skin
 off your ugly bones.”
 this speech had very nearly proved fatal to me, for when i am agitated, i
 involuntarily adopt some of the phraseology peculiar to my own country;
 which is so un-eastern, that, had there been any suspicion as to my real
 character, detection must indubitably have ensued. as it was, holkar
 perceived nothing, but instantaneously stopped the dispute. loll mahommed,
 however, evidently suspected something, for, as holkar, with a voice of
 thunder, shouted out, “tomasha (silence),” loll sprang forward and gasped
 out—
 “my lord! my lord i this is not bob—”
 but he could say no more. “gag the slave!” screamed out holkar, stamping
 with fury: and a turban was instantly twisted round the poor devil's jaws.
 “ho, furoshes! carry out loll mahommed khan, give him a hundred dozen on
 the soles of his feet, set him upon a white donkey, and carry him round
 the camp, with an inscription before him: 'this is the way that holkar
 rewards the talkative.'”
 i breathed again; and ever as i heard each whack of the bamboo falling on
 loll mahommed's feet, i felt peace returning to my mind, and thanked my
 stars that i was delivered of this danger.
 “vizier,” said holkar, who enjoyed loll's roars amazingly, “i owe you a
 reparation for your nose: kiss the hand of your prince, o saadut alee beg
 bimbukchee! be from this day forth zoheir u dowlut!”
 the good old man's eyes filled with tears. “i can bear thy severity, o
 prince,” said he; “i cannot bear thy love. was it not an honor that your
 highness did me just now when you condescended to pass over the bridge of
 your slave's nose?”
 the phrase was by all voices pronounced to be very poetical. the vizier
 retired, crowned with his new honors, to bed. holkar was in high good
 humor.
 “bobbachy,” said he, “thou, too, must pardon me. a propos, i have news for
 thee. your wife, the incomparable puttee rooge,” (white and red rose,) has
 arrived in camp.”
 “my wife, my lord!” said i, aghast.
 “our daughter, the light of thine eyes! go, my son; i see thou art wild
 with joy. the princess's tents are set up close by mine, and i know thou
 longest to join her.”
 my wife? here was a complication truly!
 i found puneeree muckun, with the rest of my attendants, waiting at the
 gate, and they immediately conducted me to my own tents in the
 neighborhood. i have been in many dangerous predicaments before that time
 and since, but i don't care to deny that i felt in the present instance
 such a throbbing of the heart as i never have experienced when leading a
 forlorn hope, or marching up to a battery.
 as soon as i entered the tents a host of menials sprang forward, some to
 ease me of my armor, some to offer me refreshments, some with hookahs,
 attar of roses (in great quart-bottles), and the thousand delicacies of
 eastern life. i motioned them away. “i will wear my armor,” said i; “i
 shall go forth to-night; carry my duty to the princess, and say i grieve
 that to-night i have not the time to see her. spread me a couch here, and
 bring me supper here: a jar of persian wine well cooled, a lamb stuffed
 with pistachio-nuts, a pillaw of a couple of turkeys, a curried kid—anything.
 begone! give me a pipe; leave me alone, and tell me when the meal is
 ready.”
 i thought by these means to put off the fair puttee rooge, and hoped to be
 able to escape without subjecting myself to the examination of her curious
 eyes. after smoking for a while, an attendant came to tell me that my
 supper was prepared in the inner apartment of the tent (i suppose that the
 reader, if he be possessed of the commonest intelligence, knows that the
 tents of the indian grandees are made of the finest cashmere shawls, and
 contain a dozen rooms at least, with carpets, chimneys, and sash-windows
 complete). i entered, i say, into an inner chamber, and there began with
 my fingers to devour my meal in the oriental fashion, taking, every now
 and then, a pull from the wine-jar, which was cooling deliciously in
 another jar of snow.
 i was just in the act of despatching the last morsel of a most savory
 stewed lamb and rice, which had formed my meal, when i heard a scuffle of
 feet, a shrill clatter of female voices, and, the curtain being flung
 open, in marched a lady accompanied by twelve slaves, with moon faces and
 slim waists, lovely as the houris in paradise.
 the lady herself, to do her justice, was as great a contrast to her
 attendants as could possibly be: she was crooked, old, of the complexion
 of molasses, and rendered a thousand times more ugly by the tawdry dress
 and the blazing jewels with which she was covered. a line of yellow chalk
 drawn from her forehead to the tip of her nose (which was further
 ornamented by an immense glittering nose-ring), her eyelids painted bright
 red, and a large dab of the same color on her chin, showed she was not of
 the mussulman, but the brahmin faith—and of a very high caste; you
 could see that by her eyes. my mind was instantaneously made up as to my
 line of action.
 the male attendants had of course quitted the apartment, as they heard the
 well-known sound of her voice. it would have been death to them to have
 remained and looked in her face. the females ranged themselves round their
 mistress, as she squatted down opposite to me.
 “and is this,” said she, “a welcome, o khan! after six months' absence,
 for the most unfortunate and loving wife in all the world? is this lamb, o
 glutton! half so tender as thy spouse? is this wine, o sot! half so sweet
 as her looks?”
 i saw the storm was brewing—her slaves, to whom she turned, kept up
 a kind of chorus:—
 “oh, the faithless one!” cried they. “oh, the rascal, the false one, who
 has no eye for beauty, and no heart for love, like the khanum's!”
 “a lamb is not so sweet as love,” said i gravely: “but a lamb has a good
 temper; a wine-cup is not so intoxicating as a woman—but a wine-cup
 has no tongue, o khanum gee!” and again i dipped my nose in the
 soul-refreshing jar.
 the sweet puttee rooge was not, however, to be put off by my repartees;
 she and her maidens recommenced their chorus, and chattered and stormed
 until i lost all patience.
 “retire, friends,” said i, “and leave me in peace.”
 “stir, on your peril!” cried the khanum.
 so, seeing there was no help for it but violence, i drew out my pistols,
 cocked them, and said, “o houris! these pistols contain each two balls:
 the daughter of holkar bears a sacred life for me—but for you!—by
 all the saints of hindustan, four of ye shall die if ye stay a moment
 longer in my presence!” this was enough; the ladies gave a shriek, and
 skurried out of the apartment like a covey of partridges on the wing.
 now, then, was the time for action. my wife, or rather bobbachy's wife,
 sat still, a little flurried by the unusual ferocity which her lord had
 displayed in her presence. i seized her hand and, gripping it close,
 whispered in her ear, to which i put the other pistol:—“o khanum,
 listen and scream not; the moment you scream, you die!” she was completely
 beaten: she turned as pale as a woman could in her situation, and said,
 “speak, bobbachy bahawder, i am dumb.”
 “woman,” said i, taking off my helmet, and removing the chain cape which
 had covered almost the whole of my face—“i am not thy husband—i
 am the slaver of elephants, the world renowned gahagan!”
 as i said this, and as the long ringlets of red hair fell over my
 shoulders (contrasting strangely with my dyed face and beard), i formed
 one of the finest pictures that can possibly be conceived, and i recommend
 it as a subject to mr. heath, for the next “book of beauty.”
 “wretch!” said she, “what wouldst thou?”
 “you black-faced fiend,” said i, “raise but your voice, and you are dead!”
 “and afterwards,” said she, “do you suppose that you can escape? the
 torments of hell are not so terrible as the tortures that holkar will
 invent for thee.”
 “tortures, madam?” answered i, coolly. “fiddlesticks! you will neither
 betray me, nor will i be put to the torture: on the contrary, you will
 give me your best jewels and facilitate my escape to the fort. don't grind
 your teeth and swear at me. listen, madam : you know this dress and these
 arms;—they are the arms of your husband, bobbachy bahawder—my
 prisoner. he now lies in yonder fort, and if i do not return before
 daylight, at sunrise he dies: and then, when they send his corpse back to
 holkar, what will you, his widow, do?”
 “oh!” said she, shuddering, “spare me, spare me!”
 “i'll tell you what you will do. you will have the pleasure of dying along
 with him—of being roasted, madam: an agonizing death, from which
 your father cannot save you, to which he will be the first man to condemn
 and conduct you. ha! i see we understand each other, and you will give me
 over the cash-box and jewels.” and so saying i threw myself back with the
 calmest air imaginable, flinging the pistols over to her. “light me a
 pipe, my love,” said i, “and then go and hand me over the dollars; do you
 hear?” you see i had her in my power—up a tree, as the americans
 say, and she very humbly lighted my pipe for me, and then departed for the
 goods i spoke about.
 what a thing is luck! if loll mahommed had not been made to take that ride
 round the camp, i should infallibly have been lost.
 my supper, my quarrel with the princess, and my pipe afterwards, had
 occupied a couple of hours of my time. the princess returned from her
 quest, and brought with her the box, containing valuables to the amount of
 about three millions sterling. (i was cheated of them afterwards, but have
 the box still, a plain deal one.) i was just about to take my departure,
 when a tremendous knocking, shouting, and screaming was heard at the
 entrance of the tent. it was holkar himself, accompanied by that cursed
 loll mahommed, who, after his punishment, found his master restored to
 good humor, and had communicated to him his firm conviction that i was an
 impostor.
 “ho, begum,” shouted he, in the ante-room (for he and his people could not
 enter the women's apartments), “speak, o my daughter! is your husband
 returned?”
 “speak, madam,” said i, “or remember the roasting.”
 “he is, papa,” said the begum.
 “are you sure? ho! ho! ho!” (the old ruffian was laughing outside)—“are
 you sure it is?—ha! aha!—he-e-e!”
 “indeed it is he, and no other. i pray you, father, to go, and to pass no
 more such shameless jests on your daughter. have i ever seen the face of
 any other man?” and hereat she began to weep as if her heart would break—the
 deceitful minx!
 holkar's laugh was instantly turned to fury. “oh, you liar and eternal
 thief!” said he, turning round (as i presume, for i could only hear) to
 loll mahommed, “to make your prince eat such monstrous dirt as this!
 furoshes, seize this man. i dismiss him from my service, i degrade him
 from his rank, i appropriate to myself all his property: and hark ye,
 furoshes, give him a hundred dozen more!”
 again i heard the whacks of the bamboos, and peace flowed into my soul.
 just as morn began to break, two figures were seen to approach the little
 fortress of futtyghur: one was a woman wrapped closely in a veil, the
 other a warrior, remarkable for the size and manly beauty of his form, who
 carried in his hand a deal box of considerable size. the warrior at the
 gate gave the word and was admitted, the woman returned slowly to the
 indian camp. her name was puttee rooge; his was—
 thus my dangers for the night being overcome, i hastened with my precious
 box into my own apartment, which communicated with another, where i had
 left my prisoner, with a guard to report if he should recover, and to
 prevent his escape. my servant, ghorumsaug, was one of the guard. i called
 him, and the fellow came, looking very much confused and frightened, as it
 seemed, at my appearance.
 “why, ghorumsaug,” said i, “what makes thee look so pale, fellow?” (he was
 as white as a sheet.) “it is thy master, dost thou not remember him?” the
 man had seen me dress myself in the pitan's clothes, but was not present
 when i had blacked my face and beard in the manner i have described.
 “o bramah, vishnu, and mahomet!” cried the faithful fellow, “and do i see
 my dear master disguised in this way? for heaven's sake let me rid you of
 this odious black paint; for what will the ladies say in the ball-room, if
 the beautiful feringhee should appear amongst them with his roses turned
 into coal?”
 i am still one of the finest men in europe, and at the time of which i
 write, when only two-and-twenty, i confess i was a little vain of my
 personal appearance, and not very willing to appear before my dear belinda
 disguised like a blackamoor. i allowed ghorumsaug to divest me of the
 heathenish armor and habiliments which i wore; and having, with a world of
 scrubbing and trouble, divested my face and beard of their black tinge, i
 put on my own becoming uniform, and hastened to wait on the ladies;
 hastened, i say,—although delayed would have been the better word,
 for the operation of bleaching lasted at least two hours.
 “how is the prisoner, ghorumsaug?” said i, before leaving my apartment.
 “he has recovered from the blow which the lion dealt him; two men and
 myself watch over him; and macgillicuddy sahib (the second in command) has
 just been the rounds, and has seen that all was secure.”
 i bade ghorumsaug help me to put away my chest of treasure (my exultation
 in taking it was so great that i could not help informing him of its
 contents); and this done, i despatched him to his post near the prisoner,
 while i prepared to sally forth and pay my respects to the fair creatures
 under my protection. “what good after all have i done,” thought i to
 myself, “in this expedition which i had so rashly undertaken?” i had seen
 the renowned holkar, i had been in the heart of his camp; i knew the
 disposition of his troops, that there were eleven thousand of them, and
 that he only waited for his guns to make a regular attack on the fort. i
 had seen puttee rooge; i had robbed her (i say robbed her, and i don't
 care what the reader or any other man may think of the act) of a deal box,
 containing jewels to the amount of three millions sterling, the property
 of herself and husband.
 three millions in money and jewels! and what the deuce were money and
 jewels to me or to my poor garrison? could my adorable miss bulcher eat a
 fricassee of diamonds, or, cleopatra-like, melt down pearls to her tea?
 could i, careless as i am about food, with a stomach that would digest
 anything—(once, in spain, i ate the leg of a horse during a famine,
 and was so eager to swallow this morsel that i bolted the shoe, as well as
 the hoof, and never felt the slightest inconvenience from either,)—could
 i, i say, expect to live long and well upon a ragout of rupees, or a dish
 of stewed emeralds and rubies? with all the wealth of croesus before me i
 felt melancholy; and would have paid cheerfully its weight in carats for a
 good honest round of boiled beef. wealth, wealth, what art thou? what is
 gold?—soft metal. what are diamonds?—shining tinsel. the great
 wealth-winners, the only fame-achievers, the sole objects worthy of a
 soldier's consideration, are beefsteaks, gunpowder, and cold iron.
 the two latter means of competency we possessed; i had in my own
 apartments a small store of gunpowder (keeping it under my own bed, with a
 candle burning for fear of accidents); i had  pieces of artillery (
 long 's and  carronades,  howitzers, and a long brass mortar, for
 grape, which i had taken myself at the battle of assaye), and muskets for
 ten times my force. my garrison, as i have told the reader in a previous
 number, consisted of  men, two chaplains, and a surgeon; add to these my
 guests,  in number, of whom nine only were gentlemen (in tights, powder,
 pigtails, and silk stockings, who had come out merely for a dance, and
 found themselves in for a siege). such were our numbers:—
 ladies 
 troops and artillerymen 
 other non-combatants 
 i count myself good for a thousand, for so i was regularly rated in the
 army: with this great benefit to it, that i only consumed as much as an
 ordinary mortal. we were then, as far as the victuals went,  mouths; as
 combatants we numbered , gallant men, with  guns and a fort, against
 holkar and his ,. no such alarming odds, if—
 if!—ay, there was the rub—if we had shot, as well as powder
 for our guns; if we had not only men but meat. of the former commodity we
 had only three rounds for each piece. of the latter, upon my sacred honor,
 to feed  souls, we had but
 two drumsticks of fowls, and a bone of ham.
 fourteen bottles of ginger-beer.
 of soda-water, four ditto.
 two bottles of fine spanish olives.
 raspberry cream—the remainder of two dishes.
 seven macaroons, lying in the puddle of a demolished trifle.
 half a drum of best turkey figs.
 some bits of broken bread; two dutch cheeses (whole); the crust
 of an old stilton; and about an ounce of almonds and raisins.
 three ham-sandwiches, and a pot of currant-jelly, and  bottles
 of brandy, rum, madeira, pale ale (my private stock); a couple
 of hard eggs for a salad, and a flask of florence oil.
 this was the provision for the whole garrison! the men after supper had
 seized upon the relics of the repast, as they were carried off from the
 table; and these were the miserable remnants i found and counted on my
 return, taking good care to lock the door of the supper-room, and treasure
 what little sustenance still remained in it.
 when i appeared in the saloon, now lighted up by the morning sun, i not
 only caused a sensation myself, but felt one in my own bosom, which was of
 the most painful description. oh, my reader! may you never behold such a
 sight as that which presented itself: eighty-three men and women in
 ball-dresses; the former with their lank powdered locks streaming over
 their faces; the latter with faded flowers, uncurled wigs, smudged rouge,
 blear eyes, draggling feathers, rumpled satins—each more desperately
 melancholy and hideous than the other—each, except my beloved
 belinda bulcher, whose raven ringlets never having been in curl, could of
 course never go out of curl; whose cheek, pale as the lily, could, as it
 may naturally be supposed, grow no paler; whose neck and beauteous arms,
 dazzling as alabaster, needed no pearl-powder, and therefore, as i need
 not state, did not suffer because the pearl-powder had come off. joy (deft
 link-boy!) lit his lamps in each of her eyes as i entered. as if i had
 been her sun, her spring, lo! blushing roses mantled in her cheek!
 seventy-three ladies, as i entered, opened their fire upon me, and stunned
 me with cross-questions, regarding my adventures in the camp—she, as
 she saw me, gave a faint scream, (the sweetest, sure, that ever gurgled
 through the throat of a woman!) then started up—then made as if she
 would sit down—then moved backwards—then tottered forwards—then
 tumbled into my—psha! why recall, why attempt to describe that
 delicious—that passionate greeting of two young hearts? what was the
 surrounding crowd to us? what cared we for the sneers of the men, the
 titters of the jealous women, the shrill “upon my word!” of the elder miss
 bulcher, and the loud expostulations of belinda's mamma? the brave girl
 loved me, and wept in my arms. “goliah! my goliah!” said she, “my brave,
 my beautiful, thou art returned, and hope comes back with thee. oh! who
 can tell the anguish of my soul, during this dreadful, dreadful night!”
 other similar ejaculations of love and joy she uttered; and if i had
 perilled life in her service, if i did believe that hope of escape there
 was none, so exquisite was the moment of our meeting, that i forgot all
 else in this overwhelming joy!
 [the major's description of this meeting, which lasted at the very most
 not ten seconds, occupies thirteen pages of writing. we have been
 compelled to dock off twelve and a half; for the whole passage, though
 highly creditable to his feelings, might possibly be tedious to the
 reader.]
 as i said, the ladies and gentlemen were inclined to sneer, and were
 giggling audibly. i led the dear girl to a chair, and, scowling round with
 a tremendous fierceness, which those who know me know i can sometimes put
 on, i shouted out, “hark ye men and women—i am this lady's truest
 knight—her husband i hope one day to be. i am commander, too, in
 this fort—the enemy is without it; another word of mockery—another
 glance of scorn—and, by heaven, i will hurl every man and woman from
 the battlements, a prey to the ruffianly holkar!” this quieted them. i am
 a man of my word, and none of them stirred or looked disrespectfully from
 that moment.
 it was now my turn to make them look foolish. mrs. vandegobbleschroy
 (whose unfailing appetite is pretty well known to every person who has
 been in india) cried, “well, captain gahagan, your ball has been so
 pleasant, and the supper was despatched so long ago, that myself and the
 ladies would be very glad of a little breakfast.” and mrs. van giggled as
 if she had made a very witty and reasonable speech. “oh! breakfast,
 breakfast by all means,” said the rest; “we really are dying for a warm
 cup of tea.”
 “is it bohay tay or souchong tay that you'd like, ladies?” says i.
 “nonsense, you silly man; any tea you like,” said fat mrs. van.
 “what do you say, then, to some prime gunpowder?” of course they said it
 was the very thing.
 “and do you like hot rowls or cowld—muffins or crumpets—fresh
 butter or salt? and you, gentlemen, what do you say to some ilegant
 divvled-kidneys for yourselves, and just a trifle of grilled turkeys, and
 a couple of hundthred new-laid eggs for the ladies?”
 “pooh, pooh! be it as you will, my dear fellow,” answered they all.
 “but stop,” says i. “o ladies, o ladies: o gentlemen, gentlemen, that you
 should ever have come to the quarters of goliah gahagan, and he been
 without—”
 “what?” said they, in a breath.
 “alas i alas! i have not got a single stick of chocolate in the whole
 house.”
 “well, well, we can do without it.”
 “or a single pound of coffee.”
 “never mind; let that pass too.” (mrs. van and the rest were beginning to
 look alarmed.)
 “and about the kidneys—now i remember, the black divvles outside the
 fort have seized upon all the sheep; and how are we to have kidneys
 without them?” (here there was a slight o—o—o!)
 “and with regard to the milk and crame, it may be remarked that the cows
 are likewise in pawn, and not a single drop can be had for money or love:
 but we can beat up eggs, you know, in the tay, which will be just as
 good.”
 “oh! just as good.”
 “only the divvle's in the luck, there's not a fresh egg to be had—no,
 nor a fresh chicken,” continued i, “nor a stale one either; nor a
 tayspoonful of souchong, nor a thimbleful of bohay; nor the laste taste in
 life of butther, salt or fresh; nor hot rowls or cowld!”
 “in the name of heaven!” said mrs. van, growing very pale, “what is there,
 then?”
 “ladies and gentlemen, i'll tell you what there is now,” shouted i.
 “there's
 “two drumsticks of fowls, and a bone of ham.
 fourteen bottles of ginger-beer,” &c. &c. &c.
 and i went through the whole list of eatables as before, ending with the
 ham-sandwiches and the pot of jelly.
 “law! mr. gahagan,” said mrs. colonel vandegobbleschroy, “give me the
 ham-sandwiches—i must manage to breakfast off them.”
 and you should have heard the pretty to-do there was at this modest
 proposition! of course i did not accede to it—why should i? i was
 the commander of the fort, and intended to keep these three very
 sandwiches for the use of myself and my dear belinda. “ladies,” said i,
 “there are in this fort one hundred and twenty-six souls, and this is all
 the food which is to last us during the siege. meat there is none—of
 drink there is a tolerable quantity; and at one o'clock punctually, a
 glass of wine and one olive shall be served out to each woman: the men
 will receive two glasses, and an olive and a fig—and this must be
 your food during the siege. lord lake cannot be absent more than three
 days; and if he be—why, still there is a chance—why do i say a
 chance?—a certainty of escaping from the hands of these ruffians.”
 “oh, name it, name it, dear captain gahagan!” screeched the whole covey at
 a breath.
 “it lies,” answered i, “in the powder magazine. i will blow this fort, and
 all it contains, to atoms, ere it becomes the prey of holkar.”
 the women, at this, raised a squeal that might have been heard in holkar's
 camp, and fainted in different directions; but my dear belinda whispered
 in my ear, “well done, thou noble knight! bravely said, my heart's
 goliah!” i felt i was right: i could have blown her up twenty times for
 the luxury of that single moment! “and now, ladies,” said i, “i must leave
 you. the two chaplains will remain with you to administer professional
 consolation—the other gentlemen will follow me up stairs to the
 ramparts, where i shall find plenty of work for them.”
 loth as they were, these gentlemen had nothing for it but to obey, and
 they accordingly followed me to the ramparts, where i proceeded to review
 my men. the fort, in my absence, had been left in command of lieutenant
 macgillicuddy, a countryman of my own (with whom, as may be seen in an
 early chapter of my memoirs, i had an affair of honor); and the prisoner
 bobbachy bahawder, whom i had only stunned, never wishing to kill him, had
 been left in charge of that officer. three of the garrison (one of them a
 man of the ahmednuggar irregulars, my own body-servant, ghorumsaug above
 named,) were appointed to watch the captive by turns, and never leave him
 out of their sight. the lieutenant was instructed to look to them and to
 their prisoner, and as bobbachy was severely injured by the blow which i
 had given him, and was, moreover, bound hand and foot, and gagged smartly
 with cords, i considered myself sure of his person.
 macgillicuddy did not make his appearance when i reviewed my little force,
 and the three havildars were likewise absent: this did not surprise me, as
 i had told them not to leave their prisoner; but desirous to speak with
 the lieutenant, i despatched a messenger to him, and ordered him to appear
 immediately.
 the messenger came back; he was looking ghastly pale: he whispered some
 information into my ear, which instantly caused me to hasten to the
 apartments where i had caused bobbachy bahawder to be confined.
 the men had fled;—bobbachy had fled; and in his place, fancy my
 astonishment when i found—with a rope cutting his naturally wide
 mouth almost into his ears—with a dreadful sabre-cut across his
 forehead—with his legs tied over his head, and his arms tied between
 his legs—my unhappy, my attached friend—mortimer
 macgillicuddy!
 he had been in this position for about three hours—it was the very
 position in which i had caused bobbachy bahawder to be placed—an
 attitude uncomfortable, it is true, but one which renders escape
 impossible, unless treason aid the prisoner.
 i restored the lieutenant to his natural erect position: i poured half a
 bottle of whiskey down the immensely enlarged orifice of his mouth, and
 when he had been released, he informed me of the circumstances that had
 taken place.
 fool that i was! idiot!—upon my return to the fort, to have been
 anxious about my personal appearance, and to have spent a couple of hours
 in removing the artificial blackening from my beard and complexion,
 instead of going to examine my prisoner—when his escape would have
 been prevented. o foppery, foppery!—it was that cursed love of
 personal appearance which had led me to forget my duty to my general, my
 country, my monarch, and my own honor!
 thus it was that the escape took place:—my own fellow of the
 irregulars, whom i had summoned to dress me, performed the operation to my
 satisfaction, invested me with the elegant uniform of my corps, and
 removed the pitan's disguise, which i had taken from the back of the
 prostrate bobbachy bahawder. what did the rogue do next?—why, he
 carried back the dress to the bobbachy—he put it, once more, on its
 right owner; he and his infernal black companions (who had been won over
 by the bobbachy with promises of enormous reward), gagged macgillicuddy,
 who was going the rounds, and then marched with the indian coolly up to
 the outer gate, and gave the word. the sentinel, thinking it was myself,
 who had first come in, and was as likely to go out again,—(indeed my
 rascally valet said that gahagan sahib was about to go out with him and
 his two companions to reconnoitre,)—opened the gates, and off they
 went!
 this accounted for the confusion of my valet when i entered!—and for
 the scoundrel's speech, that the lieutenant had just been the rounds;—he
 had, poor fellow, and had been seized and bound in this cruel way. the
 three men, with their liberated prisoner, had just been on the point of
 escape, when my arrival disconcerted them: i had changed the guard at the
 gate (whom they had won over likewise); and yet, although they had
 overcome poor mac, and although they were ready for the start, they had
 positively no means for effecting their escape, until i was ass enough to
 put means in their way. fool! fool! thrice besotted fool that i was, to
 think of my own silly person when i should have been occupied solely with
 my public duty.
 from macgillicuddy's incoherent accounts, as he was gasping from the
 effects of the gag and the whiskey he had taken to revive him, and from my
 own subsequent observations, i learned this sad story. a sudden and
 painful thought struck me—my precious box!—i rushed back, i
 found that box—i have it still. opening it, there, where i had left
 ingots, sacks of bright tomauns, kopeks and rupees, strings of diamonds as
 big as ducks' eggs, rubies as red as the lips of my belinda, countless
 strings of pearls, amethysts, emeralds, piles upon piles of bank-notes—i
 found—a piece of paper! with a few lines in the sanscrit language,
 which are thus, word for word, translated:
 “(on disappointing a certain major.)
 “the conquering lion return'd with his prey,
 and safe in his cavern he set it,
 the sly little fox stole the booty away;
 and, as he escaped, to the lion did say,
 'aha! don't you wish you may get it?'”
 confusion! oh, how my blood boiled as i read these cutting lines. i
 stamped,—i swore,—i don't know to what insane lengths my rage
 might have carried me, had not at this moment a soldier rushed in,
 screaming, “the enemy, the enemy!”
 it was high time, indeed, that i should make my appearance. waving my
 sword with one hand, and seizing my telescope with the other, i at once
 frightened and examined the enemy. well they knew when they saw that
 flamingo-plume floating in the breeze—that awful figure standing in
 the breach—that waving war-sword sparkling in the sky—well, i
 say, they knew the name of the humble individual who owned the sword, the
 plume, and the figure. the ruffians were mustered in front, the cavalry
 behind. the flags were flying, the drums, gongs, tambourines,
 violoncellos, and other instruments of eastern music, raised in the air a
 strange, barbaric melody; the officers (yatabals), mounted on white
 dromedaries, were seen galloping to and fro, carrying to the advancing
 hosts the orders of holkar.
 you see that two sides of the fort of futtyghur (rising as it does on a
 rock that is almost perpendicular) are defended by the burrumpooter river,
 two hundred feet deep at this point, and a thousand yards wide, so that i
 had no fear about them attacking me in that quarter. my guns, therefore
 (with their six-and-thirty miserable charges of shot) were dragged round
 to the point at which i conceived holkar would be most likely to attack
 me. i was in a situation that i did not dare to fire, except at such times
 as i could kill a hundred men by a single discharge of a cannon; so the
 attacking party marched and marched, very strongly, about a mile and a
 half off, the elephants marching without receiving the slightest damage
 from us, until they had come to within four hundred yards of our walls
 (the rogues knew all the secrets of our weakness, through the betrayal of
 the dastardly ghorumsaug, or they never would have ventured so near). at
 that distance—it was about the spot where the futtyghur hill began
 gradually to rise—the invading force stopped; the elephants drew up
 in a line, at right angles with our wall (the fools! they thought they
 should expose themselves too much by taking a position parallel to it);
 the cavalry halted too, and—after the deuce's own flourish of
 trumpets and banging of gongs, to be sure,—somebody, in a
 flame-colored satin-dress, with an immense jewel blazing in his pugree
 (that looked through my telescope like a small but very bright planet),
 got up from the back of one of the very biggest elephants, and began a
 speech.
 the elephants were, as i said, in a line formed with admirable precision,
 about three hundred of them. the following little diagram will explain
 matters:—
 e is the line of elephants. f is the wall of the fort. g a gun in the
 fort. now the reader will see what i did.
 the elephants were standing, their trunks waggling to and fro gracefully
 before them; and i, with superhuman skill and activity, brought the gun g
 (a devilish long brass gun) to bear upon them. i pointed it myself; bang!
 it went, and what was the consequence? why, this:—
 f is the fort, as before. g is the gun, as before. e, the elephants, as we
 have previously seen them. what then is x? x is the line taken by the ball
 fired from g, which took off one hundred and thirty-four elephants'
 trunks, and only spent itself in the tusk of a very old animal, that stood
 the hundred and thirty-fifth.
 i say that such a shot was never fired before or since; that a gun was
 never pointed in such a way. suppose i had been a common man, and
 contented myself with firing bang at the head of the first animal? an ass
 would have done it, prided himself had he hit his mark, and what would
 have been the consequence? why, that the ball might have killed two
 elephants and wounded a third; but here, probably, it would have stopped,
 and done no further mischief. the trunk was the place at which to aim;
 there are no bones there; and away, consequently, went the bullet,
 shearing, as i have said, through one hundred and thirty-five probosces.
 heavens! what a howl there was when the shot took effect! what a sudden
 stoppage of holkar's speech! what a hideous snorting of elephants! what a
 rush backwards was made by the whole army, as if some demon was pursuing
 them!
 away they went. no sooner did i see them in full retreat, than, rushing
 forward myself, i shouted to my men, “my friends, yonder lies your
 dinner!” we flung open the gates—we tore down to the spot where the
 elephants had fallen: seven of them were killed; and of those that escaped
 to die of their hideous wounds elsewhere, most had left their trunks
 behind them. a great quantity of them we seized; and i myself, cutting up
 with my scimitar a couple of the fallen animals, as a butcher would a
 calf, motioned to the men to take the pieces back to the fort, where
 barbacued elephant was served round for dinner, instead of the miserable
 allowance of an olive and a glass of wine, which i had promised to my
 female friends, in my speech to them. the animal reserved for the ladies
 was a young white one—the fattest and tenderest i ever ate, in my
 life: they are very fair eating, but the flesh has an india-rubber flavor,
 which, until one is accustomed to it, is unpalatable.
 it was well that i had obtained this supply, for, during my absence on the
 works, mrs. vandegobbleschroy and one or two others had forced their way
 into the supper-room, and devoured every morsel of the garrison larder,
 with the exception of the cheeses, the olives, and the wine, which were
 locked up in my own apartment, before which stood a sentinel. disgusting
 mrs. van! when i heard of her gluttony, i had almost a mind to eat her.
 however, we made a very comfortable dinner off the barbacued steaks, and
 when everybody had done, had the comfort of knowing that there was enough
 for one meal more.
 the next day, as i expected, the enemy attacked us in great force,
 attempting to escalade the fort; but by the help of my guns, and my good
 sword, by the distinguished bravery of lieutenant macgillicuddy and the
 rest of the garrison, we beat this attack off completely, the enemy
 sustaining a loss of seven hundred men. we were victorious; but when
 another attack was made, what were we to do? we had still a little powder
 left, but had fired off all the shot, stones, iron-bars, &c. in the
 garrison! on this day, too, we devoured the last morsel of our food: i
 shall never forget mrs. vandegobbleschroy's despairing look, as i saw her
 sitting alone, attempting to make some impression on the little white
 elephant's roasted tail.
 the third day the attack was repeated. the resources of genius are never
 at an end. yesterday i had no ammunition; to-day, i discovered charges
 sufficient for two guns, and two swivels, which were much longer, but had
 bores of about blunderbuss size.
 this time my friend loll mahommed, who had received, as the reader may
 remember, such a bastinadoing for my sake, headed the attack. the poor
 wretch could not walk, but he was carried in an open palanquin, and came
 on waving his sword, and cursing horribly in his hindustan jargon. behind
 him came troops of matchlock-men, who picked off every one of our men who
 showed their noses above the ramparts: and a great host of blackamoors
 with scaling-ladders, bundles to fill the ditch, fascines, gabions,
 culverins, demilunes, counterscarps, and all the other appurtenances of
 offensive war.
 on they came: my guns and men were ready for them. you will ask how my
 pieces were loaded? i answer, that though my garrison were without food, i
 knew my duty as an officer, and had put the two dutch cheeses into the two
 guns, and had crammed the contents of a bottle of olives into each swivel.
 they advanced,—whish! went one of the dutch cheeses,—bang!
 went the other. alas! they did little execution. in their first contact
 with an opposing body, they certainly floored it but they became at once
 like so much welsh-rabbit, and did no execution beyond the man whom they
 struck down.
 “hogree, pogree, wongree-fum (praise to allah and the forty-nine imaums!)”
 shouted out the ferocious loll mahommed when he saw the failure of my
 shot. “onward, sons of the prophet! the infidel has no more ammunition. a
 hundred thousand lakhs of rupees to the man who brings me gahagan's head!”
 his men set up a shout, and rushed forward—he, to do him justice,
 was at the very head, urging on his own palanquin-bearers, and poking them
 with the tip of his scimitar. they came panting up the hill: i was black
 with rage, but it was the cold, concentrated rage of despair.
 “macgillicuddy,” said i, calling that faithful officer, “you know where
 the barrels of powder are?” he did. “you know the use to make of them?” he
 did. he grasped my hand. “goliah,” said he, “farewell! i swear that the
 fort shall be in atoms, as soon as yonder unbelievers have carried it. oh,
 my poor mother!” added the gallant youth, as sighing, yet fearless, he
 retired to his post.
 i gave one thought to my blessed, my beautiful belinda, and then, stepping
 into the front, took down one of the swivels;—a shower of matchlock
 balls came whizzing round my head. i did not heed them.
 i took the swivel, and aimed coolly. loll mahommed, his palanquin, and his
 men, were now not above two hundred yards from the fort. loll was straight
 before me, gesticulating and shouting to his men. i fired—bang! ! !
 i aimed so true, that one hundred and seventeen best spanish olives were
 lodged in a lump in the face of the unhappy loll mahommed. the wretch,
 uttering a yell the most hideous and unearthly i ever heard, fell back
 dead; the frightened bearers flung down the palanquin and ran—the
 whole host ran as one man: their screams might be heard for leagues.
 “tomasha, tomasha,” they cried, “it is enchantment!” away they fled, and
 the victory a third time was ours. soon as the fight was done, i flew back
 to my belinda. we had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, but i forgot
 hunger in the thought of once more beholding her!
 the sweet soul turned towards me with a sickly smile as i entered, and
 almost fainted in my arms; but alas! it was not love which caused in her
 bosom an emotion so strong—it was hunger! “oh! my goliah,” whispered
 she, “for three days i have not tasted food—i could not eat that
 horrid elephant yesterday; but now—oh! heaven! . . . .” she could
 say no more, but sank almost lifeless on my shoulder. i administered to
 her a trifling dram of rum, which revived her for a moment, and then
 rushed down stairs, determined that if it were a piece of my own leg, she
 should still have something to satisfy her hunger. luckily i remembered
 that three or four elephants were still lying in the field, having been
 killed by us in the first action, two days before. necessity, thought i,
 has no law; my adorable girl must eat elephant, until she can get
 something better.
 i rushed into the court where the men were, for the most part, assembled.
 “men,” said i, “our larder is empty; we must fill it as we did the day
 before yesterday. who will follow gahagan on a foraging party?” i expected
 that, as on former occasions, every man would offer to accompany me.
 to my astonishment, not a soul moved—a murmur arose among the
 troops; and at last one of the oldest and bravest came forward.
 “captain,” he said, “it is of no use; we cannot feed upon elephants for
 ever; we have not a grain of powder left, and must give up the fort when
 the attack is made to-morrow. we may as well be prisoners now as then, and
 we won't go elephant-hunting any more.”
 “ruffian!” i said, “he who first talks of surrender, dies!” and i cut him
 down. “is there any one else who wishes to speak?”
 no one stirred.
 “cowards! miserable cowards!” shouted i; “what, you dare not move for fear
 of death, at the hands of those wretches who even now fled before your
 arms—what, do i say your arms?—before mine!—alone i did
 it; and as alone i routed the foe, alone i will victual the fortress! ho!
 open the gate!”
 i rushed out; not a single man would follow. the bodies of the elephants
 that we had killed still lay on the ground where they had fallen, about
 four hundred yards from the fort. i descended calmly the hill, a very
 steep one, and coming to the spot, took my pick of the animals, choosing a
 tolerably small and plump one, of about thirteen feet high, which the
 vultures had respected. i threw this animal over my shoulders, and made
 for the fort.
 as i marched up the acclivity, whiz—piff—whir! came the balls
 over my head; and pitter-patter, pitter-patter! they fell on the body of
 the elephant like drops of rain. the enemy were behind me; i knew it, and
 quickened my pace. i heard the gallop of their horse: they came nearer,
 nearer; i was within a hundred yards of the fort—seventy—fifty!
 i strained every nerve; i panted with the superhuman exertion—i ran—could
 a man run very fast with such a tremendous weight on his shoulders?
 up came the enemy; fifty horsemen were shouting and screaming at my tail.
 o heaven! five yards more—one moment—and i am saved! it is
 done—i strain the last strain—i make the last step—i
 fling forward my precious burden into the gate opened wide to receive me
 and it, and—i fall! the gate thunders to, and i am left on the
 outside! fifty knives are gleaming before my bloodshot eyes—fifty
 black hands are at my throat, when a voice exclaims, “stop!—kill him
 not, it is gujputi!” a film came over my eyes—exhausted nature would
 bear no more.
 when i awoke from the trance into which i had fallen, i found myself in a
 bath, surrounded by innumerable black faces; and a hindoo pothukoor
 (whence our word apothecary) feeling my pulse and looking at me with an
 air of sagacity.
 “where am i?” i exclaimed, looking round and examining the strange faces,
 and the strange apartment which met my view. “bekhusm!” said the
 apothecary. “silence! gahagan sahib is in the hands of those who know his
 valor, and will save his life.”
 “know my valor, slave? of course you do,” said i; “but the fort—the
 garrison—the elephant—belinda, my love—my darling—macgillicuddy—the
 scoundrelly mutineers—the deal bo— . . . .”
 i could say no more; the painful recollections pressed so heavily upon my
 poor shattered mind and frame, that both failed once more. i fainted
 again, and i know not how long i lay insensible.
 again, however, i came to my senses: the pothukoor applied restoratives,
 and after a slumber of some hours i awoke, much refreshed. i had no wound;
 my repeated swoons had been brought on (as indeed well they might) by my
 gigantic efforts in carrying the elephant up a steep hill a quarter of a
 mile in length. walking, the task is bad enough: but running, it is the
 deuce; and i would recommend any of my readers who may be disposed to try
 and carry a dead elephant, never, on any account, to go a pace of more
 than five miles an hour.
 scarcely was i awake, when i heard the clash of arms at my door (plainly
 indicating that sentinels were posted there), and a single old gentleman,
 richly habited, entered the room. did my eyes deceive me? i had surely
 seen him before. no—yes—no—yes—it was he: the
 snowy white beard, the mild eyes, the nose flattened to a jelly, and level
 with the rest of the venerable face, proclaimed him at once to be—saadut
 alee beg bimbukchee, holkar's prime vizier; whose nose, as the reader may
 recollect, his highness had flattened with his kaleawn during my interview
 with him in the pitan's disguise. i now knew my fate but too well—i
 was in the hands of holkar.
 saadut alee beg bimbukchee slowly advanced towards me, and with a mild air
 of benevolence, which distinguished that excellent man (he was torn to
 pieces by wild horses the year after, on account of a difference with
 holkar), he came to my bedside, and taking gently my hand, said, “life and
 death, my son, are not ours. strength is deceitful, valor is unavailing,
 fame is only wind—the nightingale sings of the rose all night—where
 is the rose in the morning? booch, booch! it is withered by a frost. the
 rose makes remarks regarding the nightingale, and where is that delightful
 song-bird? penabekhoda, he is netted, plucked, spitted, and roasted! who
 knows how misfortune comes? it has come to gahagan gujputi!”
 “it is well,” said i, stoutly, and in the malay language. “gahagan gujputi
 will bear it like a man.”
 “no doubt—like a wise man and a brave one; but there is no lane so
 long to which there is not a turning, no night so black to which there
 comes not a morning. icy winter is followed by merry spring-time—grief
 is often succeeded by joy.”
 “interpret, o riddler!” said i; “gahagan khan is no reader of puzzles—no
 prating mollah. gujputi loves not words, but swords.”
 “listen, then, o gujputi: you are in holkar's power.”
 “i know it.”
 “you will die by the most horrible tortures to-morrow morning.”
 “i dare say.”
 “they will tear your teeth from your jaws, your nails from your fingers,
 and your eyes from your head.”
 “very possibly.”
 “they will flay you alive, and then burn you.”
 “well; they can't do any more.”
 “they will seize upon every man and woman in yonder fort,”—it was
 not then taken!—“and repeat upon them the same tortures.”
 “ha! belinda! speak—how can all this be avoided?”
 “listen. gahagan loves the moon-face called belinda.”
 “he does, vizier, to distraction.”
 “of what rank is he in the koompani's army?”
 “a captain.”
 “a miserable captain—oh shame! of what creed is he?”
 “i am an irishman, and a catholic.”
 “but he has not been very particular about his religious duties?”
 “alas, no.”
 “he has not been to his mosque for these twelve years?”
 “'tis too true.”
 “hearken now, gahagan khan. his highness prince holkar has sent me to
 thee. you shall have the moon-face for your wife—your second wife,
 that is;—the first shall be the incomparable puttee rooge, who loves
 you to madness;—with puttee rooge, who is the wife, you shall have
 the wealth and rank of bobbachy bahawder, of whom his highness intends to
 get rid. you shall be second in command of his highness's forces. look,
 here is his commission signed with the celestial seal, and attested by the
 sacred names of the forty-nine imaums. you have but to renounce your
 religion and your service, and all these rewards are yours.”
 he produced a parchment, signed as he said, and gave it to me (it was
 beautifully written in indian ink: i had it for fourteen years, but a
 rascally valet, seeing it very dirty, washed it, forsooth, and washed off
 every bit of the writing). i took it calmly, and said, “this is a tempting
 offer. o vizier, how long wilt thou give me to consider of it?”
 after a long parley, he allowed me six hours, when i promised to give him
 an answer. my mind, however, was made up—as soon as he was gone, i
 threw myself on the sofa and fell asleep.
 at the end of the six hours the vizier came back: two people were with
 him; one, by his martial appearance, i knew to be holkar, the other i did
 not recognize. it was about midnight.
 “have you considered?” said the vizier as he came to my couch.
 “i have,” said i, sitting up,—i could not stand, for my legs were
 tied, and my arms fixed in a neat pair of steel handcuffs. “i have,” said
 i, “unbelieving dogs! i have. do you think to pervert a christian
 gentleman from his faith and honor? ruffian blackamoors! do your worst;
 heap tortures on this body, they cannot last long. tear me to pieces:
 after you have torn me into a certain number of pieces, i shall not feel
 it; and if i did, if each torture could last a life, if each limb were to
 feel the agonies of a whole body, what then? i would bear all—all—all—all—all—all!”
 my breast heaved—my form dilated—my eye flashed as i spoke
 these words. “tyrants!” said i, “dulce et decorum est pro patria mori.”
 having thus clinched the argument, i was silent.
 the venerable grand vizier turned away; i saw a tear trickling down his
 cheeks.
 “what a constancy,” said he. “oh, that such beauty and such bravery should
 be doomed so soon to quit the earth!”
 his tall companion only sneered and said, “and belinda—?”
 “ha!” said i, “ruffian, be still!—heaven will protect her spotless
 innocence. holkar, i know thee, and thou knowest me too! who, with his
 single sword, destroyed thy armies? who, with his pistol, cleft in twain
 thy nose-ring? who slew thy generals? who slew thy elephants? three
 hundred mighty beasts went forth to battle: of these i slew one hundred
 and thirty-five! dog, coward, ruffian, tyrant, unbeliever! gahagan hates
 thee, spurns thee, spits on thee!”
 holkar, as i made these uncomplimentary remarks, gave a scream of rage,
 and, drawing his scimitar, rushed on to despatch me at once (it was the
 very thing i wished for), when the third person sprang forward, and
 seizing his arm, cried—
 “papa! oh, save him!” it was puttee rooge! “remember,” continued she, “his
 misfortunes—remember, oh, remember my—love!”—and here
 she blushed, and putting one finger into her mouth, and banging down her
 head, looked the very picture of modest affection.
 holkar sulkily sheathed his scimitar, and muttered, “'tis better as it is;
 had i killed him now, i had spared him the torture. none of this shameless
 fooling, puttee rooge,” continued the tyrant, dragging her away. “captain
 gahagan dies three hours from hence.” puttee rooge gave one scream and
 fainted—her father and the vizier carried her off between them; nor
 was i loth to part with her, for, with all her love, she was as ugly as
 the deuce.
 they were gone—my fate was decided. i had but three hours more of
 life: so i flung myself again on the sofa, and fell profoundly asleep. as
 it may happen to any of my readers to be in the same situation, and to be
 hanged themselves, let me earnestly entreat them to adopt this plan of
 going to sleep, which i for my part have repeatedly found to be
 successful. it saves unnecessary annoyance, it passes away a great deal of
 unpleasant time, and it prepares one to meet like a man the coming
 catastrophe.
 three o'clock came: the sun was at this time making his appearance in the
 heavens, and with it came the guards, who were appointed to conduct me to
 the torture. i woke, rose, was carried out, and was set on the very white
 donkey on which loll mahommed was conducted through the camp after he was
 bastinadoed. bobbachy bahawder rode behind me, restored to his rank and
 state; troops of cavalry hemmed us in on all sides; my ass was conducted
 by the common executioner: a crier went forward, shouting out, “make way
 for the destroyer of the faithful—he goes to bear the punishment of
 his crimes.” we came to the fatal plain: it was the very spot whence i had
 borne away the elephant, and in full sight of the fort. i looked towards
 it. thank heaven! king george's banner waved on it still—a crowd
 were gathered on the walls—the men, the dastards who had deserted me—and
 women, too. among the latter i thought i distinguished one who—o
 gods! the thought turned me sick—i trembled and looked pale for the
 first time.
 “he trembles! he turns pale,” shouted out bobbachy bahawder, ferociously
 exulting over his conquered enemy.
 “dog!” shouted i—(i was sitting with my head to the donkey's tail,
 and so looked the bobbachy full in the face)—“not so pale as you
 looked when i felled you with this arm—not so pale as your women
 looked when i entered your harem!” completely chop-fallen, the indian
 ruffian was silent: at any rate, i had done for him.
 we arrived at the place of execution. a stake, a couple of feet thick and
 eight high, was driven in the grass: round the stake, about seven feet
 from the ground, was an iron ring, to which were attached two fetters; in
 these my wrists were placed. two or three executioners stood near, with
 strange-looking instruments: others were blowing at a fire, over which was
 a caldron, and in the embers were stuck other prongs and instruments of
 iron.
 the crier came forward and read my sentence. it was the same in effect as
 that which had been hinted to me the day previous by the grand vizier. i
 confess i was too agitated to catch every word that was spoken.
 holkar himself, on a tall dromedary, was at a little distance. the grand
 vizier came up to me—it was his duty to stand by, and see the
 punishment performed. “it is yet time!” said he.
 i nodded my head, but did not answer.
 the vizier cast up to heaven a look of inexpressible anguish, and with a
 voice choking with emotion, said, “executioner—do—your—duty!”
 the horrid man advanced—he whispered sulkily in the ears of the
 grand vizier, “guggly ka ghee, hum khedgeree,” said he, “the oil does not
 boil yet—wait one minute.” the assistants blew, the fire blazed, the
 oil was heated. the vizier drew a few feet aside: taking a large ladle
 full of the boiling liquid, he advanced—
 “whish! bang, bang! pop!” the executioner was dead at my feet, shot
 through the head; the ladle of scalding oil had been dashed in the face of
 the unhappy grand vizier, who lay on the plain, howling. “whish! bang!
 pop! hurrah!—charge!—forwards!—cut them down!—no
 quarter!”
 i saw—yes, no, yes, no, yes!—i saw regiment upon regiment of
 galloping british horsemen riding over the ranks of the flying natives.
 first of the host, i recognized, o heaven! my ahmednuggar irregulars! on
 came the gallant line of black steeds and horsemen, swift, swift before
 them rode my officers in yellow—glogger, pappendick, and stuffle;
 their sabres gleamed in the sun, their voices rung in the air. “d—-
 them!” they cried, “give it them, boys!” a strength supernatural thrilled
 through my veins at that delicious music: by one tremendous effort, i
 wrested the post from its foundation, five feet in the ground. i could not
 release my hands from the fetters, it is true; but, grasping the beam
 tightly, i sprung forward—with one blow i levelled the five
 executioners in the midst of the fire, their fall upsetting the scalding
 oil-can; with the next, i swept the bearers of bobbachy's palanquin off
 their legs; with the third, i caught that chief himself in the small of
 the back, and sent him flying on to the sabres of my advancing soldiers!
 the next minute, glogger and stuffle were in my arms, pappendick leading
 on the irregulars. friend and foe in that wild chase had swept far away.
 we were alone; i was freed from my immense bar; and ten minutes
 afterwards, when lord lake trotted up with his staff, he found me sitting
 on it.
 “look at gahagan,” said his lordship. “gentlemen, did i not tell you we
 should be sure to find him at his post?”
 the gallant old nobleman rode on: and this was the famous battle of
 furruckabad, or surprise of futtyghur, fought on the th of november,
 about a month afterwards, the following announcement appeared in the
 boggleywollah hurkaru and other indian papers:—“married, on the th
 of december, at futtyghur, by the rev. dr. snorter, captain goliah o'grady
 gahagan, commanding irregular horse, abmednuggar, to belinda, second
 daughter of major-general bulcher, c.b. his excellency the
 commander-in-chief gave away the bride; and after a splendid dejeune, the
 happy pair set off to pass the mango season at hurrygurrybang. venus must
 recollect, however, that mars must not always be at her side. the
 irregulars are nothing without their leader.”
 such was the paragraph—such the event—the happiest in the
 existence of
 it was in the good old days of chivalry, when every mountain that bathes
 its shadow in the rhine had its castle: not inhabited, as now, by a few
 rats and owls, nor covered with moss and wallflowers, and funguses, and
 creeping ivy. no, no! where the ivy now clusters there grew strong
 portcullis and bars of steel; where the wallflower now quivers in the
 rampart there were silken banners embroidered with wonderful heraldry;
 men-at-arms marched where now you shall only see a bank of moss or a
 hideous black champignon; and in place of the rats and owlets, i warrant
 me there were ladies and knights to revel in the great halls, and to
 feast, and to dance, and to make love there. they are passed away:—those
 old knights and ladies: their golden hair first changed to silver, and
 then the silver dropped off and disappeared for ever; their elegant legs,
 so slim and active in the dance, became swollen and gouty, and then, from
 being swollen and gouty, dwindled down to bare bone-shanks; the roses left
 their cheeks, and then their cheeks disappeared, and left their skulls,
 and then their skulls powdered into dust, and all sign of them was gone.
 and as it was with them, so shall it be with us. ho, seneschal! fill me a
 cup of liquor! put sugar in it, good fellow—yea, and a little hot
 water; a very little, for my soul is sad, as i think of those days and
 knights of old.
 they, too, have revelled and feasted, and where are they?—gone?—nay,
 not altogether gone; for doth not the eye catch glimpses of them as they
 walk yonder in the gray limbo of romance, shining faintly in their coats
 of steel, wandering by the side of long-haired ladies, with long-tailed
 gowns that little pages carry? yes! one sees them: the poet sees them
 still in the far-off cloudland, and hears the ring of their clarions as
 they hasten to battle or tourney—and the dim echoes of their lutes
 chanting of love and fair ladies! gracious privilege of poesy! it is as
 the dervish's collyrium to the eyes, and causes them to see treasures that
 to the sight of donkeys are invisible. blessed treasures of fancy! i would
 not change ye—no, not for many donkey-loads of gold. . . . fill
 again, jolly seneschal, thou brave wag; chalk me up the produce on the
 hostel door—surely the spirits of old are mixed up in the wondrous
 liquor, and gentle visions of bygone princes and princesses look blandly
 down on us from the cloudy perfume of the pipe. do you know in what year
 the fairies left the rhine?—long before murray's “guide-book” was
 wrote—long before squat steamboats, with snorting funnels, came
 paddling down the stream. do you not know that once upon a time the
 appearance of eleven thousand british virgins was considered at cologne as
 a wonder? now there come twenty thousand such annually, accompanied by
 their ladies'-maids. but of them we will say no more—let us back to
 those who went before them.
 many, many hundred thousand years ago, and at the exact period when
 chivalry was in full bloom, there occurred a little history upon the banks
 of the rhine, which has been already written in a book, and hence must be
 positively true. 'tis a story of knights and ladies—of love and
 battle, and virtue rewarded; a story of princes and noble lords, moreover:
 the best of company. gentles, an ye will, ye shall hear it. fair dames and
 damsels, may your loves be as happy as those of the heroine of this
 romaunt.
 on the cold and rainy evening of thursday, the th of october, in the
 year previously indicated, such travellers as might have chanced to be
 abroad in that bitter night, might have remarked a fellow-wayfarer
 journeying on the road from oberwinter to godesberg. he was a man not tall
 in stature, but of the most athletic proportions, and time, which had
 browned and furrowed his cheek and sprinkled his locks with gray, declared
 pretty clearly that he must have been acquainted with the warrior for some
 fifty good years. he was armed in mail, and rode a powerful and active
 battle-horse, which (though the way the pair had come that day was long
 and weary indeed,) yet supported the warrior, his armor and luggage, with
 seeming ease. as it was in a friend's country, the knight did not think
 fit to wear his heavy destrier, or helmet, which hung at his saddlebow
 over his portmanteau. both were marked with the coronet of a count; and
 from the crown which surmounted the helmet, rose the crest of his knightly
 race, an arm proper lifting a naked sword.
 at his right hand, and convenient to the warrior's grasp, hung his
 mangonel or mace—a terrific weapon which had shattered the brains of
 many a turbaned soldan; while over his broad and ample chest there fell
 the triangular shield of the period, whereon were emblazoned his arms—argent,
 a gules wavy, on a saltire reversed of the second: the latter device was
 awarded for a daring exploit before ascalon, by the emperor maximilian,
 and a reference to the german peerage of that day, or a knowledge of high
 families which every gentleman then possessed, would have sufficed to show
 at once that the rider we have described was of the noble house of
 hombourg. it was, in fact, the gallant knight sir ludwig of hombourg: his
 rank as a count, and chamberlain of the emperor of austria, was marked by
 the cap of maintenance with the peacock's feather which he wore (when not
 armed for battle), and his princely blood was denoted by the oiled silk
 umbrella which he carried (a very meet protection against the pitiless
 storm), and which, as it is known, in the middle ages, none but princes
 were justified in using. a bag, fastened with a brazen padlock, and made
 of the costly produce of the persian looms (then extremely rare in
 europe), told that he had travelled in eastern climes. this, too, was
 evident from the inscription writ on card or parchment, and sewed on the
 bag. it first ran “count ludwig de hombourg, jerusalem;” but the name of
 the holy city had been dashed out with the pen, and that of “godesberg”
 substituted. so far indeed had the cavalier travelled!—and it is
 needless to state that the bag in question contained such remaining
 articles of the toilet as the high-born noble deemed unnecessary to place
 in his valise.
 “by saint bugo of katzenellenbogen!” said the good knight, shivering,
 “'tis colder here than at damascus! marry, i am so hungry i could eat one
 of saladin's camels. shall i be at godesberg in time for dinner?” and
 taking out his horologe (which hung in a small side-pocket of his
 embroidered surcoat), the crusader consoled himself by finding that it was
 but seven of the night, and that he would reach godesberg ere the warder
 had sounded the second gong.
 his opinion was borne out by the result. his good steed, which could trot
 at a pinch fourteen leagues in the hour, brought him to this famous
 castle, just as the warder was giving the first welcome signal which told
 that the princely family of count karl, margrave of godesberg, were about
 to prepare for their usual repast at eight o'clock. crowds of pages and
 horse-keepers were in the court, when, the portcullis being raised, and
 amidst the respectful salutes of the sentinels, the most ancient friend of
 the house of godesberg entered into its castle-yard. the under-butler
 stepped forward to take his bridle-rein. “welcome, sir count, from the
 holy land!” exclaimed the faithful old man. “welcome, sir count, from the
 holy land!” cried the rest of the servants in the hall. a stable was
 speedily found for the count's horse, streithengst, and it was not before
 the gallant soldier had seen that true animal well cared for, that he
 entered the castle itself, and was conducted to his chamber. wax-candles
 burning bright on the mantel, flowers in china vases, every variety of
 soap, and a flask of the precious essence manufactured at the neighboring
 city of cologne, were displayed on his toilet-table; a cheering fire
 “crackled on the hearth,” and showed that the good knight's coming had
 been looked and cared for. the serving-maidens, bringing him hot water for
 his ablutions, smiling asked, “would he have his couch warmed at eve?” one
 might have been sure from their blushes that the tough old soldier made an
 arch reply. the family tonsor came to know whether the noble count had
 need of his skill. “by saint bugo,” said the knight, as seated in an easy
 settle by the fire, the tonsor rid his chin of its stubby growth, and
 lightly passed the tongs and pomatum through “the sable silver” of his
 hair,—“by saint bugo, this is better than my dungeon at grand cairo.
 how is my godson otto, master barber; and the lady countess, his mother;
 and the noble count karl, my dear brother-in-arms?”
 “they are well,” said the tonsor, with a sigh.
 “by saint bugo, i'm glad on't; but why that sigh?”
 “things are not as they have been with my good lord,” answered the
 hairdresser, “ever since count gottfried's arrival.”
 “he here!” roared sir ludwig. “good never came where gottfried was!” and
 the while he donned a pair of silken hose, that showed admirably the
 proportions of his lower limbs, and exchanged his coat of mail for the
 spotless vest and black surcoat collared with velvet of genoa, which was
 the fitting costume for “knight in ladye's bower,” the knight entered into
 a conversation with the barber, who explained to him, with the usual
 garrulousness of his tribe, what was the present position of the noble
 family of godesberg.
 this will be narrated in the next chapter.
 'tis needless to state that the gallant warrior ludwig of hombourg found
 in the bosom of his friend's family a cordial welcome. the brother-in-arms
 of the margrave karl, he was the esteemed friend of the margravine, the
 exalted and beautiful theodora of boppum, and (albeit no theologian, and
 although the first princes of christendom coveted such an honor,) he was
 selected to stand as sponsor for the margrave's son otto, the only child
 of his house.
 it was now seventeen years since the count and countess had been united:
 and although heaven had not blessed their couch with more than one child,
 it may be said of that one that it was a prize, and that surely never
 lighted on the earth a more delightful vision. when count ludwig,
 hastening to the holy wars, had quitted his beloved godchild, he had left
 him a boy; he now found him, as the latter rushed into his arms, grown to
 be one of the finest young men in germany: tall and excessively graceful
 in proportion, with the blush of health mantling upon his cheek, that was
 likewise adorned with the first down of manhood, and with magnificent
 golden ringlets, such as a rowland might envy, curling over his brow and
 his shoulders. his eyes alternately beamed with the fire of daring, or
 melted with the moist glance of benevolence. well might a mother be proud
 of such a boy. well might the brave ludwig exclaim, as he clasped the
 youth to his breast, “by st. bugo of katzenellenbogen, otto, thou art fit
 to be one of coeur de lion's grenadiers!” and it was the fact: the
 “childe” of godesberg measured six feet three.
 he was habited for the evening meal in the costly, though simple attire of
 the nobleman of the period—and his costume a good deal resembled
 that of the old knight whose toilet we have just described; with the
 difference of color, however. the pourpoint worn by young otto of
 godesberg was of blue, handsomely decorated with buttons of carved and
 embossed gold; his haut-de-chausses, or leggings, were of the stuff of
 nanquin, then brought by the lombard argosies at an immense price from
 china. the neighboring country of holland had supplied his wrists and
 bosom with the most costly laces; and thus attired, with an opera-hat
 placed on one side of his head, ornamented with a single flower, (that
 brilliant one, the tulip,) the boy rushed into his godfather's
 dressing-room, and warned him that the banquet was ready.
 it was indeed: a frown had gathered on the dark brows of the lady
 theodora, and her bosom heaved with an emotion akin to indignation; for
 she feared lest the soups in the refectory and the splendid fish now
 smoking there were getting cold: she feared not for herself, but for her
 lord's sake. “godesberg,” whispered she to count ludwig, as trembling on
 his arm they descended from the drawing-room, “godesberg is sadly changed
 of late.”
 “by st. bugo!” said the burly knight, starting, “these are the very words
 the barber spake.”
 the lady heaved a sigh, and placed herself before the soup-tureen. for
 some time the good knight ludwig of hombourg was too much occupied in
 ladling out the forced-meat balls and rich calves' head of which the
 delicious pottage was formed (in ladling them out, did we say? ay, marry,
 and in eating them, too,) to look at his brother-in-arms at the bottom of
 the table, where he sat with his son on his left hand, and the baron
 gottfried on his right.
 the margrave was indeed changed. “by st. bugo,” whispered ludwig to the
 countess, “your husband is as surly as a bear that hath been wounded o'
 the head.” tears falling into her soup-plate were her only reply. the
 soup, the turbot, the haunch of mutton, count ludwig remarked that the
 margrave sent all away untasted.
 “the boteler will serve ye with wine, hombourg,” said the margrave
 gloomily from the end of the table: not even an invitation to drink! how
 different was this from the old times!
 but when in compliance with this order the boteler proceeded to hand round
 the mantling vintage of the cape to the assembled party, and to fill young
 otto's goblet, (which the latter held up with the eagerness of youth,) the
 margrave's rage knew no bounds. he rushed at his son; he dashed the
 wine-cup over his spotless vest: and giving him three or four heavy blows
 which would have knocked down a bonassus, but only caused the young childe
 to blush: “you take wine!” roared out the margrave; “you dare to help
 yourself! who time d-v-l gave you leave to help yourself?” and the
 terrible blows were reiterated over the delicate ears of the boy.
 “ludwig! ludwig!” shrieked the margravine.
 “hold your prate, madam,” roared the prince. “by st. buffo, mayn't a
 father beat his own child?”
 “his own child!” repeated the margrave with a burst, almost a shriek of
 indescribable agony. “ah, what did i say?”
 sir ludwig looked about him in amaze; sir gottfried (at the margrave's
 right hand) smiled ghastily; the young otto was too much agitated by the
 recent conflict to wear any expression but that of extreme discomfiture;
 but the poor margravine turned her head aside and blushed, red almost as
 the lobster which flanked the turbot before her.
 in those rude old times, 'tis known such table quarrels were by no means
 unusual amongst gallant knights; and ludwig, who had oft seen the margrave
 cast a leg of mutton at an offending servitor, or empty a sauce-boat in
 the direction of the margravine, thought this was but one of the usual
 outbreaks of his worthy though irascible friend, and wisely determined to
 change the converse.
 “how is my friend,” said he, “the good knight, sir hildebrandt?”
 “by saint buffo, this is too much!” screamed the margrave, and actually
 rushed from time room.
 “by saint bugo,” said his friend, “gallant knights, gentle sirs, what ails
 my good lord margave?”
 “perhaps his nose bleeds,” said gottfried, with a sneer.
 “ah, my kind friend,” said the margravine with uncontrollable emotion, “i
 fear some of you have passed from the frying-pan into the fire.” and
 making the signal of departure to the ladies, they rose and retired to
 coffee in the drawing-room.
 the margrave presently came back again, somewhat more collected than he
 had been. “otto,” he said sternly, “go join the ladies: it becomes not a
 young boy to remain in the company of gallant knights after dinner.” the
 noble childe with manifest unwillingness quitted the room, and the
 margrave, taking his lady's place at the head of the table, whispered to
 sir ludwig, “hildebrandt will be here to-night to an evening-party, given
 in honor of your return from palestine. my good friend—my true
 friend—my old companion in arms, sir gottfried! you had best see
 that the fiddlers be not drunk, and that the crumpets be gotten ready.”
 sir gottfried, obsequiously taking his patron's hint, bowed and left the
 room.
 “you shall know all soon, dear ludwig,” said the margrave, with a
 heart-rending look. “you marked gottfried, who left the room anon?”
 “i did.”
 “you look incredulous concerning his worth; but i tell thee, ludwig, that
 yonder gottfried is a good fellow, and my fast friend. why should he not
 be! he is my near relation, heir to my property: should i” (here the
 margrave's countenance assumed its former expression of excruciating
 agony),—“should i have no son.”
 “but i never saw the boy in better health,” replied sir ludwig.
 “nevertheless,—ha! ha!—it may chance that i shall soon have no
 son.”
 the margrave had crushed many a cup of wine during dinner, and sir ludwig
 thought naturally that his gallant friend had drunken rather deeply. he
 proceeded in this respect to imitate him; for the stern soldier of those
 days neither shrunk before the paynim nor the punch-bowl: and many a
 rousing night had our crusader enjoyed in syria with lion-hearted richard;
 with his coadjutor, godfrey of bouillon; nay, with the dauntless saladin
 himself.
 “you knew gottfried in palestine?” asked the margrave.
 “i did.”
 “why did ye not greet him then, as ancient comrades should, with the warm
 grasp of friendship? it is not because sir gottfried is poor? you know
 well that he is of race as noble as thine own, my early friend!”
 “i care not for his race nor for his poverty,” replied the blunt crusader.
 “what says the minnesinger? 'marry, that the rank is but the stamp of the
 guinea; the man is the gold.' and i tell thee, karl of godesberg, that
 yonder gottfried is base metal.”
 “by saint buffo, thou beliest him, dear ludwig.”
 “by saint bugo, dear karl, i say sooth. the fellow was known i' the camp
 of the crusaders—disreputably known. ere he joined us in palestine,
 he had sojourned in constantinople, and learned the arts of the greek. he
 is a cogger of dice, i tell thee—a chanter of horseflesh. he won
 five thousand marks from bluff richard of england the night before the
 storming of ascalon, and i caught him with false trumps in his pocket. he
 warranted a bay mare to conrad of mont serrat, and the rogue had fired
 her.”
 “ha! mean ye that sir gottfried is a leg?” cried sir karl, knitting his
 brows. “now, by my blessed patron, saint buffo of bonn, had any other but
 ludwig of hombourg so said, i would have cloven him from skull to chine.”
 “by saint bugo of katzenellenbogen, i will prove my words on sir
 gottfried's body—not on thine, old brother-in-arms. and to do the
 knave justice, he is a good lance. holy bugo! but he did good service at
 acre! but his character was such that, spite of his bravery, he was
 dismissed the army; nor even allowed to sell his captain's commission.”
 “i have heard of it,” said the margrave; “gottfried hath told me of it.
 'twas about some silly quarrel over the wine-cup—a mere silly jape,
 believe me. hugo de brodenel would have no black bottle on the board.
 gottfried was wroth, and to say sooth, flung the black bottle at the
 county's head. hence his dismission and abrupt return. but you know not,”
 continued the margrave, with a heavy sigh, “of what use that worthy
 gottfried has been to me. he has uncloaked a traitor to me.”
 “not yet,” answered hombourg, satirically.
 “by saint buffo! a deep-dyed dastard! a dangerous, damnable traitor!—a
 nest of traitors. hildebranndt is a traitor—otto is a traitor—and
 theodora (o heaven!) she—she is another.” the old prince burst into
 tears at the word, and was almost choked with emotion.
 “what means this passion, dear friend?” cried sir ludwig, seriously
 alarmed.
 “mark, ludwig! mark hildebrandt and theodora together: mark hildebrandt
 and otto together. like, like i tell thee as two peas. o holy saints, that
 i should be born to suffer this!—to have all my affections wrenched
 out of my bosom, and to be left alone in my old age! but, hark! the guests
 are arriving. an ye will not empty another flask of claret, let us join
 the ladyes i' the withdrawing chamber. when there, mark hildebrandt and
 the festival was indeed begun. coming on horseback, or in their caroches,
 knights and ladies of the highest rank were assembled in the grand saloon
 of godesberg, which was splendidly illuminated to receive them. servitors,
 in rich liveries, (they were attired in doublets of the sky-blue
 broadcloth of ypres, and hose of the richest yellow sammit—the
 colors of the house of godesberg,) bore about various refreshments on
 trays of silver—cakes, baked in the oven, and swimming in melted
 butter; manchets of bread, smeared with the same delicious condiment, and
 carved so thin that you might have expected them to take wing and fly to
 the ceiling; coffee, introduced by peter the hermit, after his excursion
 into arabia, and tea such as only bohemia could produce, circulated amidst
 the festive throng, and were eagerly devoured by the guests. the
 margrave's gloom was unheeded by them—how little indeed is the
 smiling crowd aware of the pangs that are lurking in the breasts of those
 who bid them to the feast! the margravine was pale; but woman knows how to
 deceive; she was more than ordinarily courteous to her friends, and
 laughed, though the laugh was hollow, and talked, though the talk was
 loathsome to her.
 “the two are together,” said the margrave, clutching his friend's
 shoulder. “now look!”
 sir ludwig turned towards a quadrille, and there, sure enough, were sir
 hildebrandt and young otto standing side by side in the dance. two eggs
 were not more like! the reason of the margrave's horrid suspicion at once
 flashed across his friend's mind.
 “'tis clear as the staff of a pike,” said the poor margrave, mournfully.
 “come, brother, away from the scene; let us go play a game at cribbage!”
 and retiring to the margravine's boudoir, the two warriors sat down to the
 game.
 but though 'tis an interesting one, and though the margrave won, yet he
 could not keep his attention on the cards: so agitated was his mind by the
 dreadful secret which weighed upon it. in the midst of their play, the
 obsequious gottfried came to whisper a word in his patron's ear, which
 threw the latter into such a fury, that apoplexy was apprehended by the
 two lookers-on. but the margrave mastered his emotion. “at what time, did
 you say?” said he to gottfried.
 “at daybreak, at the outer gate.”
 “i will be there.”
 “and so will i too,” thought count ludwig, the good knight of hombourg.
 how often does man, proud man, make calculations for the future, and think
 he can bend stern fate to his will! alas, we are but creatures in its
 hands! how many a slip between the lip and the lifted wine-cup! how often,
 though seemingly with a choice of couches to repose upon, do we find
 ourselves dashed to earth; and then we are fain to say the grapes are
 sour, because we cannot attain them; or worse, to yield to anger in
 consequence of our own fault. sir ludwig, the hombourger, was not at the
 outer gate at daybreak.
 he slept until ten of the clock. the previous night's potations had been
 heavy, the day's journey had been long and rough. the knight slept as a
 soldier would, to whom a featherbed is a rarity, and who wakes not till he
 hears the blast of the reveille.
 he looked up as he woke. at his bedside sat the margrave. he had been
 there for hours watching his slumbering comrade. watching?—no, not
 watching, but awake by his side, brooding over thoughts unutterably bitter—over
 feelings inexpressibly wretched.
 “what's o'clock?” was the first natural exclamation of the hombourger.
 “i believe it is five o'clock,” said his friend. it was ten. it might have
 been twelve, two, half-past four, twenty minutes to six, the margrave
 would still have said, “i believe it is five o'clock.” the wretched take
 no count of time: it flies with unequal pinions, indeed, for them.
 “is breakfast over?” inquired the crusader.
 “ask the butler,” said the margrave, nodding his head wildly, rolling his
 eyes wildly, smiling wildly.
 “gracious bugo!” said the knight of hombourg, “what has ailed thee, my
 friend? it is ten o'clock by my horologe. your regular hour is nine. you
 are not—no, by heavens! you are not shaved! you wear the tights and
 silken hose of last evening's banquet. your collar is all rumpled—'tis
 that of yesterday. you have not been to bed! what has chanced, brother of
 mine: what has chanced?”
 “a common chance, louis of hombourg,” said the margrave: “one that chances
 every day. a false woman, a false friend, a broken heart. this has
 chanced. i have not been to bed.”
 “what mean ye?” cried count ludwig, deeply affected. “a false friend? i am
 not a false friend. a false woman? surely the lovely theodora, your wife—”
 “i have no wife, louis, now; i have no wife and no son.”
 in accents broken by grief, the margrave explained what had occurred.
 gottfried's information was but too correct. there was a cause for the
 likeness between otto and sir hildebrandt: a fatal cause! hildebrandt and
 theodora had met at dawn at the outer gate. the margrave had seen them.
 they walked long together; they embraced. ah! how the husband's, the
 father's, feelings were harrowed at that embrace! they parted; and then
 the margrave, coming forward, coldly signified to his lady that she was to
 retire to a convent for life, and gave orders that the boy should be sent
 too, to take the vows at a monastery.
 both sentences had been executed. otto, in a boat, and guarded by a
 company of his father's men-at-arms, was on the river going towards
 cologne, to the monastery of saint buffo there. the lady theodora, under
 the guard of sir gottfried and an attendant, were on their way to the
 convent of nonnenwerth, which many of our readers have seen—the
 beautiful green island convent, laved by the bright waters of the rhine!
 “what road did gottfried take?” asked the knight of hombourg, grinding his
 teeth.
 “you cannot overtake him,” said the margrave. “my good gottfried, he is my
 only comfort now: he is my kinsman, and shall be my heir. he will be back
 anon.”
 “will he so?” thought sir ludwig. “i will ask him a few questions ere he
 return.” and springing from his couch, he began forthwith to put on his
 usual morning dress of complete armor; and, after a hasty ablution,
 donned, not his cap of maintenance, but his helmet of battle. he rang the
 bell violently.
 “a cup of coffee, straight,” said he, to the servitor who answered the
 summons; “bid the cook pack me a sausage and bread in paper, and the groom
 saddle streithengst; we have far to ride.”
 the various orders were obeyed. the horse was brought; the refreshments
 disposed of; the clattering steps of the departing steed were heard in the
 court-yard; but the margrave took no notice of his friend, and sat,
 plunged in silent grief, quite motionless by the empty bedside.
 the hombourger led his horse down the winding path which conducts from the
 hill and castle of godesberg into the beautiful green plain below. who has
 not seen that lovely plain, and who that has seen it has not loved it? a
 thousand sunny vineyards and cornfields stretch around in peaceful
 luxuriance; the mighty rhine floats by it in silver magnificence, and on
 the opposite bank rise the seven mountains robed in majestic purple, the
 monarchs of the royal scene.
 a pleasing poet, lord byron, in describing this very scene, has mentioned
 that “peasant girls, with dark blue eyes, and hands that offer cake and
 wine,” are perpetually crowding round the traveller in this delicious
 district, and proffering to him their rustic presents. this was no doubt
 the case in former days, when the noble bard wrote his elegant poems—in
 the happy ancient days! when maidens were as yet generous, and men kindly!
 now the degenerate peasantry of the district are much more inclined to ask
 than to give, and their blue eyes seem to have disappeared with their
 generosity.
 but as it was a long time ago that the events of our story occurred, 'tis
 probable that the good knight ludwig of hombourg was greeted upon his path
 by this fascinating peasantry; though we know not how he accepted their
 welcome. he continued his ride across the flat green country until he came
 to rolandseck, whence he could command the island of nonnenwerth (that
 lies in the rhine opposite that place), and all who went to it or passed
 from it.
 over the entrance of a little cavern in one of the rocks hanging above the
 rhine-stream at rolandseck, and covered with odoriferous cactuses and
 silvery magnolias, the traveller of the present day may perceive a rude
 broken image of a saint: that image represented the venerable saint buffo
 of bonn, the patron of the margrave; and sir ludwig, kneeling on the
 greensward, and reciting a censer, an ave, and a couple of acolytes before
 it, felt encouraged to think that the deed he meditated was about to be
 performed under the very eyes of his friend's sanctified patron. his
 devotion done (and the knight of those days was as pious as he was brave),
 sir ludwig, the gallant hombourger, exclaimed with a loud voice:—
 “ho! hermit! holy hermit, art thou in thy cell?”
 “who calls the poor servant of heaven and saint buffo?” exclaimed a voice
 from the cavern; and presently, from beneath the wreaths of geranium and
 magnolia, appeared an intensely venerable, ancient, and majestic head—'twas
 that, we need not say, of saint buffo's solitary. a silver beard hanging
 to his knees gave his person an appearance of great respectability; his
 body was robed in simple brown serge, and girt with a knotted cord: his
 ancient feet were only defended from the prickles and stones by the rudest
 sandals, and his bald and polished head was bare.
 “holy hermit,” said the knight, in a grave voice, “make ready thy
 ministry, for there is some one about to die.”
 “where, son?”
 “here, father.”
 “is he here, now?”
 “perhaps,” said the stout warrior, crossing himself; “but not so if right
 prevail.” at this moment he caught sight of a ferry-boat putting off from
 nonnenwerth, with a knight on board. ludwig knew at once, by the sinople
 reversed and the truncated gules on his surcoat, that it was sir gottfried
 of godesberg.
 “be ready, father,” said the good knight, pointing towards the advancing
 boat; and waving his hand by way of respect to the reverend hermit,
 without a further word, he vaulted into his saddle, and rode back for a
 few score of paces; when he wheeled round, and remained steady. his great
 lance and pennon rose in the air. his armor glistened in the sun; the
 chest and head of his battle-horse were similarly covered with steel. as
 sir gottfried, likewise armed and mounted (for his horse had been left at
 the ferry hard by), advanced up the road, he almost started at the figure
 before him—a glistening tower of steel.
 “are you the lord of this pass, sir knight?” said sir gottfried,
 haughtily, “or do you hold it against all comers, in honor of your
 lady-love?”
 “i am not the lord of this pass. i do not hold it against all comers. i
 hold it but against one, and he is a liar and a traitor.”
 “as the matter concerns me not, i pray you let me pass,” said gottfried.
 “the matter does concern thee, gottfried of godesberg. liar and traitor!
 art thou coward, too?”
 “holy saint buffo! 'tis a fight!” exclaimed the old hermit (who, too, had
 been a gallant warrior in his day); and like the old war-horse that hears
 the trumpet's sound, and spite of his clerical profession, he prepared to
 look on at the combat with no ordinary eagerness, and sat down on the
 overhanging ledge of the rock, lighting his pipe, and affecting unconcern,
 but in reality most deeply interested in the event which was about to
 ensue.
 as soon as the word “coward” had been pronounced by sir ludwig, his
 opponent, uttering a curse far too horrible to be inscribed here, had
 wheeled back his powerful piebald, and brought his lance to the rest.
 “ha! beauseant!” cried he. “allah humdillah!” 'twas the battle-cry in
 palestine of the irresistible knights hospitallers. “look to thyself, sir
 knight, and for mercy from heaven! i will give thee none.”
 “a bugo for katzenellenbogen!” exclaimed sir ludwig, piously: that, too,
 was the well-known war-cry of his princely race.
 “i will give the signal,” said the old hermit, waving his pipe. “knights,
 are you ready? one, two, three. los!” (let go.)
 at the signal, the two steeds tore up the ground like whirlwinds; the two
 knights, two flashing perpendicular masses of steel, rapidly converged;
 the two lances met upon the two shields of either, and shivered,
 splintered, shattered into ten hundred thousand pieces, which whirled
 through the air here and there, among the rocks, or in the trees, or in
 the river. the two horses fell back trembling on their haunches, where
 they remained for half a minute or so.
 “holy buffo! a brave stroke!” said the old hermit. “marry, but a splinter
 wellnigh took off my nose!” the honest hermit waved his pipe in delight,
 not perceiving that one of the splinters had carried off the head of it,
 and rendered his favorite amusement impossible. “ha! they are to it again!
 o my! how they go to with their great swords! well stricken, gray! well
 parried, piebald! ha, that was a slicer! go it, piebald! go it, gray!—go
 it, gray! go it, pie—peccavi! peccavi!” said the old man, here
 suddenly closing his eyes, and falling down on his knees. “i forgot i was
 a man of peace.” and the next moment, muttering a hasty matin, he sprung
 down the ledge of rock, and was by the side of the combatants.
 the battle was over. good knight as sir gottfried was, his strength and
 skill had not been able to overcome sir ludwig the hombourger, with right
 on his side. he was bleeding at every point of his armor: he had been run
 through the body several times, and a cut in tierce, delivered with
 tremendous dexterity, had cloven the crown of his helmet of damascus
 steel, and passing through the cerebellum and sensorium, had split his
 nose almost in twain.
 his mouth foaming—his face almost green—his eyes full of blood—his
 brains spattered over his forehead, and several of his teeth knocked out,—the
 discomfited warrior presented a ghastly spectacle, as, reeling under the
 effects of the last tremendous blow which the knight of hombourg dealt,
 sir gottfried fell heavily from the saddle of his piebald charger; the
 frightened animal whisked his tail wildly with a shriek and a snort,
 plunged out his hind legs, trampling for one moment upon the feet of the
 prostrate gottfried, thereby causing him to shriek with agony, and then
 galloped away riderless.
 away! ay, away!—away amid the green vineyards and golden cornfields;
 away up the steep mountains, where he frightened the eagles in their
 eyries; away down the clattering ravines, where the flashing cataracts
 tumble; away through the dark pine-forests, where the hungry wolves are
 howling away over the dreary wolds, where the wild wind walks alone; away
 through the plashing quagmires, where the will-o'-the-wisp slunk
 frightened among the reeds; away through light and darkness, storm and
 sunshine; away by tower and town, high-road and hamlet. once a
 turnpike-man would have detained him; but, ha! ha! he charged the pike,
 and cleared it at a bound. once the cologne diligence stopped the way: he
 charged the diligence, he knocked off the cap of the conductor on the
 roof, and yet galloped wildly, madly, furiously, irresistibly on! brave
 horse! gallant steed! snorting child of araby! on went the horse, over
 mountains, rivers, turnpikes, apple-women; and never stopped until he
 reached a livery-stable in cologne where his master was accustomed to put
 him up.
 but we have forgotten, meanwhile, that prostrate individual. having
 examined the wounds in his side, legs, head, and throat, the old hermit (a
 skilful leech) knelt down by the side of the vanquished one and said, “sir
 knight, it is my painful duty to state to you that you are in an
 exceedingly dangerous condition, and will not probably survive.”
 “say you so, sir priest? then 'tis time i make my confession. hearken you,
 priest, and you, sir knight, whoever you be.”
 sir ludwig (who, much affected by the scene, had been tying his horse up
 to a tree), lifted his visor and said, “gottfried of godesberg! i am the
 friend of thy kinsman, margrave karl, whose happiness thou hast ruined; i
 am the friend of his chaste and virtuous lady, whose fair fame thou hast
 belied; i am the godfather of young count otto, whose heritage thou
 wouldst have appropriated. therefore i met thee in deadly fight, and
 overcame thee, and have wellnigh finished thee. speak on.”
 “i have done all this,” said the dying man, “and here, in my last hour,
 repent me. the lady theodora is a spotless lady; the youthful otto the
 true son of his father—sir hildebrandt is not his father, but his
 “gracious buffo!” “celestial bugo!” here said the hermit and the knight of
 hombourg simultaneously, clasping their hands.
 “yes, his uncle; but with the bar-sinister in his scutcheon. hence he
 could never be acknowledged by the family; hence, too, the lady theodora's
 spotless purity (though the young people had been brought up together)
 could never be brought to own the relationship.”
 “may i repeat your confession?” asked the hermit.
 “with the greatest pleasure in life: carry my confession to the margrave,
 and pray him give me pardon. were there—a notary-public present,”
 slowly gasped the knight, the film of dissolution glazing over his eyes,
 “i would ask—you—two—gentlemen to witness it. i would
 gladly—sign the deposition—that is, if i could
 wr-wr-wr-wr-ite!” a faint shuddering smile—a quiver, a gasp, a
 gurgle—the blood gushed from his mouth in black volumes . . . .
 “he will never sin more,” said the hermit, solemnly.
 “may heaven assoilzie him!” said sir ludwig. “hermit, he was a gallant
 knight. he died with harness on his back and with truth on his lips:
 ludwig of hombourg would ask no other death. . . . .”
 an hour afterwards the principal servants at the castle of godesberg were
 rather surprised to see the noble lord louis trot into the court-yard of
 the castle, with a companion on the crupper of his saddle. 'twas the
 venerable hermit of rolandseck, who, for the sake of greater celerity, had
 adopted this undignified conveyance, and whose appearance and little dumpy
 legs might well create hilarity among the “pampered menials” who are
 always found lounging about the houses of the great. he skipped off the
 saddle with considerable lightness however; and sir ludwig, taking the
 reverend man by the arm and frowning the jeering servitors into awe, bade
 one of them lead him to the presence of his highness the margrave.
 “what has chanced?” said the inquisitive servitor. “the riderless horse of
 sir gottfried was seen to gallop by the outer wall anon. the margrave's
 grace has never quitted your lordship's chamber, and sits as one
 distraught.”
 “hold thy prate, knave, and lead us on!” and so saying, the knight and his
 reverence moved into the well-known apartment, where, according to the
 servitor's description, the wretched margrave sat like a stone.
 ludwig took one of the kind broken-hearted man's hands, the hermit seized
 the other, and began (but on account of his great age, with a prolixity
 which we shall not endeavor to imitate) to narrate the events which we
 have already described. let the dear reader fancy, while his reverence
 speaks, the glazed eyes of the margrave gradually lighting up with
 attention; the flush of joy which mantles in his countenance—the
 start—the throb—the almost delirious outburst of hysteric
 exultation with which, when the whole truth was made known, he clasped the
 two messengers of glad tidings to his breast, with an energy that almost
 choked the aged recluse! “ride, ride this instant to the margravine—say
 i have wronged her, that it is all right, that she may come back—that
 i forgive her—that i apologize if you will”—and a secretary
 forthwith despatched a note to that effect, which was carried off by a
 fleet messenger.
 “now write to the superior of the monastery at cologne, and bid him send
 me back my boy, my darling, my otto—my otto of roses!” said the fond
 father, making the first play upon words he had ever attempted in his
 life. but what will not paternal love effect? the secretary (smiling at
 the joke) wrote another letter, and another fleet messenger was despatched
 on another horse.
 “and now,” said sir ludwig, playfully, “let us to lunch. holy hermit, are
 you for a snack?”
 the hermit could not say nay on an occasion so festive, and the three
 gentles seated themselves to a plenteous repast; for which the remains of
 the feast of yesterday offered, it need not be said, ample means.
 “they will be home by dinner-time,” said the exulting father. “ludwig!
 reverend hermit! we will carry on till then.” and the cup passed gayly
 round, and the laugh and jest circulated, while the three happy friends
 sat confidentially awaiting the return of the margravine and her son.
 but alas! said we not rightly at the commencement of a former chapter,
 that betwixt the lip and the raised wine-cup there is often many a spill?
 that our hopes are high, and often, too often, vain? about three hours
 after the departure of the first messenger, he returned, and with an
 exceedingly long face knelt down and presented to the margrave a billet to
 the following effect:—
 “convent of nonnenwerth, friday afternoon.
 “sir—i have submitted too long to your ill-usage, and am disposed to
 bear it no more. i will no longer be made the butt of your ribald satire,
 and the object of your coarse abuse. last week you threatened me with your
 cane! on tuesday last you threw a wine-decanter at me, which hit the
 butler, it is true, but the intention was evident. this morning, in the
 presence of all the servants, you called me by the most vile, abominable
 name, which heaven forbid i should repeat! you dismissed me from your
 house under a false accusation. you sent me to this odious convent to be
 immured for life. be it so! i will not come back, because, forsooth; you
 relent. anything is better than a residence with a wicked, coarse,
 violent, intoxicated, brutal monster like yourself. i remain here for ever
 and blush to be obliged to sign myself
 “p.s.—i hope you do not intend to keep all my best gowns, jewels,
 and wearing-apparel; and make no doubt you dismissed me from your house in
 order to make way for some vile hussy, whose eyes i would like to tear
 out. t. v. g.”
 this singular document, illustrative of the passions of women at all
 times, and particularly of the manners of the early ages, struck dismay
 into the heart of the margrave.
 “are her ladyship's insinuations correct?” asked the hermit, in a severe
 tone. “to correct a wife with a cane is a venial, i may say a justifiable
 practice; but to fling a bottle at her is ruin both to the liquor and to
 her.”
 “but she sent a carving-knife at me first,” said the heartbroken husband.
 “o jealousy, cursed jealousy, why, why did i ever listen to thy green and
 yellow tongue?”
 “they quarrelled; but they loved each other sincerely,” whispered sir
 ludwig to the hermit: who began to deliver forthwith a lecture upon family
 discord and marital authority, which would have sent his two hearers to
 sleep, but for the arrival of the second messenger, whom the margrave had
 despatched to cologne for his son. this herald wore a still longer face
 than that of his comrade who preceded him.
 “where is my darling?” roared the agonized parent. “have ye brought him
 with ye?”
 “n—no,” said the man, hesitating.
 “i will flog the knave soundly when he comes,” cried the father, vainly
 endeavoring, under an appearance of sternness, to hide his inward emotion
 and tenderness.
 “please, your highness,” said the messenger, making a desperate effort,
 “count otto is not at the convent.”
 “know ye, knave, where he is?”
 the swain solemnly said, “i do. he is there.” he pointed as he spake to
 the broad rhine, that was seen from the casement, lighted up by the
 magnificent hues of sunset.
 “there! how mean ye there?” gasped the margrave, wrought to a pitch of
 nervous fury.
 “alas! my good lord, when he was in the boat which was to conduct him to
 the convent, he—he jumped suddenly from it, and is dr—dr—owned.”
 “carry that knave out and hang him!” said the margrave, with a calmness
 more dreadful than any outburst of rage. “let every man of the boat's crew
 be blown from the mouth of the cannon on the tower—except the
 coxswain, and let him be—”
 what was to be done with the coxswain, no one knows; for at that moment,
 and overcome by his emotion, the margrave sank down lifeless on the floor.
 it must be clear to the dullest intellect (if amongst our readers we dare
 venture to presume that a dull intellect should be found) that the cause
 of the margrave's fainting-fit, described in the last chapter, was a
 groundless apprehension on the part of that too solicitous and credulous
 nobleman regarding the fate of his beloved child. no, young otto was not
 drowned. was ever hero of romantic story done to death so early in the
 tale? young otto was not drowned. had such been the case, the lord
 margrave would infallibly have died at the close of the last chapter; and
 a few gloomy sentences at its close would have denoted how the lovely lady
 theodora became insane in the convent, and how sir ludwig determined, upon
 the demise of the old hermit (consequent upon the shock of hearing the
 news), to retire to the vacant hermitage, and assume the robe, the beard,
 the mortifications of the late venerable and solitary ecclesiastic. otto
 was not drowned, and all those personages of our history are consequently
 alive and well.
 the boat containing the amazed young count—for he knew not the cause
 of his father's anger, and hence rebelled against the unjust sentence
 which the margrave had uttered—had not rowed many miles, when the
 gallant boy rallied from his temporary surprise and despondency, and
 determined not to be a slave in any convent of any order: determined to
 make a desperate effort for escape. at a moment when the men were pulling
 hard against the tide, and kuno, the coxswain, was looking carefully to
 steer the barge between some dangerous rocks and quicksands which are
 frequently met with in the majestic though dangerous river, otto gave a
 sudden spring from the boat, and with one single flounce was in the
 boiling, frothing, swirling eddy of the stream.
 fancy the agony of the crew at the disappearance of their young lord! all
 loved him; all would have given their lives for him; but as they did not
 know how to swim, of course they declined to make any useless plunges in
 search of him, and stood on their oars in mute wonder and grief. once, his
 fair head and golden ringlets were seen to arise from the water; twice,
 puffing and panting, it appeared for an instant again; thrice, it rose but
 for one single moment: it was the last chance, and it sunk, sunk, sunk.
 knowing the reception they would meet with from their liege lord, the men
 naturally did not go home to godesberg, but putting in at the first creek
 on the opposite bank, fled into the duke of nassau's territory; where, as
 they have little to do with our tale, we will leave them.
 but they little knew how expert a swimmer was young otto. he had
 disappeared, it is true; but why? because he had dived. he calculated that
 his conductors would consider him drowned, and the desire of liberty
 lending him wings, (or we had rather say fins, in this instance,) the
 gallant boy swam on beneath the water, never lifting his head for a single
 moment between godesberg and cologne—the distance being twenty-five
 or thirty miles.
 escaping from observation, he landed on the deutz side of the river,
 repaired to a comfortable and quiet hostel there, saying he had had an
 accident from a boat, and thus accounting for the moisture of his
 habiliments, and while these were drying before a fire in his chamber,
 went snugly to bed, where he mused, not without amaze, on the strange
 events of the day. “this morning,” thought he, “a noble, and heir to a
 princely estate—this evening an outcast, with but a few bank-notes
 which my mamma luckily gave me on my birthday. what a strange entry into
 life is this for a young man of my family! well, i have courage and
 resolution: my first attempt in life has been a gallant and successful
 one; other dangers will be conquered by similar bravery.” and recommending
 himself, his unhappy mother, and his mistaken father to the care of their
 patron saint, saint buffo, the gallant-hearted boy fell presently into
 such a sleep as only the young, the healthy, the innocent, and the
 extremely fatigued can enjoy.
 the fatigues of the day (and very few men but would be fatigued after
 swimming wellnigh thirty miles under water) caused young otto to sleep so
 profoundly, that he did not remark how, after friday's sunset, as a
 natural consequence, saturday's phoebus illumined the world, ay, and sunk
 at his appointed hour. the serving-maidens of the hostel, peeping in,
 marked him sleeping, and blessing him for a pretty youth, tripped lightly
 from the chamber; the boots tried haply twice or thrice to call him (as
 boots will fain), but the lovely boy, giving another snore, turned on his
 side, and was quite unconscious of the interruption. in a word, the youth
 slept for six-and-thirty hours at an elongation; and the sunday sun was
 shining and the bells of the hundred churches of cologne were clinking and
 tolling in pious festivity, and the burghers and burgheresses of the town
 were trooping to vespers and morning service when otto awoke.
 as he donned his clothes of the richest genoa velvet, the astonished boy
 could not at first account for his difficulty in putting them on. “marry,”
 said he, “these breeches that my blessed mother” (tears filled his fine
 eyes as he thought of her)—“that my blessed mother had made long on
 purpose, are now ten inches too short for me. whir-r-r! my coat cracks i'
 the back, as in vain i try to buckle it round me; and the sleeves reach no
 farther than my elbows! what is this mystery? am i grown fat and tall in a
 single night? ah! ah! ah! ah! i have it.”
 the young and good-humored childe laughed merrily. he bethought him of the
 reason of his mistake: his garments had shrunk from being five-and-twenty
 miles under water.
 but one remedy presented itself to his mind; and that we need not say was
 to purchase new ones. inquiring the way to the most genteel
 ready-made-clothes' establishment in the city of cologne, and finding it
 was kept in the minoriten strasse, by an ancestor of the celebrated moses
 of london, the noble childe hied him towards the emporium; but you may be
 sure did not neglect to perform his religious duties by the way. entering
 the cathedral, he made straight for the shrine of saint buffo, and hiding
 himself behind a pillar there (fearing he might be recognized by the
 archbishop, or any of his father's numerous friends in cologne), he
 proceeded with his devotions, as was the practice of the young nobles of
 the age.
 but though exceedingly intent upon the service, yet his eye could not
 refrain from wandering a little round about him, and he remarked with
 surprise that the whole church was filled with archers; and he remembered,
 too, that he had seen in the streets numerous other bands of men similarly
 attired in green. on asking at the cathedral porch the cause of this
 assemblage, one of the green ones said (in a jape), “marry, youngster, you
 must be green, not to know that we are all bound to the castle of his
 grace duke adolf of cleves, who gives an archery meeting once a year, and
 prizes for which we toxophilites muster strong.”
 otto, whose course hitherto had been undetermined, now immediately settled
 what to do. he straightway repaired to the ready-made emporium of herr
 moses, and bidding that gentleman furnish him with an archer's complete
 dress, moses speedily selected a suit from his vast stock, which fitted
 the youth to a t, and we need not say was sold at an exceedingly moderate
 price. so attired (and bidding herr moses a cordial farewell), young otto
 was a gorgeous, a noble, a soul-inspiring boy to gaze on. a coat and
 breeches of the most brilliant pea-green, ornamented with a profusion of
 brass buttons, and fitting him with exquisite tightness, showed off a
 figure unrivalled for slim symmetry. his feet were covered with peaked
 buskins of buff leather, and a belt round his slender waist, of the same
 material, held his knife, his tobacco-pipe and pouch, and his long shining
 dirk; which, though the adventurous youth had as yet only employed it to
 fashion wicket-bails, or to cut bread-and-cheese, he was now quite ready
 to use against the enemy. his personal attractions were enhanced by a neat
 white hat, flung carelessly and fearlessly on one side of his open smiling
 countenance; and his lovely hair, curling in ten thousand yellow ringlets,
 fell over his shoulder like golden epaulettes, and down his back as far as
 the waist-buttons of his coat. i warrant me, many a lovely colnerinn
 looked after the handsome childe with anxiety, and dreamed that night of
 cupid under the guise of “a bonny boy in green.”
 so accoutred, the youth's next thought was, that he must supply himself
 with a bow. this he speedily purchased at the most fashionable bowyer's,
 and of the best material and make. it was of ivory, trimmed with pink
 ribbon, and the cord of silk. an elegant quiver, beautifully painted and
 embroidered, was slung across his back, with a dozen of the finest arrows,
 tipped with steel of damascus, formed of the branches of the famous
 upas-tree of java, and feathered with the wings of the ortolan. these
 purchases being completed (together with that of a knapsack,
 dressing-case, change, &c.), our young adventurer asked where was the
 hostel at which the archers were wont to assemble? and being informed that
 it was at the sign of the “golden stag,” hied him to that house of
 entertainment, where, by calling for quantities of liquor and beer, he
 speedily made the acquaintance and acquired the good will of a company of
 his future comrades, who happened to be sitting in the coffee-room.
 after they had eaten and drunken for all, otto said, addressing them,
 “when go ye forth, gentles? i am a stranger here, bound as you to the
 archery meeting of duke adolf. an ye will admit a youth into your company
 'twill gladden me upon my lonely way?”
 the archers replied, “you seem so young and jolly, and you spend your gold
 so very like a gentleman, that we'll receive you in our band with
 pleasure. be ready, for we start at half-past two!” at that hour
 accordingly the whole joyous company prepared to move, and otto not a
 little increased his popularity among them by stepping out and having a
 conference with the landlord, which caused the latter to come into the
 room where the archers were assembled previous to departure, and to say,
 “gentlemen, the bill is settled!”—words never ungrateful to an
 archer yet: no, marry, nor to a man of any other calling that i wot of.
 they marched joyously for several leagues, singing and joking, and telling
 of a thousand feats of love and chase and war. while thus engaged, some
 one remarked to otto, that he was not dressed in the regular uniform,
 having no feathers in his hat.
 “i dare say i will find a feather,” said the lad, smiling.
 then another gibed because his bow was new.
 “see that you can use your old one as well, master wolfgang,” said the
 undisturbed youth. his answers, his bearing, his generosity, his beauty,
 and his wit, inspired all his new toxophilite friends with interest and
 curiosity, and they longed to see whether his skill with the bow
 corresponded with their secret sympathies for him.
 an occasion for manifesting this skill did not fail to present itself soon—as
 indeed it seldom does to such a hero of romance as young otto was. fate
 seems to watch over such: events occur to them just in the nick of time;
 they rescue virgins just as ogres are on the point of devouring them; they
 manage to be present at court and interesting ceremonies, and to see the
 most interesting people at the most interesting moment; directly an
 adventure is necessary for them, that adventure occurs: and i, for my
 part, have often wondered with delight (and never could penetrate the
 mystery of the subject) at the way in which that humblest of romance
 heroes, signor clown, when he wants anything in the pantomime, straightway
 finds it to his hand. how is it that,—suppose he wishes to dress
 himself up like a woman for instance, that minute a coalheaver walks in
 with a shovel-hat that answers for a bonnet; at the very next instant a
 butcher's lad passing with a string of sausages and a bundle of bladders
 unconsciously helps master clown to a necklace and a tournure, and so on
 through the whole toilet? depend upon it there is something we do not wot
 of in that mysterious overcoming of circumstances by great individuals:
 that apt and wondrous conjuncture of the hour and the man; and so, for my
 part, when i heard the above remark of one of the archers, that otto had
 never a feather in his bonnet, i felt sure that a heron would spring up in
 the next sentence to supply him with an aigrette.
 and such indeed was the fact: rising out of a morass by which the archers
 were passing, a gallant heron, arching his neck, swelling his crest,
 placing his legs behind him, and his beak and red eyes against the wind,
 rose slowly, and offered the fairest mark in the world.
 “shoot, otto,” said one of the archers. “you would not shoot just now at a
 crow because it was a foul bird, nor at a hawk because it was a noble
 bird; bring us down yon heron: it flies slowly.”
 but otto was busy that moment tying his shoestring, and rudolf, the third
 best of the archers, shot at the bird and missed it.
 “shoot, otto,” said wolfgang, a youth who had taken a liking to the young
 archer: “the bird is getting further and further.”
 but otto was busy that moment whittling a willow-twig he had just cut.
 max, the second best archer, shot and missed.
 “then,” said wolfgang, “i must try myself: a plague on you, young
 springald, you have lost a noble chance!”
 wolfgang prepared himself with all his care, and shot at the bird. “it is
 out of distance,” said he, “and a murrain on the bird!”
 otto, who by this time had done whittling his willow-stick (having carved
 a capital caricature of wolfgang upon it), flung the twig down and said
 carelessly, “out of distance! pshaw! we have two minutes yet,” and fell to
 asking riddles and cutting jokes; to the which none of the archers
 listened, as they were all engaged, their noses in air, watching the
 retreating bird.
 “where shall i hit him?” said otto.
 “go to,” said rudolf, “thou canst see no limb of him: he is no bigger than
 a flea.”
 “here goes for his right eye!” said otto; and stepping forward in the
 english manner (which his godfather having learnt in palestine, had taught
 him), he brought his bowstring to his ear, took a good aim, allowing for
 the wind and calculating the parabola to a nicety. whiz! his arrow went
 off.
 he took up the willow-twig again and began carving a head of rudolf at the
 other end, chatting and laughing, and singing a ballad the while.
 the archers, after standing a long time looking skywards with their noses
 in the air, at last brought them down from the perpendicular to the
 horizontal position, and said, “pooh, this lad is a humbug! the arrow's
 lost; let's go!”
 “heads!” cried otto, laughing. a speck was seen rapidly descending from
 the heavens; it grew to be as big as a crown-piece, then as a partridge,
 then as a tea-kettle, and flop! down fell a magnificent heron to the
 ground, flooring poor max in its fall.
 “take the arrow out of his eye, wolfgang,” said otto, without looking at
 the bird: “wipe it and put it back into my quiver.”
 the arrow indeed was there, having penetrated right through the pupil.
 “are you in league with der freischutz?” said rudolf, quite amazed.
 otto laughingly whistled the “huntsman's chorus,” and said, “no, my
 friend. it was a lucky shot: only a lucky shot. i was taught shooting,
 look you, in the fashion of merry england, where the archers are archers
 indeed.”
 and so he cut off the heron's wing for a plume for his hat; and the
 archers walked on, much amazed, and saying, “what a wonderful country that
 merry england must be!”
 far from feeling any envy at their comrade's success, the jolly archers
 recognized his superiority with pleasure; and wolfgang and rudolf
 especially held out their hands to the younker, and besought the honor of
 his friendship. they continued their walk all day, and when night fell
 made choice of a good hostel you may be sure, where over beer, punch,
 champagne, and every luxury, they drank to the health of the duke of
 cleves, and indeed each other's healths all round. next day they resumed
 their march, and continued it without interruption, except to take in a
 supply of victuals here and there (and it was found on these occasions
 that otto, young as he was, could eat four times as much as the oldest
 archer present, and drink to correspond); and these continued refreshments
 having given them more than ordinary strength, they determined on making
 rather a long march of it, and did not halt till after nightfall at the
 gates of the little town of windeck.
 what was to be done? the town-gates were shut. “is there no hostel, no
 castle where we can sleep?” asked otto of the sentinel at the gate. “i am
 so hungry that in lack of better food i think i could eat my grandmamma.”
 the sentinel laughed at this hyperbolical expression of hunger, and said,
 “you had best go sleep at the castle of windeck yonder;” adding with a
 peculiarly knowing look, “nobody will disturb you there.”
 at that moment the moon broke out from a cloud, and showed on a hill hard
 by a castle indeed—but the skeleton of a castle. the roof was gone,
 the windows were dismantled, the towers were tumbling, and the cold
 moonlight pierced it through and through. one end of the building was,
 however, still covered in, and stood looking still more frowning, vast,
 and gloomy, even than the other part of the edifice.
 “there is a lodging, certainly,” said otto to the sentinel, who pointed
 towards the castle with his bartizan; “but tell me, good fellow, what are
 we to do for a supper?”
 “oh, the castellan of windeck will entertain you,” said the man-at-arms
 with a grin, and marched up the embrasure; the while the archers, taking
 counsel among themselves, debated whether or not they should take up their
 quarters in the gloomy and deserted edifice.
 “we shall get nothing but an owl for supper there,” said young otto.
 “marry, lads, let us storm the town; we are thirty gallant fellows, and i
 have heard the garrison is not more than three hundred.” but the rest of
 the party thought such a way of getting supper was not a very cheap one,
 and, grovelling knaves, preferred rather to sleep ignobly and without
 victuals, than dare the assault with otto, and die, or conquer something
 comfortable.
 one and all then made their way towards the castle. they entered its vast
 and silent halls, frightening the owls and bats that fled before them with
 hideous hootings and flappings of wings, and passing by a multiplicity of
 mouldy stairs, dank reeking roofs, and rickety corridors, at last came to
 an apartment which, dismal and dismantled as it was, appeared to be in
 rather better condition than the neighboring chambers, and they therefore
 selected it as their place of rest for the night. they then tossed up
 which should mount guard. the first two hours of watch fell to otto, who
 was to be succeeded by his young though humble friend wolfgang; and,
 accordingly, the childe of godesberg, drawing his dirk, began to pace upon
 his weary round; while his comrades, by various gradations of snoring,
 told how profoundly they slept, spite of their lack of supper.
 'tis needless to say what were the thoughts of the noble childe as he
 performed his two hours' watch; what gushing memories poured into his full
 soul; what “sweet and bitter” recollections of home inspired his throbbing
 heart; and what manly aspirations after fame buoyed him up. “youth is ever
 confident,” says the bard. happy, happy season! the moonlit hours passed
 by on silver wings, the twinkling stars looked friendly down upon him.
 confiding in their youthful sentinel, sound slept the valorous
 toxophilites, as up and down, and there and back again, marched on the
 noble childe. at length his repeater told him, much to his satisfaction,
 that it was half-past eleven, the hour when his watch was to cease; and
 so, giving a playful kick to the slumbering wolfgang, that good-humored
 fellow sprung up from his lair, and, drawing his sword, proceeded to
 relieve otto.
 the latter laid him down for warmth's sake on the very spot which his
 comrade had left, and for some time could not sleep. realities and visions
 then began to mingle in his mind, till he scarce knew which was which. he
 dozed for a minute; then he woke with a start; then he went off again;
 then woke up again. in one of these half-sleeping moments he thought he
 saw a figure, as of a woman in white, gliding into the room, and beckoning
 wolfgang from it. he looked again. wolfgang was gone. at that moment
 twelve o'clock clanged from the town, and otto started up.
 as the bell with iron tongue called midnight, wolfgang the archer, pacing
 on his watch, beheld before him a pale female figure. he did not know
 whence she came: but there suddenly she stood close to him. her blue,
 clear, glassy eyes were fixed upon him. her form was of faultless beauty;
 her face pale as the marble of the fairy statue, ere yet the sculptor's
 love had given it life. a smile played upon her features, but it was no
 warmer than the reflection of a moonbeam on a lake; and yet it was
 wondrous beautiful. a fascination stole over the senses of young wolfgang.
 he stared at the lovely apparition with fixed eyes and distended jaws. she
 looked at him with ineffable archness. she lifted one beautifully rounded
 alabaster arm, and made a sign as if to beckon him towards her. did
 wolfgang—the young and lusty wolfgang—follow? ask the iron
 whether it follows the magnet?—ask the pointer whether it pursues
 the partridge through the stubble?—ask the youth whether the
 lollipop-shop does not attract him? wolfgang did follow. an antique door
 opened, as if by magic. there was no light, and yet they saw quite plain;
 they passed through the innumerable ancient chambers, and yet they did not
 wake any of the owls and bats roosting there. we know not through how many
 apartments the young couple passed; but at last they came to one where a
 feast was prepared: and on an antique table, covered with massive silver,
 covers were laid for two. the lady took her place at one end of the table,
 and with her sweetest nod beckoned wolfgang to the other seat. he took it.
 the table was small, and their knees met. he felt as cold in his legs as
 if he were kneeling against an ice-well.
 “gallant archer,” said she, “you must be hungry after your day's march.
 what supper will you have? shall it be a delicate lobster-salad? or a dish
 of elegant tripe and onions? or a slice of boar's-head and truffles? or a
 welsh rabbit a la cave au cidre? or a beefsteak and shallot? or a couple
 of rognons a la brochette? speak, brave bowyer: you have but to order.”
 as there was nothing on the table but a covered silver dish, wolfgang
 thought that the lady who proposed such a multiplicity of delicacies to
 him was only laughing at him; so he determined to try her with something
 extremely rare.
 “fair princess,” he said, “i should like very much a pork-chop and some
 mashed potatoes.”
 she lifted the cover: there was such a pork-chop as simpson never served,
 with a dish of mashed potatoes that would have formed at least six
 portions in our degenerate days in rupert street.
 when he had helped himself to these delicacies, the lady put the cover on
 the dish again, and watched him eating with interest. he was for some time
 too much occupied with his own food to remark that his companion did not
 eat a morsel; but big as it was, his chop was soon gone; the shining
 silver of his plate was scraped quite clean with his knife, and, heaving a
 great sigh, he confessed a humble desire for something to drink.
 “call for what you like, sweet sir,” said the lady, lifting up a silver
 filigree bottle, with an india-rubber cork, ornamented with gold.
 “then,” said master wolfgang—for the fellow's tastes were, in sooth,
 very humble—“i call for half-and-half.” according to his wish, a
 pint of that delicious beverage was poured from the bottle, foaming, into
 his beaker.
 having emptied this at a draught, and declared that on his conscience it
 was the best tap he ever knew in his life, the young man felt his appetite
 renewed; and it is impossible to say how many different dishes he called
 for. only enchantment, he was afterwards heard to declare (though none of
 his friends believed him), could have given him the appetite he possessed
 on that extraordinary night. he called for another pork-chop and potatoes,
 then for pickled salmon; then he thought he would try a devilled
 turkey-wing. “i adore the devil,” said he.
 “so do i,” said the pale lady, with unwonted animation; and the dish was
 served straightway. it was succeeded by black-puddings, tripe, toasted
 cheese, and—what was most remarkable—every one of the dishes
 which he desired came from under the same silver cover: which
 circumstance, when he had partaken of about fourteen different articles,
 he began to find rather mysterious.
 “oh,” said the pale lady, with a smile, “the mystery is easily accounted
 for: the servants hear you, and the kitchen is below.” but this did not
 account for the manner in which more half-and-half, bitter ale, punch
 (both gin and rum), and even oil and vinegar, which he took with cucumber
 to his salmon, came out of the self-same bottle from which the lady had
 first poured out his pint of half-and-half.
 “there are more things in heaven and earth, voracio,” said his arch
 entertainer, when he put this question to her, “than are dreamt of in your
 philosophy:” and, sooth to say, the archer was by this time in such a
 state, that he did not find anything wonderful more.
 “are you happy, dear youth?” said the lady, as, after his collation, he
 sank back in his chair.
 “oh, miss, ain't i?” was his interrogative and yet affirmative reply.
 “should you like such a supper every night, wolfgang?” continued the pale
 one.
 “why, no,” said he; “no, not exactly; not every night: some nights i
 should like oysters.”
 “dear youth,” said she, “be but mine, and you may have them all the year
 round!” the unhappy boy was too far gone to suspect anything, otherwise
 this extraordinary speech would have told him that he was in suspicious
 company. a person who can offer oysters all the year round can live to no
 good purpose.
 “shall i sing you a song, dear archer?” said the lady.
 “sweet love!” said he, now much excited, “strike up, and i will join the
 chorus.”
 she took down her mandolin, and commenced a ditty. 'twas a sweet and wild
 one. it told how a lady of high lineage cast her eyes on a peasant page;
 it told how nought could her love assuage, her suitor's wealth and her
 father's rage: it told how the youth did his foes engage; and at length
 they went off in the gretna stage, the high-born dame and the peasant
 page. wolfgang beat time, waggled his head, sung wofully out of tune as
 the song proceeded; and if he had not been too intoxicated with love and
 other excitement, he would have remarked how the pictures on the wall, as
 the lady sung, began to waggle their heads too, and nod and grin to the
 music. the song ended. “i am the lady of high lineage: archer, will you be
 the peasant page?”
 “i'll follow you to the devil!” said wolfgang.
 “come,” replied the lady, glaring wildly on him, “come to the chapel;
 we'll be married this minute!”
 she held out her hand—wolfgang took it. it was cold, damp,—deadly
 cold; and on they went to the chapel.
 as they passed out, the two pictures over the wall, of a gentleman and
 lady, tripped lightly out of their frames, skipped noiselessly down to the
 ground, and making the retreating couple a profound curtsy and bow, took
 the places which they had left at the table.
 meanwhile the young couple passed on towards the chapel, threading
 innumerable passages, and passing through chambers of great extent. as
 they came along, all the portraits on the wall stepped out of their frames
 to follow them. one ancestor, of whom there was only a bust, frowned in
 the greatest rage, because, having no legs, his pedestal would not move;
 and several sticking-plaster profiles of the former lords of windeck
 looked quite black at being, for similar reasons, compelled to keep their
 places. however, there was a goodly procession formed behind wolfgang and
 his bride; and by the time they reached the church, they had near a
 hundred followers.
 the church was splendidly illuminated; the old banners of the old knights
 glittered as they do at drury lane. the organ set up of itself to play the
 “bridesmaid's chorus.” the choir-chairs were filled with people in black.
 “come, love,” said the pale lady.
 “i don't see the parson,” exclaimed wolfgang, spite of himself rather
 alarmed.
 “oh, the parson! that's the easiest thing in the world! i say, bishop!”
 said the lady, stooping down.
 stooping down—and to what? why, upon my word and honor, to a great
 brass plate on the floor, over which they were passing, and on which was
 engraven the figure of a bishop—and a very ugly bishop, too—with
 crosier and mitre, and lifted finger, on which sparkled the episcopal
 ring. “do, my dear lord, come and marry us,” said the lady, with a levity
 which shocked the feelings of her bridegroom.
 the bishop got up; and directly he rose, a dean, who was sleeping under a
 large slate near him, came bowing and cringing up to him; while a canon of
 the cathedral (whose name was schidnischmidt) began grinning and making
 fun at the pair. the ceremony was begun, and . . . .
 as the clock struck twelve, young otto bounded up, and remarked the
 absence of his companion wolfgang. the idea he had had, that his friend
 disappeared in company with a white-robed female, struck him more and
 more. “i will follow them,” said he; and, calling to the next on the watch
 (old snozo, who was right unwilling to forego his sleep), he rushed away
 by the door through which he had seen wolfgang and his temptress take
 their way.
 that he did not find them was not his fault. the castle was vast, the
 chamber dark. there were a thousand doors, and what wonder that, after he
 had once lost sight of them, the intrepid childe should not be able to
 follow in their steps? as might be expected, he took the wrong door, and
 wandered for at least three hours about the dark enormous solitary castle,
 calling out wolfgang's name to the careless and indifferent echoes,
 knocking his young shins against the ruins scattered in the darkness, but
 still with a spirit entirely undaunted, and a firm resolution to aid his
 absent comrade. brave otto! thy exertions were rewarded at last!
 for he lighted at length upon the very apartment where wolfgang had
 partaken of supper, and where the old couple who had been in the
 picture-frames, and turned out to be the lady's father and mother, were
 now sitting at the table.
 “well, bertha has got a husband at last,” said the lady.
 “after waiting four hundred and fifty-three years for one, it was quite
 time,” said the gentleman. (he was dressed in powder and a pigtail, quite
 in the old fashion.)
 “the husband is no great things,” continued the lady, taking snuff. “a low
 fellow, my dear; a butcher's son, i believe. did you see how the wretch
 ate at supper? to think my daughter should have to marry an archer!”
 “there are archers and archers,” said the old man. “some archers are
 snobs, as your ladyship states; some, on the contrary, are gentlemen by
 birth, at least, though not by breeding. witness young otto, the landgrave
 of godesberg's son, who is listening at the door like a lackey, and whom i
 intend to run through the—”
 “law, baron!” said the lady.
 “i will, though,” replied the baron, drawing an immense sword, and glaring
 round at otto: but though at the sight of that sword and that scowl a less
 valorous youth would have taken to his heels, the undaunted childe
 advanced at once into the apartment. he wore round his neck a relic of st.
 buffo (the tip of the saint's ear, which had been cut off at
 constantinople). “fiends! i command you to retreat!” said he, holding up
 this sacred charm, which his mamma had fastened on him; and at the sight
 of it, with an unearthly yell the ghosts of the baron and the baroness
 sprung back into their picture-frames, as clowns go through a clock in a
 pantomime.
 he rushed through the open door by which the unlucky wolfgang had passed
 with his demoniacal bride, and went on and on through the vast gloomy
 chambers lighted by the ghastly moonshine: the noise of the organ in the
 chapel, the lights in the kaleidoscopic windows, directed him towards that
 edifice. he rushed to the door: 'twas barred! he knocked: the beadles were
 deaf. he applied his inestimable relic to the lock, and—whiz! crash!
 clang! bang! whang!—the gate flew open! the organ went off in a
 fugue—the lights quivered over the tapers, and then went off towards
 the ceiling—the ghosts assembled rushed away with a skurry and a
 scream—the bride howled, and vanished—the fat bishop waddled
 back under his brass plate—the dean flounced down into his family
 vault—and the canon schidnischmidt, who was making a joke, as usual,
 on the bishop, was obliged to stop at the very point of his epigram, and
 to disappear into the void whence he came.
 otto fell fainting at the porch, while wolfgang tumbled lifeless down at
 the altar-steps; and in this situation the archers, when they arrived,
 found the two youths. they were resuscitated, as we scarce need say; but
 when, in incoherent accents, they came to tell their wondrous tale, some
 sceptics among the archers said—“pooh! they were intoxicated!” while
 others, nodding their older heads, exclaimed—“they have seen the
 lady of windeck!” and recalled the stories of many other young men, who,
 inveigled by her devilish arts, had not been so lucky as wolfgang, and had
 disappeared—for ever!
 this adventure bound wolfgang heart and soul to his gallant preserver; and
 the archers—it being now morning, and the cocks crowing lustily
 round about—pursued their way without further delay to the castle of
 the noble patron of toxophilites, the gallant duke of cleves.
 although there lay an immense number of castles and abbeys between windeck
 and cleves, for every one of which the guide-books have a legend and a
 ghost, who might, with the commonest stretch of ingenuity, be made to
 waylay our adventurers on the road; yet, as the journey would be thus
 almost interminable, let us cut it short by saying that the travellers
 reached cleves without any further accident, and found the place thronged
 with visitors for the meeting next day.
 and here it would be easy to describe the company which arrived, and make
 display of antiquarian lore. now we would represent a cavalcade of knights
 arriving, with their pages carrying their shining helms of gold, and the
 stout esquires, bearers of lance and banner. anon would arrive a fat abbot
 on his ambling pad, surrounded by the white-robed companions of his
 convent. here should come the gleemen and jonglers, the minstrels, the
 mountebanks, the party-colored gipsies, the dark-eyed, nut-brown
 zigeunerinnen; then a troop of peasants chanting rhine-songs, and leading
 in their ox-drawn carts the peach-cheeked girls from the vine-lands. next
 we would depict the litters blazoned with armorial bearings, from between
 the broidered curtains of which peeped out the swan-like necks and the
 haughty faces of the blond ladies of the castles. but for these
 descriptions we have not space; and the reader is referred to the account
 of the tournament in the ingenious novel of “ivanhoe,” where the above
 phenomena are described at length. suffice it to say, that otto and his
 companions arrived at the town of cleves, and, hastening to a hostel,
 reposed themselves after the day's march, and prepared them for the
 encounter of the morrow.
 that morrow came: and as the sports were to begin early, otto and his
 comrades hastened to the field, armed with their best bows and arrows, you
 may be sure, and eager to distinguish themselves; as were the multitude of
 other archers assembled. they were from all neighboring countries—crowds
 of english, as you may fancy, armed with murray's guide-books, troops of
 chattering frenchmen, frankfort jews with roulette-tables, and tyrolese,
 with gloves and trinkets—all hied towards the field where the butts
 were set up, and the archery practice was to be held. the childe and his
 brother archers were, it need not be said, early on the ground.
 but what words of mine can describe the young gentleman's emotion when,
 preceded by a band of trumpets, bagpipes, ophicleides, and other wind
 instruments, the prince of cleves appeared with the princess helen, his
 daughter? and ah! what expressions of my humble pen can do justice to the
 beauty of that young lady? fancy every charm which decorates the person,
 every virtue which ornaments the mind, every accomplishment which renders
 charming mind and charming person doubly charming, and then you will have
 but a faint and feeble idea of the beauties of her highness the princess
 helen. fancy a complexion such as they say (i know not with what justice)
 rowland's kalydor imparts to the users of that cosmetic; fancy teeth to
 which orient pearls are like wallsend coals; eyes, which were so blue,
 tender, and bright, that while they run you through with their lustre,
 they healed you with their kindness; a neck and waist, so ravishingly
 slender and graceful, that the least that is said about them the better; a
 foot which fell upon the flowers no heavier than a dew-drop—and this
 charming person set off by the most elegant toilet that ever milliner
 devised! the lovely helen's hair (which was as black as the finest varnish
 for boots) was so long, that it was borne on a cushion several yards
 behind her by the maidens of her train; and a hat, set off with
 moss-roses, sunflowers, bugles, birds-of-paradise, gold lace, and pink
 ribbon, gave her a distingue air, which would have set the editor of the
 morning post mad with love.
 it had exactly the same effect upon the noble childe of godesberg, as
 leaning on his ivory bow, with his legs crossed, he stood and gazed on
 her, as cupid gazed on psyche. their eyes met: it was all over with both
 of them. a blush came at one and the same minute budding to the cheek of
 either. a simultaneous throb beat in those young hearts! they loved each
 other for ever from that instant. otto still stood, cross-legged,
 enraptured, leaning on his ivory bow; but helen, calling to a maiden for
 her pocket-handkerchief, blew her beautiful grecian nose in order to hide
 her agitation. bless ye, bless ye, pretty ones! i am old now; but not so
 old but that i kindle at the tale of love. theresa macwhirter too has
 lived and loved. heigho!
 who is yon chief that stands behind the truck whereon are seated the
 princess and the stout old lord, her father? who is he whose hair is of
 the carroty hue? whose eyes, across a snubby bunch of a nose, are
 perpetually scowling at each other; who has a hump-back and a hideous
 mouth, surrounded with bristles, and crammed full of jutting yellow odious
 teeth. although he wears a sky-blue doublet laced with silver, it only
 serves to render his vulgar punchy figure doubly ridiculous; although his
 nether garment is of salmon-colored velvet, it only draws the more
 attention to his legs, which are disgustingly crooked and bandy. a
 rose-colored hat, with towering pea-green ostrich-plumes, looks absurd on
 his bull-head; and though it is time of peace, the wretch is armed with a
 multiplicity of daggers, knives, yataghans, dirks, sabres, and scimitars,
 which testify his truculent and bloody disposition. 'tis the terrible
 rowski de donnerblitz, margrave of eulenschreckenstein. report says he is
 a suitor for the hand of the lovely helen. he addresses various speeches
 of gallantry to her, and grins hideously as he thrusts his disgusting head
 over her lily shoulder. but she turns away from him! turns and shudders—ay,
 as she would at a black dose!
 otto stands gazing still, and leaning on his bow. “what is the prize?”
 asks one archer of another. there are two prizes—a velvet cap,
 embroidered by the hand of the princess, and a chain of massive gold, of
 enormous value. both lie on cushions before her.
 “i know which i shall choose, when i win the first prize,” says a swarthy,
 savage, and bandy-legged archer, who bears the owl gules on a black
 shield, the cognizance of the lord rowski de donnerblitz.
 “which, fellow?” says otto, turning fiercely upon him.
 “the chain, to be sure!” says the leering archer. “you do not suppose i am
 such a flat as to choose that velvet gimcrack there?” otto laughed in
 scorn, and began to prepare his bow. the trumpets sounding proclaimed that
 the sports were about to commence.
 is it necessary to describe them? no: that has already been done in the
 novel of “ivanhoe” before mentioned. fancy the archers clad in lincoln
 green, all coming forward in turn, and firing at the targets. some hit,
 some missed; those that missed were fain to retire amidst the jeers of the
 multitudinous spectators. those that hit began new trials of skill; but it
 was easy to see, from the first, that the battle lay between squintoff
 (the rowski archer) and the young hero with the golden hair and the ivory
 bow. squintoff's fame as a marksman was known throughout europe; but who
 was his young competitor? ah? there was one heart in the assembly that
 beat most anxiously to know. 'twas helen's.
 the crowning trial arrived. the bull's eye of the target, set up at
 three-quarters of a mile distance from the archers, was so small, that it
 required a very clever man indeed to see, much more to hit it; and as
 squintoff was selecting his arrow for the final trial, the rowski flung a
 purse of gold towards his archer, saying—“squintoff, an ye win the
 prize, the purse is thine.” “i may as well pocket it at once, your honor,”
 said the bowman with a sneer at otto. “this young chick, who has been
 lucky as yet, will hardly hit such a mark as that.” and, taking his aim,
 squintoff discharged his arrow right into the very middle of the
 bull's-eye.
 “can you mend that, young springald?” said he, as a shout rent the air at
 his success, as helen turned pale to think that the champion of her secret
 heart was likely to be overcome, and as squintoff, pocketing the rowski's
 money, turned to the noble boy of godesberg.
 “has anybody got a pea?” asked the lad. everybody laughed at his droll
 request; and an old woman, who was selling porridge in the crowd, handed
 him the vegetable which he demanded. it was a dry and yellow pea. otto,
 stepping up to the target, caused squintoff to extract his arrow from the
 bull's-eye, and placed in the orifice made by the steel point of the
 shaft, the pea which he had received from the old woman. he then came back
 to his place. as he prepared to shoot, helen was so overcome by emotion,
 that 'twas thought she would have fainted. never, never had she seen a
 being so beautiful as the young hero now before her.
 he looked almost divine. he flung back his long clusters of hair from his
 bright eyes and tall forehead; the blush of health mantled on his cheek,
 from which the barber's weapon had never shorn the down. he took his bow,
 and one of his most elegant arrows, and poising himself lightly on his
 right leg, he flung himself forward, raising his left leg on a level with
 his ear. he looked like apollo, as he stood balancing himself there. he
 discharged his dart from the thrumming bowstring: it clove the blue air—whiz!
 “he has split the pea!” said the princess, and fainted. the rowski, with
 one eye, hurled an indignant look at the boy, while with the other he
 levelled (if aught so crooked can be said to level anything) a furious
 glance at his archer.
 the archer swore a sulky oath. “he is the better man!” said he. “i
 suppose, young chap, you take the gold chain?”
 “the gold chain?” said otto. “prefer a gold chain to a cap worked by that
 august hand? never!” and advancing to the balcony where the princess, who
 now came to herself, was sitting, he kneeled down before her, and received
 the velvet cap; which, blushing as scarlet as the cap itself, the princess
 helen placed on his golden ringlets. once more their eyes met—their
 hearts thrilled. they had never spoken, but they knew they loved each
 other for ever.
 “wilt thou take service with the rowski of donnerblitz?” said that
 individual to the youth. “thou shalt be captain of my archers in place of
 yon blundering nincompoop, whom thou hast overcome.”
 “yon blundering nincompoop is a skilful and gallant archer,” replied otto,
 haughtily; “and i will not take service with the rowski of donnerblitz.”
 “wilt thou enter the household of the prince of cleves?” said the father
 of helen, laughing, and not a little amused at the haughtiness of the
 humble archer.
 “i would die for the duke of cleves and his family,” said otto, bowing
 low. he laid a particular and a tender emphasis on the word family. helen
 knew what he meant. she was the family. in fact her mother was no more,
 and her papa had no other offspring.
 “what is thy name, good fellow,” said the prince, “that my steward may
 enroll thee?”
 “sir,” said otto, again blushing, “i am otto the archer.”
 the archers who had travelled in company with young otto gave a handsome
 dinner in compliment to the success of our hero; at which his friend
 distinguished himself as usual in the eating and drinking department.
 squintoff, the rowski bowman, declined to attend; so great was the envy of
 the brute at the youthful hero's superiority. as for otto himself, he sat
 on the right hand of the chairman; but it was remarked that he could not
 eat. gentle reader of my page! thou knowest why full well. he was too much
 in love to have any appetite; for though i myself when laboring under that
 passion, never found my consumption of victuals diminish, yet remember our
 otto was a hero of romance, and they never are hungry when they're in
 love.
 the next day, the young gentleman proceeded to enroll himself in the corps
 of archers of the prince of cleves, and with him came his attached squire,
 who vowed he never would leave him. as otto threw aside his own elegant
 dress, and donned the livery of the house of cleves, the noble childe
 sighed not a little. 'twas a splendid uniform 'tis true, but still it was
 a livery, and one of his proud spirit ill bears another's cognizances.
 “they are the colors of the princess, however,” said he, consoling
 himself; “and what suffering would i not undergo for her?” as for
 wolfgang, the squire, it may well be supposed that the good-natured,
 low-born fellow had no such scruples; but he was glad enough to exchange
 for the pink hose, the yellow jacket, the pea-green cloak, and
 orange-tawny hat, with which the duke's steward supplied him, the homely
 patched doublet of green which he had worn for years past.
 “look at you two archers,” said the prince of cleves to his guest, the
 rowski of donnerblitz, as they were strolling on the battlements after
 dinner, smoking their cigars as usual. his highness pointed to our two
 young friends, who were mounting guard for the first time. “see yon two
 bowmen—mark their bearing! one is the youth who beat thy squintoff,
 and t'other, an i mistake not, won the third prize at the butts. both wear
 the same uniform—the colors of my house—yet wouldst not swear
 that the one was but a churl, and the other a noble gentleman?”
 “which looks like the nobleman?” said the rowski, as black as thunder.
 “which? why, young otto, to be sure,” said the princess helen, eagerly.
 the young lady was following the pair; but under pretence of disliking the
 odor of the cigar, she had refused the rowski's proffered arm, and was
 loitering behind with her parasol.
 her interposition in favor of her young protege only made the black and
 jealous rowski more ill-humored. “how long is it, sir prince of cleves,”
 said he, “that the churls who wear your livery permit themselves to wear
 the ornaments of noble knights? who but a noble dare wear ringlets such as
 yon springald's? ho, archer!” roared he, “come, hither, fellow.” and otto
 stood before him. as he came, and presenting arms stood respectfully
 before the prince and his savage guest, he looked for one moment at the
 lovely helen—their eyes met, their hearts beat simultaneously: and,
 quick, two little blushes appeared in the cheek of either. i have seen one
 ship at sea answering another's signal so.
 while they are so regarding each other, let us just remind our readers of
 the great estimation in which the hair was held in the north. only nobles
 were permitted to wear it long. when a man disgraced himself, a shaving
 was sure to follow. penalties were inflicted upon villains or vassals who
 sported ringlets. see the works of aurelius tonsor; hirsutus de nobilitate
 capillari; rolandus de oleo macassari; schnurrbart; fresirische
 alterthumskunde, &c.
 “we must have those ringlets of thine cut, good fellow,” said the duke of
 cleves good-naturedly, but wishing to spare the feelings of his gallant
 recruit. “'tis against the regulation cut of my archer guard.”
 “cut off my hair!” cried otto, agonized.
 “ay, and thine ears with it, yokel,” roared donnerblitz.
 “peace, noble eulenschreckenstein,” said the duke with dignity: “let the
 duke of cleves deal as he will with his own men-at-arms. and you, young
 sir, unloose the grip of thy dagger.”
 otto, indeed, had convulsively grasped his snickersnee, with intent to
 plunge it into the heart of the rowski; but his politer feelings overcame
 him. “the count need not fear, my lord,” said he: “a lady is present.” and
 he took off his orange-tawny cap and bowed low. ah! what a pang shot
 through the heart of helen, as she thought that those lovely ringlets must
 be shorn from that beautiful head!
 otto's mind was, too, in commotion. his feelings as a gentleman—let
 us add, his pride as a man—for who is not, let us ask, proud of a
 good head of hair?—waged war within his soul. he expostulated with
 the prince. “it was never in my contemplation,” he said, “on taking
 service, to undergo the operation of hair-cutting.”
 “thou art free to go or stay, sir archer,” said the prince pettishly. “i
 will have no churls imitating noblemen in my service: i will bandy no
 conditions with archers of my guard.”
 “my resolve is taken,” said otto, irritated too in his turn. “i will . . .
 “what?” cried helen, breathless with intense agitation.
 “i will stay,” answered otto. the poor girl almost fainted with joy. the
 rowski frowned with demoniac fury, and grinding his teeth and cursing in
 the horrible german jargon, stalked away. “so be it,” said the prince of
 cleves, taking his daughter's arm—“and here comes snipwitz, my
 barber, who shall do the business for you.” with this the prince too moved
 on, feeling in his heart not a little compassion for the lad; for adolf of
 cleves had been handsome in his youth, and distinguished for the ornament
 of which he was now depriving his archer.
 snipwitz led the poor lad into a side-room, and there—in a word—operated
 upon him. the golden curls—fair curls that his mother had so often
 played with!—fell under the shears and round the lad's knees, until
 he looked as if he was sitting in a bath of sunbeams.
 when the frightful act had been performed, otto, who entered the little
 chamber in the tower ringleted like apollo, issued from it as cropped as a
 charity-boy.
 see how melancholy he looks, now that the operation is over!—and no
 wonder. he was thinking what would be helen's opinion of him, now that one
 of his chief personal ornaments was gone. “will she know me?” thought he;
 “will she love me after this hideous mutilation?”
 yielding to these gloomy thoughts, and, indeed, rather unwilling to be
 seen by his comrades, now that he was so disfigured, the young gentleman
 had hidden himself behind one of the buttresses of the wall, a prey to
 natural despondency; when he saw something which instantly restored him to
 good spirits. he saw the lovely helen coming towards the chamber where the
 odious barber had performed upon him,—coming forward timidly,
 looking round her anxiously, blushing with delightful agitation,—and
 presently seeing, as she thought, the coast clear, she entered the
 apartment. she stooped down, and ah! what was otto's joy when he saw her
 pick up a beautiful golden lock of his hair, press it to her lips, and
 then hide it in her bosom! no carnation ever blushed so redly as helen did
 when she came out after performing this feat. then she hurried straightway
 to her own apartments in the castle, and otto, whose first impulse was to
 come out from his hiding-place, and, falling at her feet, call heaven and
 earth to witness to his passion, with difficulty restrained his feelings
 and let her pass: but the love-stricken young hero was so delighted with
 this evident proof of reciprocated attachment, that all regret at losing
 his ringlets at once left him, and he vowed he would sacrifice not only
 his hair, but his head, if need were, to do her service.
 that very afternoon, no small bustle and conversation took place in the
 castle, on account of the sudden departure of the rowski of
 eulenschreckenstein, with all his train and equipage. he went away in the
 greatest wrath, it was said, after a long and loud conversation with the
 prince. as that potentate conducted his guest to the gate, walking rather
 demurely and shamefacedly by his side, as he gathered his attendants in
 the court, and there mounted his charger, the rowski ordered his trumpets
 to sound, and scornfully flung a largesse of gold among the servitors and
 men-at-arms of the house of cleves, who were marshalled in the court.
 “farewell, sir prince,” said he to his host: “i quit you now suddenly; but
 remember, it is not my last visit to the castle of cleves.” and ordering
 his band to play “see the conquering hero comes,” he clattered away
 through the drawbridge. the princess helen was not present at his
 departure; and the venerable prince of cleves looked rather moody and
 chap-fallen when his guest left him. he visited all the castle defences
 pretty accurately that night, and inquired of his officers the state of
 the ammunition, provisions, &c. he said nothing; but the princess
 helen's maid did: and everybody knew that the rowski had made his
 proposals, had been rejected, and, getting up in a violent fury, had
 called for his people, and sworn by his great gods that he would not enter
 the castle again until he rode over the breach, lance in hand, the
 conqueror of cleves and all belonging to it.
 no little consternation was spread through the garrison at the news: for
 everybody knew the rowski to be one of the most intrepid and powerful
 soldiers in all germany,—one of the most skilful generals. generous
 to extravagance to his own followers, he was ruthless to the enemy: a
 hundred stories were told of the dreadful barbarities exercised by him in
 several towns and castles which he had captured and sacked. and poor helen
 had the pain of thinking, that in consequence of her refusal she was
 dooming all the men, women, and children of the principality to
 indiscriminate and horrible slaughter.
 the dreadful surmises regarding a war received in a few days dreadful
 confirmation. it was noon, and the worthy prince of cleves was taking his
 dinner (though the honest warrior had had little appetite for that meal
 for some time past), when trumpets were heard at the gate; and presently
 the herald of the rowski of donnerblitz, clad in a tabard on which the
 arms of the count were blazoned, entered the dining-hall. a page bore a
 steel gauntlet on a cushion; bleu sanglier had his hat on his head. the
 prince of cleves put on his own, as the herald came up to the chair of
 state where the sovereign sat.
 “silence for bleu sanglier,” cried the prince, gravely. “say your say, sir
 herald.”
 “in the name of the high and mighty rowski, prince of donnerblitz,
 margrave of eulenschreckenstein, count of krotenwald, schnauzestadt, and
 galgenhugel, hereditary grand corkscrew of the holy roman empire—to
 you, adolf the twenty-third, prince of cleves, i, bleu sanglier, bring war
 and defiance. alone, and lance to lance, or twenty to twenty in field or
 in fort, on plain or on mountain, the noble rowski defies you. here, or
 wherever he shall meet you, he proclaims war to the death between you and
 him. in token whereof, here is his glove.” and taking the steel glove from
 the page, bleu boar flung it clanging on the marble floor.
 the princess helen turned deadly pale: but the prince, with a good
 assurance, flung down his own glove, calling upon some one to raise the
 rowski's; which otto accordingly took up and presented to him, on his
 knee.
 “boteler, fill my goblet,” said the prince to that functionary, who,
 clothed in tight black hose, with a white kerchief, and a napkin on his
 dexter arm, stood obsequiously by his master's chair. the goblet was
 filled with malvoisie: it held about three quarts; a precious golden hanap
 carved by the cunning artificer, benvenuto the florentine.
 “drink, bleu sanglier,” said the prince, “and put the goblet in thy bosom.
 wear this chain, furthermore, for my sake.” and so saying, prince adolf
 flung a precious chain of emeralds round the herald's neck. “an invitation
 to battle was ever a welcome call to adolf of cleves.” so saying, and
 bidding his people take good care of bleu sanglier's retinue, the prince
 left the hall with his daughter. all were marvelling at his dignity,
 courage, and generosity.
 but, though affecting unconcern, the mind of prince adolf was far from
 tranquil. he was no longer the stalwart knight who, in the reign of
 stanislaus augustus, had, with his naked fist, beaten a lion to death in
 three minutes; and alone had kept the postern of peterwaradin for two
 hours against seven hundred turkish janissaries, who were assailing it.
 those deeds which had made the heir of cleves famous were done thirty
 years syne. a free liver since he had come into his principality, and of a
 lazy turn, he had neglected the athletic exercises which had made him in
 youth so famous a champion, and indolence had borne its usual fruits. he
 tried his old battle-sword—that famous blade with which, in
 palestine, he had cut an elephant-driver in two pieces, and split asunder
 the skull of the elephant which he rode. adolf of cleves could scarcely
 now lift the weapon over his head. he tried his armor. it was too tight
 for him. and the old soldier burst into tears, when he found he could not
 buckle it. such a man was not fit to encounter the terrible rowski in
 single combat.
 nor could he hope to make head against him for any time in the field. the
 prince's territories were small; his vassals proverbially lazy and
 peaceable; his treasury empty. the dismallest prospects were before him:
 and he passed a sleepless night writing to his friends for succor, and
 calculating with his secretary the small amount of the resources which he
 could bring to aid him against his advancing and powerful enemy.
 helen's pillow that evening was also unvisited by slumber. she lay awake
 thinking of otto,—thinking of the danger and the ruin her refusal to
 marry had brought upon her dear papa. otto, too, slept not: but his waking
 thoughts were brilliant and heroic: the noble childe thought how he should
 defend the princess, and win los and honor in the ensuing combat.
 and now the noble cleves began in good earnest to prepare his castle for
 the threatened siege. he gathered in all the available cattle round the
 property, and the pigs round many miles; and a dreadful slaughter of
 horned and snouted animals took place,—the whole castle resounding
 with the lowing of the oxen and the squeaks of the gruntlings, destined to
 provide food for the garrison. these, when slain, (her gentle spirit, of
 course, would not allow of her witnessing that disagreeable operation,)
 the lovely helen, with the assistance of her maidens, carefully salted and
 pickled. corn was brought in in great quantities, the prince paying for
 the same when he had money, giving bills when he could get credit, or
 occasionally, marry, sending out a few stout men-at-arms to forage, who
 brought in wheat without money or credit either. the charming princess,
 amidst the intervals of her labors, went about encouraging the garrison,
 who vowed to a man they would die for a single sweet smile of hers; and in
 order to make their inevitable sufferings as easy as possible to the
 gallant fellows, she and the apothecaries got ready a plenty of
 efficacious simples, and scraped a vast quantity of lint to bind their
 warriors' wounds withal. all the fortifications were strengthened; the
 fosses carefully filled with spikes and water; large stones placed over
 the gates, convenient to tumble on the heads of the assaulting parties;
 and caldrons prepared, with furnaces to melt up pitch, brimstone, boiling
 oil, &c., wherewith hospitably to receive them. having the keenest eye
 in the whole garrison, young otto was placed on the topmost tower, to
 watch for the expected coming of the beleaguering host.
 they were seen only too soon. long ranks of shining spears were seen
 glittering in the distance, and the army of the rowski soon made its
 appearance in battle's magnificently stern array. the tents of the
 renowned chief and his numerous warriors were pitched out of arrow-shot of
 the castle, but in fearful proximity; and when his army had taken up its
 position, an officer with a flag of truce and a trumpet was seen advancing
 to the castle gate. it was the same herald who had previously borne his
 master's defiance to the prince of cleves. he came once more to the castle
 gate, and there proclaimed that the noble count of eulenschreckenstein was
 in arms without, ready to do battle with the prince of cleves, or his
 champion; that he would remain in arms for three days, ready for combat.
 if no man met him at the end of that period, he would deliver an assault,
 and would give quarter to no single soul in the garrison. so saying, the
 herald nailed his lord's gauntlet on the castle gate. as before, the
 prince flung him over another glove from the wall; though how he was to
 defend himself from such a warrior, or get a champion, or resist the
 pitiless assault that must follow, the troubled old nobleman knew not in
 the least.
 the princess helen passed the night in the chapel, vowing tons of
 wax-candles to all the patron saints of the house of cleves, if they would
 raise her up a defender.
 but how did the noble girl's heart sink—how were her notions of the
 purity of man shaken within her gentle bosom, by the dread intelligence
 which reached her the next morning, after the defiance of the rowski! at
 roll-call it was discovered that he on whom she principally relied—he
 whom her fond heart had singled out as her champion, had proved faithless!
 otto, the degenerate otto, had fled! his comrade, wolfgang, had gone with
 him. a rope was found dangling from the casement of their chamber, and
 they must have swum the moat and passed over to the enemy in the darkness
 of the previous night. “a pretty lad was this fair-spoken archer of
 thine!” said the prince her father to her; “and a pretty kettle of fish
 hast thou cooked for the fondest of fathers.” she retired weeping to her
 apartment. never before had that young heart felt so wretched.
 that morning, at nine o'clock, as they were going to breakfast, the
 rowski's trumpets sounded. clad in complete armor, and mounted on his
 enormous piebald charger, he came out of his pavilion, and rode slowly up
 and down in front of the castle. he was ready there to meet a champion.
 three times each day did the odious trumpet sound the same notes of
 defiance. thrice daily did the steel-clad rowski come forth challenging
 the combat. the first day passed, and there was no answer to his summons.
 the second day came and went, but no champion had risen to defend. the
 taunt of his shrill clarion remained without answer; and the sun went down
 upon the wretchedest father and daughter in all the land of christendom.
 the trumpets sounded an hour after sunrise, an hour after noon, and an
 hour before sunset. the third day came, but with it brought no hope. the
 first and second summons met no response. at five o'clock the old prince
 called his daughter and blessed her. “i go to meet this rowski,” said he.
 “it may be we shall meet no more, my helen—my child—the
 innocent cause of all this grief. if i shall fall to-night the rowski's
 victim, 'twill be that life is nothing without honor.” and so saying, he
 put into her hands a dagger, and bade her sheathe it in her own breast so
 soon as the terrible champion had carried the castle by storm.
 this helen most faithfully promised to do; and her aged father retired to
 his armory, and donned his ancient war-worn corselet. it had borne the
 shock of a thousand lances ere this, but it was now so tight as almost to
 choke the knightly wearer.
 the last trumpet sounded—tantara! tantara!—its shrill call
 rang over the wide plains, and the wide plains gave back no answer. again!—but
 when its notes died away, there was only a mournful, an awful silence.
 “farewell, my child,” said the prince, bulkily lifting himself into his
 battle-saddle. “remember the dagger. hark! the trumpet sounds for the
 third time. open, warders! sound, trumpeters! and good st. bendigo guard
 the right.”
 but puffendorff, the trumpeter, had not leisure to lift the trumpet to his
 lips: when, hark! from without there came another note of another clarion!—a
 distant note at first, then swelling fuller. presently, in brilliant
 variations, the full rich notes of the “huntsman's chorus” came clearly
 over the breeze; and a thousand voices of the crowd gazing over the gate
 exclaimed, “a champion! a champion!”
 and, indeed, a champion had come. issuing from the forest came a knight
 and squire: the knight gracefully cantering an elegant cream-colored
 arabian of prodigious power—the squire mounted on an unpretending
 gray cob; which, nevertheless, was an animal of considerable strength and
 sinew. it was the squire who blew the trumpet, through the bars of his
 helmet; the knight's visor was completely down. a small prince's coronet
 of gold, from which rose three pink ostrich-feathers, marked the warrior's
 rank: his blank shield bore no cognizance. as gracefully poising his lance
 he rode into the green space where the rowski's tents were pitched, the
 hearts of all present beat with anxiety, and the poor prince of cleves,
 especially, had considerable doubts about his new champion. “so slim a
 figure as that can never compete with donnerblitz,” said he, moodily, to
 his daughter; “but whoever he be, the fellow puts a good face on it, and
 rides like a man. see, he has touched the rowski's shield with the point
 of his lance! by st. bendigo, a perilous venture!”
 the unknown knight had indeed defied the rowski to the death, as the
 prince of cleves remarked from the battlement where he and his daughter
 stood to witness the combat; and so, having defied his enemy, the
 incognito galloped round under the castle wall, bowing elegantly to the
 lovely princess there, and then took his ground and waited for the foe.
 his armor blazed in the sunshine as he sat there, motionless, on his
 cream-colored steed. he looked like one of those fairy knights one has
 read of—one of those celestial champions who decided so many
 victories before the invention of gun powder.
 the rowski's horse was speedily brought to the door of his pavilion; and
 that redoubted warrior, blazing in a suit of magnificent brass armor,
 clattered into his saddle. long waves of blood-red feathers bristled over
 his helmet, which was farther ornamented by two huge horns of the aurochs.
 his lance was painted white and red, and he whirled the prodigious beam in
 the air and caught it with savage glee. he laughed when he saw the slim
 form of his antagonist; and his soul rejoiced to meet the coming battle.
 he dug his spurs into the enormous horse he rode: the enormous horse
 snorted, and squealed, too, with fierce pleasure. he jerked and curveted
 him with a brutal playfulness, and after a few minutes' turning and
 wheeling, during which everybody had leisure to admire the perfection of
 his equitation, he cantered round to a point exactly opposite his enemy,
 and pulled up his impatient charger.
 the old prince on the battlement was so eager for the combat, that he
 seemed quite to forget the danger which menaced himself, should his slim
 champion be discomfited by the tremendous knight of donnerblitz. “go it!”
 said he, flinging his truncheon into the ditch; and at the word, the two
 warriors rushed with whirling rapidity at each other.
 and now ensued a combat so terrible, that a weak female hand, like that of
 her who pens this tale of chivalry, can never hope to do justice to the
 terrific theme. you have seen two engines on the great western line rush
 past each other with a pealing scream? so rapidly did the two warriors
 gallop towards one another; the feathers of either streamed yards behind
 their backs as they converged. their shock as they met was as that of two
 cannon-balls; the mighty horses trembled and reeled with the concussion;
 the lance aimed at the rowski's helmet bore off the coronet, the horns,
 the helmet itself, and hurled them to an incredible distance: a piece of
 the rowski's left ear was carried off on the point of the nameless
 warrior's weapon. how had he fared? his adversary's weapon had glanced
 harmless along the blank surface of his polished buckler; and the victory
 so far was with him.
 the expression of the rowski's face, as, bareheaded, he glared on his
 enemy with fierce bloodshot eyeballs, was one worthy of a demon. the
 imprecatory expressions which he made use of can never be copied by a
 feminine pen.
 his opponent magnanimously declined to take advantage of the opportunity
 thus offered him of finishing the combat by splitting his opponent's skull
 with his curtal-axe, and, riding back to his starting-place, bent his
 lance's point to the ground, in token that he would wait until the count
 of eulenschreckenstein was helmeted afresh.
 “blessed bendigo!” cried the prince, “thou art a gallant lance: but why
 didst not rap the schelm's brain out?”
 “bring me a fresh helmet!” yelled the rowski. another casque was brought
 to him by his trembling squire.
 as soon as he had braced it, he drew his great flashing sword from his
 side, and rushed at his enemy, roaring hoarsely his cry of battle. the
 unknown knight's sword was unsheathed in a moment, and at the next the two
 blades were clanking together the dreadful music of the combat!
 the donnerblitz wielded his with his usual savageness and activity. it
 whirled round his adversary's head with frightful rapidity. now it carried
 away a feather of his plume; now it shore off a leaf of his coronet. the
 flail of the thrasher does not fall more swiftly upon the corn. for many
 minutes it was the unknown's only task to defend himself from the
 tremendous activity of the enemy.
 but even the rowski's strength would slacken after exertion. the blows
 began to fall less thick anon, and the point of the unknown knight began
 to make dreadful play. it found and penetrated every joint of the
 donnerblitz's armor. now it nicked him in the shoulder where the vambrace
 was buckled to the corselet; now it bored a shrewd hole under the light
 brissart, and blood followed; now, with fatal dexterity, it darted through
 the visor, and came back to the recover deeply tinged with blood. a scream
 of rage followed the last thrust; and no wonder:—it had penetrated
 the rowski's left eye.
 his blood was trickling through a dozen orifices; he was almost choking in
 his helmet with loss of breath, and loss of blood, and rage. gasping with
 fury, he drew back his horse, flung his great sword at his opponent's
 head, and once more plunged at him, wielding his curtal-axe.
 then you should have seen the unknown knight employing the same dreadful
 weapon! hitherto he had been on his defence; now he began the attack; and
 the gleaming axe whirred in his hand like a reed, but descended like a
 thunderbolt! “yield! yield! sir rowski,” shouted he, in a calm, clear
 voice.
 a blow dealt madly at his head was the reply. 'twas the last blow that the
 count of eulenschreckenstein ever struck in battle! the curse was on his
 lips as the crushing steel descended into his brain, and split it in two.
 he rolled like a log from his horse: his enemy's knee was in a moment on
 his chest, and the dagger of mercy at his throat, as the knight once more
 called upon him to yield.
 but there was no answer from within the helmet. when it was withdrawn, the
 teeth were crunched together; the mouth that should have spoken, grinned a
 ghastly silence: one eye still glared with hate and fury, but it was
 glazed with the film of death!
 the red orb of the sun was just then dipping into the rhine. the unknown
 knight, vaulting once more into his saddle, made a graceful obeisance to
 the prince of cleves and his daughter, without a word, and galloped back
 into the forest, whence he had issued an hour before sunset.
 the consternation which ensued on the death of the rowski, speedily sent
 all his camp-followers, army, &c. to the right-about. they struck
 their tents at the first news of his discomfiture; and each man laying
 hold of what he could, the whole of the gallant force which had marched
 under his banner in the morning had disappeared ere the sun rose.
 on that night, as it may be imagined, the gates of the castle of cleves
 were not shut. everybody was free to come in. wine-butts were broached in
 all the courts; the pickled meat prepared in such lots for the siege was
 distributed among the people, who crowded to congratulate their beloved
 sovereign on his victory; and the prince, as was customary with that good
 man, who never lost an opportunity of giving a dinner-party, had a
 splendid entertainment made ready for the upper classes, the whole
 concluding with a tasteful display of fireworks.
 in the midst of these entertainments, our old friend the count of hombourg
 arrived at the castle. the stalwart old warrior swore by saint bugo that
 he was grieved the killing of the rowski had been taken out of his hand.
 the laughing cleves vowed by saint bendigo, hombourg could never have
 finished off his enemy so satisfactorily as the unknown knight had just
 done.
 but who was he? was the question which now agitated the bosom of these two
 old nobles. how to find him—how to reward the champion and restorer
 of the honor and happiness of cleves? they agreed over supper that he
 should be sought for everywhere. beadles were sent round the principal
 cities within fifty miles, and the description of the knight advertised,
 in the journal de francfort and the allgemeine zeitung. the hand of the
 princess helen was solemnly offered to him in these advertisements, with
 the reversion of the prince of cleves's splendid though somewhat
 dilapidated property.
 “but we don't know him, my dear papa,” faintly ejaculated that young lady.
 “some impostor may come in a suit of plain armor, and pretend that he was
 the champion who overcame the rowski (a prince who had his faults
 certainly, but whose attachment for me i can never forget); and how are
 you to say whether he is the real knight or not? there are so many
 deceivers in this world,” added the princess, in tears, “that one can't be
 too cautious now.” the fact is, that she was thinking of the desertion of
 otto in the morning; by which instance of faithlessness her heart was
 wellnigh broken.
 as for that youth and his comrade wolfgang, to the astonishment of
 everybody at their impudence, they came to the archers' mess that night,
 as if nothing had happened; got their supper, partaking both of meat and
 drink most plentifully; fell asleep when their comrades began to describe
 the events of the day, and the admirable achievements of the unknown
 warrior; and turning into their hammocks, did not appear on parade in the
 morning until twenty minutes after the names were called.
 when the prince of cleves heard of the return of these deserters he was in
 a towering passion. “where were you, fellows,” shouted he, “during the
 time my castle was at its utmost need?”
 otto replied, “we were out on particular business.”
 “does a soldier leave his post on the day of battle, sir?” exclaimed the
 prince. “you know the reward of such—death! and death you merit. but
 you are a soldier only of yesterday, and yesterday's victory has made me
 merciful. hanged you shall not be, as you merit—only flogged, both
 of you. parade the men, colonel tickelstern, after breakfast, and give
 these scoundrels five hundred apiece.”
 you should have seen how young otto bounded, when this information was
 thus abruptly conveyed to him. “flog me!” cried he. “flog otto of—”
 “not so, my father,” said the princess helen, who had been standing by
 during the conversation, and who had looked at otto all the while with the
 most ineffable scorn. “not so: although these persons have forgotten their
 duty” (she laid a particularly sarcastic emphasis on the word persons),
 “we have had no need of their services, and have luckily found others more
 faithful. you promised your daughter a boon, papa; it is the pardon of
 these two persons. let them go, and quit a service they have disgraced; a
 mistress—that is, a master—they have deceived.”
 “drum 'em out of the castle, ticklestern; strip their uniforms from their
 backs, and never let me hear of the scoundrels again.” so saying, the old
 prince angrily turned on his heel to breakfast, leaving the two young men
 to the fun and derision of their surrounding comrades.
 the noble count of hombourg, who was taking his usual airing on the
 ramparts before breakfast, came up at this juncture, and asked what was
 the row? otto blushed when he saw him and turned away rapidly; but the
 count, too, catching a glimpse of him, with a hundred exclamations of
 joyful surprise seized upon the lad, hugged him to his manly breast,
 kissed him most affectionately, and almost burst into tears as he embraced
 him. for, in sooth, the good count had thought his godson long ere this at
 the bottom of the silver rhine.
 the prince of cleves, who had come to the breakfast-parlor window, (to
 invite his guest to enter, as the tea was made,) beheld this strange scene
 from the window, as did the lovely tea-maker likewise, with breathless and
 beautiful agitation. the old count and the archer strolled up and down the
 battlements in deep conversation. by the gestures of surprise and delight
 exhibited by the former, 'twas easy to see the young archer was conveying
 some very strange and pleasing news to him; though the nature of the
 conversation was not allowed to transpire.
 “a godson of mine,” said the noble count, when interrogated over his
 muffins. “i know his family; worthy people; sad scapegrace; ran away;
 parents longing for him; glad you did not flog him; devil to pay,” and so
 forth. the count was a man of few words, and told his tale in this brief,
 artless manner. but why, at its conclusion, did the gentle helen leave the
 room, her eyes filled with tears? she left the room once more to kiss a
 certain lock of yellow hair she had pilfered. a dazzling, delicious
 thought, a strange wild hope, arose in her soul!
 when she appeared again, she made some side-handed inquiries regarding
 otto (with that gentle artifice oft employed by women); but he was gone.
 he and his companion were gone. the count of hombourg had likewise taken
 his departure, under pretext of particular business. how lonely the vast
 castle seemed to helen, now that he was no longer there. the transactions
 of the last few days; the beautiful archer-boy; the offer from the rowski
 (always an event in a young lady's life); the siege of the castle; the
 death of her truculent admirer: all seemed like a fevered dream to her:
 all was passed away, and had left no trace behind. no trace?—yes!
 one: a little insignificant lock of golden hair, over which the young
 creature wept so much that she put it out of curl; passing hours and hours
 in the summer-house, where the operation had been performed.
 on the second day (it is my belief she would have gone into a consumption
 and died of languor, if the event had been delayed a day longer,) a
 messenger, with a trumpet, brought a letter in haste to the prince of
 cleves, who was, as usual, taking refreshment. “to the high and mighty
 prince,” &c. the letter ran. “the champion who had the honor of
 engaging on wednesday last with his late excellency the rowski of
 donnerblitz, presents his compliments to h. s. h. the prince of cleves.
 through the medium of the public prints the c. has been made acquainted
 with the flattering proposal of his serene highness relative to a union
 between himself (the champion) and her serene highness the princess helen
 of cleves. the champion accepts with pleasure that polite invitation, and
 will have the honor of waiting upon the prince and princess of cleves
 about half an hour after the receipt of this letter.”
 “tol lol de rol, girl,” shouted the prince with heartfelt joy. (have you
 not remarked, dear friend, how often in novel-books, and on the stage, joy
 is announced by the above burst of insensate monosyllables?) “tol lol de
 rol. don thy best kirtle, child; thy husband will be here anon.” and helen
 retired to arrange her toilet for this awful event in the life of a young
 woman. when she returned, attired to welcome her defender, her young cheek
 was as pale as the white satin slip and orange sprigs she wore.
 she was scarce seated on the dais by her father's side, when a huge
 flourish of trumpets from without proclaimed the arrival of the champion.
 helen felt quite sick: a draught of ether was necessary to restore her
 tranquillity.
 the great door was flung open. he entered,—the same tall warrior,
 slim, and beautiful, blazing in shining steel. he approached the prince's
 throne, supported on each side by a friend likewise in armor. he knelt
 gracefully on one knee.
 “i come,” said he in a voice trembling with emotion, “to claim, as per
 advertisement, the hand of the lovely lady helen.” and he held out a copy
 of the allgemeine zeitung as he spoke.
 “art thou noble, sir knight?” asked the prince of cleves.
 “as noble as yourself,” answered the kneeling steel.
 “who answers for thee?”
 “i, karl, margrave of godesberg, his father!” said the knight on the right
 hand, lifting up his visor.
 “and i—ludwig, count of hombourg, his godfather!” said the knight on
 the left, doing likewise.
 the kneeling knight lifted up his visor now, and looked on helen.
 “i knew it was,” said she, and fainted as she saw otto the archer.
 but she was soon brought to, gentles, as i have small need to tell ye. in
 a very few days after, a great marriage took place at cleves under the
 patronage of saint bugo, saint buffo, and saint bendigo. after the
 marriage ceremony, the happiest and handsomest pair in the world drove off
 in a chaise-and-four, to pass the honeymoon at kissingen. the lady
 theodora, whom we left locked up in her convent a long while since, was
 prevailed upon to come back to godesberg, where she was reconciled to her
 husband. jealous of her daughter-in-law, she idolized her son, and spoiled
 all her little grandchildren. and so all are happy, and my simple tale is
 done.
 i read it in an old, old book, in a mouldy old circulating library. 'twas
 written in the french tongue, by the noble alexandre dumas; but 'tis
 probable that he stole it from some other, and that the other had filched
 it from a former tale-teller. for nothing is new under the sun. things die
 and are reproduced only. and so it is that the forgotten tale of the great
 dumas reappears under the signature of
 whistlebinkie, n.b., december .
 well-beloved novel-readers and gentle patronesses of romance, assuredly it
 has often occurred to every one of you, that the books we delight in have
 very unsatisfactory conclusions, and end quite prematurely with page 
 of the third volume. at that epoch of the history it is well known that
 the hero is seldom more than thirty years old, and the heroine by
 consequence some seven or eight years younger; and i would ask any of you
 whether it is fair to suppose that people after the above age have nothing
 worthy of note in their lives, and cease to exist as they drive away from
 saint george's, hanover square? you, dear young ladies, who get your
 knowledge of life from the circulating library, may be led to imagine that
 when the marriage business is done, and emilia is whisked off in the new
 travelling-carriage, by the side of the enraptured earl; or belinda,
 breaking away from the tearful embraces of her excellent mother, dries her
 own lovely eyes upon the throbbing waistcoat of her bridegroom—you
 may be apt, i say, to suppose that all is over then; that emilia and the
 earl are going to be happy for the rest of their lives in his lordship's
 romantic castle in the north, and belinda and her young clergyman to enjoy
 uninterrupted bliss in their rose-trellised parsonage in the west of
 england: but some there be among the novel-reading classes—old
 experienced folks—who know better than this. some there be who have
 been married, and found that they have still something to see and to do,
 and to suffer mayhap; and that adventures, and pains, and pleasures, and
 taxes, and sunrises and settings, and the business and joys and griefs of
 life go on after, as before the nuptial ceremony.
 therefore i say, it is an unfair advantage which the novelist takes of
 hero and heroine, as of his inexperienced reader, to say good-by to the
 two former, as soon as ever they are made husband and wife; and i have
 often wished that additions should be made to all works of fiction which
 have been brought to abrupt terminations in the manner described; and that
 we should hear what occurs to the sober married man, as well as to the
 ardent bachelor; to the matron, as well as to the blushing spinster. and
 in this respect i admire (and would desire to imitate,) the noble and
 prolific french author, alexandre dumas, who carries his heroes from early
 youth down to the most venerable old age; and does not let them rest until
 they are so old, that it is full time the poor fellows should get a little
 peace and quiet. a hero is much too valuable a gentleman to be put upon
 the retired list, in the prime and vigor of his youth; and i wish to know
 what lady among us would like to be put on the shelf, and thought no
 longer interesting, because she has a family growing up, and is four or
 five and thirty years of age? i have known ladies at sixty, with hearts as
 tender and ideas as romantic as any young misses of sixteen. let us have
 middle-aged novels then, as well as your extremely juvenile legends: let
 the young ones be warned that the old folks have a right to be
 interesting: and that a lady may continue to have a heart, although she is
 somewhat stouter than she was when a school-girl, and a man his feelings,
 although he gets his hair from truefitt's.
 thus i would desire that the biographies of many of our most illustrious
 personages of romance should be continued by fitting hands, and that they
 should be heard of, until at least a decent age.—look at mr. james's
 heroes: they invariably marry young. look at mr. dickens's: they disappear
 from the scene when they are mere chits. i trust these authors, who are
 still alive, will see the propriety of telling us something more about
 people in whom we took a considerable interest, and who must be at present
 strong and hearty, and in the full vigor of health and intellect. and in
 the tales of the great sir walter (may honor be to his name), i am sure
 there are a number of people who are untimely carried away from us, and of
 whom we ought to hear more.
 my dear rebecca, daughter of isaac of york, has always, in my mind, been
 one of these; nor can i ever believe that such a woman, so admirable, so
 tender, so heroic, so beautiful, could disappear altogether before such
 another woman as rowena, that vapid, flaxen-headed creature, who is, in my
 humble opinion, unworthy of ivanhoe, and unworthy of her place as heroine.
 had both of them got their rights, it ever seemed to me that rebecca would
 have had the husband, and rowena would have gone off to a convent and shut
 herself up, where i, for one, would never have taken the trouble of
 inquiring for her.
 but after all she married ivanhoe. what is to be done? there is no help
 for it. there it is in black and white at the end of the third volume of
 sir walter scott's chronicle, that the couple were joined together in
 matrimony. and must the disinherited knight, whose blood has been fired by
 the suns of palestine, and whose heart has been warmed in the company of
 the tender and beautiful rebecca, sit down contented for life by the side
 of such a frigid piece of propriety as that icy, faultless, prim,
 niminy-piminy rowena? forbid it fate, forbid it poetical justice! there is
 a simple plan for setting matters right, and giving all parties their due,
 which is here submitted to the novel-reader. ivanhoe's history must have
 had a continuation; and it is this which ensues. i may be wrong in some
 particulars of the narrative,—as what writer will not be?—but
 of the main incidents of the history, i have in my own mind no sort of
 doubt, and confidently submit them to that generous public which likes to
 see virtue righted, true love rewarded, and the brilliant fairy descend
 out of the blazing chariot at the end of the pantomime, and make harlequin
 and columbine happy. what, if reality be not so, gentlemen and ladies; and
 if, after dancing a variety of jigs and antics, and jumping in and out of
 endless trap-doors and windows, through life's shifting scenes, no fairy
 comes down to make us comfortable at the close of the performance? ah! let
 us give our honest novel-folks the benefit of their position, and not be
 envious of their good luck.
 no person who has read the preceding volumes of this history, as the
 famous chronicler of abbotsford has recorded them, can doubt for a moment
 what was the result of the marriage between sir wilfrid of ivanhoe and
 lady rowena. those who have marked her conduct during her maidenhood, her
 distinguished politeness, her spotless modesty of demeanor, her
 unalterable coolness under all circumstances, and her lofty and
 gentlewomanlike bearing, must be sure that her married conduct would equal
 her spinster behavior, and that rowena the wife would be a pattern of
 correctness for all the matrons of england.
 such was the fact. for miles around rotherwood her character for piety was
 known. her castle was a rendezvous for all the clergy and monks of the
 district, whom she fed with the richest viands, while she pinched herself
 upon pulse and water. there was not an invalid in the three ridings, saxon
 or norman, but the palfrey of the lady rowena might be seen journeying to
 his door, in company with father glauber, her almoner, and brother thomas
 of epsom, her leech. she lighted up all the churches in yorkshire with
 wax-candles, the offerings of her piety. the bells of her chapel began to
 ring at two o'clock in the morning; and all the domestics of rotherwood
 were called upon to attend at matins, at complins, at nones, at vespers,
 and at sermon. i need not say that fasting was observed with all the
 rigors of the church; and that those of the servants of the lady rowena
 were looked upon with most favor whose hair-shirts were the roughest, and
 who flagellated themselves with the most becoming perseverance.
 whether it was that this discipline cleared poor wamba's wits or cooled
 his humor, it is certain that he became the most melancholy fool in
 england, and if ever he ventured upon a pun to the shuddering poor
 servitors, who were mumbling their dry crusts below the salt, it was such
 a faint and stale joke that noboby dared to laugh at the innuendoes of the
 unfortunate wag, and a sickly smile was the best applause he could muster.
 once, indeed, when guffo, the goose-boy (a half-witted poor wretch),
 laughed outright at a lamentably stale pun which wamba palmed upon him at
 supper-time, (it was dark, and the torches being brought in, wamba said,
 “guffo, they can't see their way in the argument, and are going to throw a
 little light upon the subject,”) the lady rowena, being disturbed in a
 theological controversy with father willibald, (afterwards canonized as
 st. willibald, of bareacres, hermit and confessor,) called out to know
 what was the cause of the unseemly interruption, and guffo and wamba being
 pointed out as the culprits, ordered them straightway into the court-yard,
 and three dozen to be administered to each of them.
 “i got you out of front-de-boeufs castle,” said poor wamba, piteously,
 appealing to sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, “and canst thou not save me from the
 lash?”
 “yes, from front-de-boeuf's castle, where you were locked up with the
 jewess in the tower!” said rowena, haughtily replying to the timid appeal
 of her husband. “gurth, give him four dozen!”
 and this was all poor wamba got by applying for the mediation of his
 master.
 in fact, rowena knew her own dignity so well as a princess of the royal
 blood of england, that sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, her consort, could scarcely
 call his life his own, and was made, in all things, to feel the
 inferiority of his station. and which of us is there acquainted with the
 sex that has not remarked this propensity in lovely woman, and how often
 the wisest in the council are made to be as fools at her board, and the
 boldest in the battle-field are craven when facing her distaff?
 “where you were locked up with the jewess in the tower,” was a remark,
 too, of which wilfrid keenly felt, and perhaps the reader will understand,
 the significancy. when the daughter of isaac of york brought her diamonds
 and rubies—the poor gentle victim!—and, meekly laying them at
 the feet of the conquering rowena, departed into foreign lands to tend the
 sick of her people, and to brood over the bootless passion which consumed
 her own pure heart, one would have thought that the heart of the royal
 lady would have melted before such beauty and humility, and that she would
 have been generous in the moment of her victory.
 but did you ever know a right-minded woman pardon another for being
 handsome and more love-worthy than herself? the lady rowena did certainly
 say with mighty magnanimity to the jewish maiden, “come and live with me
 as a sister,” as the former part of this history shows; but rebecca knew
 in her heart that her ladyship's proposition was what is called bosh (in
 that noble eastern language with which wilfrid the crusader was familiar),
 or fudge, in plain saxon; and retired with a broken, gentle spirit,
 neither able to bear the sight of her rival's happiness, nor willing to
 disturb it by the contrast of her own wretchedness. rowena, like the most
 high-bred and virtuous of women, never forgave isaac's daughter her
 beauty, nor her flirtation with wilfrid (as the saxon lady chose to term
 it); nor, above all, her admirable diamonds and jewels, although rowena
 was actually in possession of them.
 in a word, she was always flinging rebecca into ivanhoe's teeth. there was
 not a day in his life but that unhappy warrior was made to remember that a
 hebrew damsel had been in love with him, and that a christian lady of
 fashion could never forgive the insult. for instance, if gurth, the
 swineherd, who was now promoted to be a gamekeeper and verderer, brought
 the account of a famous wild-boar in the wood, and proposed a hunt, rowena
 would say, “do, sir wilfrid, persecute these poor pigs: you know your
 friends the jews can't abide them!” or when, as it oft would happen, our
 lion-hearted monarch, richard, in order to get a loan or a benevolence
 from the jews, would roast a few of the hebrew capitalists, or extract
 some of the principal rabbis' teeth, rowena would exult and say, “serve
 them right, the misbelieving wretches! england can never be a happy
 country until every one of these monsters is exterminated!” or else,
 adopting a strain of still more savage sarcasm, would exclaim, “ivanhoe my
 dear, more persecution for the jews! hadn't you better interfere, my love?
 his majesty will do anything for you; and, you know, the jews were always
 such favorites of yours,” or words to that effect. but, nevertheless, her
 ladyship never lost an opportunity of wearing rebecca's jewels at court,
 whenever the queen held a drawing-room; or at the york assizes and ball,
 when she appeared there: not of course because she took any interest in
 such things, but because she considered it her duty to attend, as one of
 the chief ladies of the county.
 thus sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, having attained the height of his wishes,
 was, like many a man when he has reached that dangerous elevation,
 disappointed. ah, dear friends, it is but too often so in life! many a
 garden, seen from a distance, looks fresh and green, which, when beheld
 closely, is dismal and weedy; the shady walks melancholy and grass-grown;
 the bowers you would fain repose in, cushioned with stinging-nettles. i
 have ridden in a caique upon the waters of the bosphorus, and looked upon
 the capital of the soldan of turkey. as seen from those blue waters, with
 palace and pinnacle, with gilded dome and towering cypress, it seemeth a
 very paradise of mahound: but, enter the city, and it is but a beggarly
 labyrinth of rickety huts and dirty alleys, where the ways are steep and
 the smells are foul, tenanted by mangy dogs and ragged beggars—a
 dismal illusion! life is such, ah, well-a-day! it is only hope which is
 real, and reality is a bitterness and a deceit.
 perhaps a man with ivanhoe's high principles would never bring himself to
 acknowledge this fact; but others did for him. he grew thin, and pined
 away as much as if he had been in a fever under the scorching sun of
 ascalon. he had no appetite for his meals; he slept ill, though he was
 yawning all day. the jangling of the doctors and friars whom rowena
 brought together did not in the least enliven him, and he would sometimes
 give proofs of somnolency during their disputes, greatly to the
 consternation of his lady. he hunted a good deal, and, i very much fear,
 as rowena rightly remarked, that he might have an excuse for being absent
 from home. he began to like wine, too, who had been as sober as a hermit;
 and when he came back from athelstane's (whither he would repair not
 unfrequently), the unsteadiness of his gait and the unnatural brilliancy
 of his eye were remarked by his lady: who, you may be sure, was sitting up
 for him. as for athelstane, he swore by st. wullstan that he was glad to
 have escaped a marriage with such a pattern of propriety; and honest
 cedric the saxon (who had been very speedily driven out of his
 daughter-in-law's castle) vowed by st. waltheof that his son had bought a
 dear bargain.
 so sir wilfrid of ivanhoe became almost as tired of england as his royal
 master richard was, (who always quitted the country when he had squeezed
 from his loyal nobles, commons, clergy, and jews, all the money which he
 could get,) and when the lion-hearted prince began to make war against the
 french king, in normandy and guienne, sir wilfrid pined like a true
 servant to be in company of the good champion, alongside of whom he had
 shivered so many lances, and dealt such woundy blows of sword and
 battle-axe on the plains of jaffa or the breaches of acre. travellers were
 welcome at rotherwood that brought news from the camp of the good king:
 and i warrant me that the knight listened with all his might when father
 drono, the chaplain, read in the st. james's chronykyll (which was the
 paper of news he of ivanhoe took in) of “another glorious triumph”—“defeat
 of the french near blois”—“splendid victory at epte, and narrow
 escape of the french king:” the which deeds of arms the learned scribes
 had to narrate.
 however such tales might excite him during the reading, they left the
 knight of ivanhoe only the more melancholy after listening: and the more
 moody as he sat in his great hall silently draining his gascony wine.
 silently sat he and looked at his coats-of-mail hanging vacant on the
 wall, his banner covered with spider-webs, and his sword and axe rusting
 there. “ah, dear axe,” sighed he (into his drinking-horn)—“ah,
 gentle steel! that was a merry time when i sent thee crashing into the
 pate of the emir abdul melik as he rode on the right of saladin. ah, my
 sword, my dainty headsman? my sweet split-rib? my razor of infidel beards!
 is the rust to eat thine edge off, and am i never more to wield thee in
 battle? what is the use of a shield on a wall, or a lance that has a
 cobweb for a pennon? o richard, my good king, would i could hear once more
 thy voice in the front of the onset! bones of brian the templar? would ye
 could rise from your grave at templestowe, and that we might break another
 spear for honor and—and—” . . .
 “and rebecca,” he would have said; but the knight paused here in rather a
 guilty panic: and her royal highness the princess rowena (as she chose to
 style herself at home) looked so hard at him out of her china-blue eyes,
 that sir wilfrid felt as if she was reading his thoughts, and was fain to
 drop his own eyes into his flagon.
 in a word, his life was intolerable. the dinner hour of the twelfth
 century, it is known, was very early; in fact, people dined at ten o'clock
 in the morning: and after dinner rowena sat mum under her canopy,
 embroidered with the arms of edward the confessor, working with her
 maidens at the most hideous pieces of tapestry, representing the tortures
 and martyrdoms of her favorite saints, and not allowing a soul to speak
 above his breath, except when she chose to cry out in her own shrill voice
 when a handmaid made a wrong stitch, or let fall a ball of worsted. it was
 a dreary life. wamba, we have said, never ventured to crack a joke, save
 in a whisper, when he was ten miles from home; and then sir wilfrid
 ivanhoe was too weary and blue-devilled to laugh; but hunted in silence,
 moodily bringing down deer and wild-boar with shaft and quarrel.
 then he besought robin of huntingdon, the jolly outlaw, nathless, to join
 him, and go to the help of their fair sire king richard, with a score or
 two of lances. but the earl of huntingdon was a very different character
 from robin hood the forester. there was no more conscientious magistrate
 in all the county than his lordship: he was never known to miss church or
 quarter-sessions; he was the strictest game-proprietor in all the riding,
 and sent scores of poachers to botany bay. “a man who has a stake in the
 country, my good sir wilfrid,” lord huntingdon said, with rather a
 patronizing air (his lordship had grown immensely fat since the king had
 taken him into grace, and required a horse as strong as an elephant to
 mount him)—“a man with a stake in the country ought to stay in the
 country. property has its duties as well as its privileges, and a person
 of my rank is bound to live on the land from which he gets his living.”
 “'amen!” sang out the reverend —— tuck, his lordship's
 domestic chaplain, who had also grown as sleek as the abbot of jorvaulx,
 who was as prim as a lady in his dress, wore bergamot in his handkerchief,
 and had his poll shaved and his beard curled every day. and so sanctified
 was his reverence grown, that he thought it was a shame to kill the pretty
 deer, (though he ate of them still hugely, both in pasties and with french
 beans and currant-jelly,) and being shown a quarter-staff upon a certain
 occasion, handled it curiously, and asked “what that ugly great stick
 was?”
 lady huntingdon, late maid marian, had still some of her old fun and
 spirits, and poor ivanhoe begged and prayed that she would come and stay
 at rotherwood occasionally, and egayer the general dulness of that castle.
 but her ladyship said that rowena gave herself such airs, and bored her so
 intolerably with stories of king edward the confessor, that she preferred
 any place rather than rotherwood, which was as dull as if it had been at
 the top of mount athos.
 the only person who visited it was athelstane. “his royal highness the
 prince” rowena of course called him, whom the lady received with royal
 honors. she had the guns fired, and the footmen turned out with presented
 arms when he arrived; helped him to all ivanhoe's favorite cuts of the
 mutton or the turkey, and forced her poor husband to light him to the
 state bedroom, walking backwards, holding a pair of wax-candles. at this
 hour of bedtime the thane used to be in such a condition, that he saw two
 pair of candles and two ivanhoes reeling before him. let us hope it was
 not ivanhoe that was reeling, but only his kinsman's brains muddled with
 the quantities of drink which it was his daily custom to consume. rowena
 said it was the crack which the wicked bois guilbert, “the jewess's other
 lover, wilfrid my dear,” gave him on his royal skull, which caused the
 prince to be disturbed so easily; but added, that drinking became a person
 of royal blood, and was but one of the duties of his station.
 sir wilfrid of ivanhoe saw it would be of no avail to ask this man to bear
 him company on his projected tour abroad; but still he himself was every
 day more and more bent upon going, and he long cast about for some means
 of breaking to his rowena his firm resolution to join the king. he thought
 she would certainty fall ill if he communicated the news too abruptly to
 her: he would pretend a journey to york to attend a grand jury; then a
 call to london on law business or to buy stock; then he would slip over to
 calais by the packet, by degrees as it were; and so be with the king
 before his wife knew that he was out of sight of westminster hall.
 “suppose your honor says you are going as your honor would say bo! to a
 goose, plump, short, and to the point,” said wamba the jester—who
 was sir wilfrid's chief counsellor and attendant—“depend on't her
 highness would bear the news like a christian woman.”
 “tush, malapert! i will give thee the strap,” said sir wilfrid, in a fine
 tone of high-tragedy indignation. “thou knowest not the delicacy of the
 nerves of high-born ladies. an she faint not, write me down hollander.”
 “i will wager my bauble against an irish billet of exchange that she will
 let your honor go off readily: that is, if you press not the matter too
 strongly,” wamba answered, knowingly. and this ivanhoe found to his
 discomfiture: for one morning at breakfast, adopting a degage air, as he
 sipped his tea, he said, “my love, i was thinking of going over to pay his
 majesty a visit in normandy.” upon which, laying down her muffin, (which,
 since the royal alfred baked those cakes, had been the chosen breakfast
 cate of noble anglo-saxons, and which a kneeling page tendered to her on a
 salver, chased by the florentine, benvenuto cellini,)—“when do you
 think of going, wilfrid my dear?” the lady said; and the moment the
 tea-things were removed, and the tables and their trestles put away, she
 set about mending his linen, and getting ready his carpet-bag.
 so sir wilfrid was as disgusted at her readiness to part with him as he
 had been weary of staying at home, which caused wamba the fool to say,
 “marry, gossip, thou art like the man on ship-board, who, when the
 boatswain flogged him, did cry out 'oh!' wherever the rope's-end fell on
 him: which caused master boatswain to say, 'plague on thee, fellow, and a
 pize on thee, knave, wherever i hit thee there is no pleasing thee.'”
 “and truly there are some backs which fortune is always belaboring,”
 thought sir wilfrid with a groan, “and mine is one that is ever sore.”
 so, with a moderate retinue, whereof the knave wamba made one, and a large
 woollen comforter round his neck, which his wife's own white fingers had
 woven, sir wilfrid of ivanhoe left home to join the king his master.
 rowena, standing on the steps, poured out a series of prayers and
 blessings, most edifying to hear, as her lord mounted his charger, which
 his squires led to the door. “it was the duty of the british female of
 rank,” she said, “to suffer all—all in the cause of her sovereign.
 she would not fear loneliness during the campaign: she would bear up
 against widowhood, desertion, and an unprotected situation.”
 “my cousin athelstane will protect thee,” said ivanhoe, with profound
 emotion, as the tears trickled down his basenet; and bestowing a chaste
 salute upon the steel-clad warrior, rowena modestly said “she hoped his
 highness would be so kind.”
 then ivanhoe's trumpet blew: then rowena waved her pocket-handkerchief:
 then the household gave a shout: then the pursuivant of the good knight,
 sir wilfrid the crusader, flung out his banner (which was argent, a gules
 cramoisy with three moors impaled sable): then wamba gave a lash on his
 mule's haunch, and ivanhoe, heaving a great sigh, turned the tail of his
 war-horse upon the castle of his fathers.
 as they rode along the forest, they met athelstane the thane powdering
 along the road in the direction of rotherwood on his great dray-horse of a
 charger. “good-by, good luck to you, old brick,” cried the prince, using
 the vernacular saxon. “pitch into those frenchmen; give it 'em over the
 face and eyes; and i'll stop at home and take care of mrs. i.”
 “thank you, kinsman,” said ivanhoe—looking, however, not
 particularly well pleased; and the chiefs shaking hands, the train of each
 took its different way—athelstane's to rotherwood, ivanhoe's towards
 his place of embarkation.
 the poor knight had his wish, and yet his face was a yard long and as
 yellow as a lawyer's parchment; and having longed to quit home any time
 these three years past, he found himself envying athelstane, because,
 forsooth, he was going to rotherwood: which symptoms of discontent being
 observed by the witless wamba, caused that absurd madman to bring his
 rebeck over his shoulder from his back, and to sing—
 “before i lost my five poor wits,
 i mind me of a romish clerk,
 who sang how care, the phantom dark,
 beside the belted horseman sits.
 methought i saw the griesly sprite
 jump up but now behind my knight.”
 “perhaps thou didst, knave,” said ivanhoe, looking over his shoulder; and
 the knave went on with his jingle:
 “and though he gallop as he may,
 i mark that cursed monster black
 still sits behind his honor's back,
 tight squeezing of his heart alway.
 like two black templars sit they there,
 beside one crupper, knight and care.
 “no knight am i with pennoned spear,
 to prance upon a bold destrere:
 i will not have black care prevail
 upon my long-eared charger's tail,
 for lo, i am a witless fool,
 and laugh at grief and ride a mule.”
 and his bells rattled as he kicked his mule's sides.
 “silence, fool!” said sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, in a voice both majestic and
 wrathful. “if thou knowest not care and grief, it is because thou knowest
 not love, whereof they are the companions. who can love without an anxious
 heart? how shall there be joy at meeting, without tears at parting?” (“i
 did not see that his honor or my lady shed many anon,” thought wamba the
 fool; but he was only a zany, and his mind was not right.) “i would not
 exchange my very sorrows for thine indifference,” the knight continued.
 “where there is a sun, there must be a shadow. if the shadow offend me,
 shall i put out my eyes and live in the dark? no! i am content with my
 fate, even such as it is. the care of which thou speakest, hard though it
 may vex him, never yet rode down an honest man. i can bear him on my
 shoulders, and make my way through the world's press in spite of him; for
 my arm is strong, and my sword is keen, and my shield has no stain on it;
 and my heart, though it is sad, knows no guile.” and here, taking a locket
 out of his waistcoat (which was made of chain-mail), the knight kissed the
 token, put it back under the waistcoat again, heaved a profound sigh, and
 stuck spurs into his horse.
 as for wamba, he was munching a black pudding whilst sir wilfrid was
 making the above speech, (which implied some secret grief on the knight's
 part, that must have been perfectly unintelligible to the fool,) and so
 did not listen to a single word of ivanhoe's pompous remarks. they
 travelled on by slow stages through the whole kingdom, until they came to
 dover, whence they took shipping for calais. and in this little voyage,
 being exceedingly sea-sick, and besides elated at the thought of meeting
 his sovereign, the good knight cast away that profound melancholy which
 had accompanied him during the whole of his land journey.
 from calais sir wilfrid of ivanhoe took the diligence across country to
 limoges, sending on gurth, his squire, with the horses and the rest of his
 attendants: with the exception of wamba, who travelled not only as the
 knight's fool, but as his valet, and who, perched on the roof of the
 carriage, amused himself by blowing tunes upon the conducteur's french
 horn. the good king richard was, as ivanhoe learned, in the limousin,
 encamped before a little place called chalus; the lord whereof, though a
 vassal of the king's, was holding the castle against his sovereign with a
 resolution and valor which caused a great fury and annoyance on the part
 of the monarch with the lion heart. for brave and magnanimous as he was,
 the lion-hearted one did not love to be balked any more than another; and,
 like the royal animal whom he was said to resemble, he commonly tore his
 adversary to pieces, and then, perchance, had leisure to think how brave
 the latter had been. the count of chalus had found, it was said, a pot of
 money; the royal richard wanted it. as the count denied that he had it,
 why did he not open the gates of his castle at once? it was a clear proof
 that he was guilty; and the king was determined to punish this rebel, and
 have his money and his life too.
 he had naturally brought no breaching guns with him, because those
 instruments were not yet invented: and though he had assaulted the place a
 score of times with the utmost fury, his majesty had been beaten back on
 every occasion, until he was so savage that it was dangerous to approach
 the british lion. the lion's wife, the lovely berengaria, scarcely
 ventured to come near him. he flung the joint-stools in his tent at the
 heads of the officers of state, and kicked his aides-de-camp round his
 pavilion; and, in fact, a maid of honor, who brought a sack-posset in to
 his majesty from the queen after he came in from the assault, came
 spinning like a football out of the royal tent just as ivanhoe entered it.
 “send me my drum-major to flog that woman!” roared out the infuriate king.
 “by the bones of st. barnabas she has burned the sack! by st. wittikind, i
 will have her flayed alive. ha, st. george! ha, st. richard! whom have we
 here?” and he lifted up his demi-culverin, or curtal-axe—a weapon
 weighing about thirteen hundredweight—and was about to fling it at
 the intruder's head, when the latter, kneeling gracefully on one knee,
 said calmly, “it is i, my good liege, wilfrid of ivanhoe.”
 “what, wilfrid of templestowe, wilfrid the married man, wilfrid the
 henpecked!” cried the king with a sudden burst of good-humor, flinging
 away the culverin from him, as though it had been a reed (it lighted three
 hundred yards off, on the foot of hugo de bunyon, who was smoking a cigar
 at the door of his tent, and caused that redoubted warrior to limp for
 some days after). “what, wilfrid my gossip? art come to see the lion's
 den? there are bones in it, man, bones and carcasses, and the lion is
 angry,” said the king, with a terrific glare of his eyes. “but tush! we
 will talk of that anon. ho! bring two gallons of hypocras for the king and
 the good knight, wilfrid of ivanhoe. thou art come in time, wilfrid, for,
 by st. richard and st. george, we will give a grand assault to-morrow.
 there will be bones broken, ha!”
 “i care not, my liege,” said ivanhoe, pledging the sovereign respectfully,
 and tossing off the whole contents of the bowl of hypocras to his
 highness's good health. and he at once appeared to be taken into high
 favor; not a little to the envy of many of the persons surrounding the
 king.
 as his majesty said, there was fighting and feasting in plenty before
 chalus. day after day, the besiegers made assaults upon the castle, but it
 was held so stoutly by the count of chalus and his gallant garrison, that
 each afternoon beheld the attacking-parties returning disconsolately to
 their tents, leaving behind them many of their own slain, and bringing
 back with them store of broken heads and maimed limbs, received in the
 unsuccessful onset. the valor displayed by ivanhoe in all these contests
 was prodigious; and the way in which he escaped death from the discharges
 of mangonels, catapults, battering-rams, twenty-four pounders, boiling
 oil, and other artillery, with which the besieged received their enemies,
 was remarkable. after a day's fighting, gurth and wamba used to pick the
 arrows out of their intrepid master's coat-of-mail, as if they had been so
 many almonds in a pudding. 'twas well for the good knight, that under his
 first coat-of armor he wore a choice suit of toledan steel, perfectly
 impervious to arrow-shots, and given to him by a certain jew, named isaac
 of york, to whom he had done some considerable services a few years back.
 if king richard had not been in such a rage at the repeated failures of
 his attacks upon the castle, that all sense of justice was blinded in the
 lion-hearted monarch, he would have been the first to acknowledge the
 valor of sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, and would have given him a peerage and
 the grand cross of the bath at least a dozen times in the course of the
 siege: for ivanhoe led more than a dozen storming parties, and with his
 own hand killed as many men (viz, two thousand three hundred and
 fifty-one) within six, as were slain by the lion-hearted monarch himself.
 but his majesty was rather disgusted than pleased by his faithful
 servant's prowess; and all the courtiers, who hated ivanhoe for his
 superior valor and dexterity (for he would kill you off a couple of
 hundreds of them of chalus, whilst the strongest champions of the kings
 host could not finish more than their two dozen of a day), poisoned the
 royal mind against sir wilfrid, and made the king look upon his feats of
 arms with an evil eye. roger de backbite sneeringly told the king that sir
 wilfrid had offered to bet an equal bet that he would kill more men than
 richard himself in the next assault: peter de toadhole said that ivanhoe
 stated everywhere that his majesty was not the man he used to be; that
 pleasures and drink had enervated him; that he could neither ride, nor
 strike a blow with sword or axe, as he had been enabled to do in the old
 times in palestine: and finally, in the twenty-fifth assault, in which
 they had very nearly carried the place, and in which onset ivanhoe slew
 seven, and his majesty six, of the sons of the count de chalus, its
 defender, ivanhoe almost did for himself, by planting his banner before
 the king's upon the wall; and only rescued himself from utter disgrace by
 saving his majesty's life several times in the course of this most
 desperate onslaught.
 then the luckless knight's very virtues (as, no doubt, my respected
 readers know,) made him enemies amongst the men—nor was ivanhoe
 liked by the women frequenting the camp of the gay king richard. his young
 queen, and a brilliant court of ladies, attended the pleasure-loving
 monarch. his majesty would transact business in the morning, then fight
 severely from after breakfast till about three o'clock in the afternoon;
 from which time, until after midnight, there was nothing but jigging and
 singing, feasting and revelry, in the royal tents. ivanhoe, who was asked
 as a matter of ceremony, and forced to attend these entertainments, not
 caring about the blandishments of any of the ladies present, looked on at
 their ogling and dancing with a countenance as glum as an undertaker's,
 and was a perfect wet-blanket in the midst of the festivities. his
 favorite resort and conversation were with a remarkably austere hermit,
 who lived in the neighborhood of chalus, and with whom ivanhoe loved to
 talk about palestine, and the jews, and other grave matters of import,
 better than to mingle in the gayest amusements of the court of king
 richard. many a night, when the queen and the ladies were dancing
 quadrilles and polkas (in which his majesty, who was enormously stout as
 well as tall, insisted upon figuring, and in which he was about as
 graceful as an elephant dancing a hornpipe), ivanhoe would steal away from
 the ball, and come and have a night's chat under the moon with his
 reverend friend. it pained him to see a man of the king's age and size
 dancing about with the young folks. they laughed at his majesty whilst
 they flattered him: the pages and maids of honor mimicked the royal
 mountebank almost to his face; and, if ivanhoe ever could have laughed, he
 certainly would one night when the king, in light-blue satin
 inexpressibles, with his hair in powder, chose to dance the minuet de la
 cour with the little queen berangeria.
 then, after dancing, his majesty must needs order a guitar, and begin to
 sing. he was said to compose his own songs—words and music—but
 those who have read lord campobello's “lives of the lord chancellors” are
 aware that there was a person by the name of blondel, who, in fact, did
 all the musical part of the king's performances; and as for the words,
 when a king writes verses, we may be sure there will be plenty of people
 to admire his poetry. his majesty would sing you a ballad, of which he had
 stolen every idea, to an air that was ringing on all the barrel-organs of
 christendom, and, turning round to his courtiers, would say, “how do you
 like that? i dashed it off this morning.” or, “blondel, what do you think
 of this movement in b flat?” or what not; and the courtiers and blondel,
 you may be sure, would applaud with all their might, like hypocrites as
 they were.
 one evening—it was the evening of the th march, , indeed—his
 majesty, who was in the musical mood, treated the court with a quantity of
 his so-called composition, until the people were fairly tired of clapping
 with their hands and laughing in their sleeves. first he sang an original
 air and poem, beginning
 “cherries nice, cherries nice, nice, come choose,
 fresh and fair ones, who'll refuse?” &c.
 the which he was ready to take his affidavit he had composed the day
 before yesterday. then he sang an equally original heroic melody, of which
 the chorus was
 “rule britannia, britannia rules the sea,
 for britons never, never, never slaves shall be,” &c.
 the courtiers applauded this song as they did the other, all except
 ivanhoe, who sat without changing a muscle of his features, until the king
 questioned him, when the knight, with a bow said “he thought he had heard
 something very like the air and the words elsewhere.” his majesty scowled
 at him a savage glance from under his red bushy eyebrows; but ivanhoe had
 saved the royal life that day, and the king, therefore, with difficulty
 controlled his indignation.
 “well,” said he, “by st. richard and st. george, but ye never heard this
 song, for i composed it this very afternoon as i took my bath after the
 melee. did i not, blondel?”
 blondel, of course, was ready to take an affidavit that his majesty had
 done as he said, and the king, thrumming on his guitar with his great red
 fingers and thumbs, began to sing out of tune and as follows:—
 “the pope he is a happy man,
 his palace is the vatican,
 and there he sits and drains his can:
 the pope he is a happy man.
 i often say when i'm at home,
 i'd like to be the pope of rome.
 “and then there's sultan saladin,
 that turkish soldan full of sin;
 he has a hundred wives at least,
 by which his pleasure is increased:
 i've often wished, i hope no sin,
 that i were sultan saladin.
 “but no, the pope no wife may choose,
 and so i would not wear his shoes;
 no wine may drink the proud paynim,
 and so i'd rather not be him:
 my wife, my wine, i love i hope,
 and would be neither turk nor pope.”
 “encore! encore! bravo! bis!” everybody applauded the king's song with all
 his might: everybody except ivanhoe, who preserved his abominable gravity:
 and when asked aloud by roger de backbite whether he had heard that too,
 said firmly, “yes, roger de backbite; and so hast thou if thou darest but
 tell the truth.”
 “now, by st. cicely, may i never touch gittern again,” bawled the king in
 a fury, “if every note, word, and thought be not mine; may i die in
 to-morrow's onslaught if the song be not my song. sing thyself, wilfrid of
 the lanthorn jaws; thou could'st sing a good song in old times.” and with
 all his might, and with a forced laugh, the king, who loved brutal
 practical jests, flung his guitar at the head of ivanhoe.
 sir wilfrid caught it gracefully with one hand, and making an elegant bow
 to the sovereign, began to chant as follows:—
 “king canute was weary-hearted; he had reigned for years a score,
 battling, struggling, pushing, fighting, killing much and robbing
 more;
 and he thought upon his actions, walking by the wild sea-shore.
 “'twixt the chancellor and bishop walked the king with steps
 sedate,
 chamberlains and grooms came after, silversticks and goldsticks
 great,
 chaplains, aides-de-camp, and pages,—all the officers of state.
 “sliding after like his shadow, pausing when he chose to pause,
 if a frown his face contracted, straight the courtiers dropped
 their jaws;
 if to laugh the king was minded, out they burst in loud hee-haws.
 “but that day a something vexed him, that was clear to old and
 young:
 thrice his grace had yawned at table, when his favorite gleemen
 sung,
 once the queen would have consoled him, but he bade her hold her
 tongue.
 “'something ails my gracious master,' cried the keeper of the seal.
 'sure, my lord, it is the lampreys served at dinner, or the veal?'
 'psha!' exclaimed the angry monarch. 'keeper, 'tis not that i
 feel.
 “''tis the heart, and not the dinner, fool, that doth my rest
 impair:
 can a king be great as i am, prithee, and yet know no care?
 oh, i'm sick, and tired, and weary.'—some one cried, 'the king's
 arm-chair?'
 “then towards the lackeys turning, quick my lord the keeper nodded,
 straight the king's great chair was brought him, by two footmen
 able-bodied;
 languidly he sank into it: it was comfortably wadded.
 “'leading on my fierce companions,' cried be, 'over storm and
 brine,
 i have fought and i have conquered! where was glory like to mine?'
 loudly all the courtiers echoed: 'where is glory like to thine?'
 “'what avail me all my kingdoms? weary am i now, and old;
 those fair sons i have begotten, long to see me dead and cold;
 would i were, and quiet buried, underneath the silent mould!
 “'oh, remorse, the writhing serpent! at my bosom tears and bites;
 horrid, horrid things i look on, though i put out all the lights;
 ghosts of ghastly recollections troop about my bed of nights.
 “'cities burning, convents blazing, red with sacrilegious fires;
 mothers weeping, virgins screaming, vainly for their slaughtered
 sires.'—such a tender conscience,' cries the bishop, 'every
 one admires.
 “'but for such unpleasant bygones, cease, my gracious lord, to
 search,
 they're forgotten and forgiven by our holy mother church;
 never, never does she leave her benefactors in the lurch.
 “'look! the land is crowned with minsters, which your grace's
 bounty raised;
 abbeys filled with holy men, where you and heaven are daily
 praised:
 you, my lord, to think of dying? on my conscience i'm amazed!'
 “'nay, i feel,' replied king canute, 'that my end is drawing near.'
 'don't say so,' exclaimed the courtiers (striving each to squeeze a
 tear).
 'sure your grace is strong and lusty, and may live this fifty
 year.'
 “'live these fifty years!' the bishop roared, with actions made to
 suit.
 'are you mad, my good lord keeper, thus to speak of king canute!
 men have lived a thousand years, and sure his majesty will do't.
 “'adam, enoch, lamech, cainan, mahaleel, methusela,
 lived nine hundred years apiece, and mayn't the king as well as
 they?'
 'fervently,' exclaimed the keeper, 'fervently i trust he may.'
 “'he to die?' resumed the bishop. 'he a mortal like to us?
 death was not for him intended, though communis omnibus:
 keeper, you are irreligious, for to talk and cavil thus.
 “'with his wondrous skill in healing ne'er a doctor can compete,
 loathsome lepers, if he touch them, start up clean upon their feet;
 surely he could raise the dead up, did his highness think it meet.
 “'did not once the jewish captain stay the sun upon the hill,
 and, the while he slew the foemen, bid the silver moon stand still?
 so, no doubt, could gracious canute, if it were his sacred will.'
 “'might i stay the sun above us, good sir bishop?' canute cried;
 'could i bid the silver moon to pause upon her heavenly ride?
 if the moon obeys my orders, sure i can command the tide.
 “'will the advancing waves obey me, bishop, if i make the sign?'
 said the bishop, bowing lowly, 'land and sea, my lord, are thine.'
 canute turned towards the ocean—'back!' he said, 'thou foaming
 brine
 “'from the sacred shore i stand on, i command thee to retreat;
 venture not, thou stormy rebel, to approach thy master's seat:
 ocean, be thou still! i bid thee come not nearer to my feet!'
 “but the sullen ocean answered with a louder, deeper roar,
 and the rapid waves drew nearer, falling sounding on the shore;
 back the keeper and the bishop, back the king and courtiers bore.
 “and he sternly bade them never more to kneel to human clay,
 but alone to praise and worship that which earth and seas obey:
 and his golden crown of empire never wore he from that day.
 king canute is dead and gone: parasites exist alway.”
 at this ballad, which, to be sure, was awfully long, and as grave as a
 sermon, some of the courtiers tittered, some yawned, and some affected to
 be asleep and snore outright. but roger de backbite thinking to curry
 favor with the king by this piece of vulgarity, his majesty fetched him a
 knock on the nose and a buffet on the ear, which, i warrant me, wakened
 master roger; to whom the king said, “listen and be civil, slave; wilfrid
 is singing about thee.—wilfrid, thy ballad is long, but it is to the
 purpose, and i have grown cool during thy homily. give me thy hand, honest
 friend. ladies, good night. gentlemen, we give the grand assault
 to-morrow; when i promise thee, wilfrid, thy banner shall not be before
 mine.”—and the king, giving his arm to her majesty, retired into the
 private pavilion.
 whilst the royal richard and his court were feasting in the camp outside
 the walls of chalus, they of the castle were in the most miserable plight
 that may be conceived. hunger, as well as the fierce assaults of the
 besiegers, had made dire ravages in the place. the garrison's provisions
 of corn and cattle, their very horses, dogs, and donkeys had been eaten up—so
 that it might well be said by wamba “that famine, as well as slaughter,
 had thinned the garrison.” when the men of chalus came on the walls to
 defend it against the scaling-parties of king richard, they were like so
 many skeletons in armor; they could hardly pull their bowstrings at last,
 or pitch down stones on the heads of his majesty's party, so weak had
 their arms become; and the gigantic count of chalus—a warrior as
 redoubtable for his size and strength as richard plantagenet himself—was
 scarcely able to lift up his battle-axe upon the day of that last assault,
 when sir wilfrid of ivanhoe ran him through the—but we are advancing
 matters.
 what should prevent me from describing the agonies of hunger which the
 count (a man of large appetite) suffered in company with his heroic sons
 and garrison?—nothing, but that dante has already done the business
 in the notorious history of count ugolino; so that my efforts might be
 considered as mere imitations. why should i not, if i were minded to revel
 in horrifying details, show you how the famished garrison drew lots, and
 ate themselves during the siege; and how the unlucky lot falling upon the
 countess of chalus, that heroic woman, taking an affectionate leave of her
 family, caused her large caldron in the castle kitchen to be set
 a-boiling, had onions, carrots and herbs, pepper and salt made ready, to
 make a savory soup, as the french like it; and when all things were quite
 completed, kissed her children, jumped into the caldron from off a kitchen
 stool, and so was stewed down in her flannel bed-gown? dear friends, it is
 not from want of imagination, or from having no turn for the terrible or
 pathetic, that i spare you these details. i could give you some
 description that would spoil your dinner and night's rest, and make your
 hair stand on end. but why harrow your feelings? fancy all the tortures
 and horrors that possibly can occur in a beleaguered and famished castle:
 fancy the feelings of men who know that no more quarter will be given them
 than they would get if they were peaceful hungarian citizens kidnapped and
 brought to trial by his majesty the emperor of austria; and then let us
 rush on to the breach and prepare once more to meet the assault of
 dreadful king richard and his men.
 on the th of march in the year , the good king, having copiously
 partaken of breakfast, caused his trumpets to blow, and advanced with his
 host upon the breach of the castle of chalus. arthur de pendennis bore his
 banner; wilfrid of ivanhoe fought on the king's right hand. molyneux,
 bishop of bullocksmithy, doffed crosier and mitre for that day, and though
 fat and pursy, panted up the breach with the most resolute spirit, roaring
 out war-cries and curses, and wielding a prodigious mace of iron, with
 which he did good execution. roger de backbite was forced to come in
 attendance upon the sovereign, but took care to keep in the rear of his
 august master, and to shelter behind his huge triangular shield as much as
 possible. many lords of note followed the king and bore the ladders; and
 as they were placed against the wall, the air was perfectly dark with the
 shower of arrows which the french archers poured out at the besiegers, and
 the cataract of stones, kettles, bootjacks, chests of drawers, crockery,
 umbrellas, congreve-rockets, bombshells, bolts and arrows and other
 missiles which the desperate garrison flung out on the storming-party. the
 king received a copper coal-scuttle right over his eyes, and a mahogany
 wardrobe was discharged at his morion, which would have felled an ox, and
 would have done for the king had not ivanhoe warded it off skilfully.
 still they advanced, the warriors falling around them like grass beneath
 the scythe of the mower.
 the ladders were placed in spite of the hail of death raining round: the
 king and ivanhoe were, of course, the first to mount them. chalus stood in
 the breach, borrowing strength from despair; and roaring out, “ha!
 plantagenet, st. barbacue for chalus!” he dealt the king a crack across
 the helmet with his battle-axe, which shore off the gilt lion and crown
 that surmounted the steel cap. the king bent and reeled back; the
 besiegers were dismayed; the garrison and the count of chalus set up a
 shout of triumph: but it was premature.
 as quick as thought ivanhoe was into the count with a thrust in tierce,
 which took him just at the joint of the armor, and ran him through as
 clean as a spit does a partridge. uttering a horrid shriek, he fell back
 writhing; the king recovering staggered up the parapet; the rush of
 knights followed, and the union-jack was planted triumphantly on the
 walls, just as ivanhoe,—but we must leave him for a moment.
 “ha, st. richard!—ha, st. george!” the tremendous voice of the
 lion-king was heard over the loudest roar of the onset. at every sweep of
 his blade a severed head flew over the parapet, a spouting trunk tumbled,
 bleeding, on the flags of the bartizan. the world hath never seen a
 warrior equal to that lion-hearted plantagenet, as he raged over the keep,
 his eyes flashing fire through the bars of his morion, snorting and
 chafing with the hot lust of battle. one by one les enfans de chalus had
 fallen; there was only one left at last of all the brave race that had
 fought round the gallant count:—only one, and but a boy, a
 fair-haired boy, a blue-eyed boy! he had been gathering pansies in the
 fields but yesterday—it was but a few years, and he was a baby in
 his mother's arms! what could his puny sword do against the most redoubted
 blade in christendom?—and yet bohemond faced the great champion of
 england, and met him foot to foot! turn away, turn away, my dear young
 friends and kind-hearted ladies! do not look at that ill-fated poor boy!
 his blade is crushed into splinters under the axe of the conqueror, and
 the poor child is beaten to his knee! . . .
 “now, by st. barbacue of limoges,” said bertrand de gourdon, “the butcher
 will never strike down yonder lambling! hold thy hand, sir king, or, by
 st. barbacue—”
 swift as thought the veteran archer raised his arblast to his shoulder,
 the whizzing bolt fled from the ringing string, and the next moment
 crashed quivering into the corselet of plantagenet.
 'twas a luckless shot, bertrand of gourdon! maddened by the pain of the
 wound, the brute nature of richard was aroused: his fiendish appetite for
 blood rose to madness, and grinding his teeth, and with a curse too
 horrible to mention, the flashing axe of the royal butcher fell down on
 the blond ringlets of the child, and the children of chalus were no more!
 i just throw this off by way of description, and to show what might be
 done if i chose to indulge in this style of composition; but as in the
 battles which are described by the kindly chronicler, of one of whose
 works this present masterpiece is professedly a continuation, everything
 passes off agreeably—the people are slain, but without any
 unpleasant sensation to the reader; nay, some of the most savage and
 blood-stained characters of history, such is the indomitable good-humor of
 the great novelist, become amiable, jovial companions, for whom one has a
 hearty sympathy—so, if you please, we will have this fighting
 business at chalus, and the garrison and honest bertrand of gourdon,
 disposed of; the former, according to the usage of the good old times,
 having been hung up or murdered to a man, and the latter killed in the
 manner described by the late dr. goldsmith in his history.
 as for the lion-hearted, we all very well know that the shaft of bertrand
 de gourdon put an end to the royal hero—and that from that th of
 march he never robbed nor murdered any more. and we have legends in
 recondite books of the manner of the king's death.
 “you must die, my son,” said the venerable walter of rouen, as berengaria
 was carried shrieking from the king's tent. “repent, sir king, and
 separate yourself from your children!”
 “it is ill jesting with a dying man,” replied the king. “children have i
 none, my good lord bishop, to inherit after me.”
 “richard of england,” said the archbishop, turning up his fine eyes, “your
 vices are your children. ambition is your eldest child, cruelty is your
 second child, luxury is your third child; and you have nourished them from
 your youth up. separate yourself from these sinful ones, and prepare your
 soul, for the hour of departure draweth nigh.”
 violent, wicked, sinful, as he might have been, richard of england met his
 death like a christian man. peace be to the soul of the brave! when the
 news came to king philip of france, he sternly forbade his courtiers to
 rejoice at the death of his enemy. “it is no matter of joy but of dolor,”
 he said, “that the bulwark of christendom and the bravest king of europe
 is no more.”
 meanwhile what has become of sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, whom we left in the
 act of rescuing his sovereign by running the count of chalus through the
 body?
 as the good knight stooped down to pick his sword out of the corpse of his
 fallen foe, some one coming behind him suddenly thrust a dagger into his
 back at a place where his shirt-of-mail was open (for sir wilfrid had
 armed that morning in a hurry, and it was his breast, not his back, that
 he was accustomed ordinarily to protect); and when poor wamba came up on
 the rampart, which he did when the fighting was over,—being such a
 fool that he could not be got to thrust his head into danger for glory's
 sake—he found his dear knight with the dagger in his back lying
 without life upon the body of the count de chalus whom he had anon slain.
 ah, what a howl poor wamba set up when he found his master killed! how he
 lamented over the corpse of that noble knight and friend! what mattered it
 to him that richard the king was borne wounded to his tent, and that
 bertrand de gourdon was flayed alive? at another time the sight of this
 spectacle might have amused the simple knave; but now all his thoughts
 were of his lord: so good, so gentle, so kind, so loyal, so frank with the
 great, so tender to the poor, so truthful of speech, so modest regarding
 his own merit, so true a gentleman, in a word, that anybody might, with
 reason, deplore him.
 as wamba opened the dear knight's corselet, he found a locket round his
 neck, in which there was some hair; not flaxen like that of my lady
 rowena, who was almost as fair as an albino, but as black, wamba thought,
 as the locks of the jewish maiden whom the knight had rescued in the lists
 of templestowe. a bit of rowena's hair was in sir wilfrid's possession,
 too; but that was in his purse along with his seal of arms, and a couple
 of groats: for the good knight never kept any money, so generous was he of
 his largesses when money came in.
 wamba took the purse, and seal, and groats, but he left the locket of hair
 round his master's neck, and when he returned to england never said a word
 about the circumstance. after all, how should he know whose hair it was?
 it might have been the knight's grandmother's hair for aught the fool
 knew; so he kept his counsel when he brought back the sad news and tokens
 to the disconsolate widow at rotherwood.
 the poor fellow would never have left the body at all, and indeed sat by
 it all night, and until the gray of the morning; when, seeing two
 suspicious-looking characters advancing towards him, he fled in dismay,
 supposing that they were marauders who were out searching for booty among
 the dead bodies; and having not the least courage, he fled from these, and
 tumbled down the breach, and never stopped running as fast as his legs
 would carry him, until he reached the tent of his late beloved master.
 the news of the knight's demise, it appeared, had been known at his
 quarters long before; for his servants were gone, and had ridden off on
 his horses; his chests were plundered: there was not so much as a
 shirt-collar left in his drawers, and the very bed and blankets had been
 carried away by these faithful attendants. who had slain ivanhoe? that
 remains a mystery to the present day; but roger de backbite, whose nose he
 had pulled for defamation, and who was behind him in the assault at
 chalus, was seen two years afterwards at the court of king john in an
 embroidered velvet waistcoat which rowena could have sworn she had worked
 for ivanhoe, and about which the widow would have made some little noise,
 but that—but that she was no longer a widow.
 that she truly deplored the death of her lord cannot be questioned, for
 she ordered the deepest mourning which any milliner in york could supply,
 and erected a monument to his memory as big as a minster. but she was a
 lady of such fine principles, that she did not allow her grief to
 overmaster her; and an opportunity speedily arising for uniting the two
 best saxon families in england, by an alliance between herself and the
 gentleman who offered himself to her, rowena sacrificed her inclination to
 remain single, to her sense of duty; and contracted a second matrimonial
 engagement.
 that athelstane was the man, i suppose no reader familiar with life, and
 novels which are a rescript of life, and are all strictly natural and
 edifying, can for a moment doubt. cardinal pandulfo tied the knot for
 them: and lest there should be any doubt about ivanhoe's death (for his
 body was never sent home after all, nor seen after wamba ran away from
 it), his eminence procured a papal decree annulling the former marriage,
 so that rowena became mrs. athelstane with a clear conscience. and who
 shall be surprised, if she was happier with the stupid and boozy thane
 than with the gentle and melancholy wilfrid? did women never have a
 predilection for fools, i should like to know; or fall in love with
 donkeys, before the time of the amours of bottom and titania? ah! mary,
 had you not preferred an ass to a man, would you have married jack bray,
 when a michael angelo offered? ah! fanny, were you not a woman, would you
 persist in adoring tom hiccups, who beats you, and comes home tipsy from
 the club? yes, rowena cared a hundred times more about tipsy athelstane
 than ever she had done for gentle ivanhoe, and so great was her
 infatuation about the former, that she would sit upon his knee in the
 presence of all her maidens, and let him smoke his cigars in the very
 drawing-room.
 this is the epitaph she caused to be written by father drono (who piqued
 himself upon his latinity) on the stone commemorating the death of her
 late lord:—
 hic est guilfridus, belli dum vixit avidus:
 cum gladio et lancea, normania et quoque francia
 verbera dura dabat: per turcos multum equitabat:
 guilbertum occidit: atque hierosolyma vidit.
 heu! nunc sub fossa sunt tanti militis ossa,
 uxor athelstani est conjux castissima thani.
 and this is the translation which the doggerel knave wamba made of the
 latin lines:
 “under the stone you behold,
 buried, and coffined, and cold,
 lieth sir wilfrid the bold.
 “always he marched in advance,
 warring in flanders and france,
 doughty with sword and with lance.
 “famous in saracen fight,
 rode in his youth the good knight,
 scattering paynims in flight.
 “brian the templar untrue,
 fairly in tourney he slew,
 saw hierusalem too.
 “now he is buried and gone,
 lying beneath the gray stone:
 where shall you find such a one?
 “long time his widow deplored,
 weeping the fate of her lord,
 sadly cut off by the sword.
 “when she was eased of her pain,
 came the good lord athelstane,
 when her ladyship married again.”
 athelstane burst into a loud laugh, when he heard it, at the last line,
 but rowena would have had the fool whipped, had not the thane interceded;
 and to him, she said, she could refuse nothing.
 i trust nobody will suppose, from the events described in the last
 chapter, that our friend ivanhoe is really dead. because we have given him
 an epitaph or two and a monument, are these any reasons that he should be
 really gone out of the world? no: as in the pantomime, when we see clown
 and pantaloon lay out harlequin and cry over him, we are always sure that
 master harlequin will be up at the next minute alert and shining in his
 glistening coat; and, after giving a box on the ears to the pair of them,
 will be taking a dance with columbine, or leaping gayly through the
 clock-face, or into the three-pair-of-stairs' window:—so sir
 wilfrid, the harlequin of our christmas piece, may be run through a
 little, or may make believe to be dead, but will assuredly rise up again
 when he is wanted, and show himself at the right moment.
 the suspicious-looking characters from whom wamba ran away were no
 cut-throats and plunderers, as the poor knave imagined, but no other than
 ivanhoe's friend, the hermit, and a reverend brother of his, who visited
 the scene of the late battle in order to see if any christians still
 survived there, whom they might shrive and get ready for heaven, or to
 whom they might possibly offer the benefit of their skill as leeches. both
 were prodigiously learned in the healing art; and had about them those
 precious elixirs which so often occur in romances, and with which patients
 are so miraculously restored. abruptly dropping his master's head from his
 lap as he fled, poor wamba caused the knight's pate to fall with rather a
 heavy thump to the ground, and if the knave had but stayed a minute
 longer, he would have heard sir wilfrid utter a deep groan. but though the
 fool heard him not, the holy hermits did; and to recognize the gallant
 wilfrid, to withdraw the enormous dagger still sticking out of his back,
 to wash the wound with a portion of the precious elixir, and to pour a
 little of it down his throat, was with the excellent hermits the work of
 an instant: which remedies being applied, one of the good men took the
 knight by the heels and the other by the head, and bore him daintily from
 the castle to their hermitage in a neighboring rock. as for the count of
 chalus, and the remainder of the slain, the hermits were too much occupied
 with ivanhoe's case to mind them, and did not, it appears, give them any
 elixir: so that, if they are really dead, they must stay on the rampart
 stark and cold; or if otherwise, when the scene closes upon them as it
 does now, they may get up, shake themselves, go to the slips and drink a
 pot of porter, or change their stage-clothes and go home to supper. my
 dear readers, you may settle the matter among yourselves as you like. if
 you wish to kill the characters really off, let them be dead, and have
 done with them: but, entre nous, i don't believe they are any more dead
 than you or i are, and sometimes doubt whether there is a single syllable
 of truth in this whole story.
 well, ivanhoe was taken to the hermits' cell, and there doctored by the
 holy fathers for his hurts; which were of such a severe and dangerous
 order, that he was under medical treatment for a very considerable time.
 when he woke up from his delirium, and asked how long he had been ill,
 fancy his astonishment when he heard that he had been in the fever for six
 years! he thought the reverend fathers were joking at first, but their
 profession forbade them from that sort of levity; and besides, he could
 not possibly have got well any sooner, because the story would have been
 sadly put out had he appeared earlier. and it proves how good the fathers
 were to him, and how very nearly that scoundrel of a roger de backbite's
 dagger had finished him, that he did not get well under this great length
 of time; during the whole of which the fathers tended him without ever
 thinking of a fee. i know of a kind physician in this town who does as
 much sometimes; but i won't do him the ill service of mentioning his name
 here.
 ivanhoe, being now quickly pronounced well, trimmed his beard, which by
 this time hung down considerably below his knees, and calling for his suit
 of chain-armor, which before had fitted his elegant person as tight as
 wax, now put it on, and it bagged and hung so loosely about him, that even
 the good friars laughed at his absurd appearance. it was impossible that
 he should go about the country in such a garb as that: the very boys would
 laugh at him: so the friars gave him one of their old gowns, in which he
 disguised himself, and after taking an affectionate farewell of his
 friends, set forth on his return to his native country. as he went along,
 he learned that richard was dead, that john reigned, that prince arthur
 had been poisoned, and was of course made acquainted with various other
 facts of public importance recorded in pinnock's catechism and the
 historic page.
 but these subjects did not interest him near so much as his own private
 affairs; and i can fancy that his legs trembled under him, and his
 pilgrim's staff shook with emotion, as at length, after many perils, he
 came in sight of his paternal mansion of rotherwood, and saw once more the
 chimneys smoking, the shadows of the oaks over the grass in the sunset,
 and the rooks winging over the trees. he heard the supper gong sounding:
 he knew his way to the door well enough; he entered the familiar hall with
 a benedicite, and without any more words took his place.
 you might have thought for a moment that the gray friar trembled and his
 shrunken cheek looked deadly pale; but he recovered himself presently: nor
 could you see his pallor for the cowl which covered his face.
 a little boy was playing on athelstane's knee; rowena smiling and patting
 the saxon thane fondly on his broad bullhead, filled him a huge cup of
 spiced wine from a golden jug. he drained a quart of the liquor, and,
 turning round, addressed the friar:—
 “and so, gray frere, thou sawest good king richard fall at chalus by the
 bolt of that felon bowman?”
 “we did, an it please you. the brothers of our house attended the good
 king in his last moments: in truth, he made a christian ending!”
 “and didst thou see the archer flayed alive? it must have been rare
 sport,” roared athelstane, laughing hugely at the joke. “how the fellow
 must have howled!”
 “my love!” said rowena, interposing tenderly, and putting a pretty white
 finger on his lip.
 “i would have liked to see it too,” cried the boy.
 “that's my own little cedric, and so thou shalt. and, friar, didst see my
 poor kinsman sir wilfrid of ivanhoe? they say he fought well at chalus!”
 “my sweet lord,” again interposed rowena, “mention him not.”
 “why? because thou and he were so tender in days of yore—when you
 could not bear my plain face, being all in love with his pale one?”
 “those times are past now, dear athelstane,” said his affectionate wife,
 looking up to the ceiling.
 “marry, thou never couldst forgive him the jewess, rowena.”
 “the odious hussy! don't mention the name of the unbelieving creature,”
 exclaimed the lady.
 “well, well, poor wil was a good lad—a thought melancholy and
 milksop though. why, a pint of sack fuddled his poor brains.”
 “sir wilfrid of ivanhoe was a good lance,” said the friar. “i have heard
 there was none better in christendom. he lay in our convent after his
 wounds, and it was there we tended him till he died. he was buried in our
 north cloister.”
 “and there's an end of him,” said athelstane. “but come, this is dismal
 talk. where's wamba the jester? let us have a song. stir up, wamba, and
 don't lie like a dog in the fire! sing us a song, thou crack-brained
 jester, and leave off whimpering for bygones. tush, man! there be many
 good fellows left in this world.”
 “there be buzzards in eagles' nests,” wamba said, who was lying stretched
 before the fire, sharing the hearth with the thane's dogs. “there be dead
 men alive, and live men dead. there be merry songs and dismal songs.
 marry, and the merriest are the saddest sometimes. i will leave off motley
 and wear black, gossip athelstane. i will turn howler at funerals, and
 then, perhaps, i shall be merry. motley is fit for mutes, and black for
 fools. give me some drink, gossip, for my voice is as cracked as my
 brain.”
 “drink and sing, thou beast, and cease prating,” the thane said.
 and wamba, touching his rebeck wildly, sat up in the chimney-side and
 curled his lean shanks together and began:—
 “ho! pretty page, with dimpled chin,
 that never has known the barber's shear,
 all your aim is woman to win—
 this is the way that boys begin—
 wait till you've come to forty year!
 “curly gold locks cover foolish brains,
 billing and cooing is all your cheer,
 sighing and singing of midnight strains
 under bonnybells' window-panes.
 wait till you've come to forty year!
 “forty times over let michaelmas pass,
 grizzling hair the brain doth clear;
 then you know a boy is an ass,
 then you know the worth of a lass,
 once you have come to forty year.
 “pledge me round, i bid ye declare,
 all good fellows whose beards are gray:
 did not the fairest of the fair
 common grow, and wearisome, ere
 ever a month was passed away?
 “the reddest lips that ever have kissed,
 the brightest eyes that ever have shone,
 may pray and whisper and we not list,
 or look away and never be missed,
 ere yet ever a month was gone.
 “gillian's dead, heaven rest her bier,
 how i loved her twenty years syne!
 marian's married, but i sit here,
 alive and merry at forty year,
 dipping my nose in the gascon wine.”
 “who taught thee that merry lay, wamba, thou son of witless?” roared
 athelstane, clattering his cup on the table and shouting the chorus.
 “it was a good and holy hermit, sir, the pious clerk of copmanhurst, that
 you wot of, who played many a prank with us in the days that we knew king
 richard. ah, noble sir, that was a jovial time and a good priest.”
 “they say the holy priest is sure of the next bishopric, my love,” said
 rowena. “his majesty hath taken him into much favor. my lord of huntingdon
 looked very well at the last ball; but i never could see any beauty in the
 countess—a freckled, blowsy thing, whom they used to call maid
 marian: though, for the matter of that, what between her flirtations with
 major littlejohn and captain scarlett, really—”
 “jealous again—haw! haw!” laughed athelstane.
 “i am above jealousy, and scorn it,” rowena answered, drawing herself up
 very majestically.
 “well, well, wamba's was a good song,” athelstane said.
 “nay, a wicked song,” said rowena, turning up her eyes as usual. “what!
 rail at woman's love? prefer a filthy wine cup to a true wife? woman's
 love is eternal, my athelstane. he who questions it would be a blasphemer
 were he not a fool. the well-born and well-nurtured gentlewoman loves once
 and once only.”
 “i pray you, madam, pardon me, i—i am not well,” said the gray
 friar, rising abruptly from his settle, and tottering down the steps of
 the dais. wamba sprung after him, his bells jingling as he rose, and
 casting his arms around the apparently fainting man, he led him away into
 the court. “there be dead men alive and live men dead,” whispered he.
 “there be coffins to laugh at and marriages to cry over. said i not sooth,
 holy friar?” and when they had got out into the solitary court, which was
 deserted by all the followers of the thane, who were mingling in the
 drunken revelry in the hall, wamba, seeing that none were by, knelt down,
 and kissing the friar's garment, said, “i knew thee, i knew thee, my lord
 and my liege!”
 “get up,” said wilfrid of ivanhoe, scarcely able to articulate: “only
 fools are faithful.”
 and he passed on, and into the little chapel where his father lay buried.
 all night long the friar spent there: and wamba the jester lay outside
 watching as mute as the saint over the porch.
 when the morning came, wumba was gone; and the knave being in the habit of
 wandering hither and thither as he chose, little notice was taken of his
 absence by a master and mistress who had not much sense of humor. as for
 sir wilfrid, a gentleman of his delicacy of feelings could not be expected
 to remain in a house where things so naturally disagreeable to him were
 occurring, and he quitted rotherwood incontinently, after paying a dutiful
 visit to the tomb where his old father, cedric, was buried; and hastened
 on to york, at which city he made himself known to the family attorney, a
 most respectable man, in whose hands his ready money was deposited, and
 took up a sum sufficient to fit himself out with credit, and a handsome
 retinue, as became a knight of consideration. but he changed his name,
 wore a wig and spectacles, and disguised himself entirely, so that it was
 impossible his friends or the public should know him, and thus
 metamorphosed, went about whithersoever his fancy led him. he was present
 at a public ball at york, which the lord mayor gave, danced sir roger de
 coverley in the very same set with rowena—(who was disgusted that
 maid marian took precedence of her)—he saw little athelstane overeat
 himself at the supper and pledge his big father in a cup of sack; he met
 the reverend mr. tuck at a missionary meeting, where he seconded a
 resolution proposed by that eminent divine;—in fine, he saw a score
 of his old acquaintances, none of whom recognized in him the warrior of
 palestine and templestowe. having a large fortune and nothing to do, he
 went about this country performing charities, slaying robbers, rescuing
 the distressed, and achieving noble feats of arms. dragons and giants
 existed in his day no more, or be sure he would have had a fling at them:
 for the truth is, sir wilfrid of ivanhoe was somewhat sick of the life
 which the hermits of chalus had restored to him, and felt himself so
 friendless and solitary that he would not have been sorry to come to an
 end of it. ah, my dear friends and intelligent british public, are there
 not others who are melancholy under a mask of gayety, and who, in the
 midst of crowds, are lonely? liston was a most melancholy man; grimaldi
 had feelings; and there are others i wot of:—but psha!—let us
 have the next chapter.
 the rascally manner in which the chicken-livered successor of richard of
 the lion-heart conducted himself to all parties, to his relatives, his
 nobles, and his people, is a matter notorious, and set forth clearly in
 the historic page: hence, although nothing, except perhaps success, can,
 in my opinion, excuse disaffection to the sovereign, or appearance in
 armed rebellion against him, the loyal reader will make allowance for two
 of the principal personages of this narrative, who will have to appear in
 the present chapter in the odious character of rebels to their lord and
 king. it must be remembered, in partial exculpation of the fault of
 athelstane and rowena, (a fault for which they were bitterly punished, as
 you shall presently hear,) that the monarch exasperated his subjects in a
 variety of ways,—that before he murdered his royal nephew, prince
 arthur, there was a great question whether he was the rightful king of
 england at all,—that his behavior as an uncle, and a family man, was
 likely to wound the feelings of any lady and mother,—finally, that
 there were palliations for the conduct of rowena and ivanhoe, which it now
 becomes our duty to relate.
 when his majesty destroyed prince arthur, the lady rowena, who was one of
 the ladies of honor to the queen, gave up her place at court at once, and
 retired to her castle of rotherwood. expressions made use of by her, and
 derogatory to the character of the sovereign, were carried to the
 monarch's ears, by some of those parasites, doubtless, by whom it is the
 curse of kings to be attended; and john swore, by st. peter's teeth, that
 he would be revenged upon the haughty saxon lady,—a kind of oath
 which, though he did not trouble himself about all other oaths, he was
 never known to break. it was not for some years after he had registered
 this vow, that he was enabled to keep it.
 had ivanhoe been present at ronen, when the king meditated his horrid
 designs against his nephew, there is little doubt that sir wilfrid would
 have prevented them, and rescued the boy: for ivanhoe was, as we need
 scarcely say, a hero of romance; and it is the custom and duty of all
 gentlemen of that profession to be present on all occasions of historic
 interest, to be engaged in all conspiracies, royal interviews, and
 remarkable occurrences: and hence sir wilfrid would certainly have rescued
 the young prince, had he been anywhere in the neighborhood of rouen, where
 the foul tragedy occurred. but he was a couple of hundred leagues off, at
 chalus, when the circumstance happened; tied down in his bed as crazy as a
 bedlamite, and raving ceaselessly in the hebrew tongue (which he had
 caught up during a previous illness in which he was tended by a maiden of
 that nation) about a certain rebecca ben isaacs, of whom, being a married
 man, he never would have thought, had he been in his sound senses. during
 this delirium, what were politics to him, or he to politics? king john or
 king arthur was entirely indifferent to a man who announced to his
 nurse-tenders, the good hermits of chalus before mentioned, that he was
 the marquis of jericho, and about to marry rebecca the queen of sheba. in
 a word, he only heard of what had occurred when he reached england, and
 his senses were restored to him. whether was he happier, sound of brain
 and entirely miserable, (as any man would be who found so admirable a wife
 as rowena married again,) or perfectly crazy, the husband of the beautiful
 rebecca? i don't know which he liked best.
 howbeit the conduct of king john inspired sir wilfrid with so thorough a
 detestation of that sovereign, that he never could be brought to take
 service under him; to get himself presented at st. james's, or in any way
 to acknowledge, but by stern acquiescence, the authority of the sanguinary
 successor of his beloved king richard. it was sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, i
 need scarcely say, who got the barons of england to league together and
 extort from the king that famous instrument and palladium of our liberties
 at present in the british museum, great russell street, bloomsbury—the
 magna charta. his name does not naturally appear in the list of barons,
 because he was only a knight, and a knight in disguise too: nor does
 athelstane's signature figure on that document. athelstane, in the first
 place, could not write; nor did he care a pennypiece about politics, so
 long as he could drink his wine at home undisturbed, and have his hunting
 and shooting in quiet.
 it was not until the king wanted to interfere with the sport of every
 gentleman in england (as we know by reference to the historic page that
 this odious monarch did), that athelstane broke out into open rebellion,
 along with several yorkshire squires and noblemen. it is recorded of the
 king, that he forbade every man to hunt his own deer; and, in order to
 secure an obedience to his orders, this herod of a monarch wanted to
 secure the eldest sons of all the nobility and gentry, as hostages for the
 good behavior of their parents.
 athelstane was anxious about his game—rowena was anxious about her
 son. the former swore that he would hunt his deer in spite of all norman
 tyrants—the latter asked, should she give up her boy to the ruffian
 who had murdered his own nephew?* the speeches of both were brought to the
 king at york; and, furious, he ordered an instant attack upon rotherwood,
 and that the lord and lady of that castle should be brought before him
 dead or alive.
 *see hume, giraldus cambrensis, the monk of croyland, and
 pinnock's catechism.
 ah, where was wilfrid of ivanhoe, the unconquerable champion, to defend
 the castle against the royal party? a few thrusts from his lance would
 have spitted the leading warriors of the king's host: a few cuts from his
 sword would have put john's forces to rout. but the lance and sword of
 ivanhoe were idle on this occasion. “no, be hanged to me!” said the
 knight, bitterly, “this is a quarrel in which i can't interfere. common
 politeness forbids. let yonder ale-swilling athelstane defend his—ha,
 ha—wife; and my lady rowena guard her—ha, ha, ha—son.”
 and he laughed wildly and madly; and the sarcastic, way in which he choked
 and gurgled out the words “wife” and “son” would have made you shudder to
 hear.
 when he heard, however, that, on the fourth day of the siege, athelstane
 had been slain by a cannon-ball, (and this time for good, and not to come
 to life again as he had done before,) and that the widow (if so the
 innocent bigamist may be called) was conducting the defence of rotherwood
 herself with the greatest intrepidity, showing herself upon the walls with
 her little son, (who bellowed like a bull, and did not like the fighting
 at all,) pointing the guns and encouraging the garrison in every way—better
 feelings returned to the bosom of the knight of ivanhoe, and summoning his
 men, he armed himself quickly and determined to go forth to the rescue.
 he rode without stopping for two days and two nights in the direction of
 rotherwood, with such swiftness and disregard for refreshment, indeed,
 that his men dropped one by one upon the road, and he arrived alone at the
 lodge-gate of the park. the windows were smashed; the door stove in; the
 lodge, a neat little swiss cottage, with a garden where the pinafores of
 mrs. gurth's children might have been seen hanging on the
 gooseberry-bushes in more peaceful times, was now a ghastly heap of
 smoking ruins: cottage, bushes, pinafores, children lay mangled together,
 destroyed by the licentious soldiery of an infuriate monarch! far be it
 from me to excuse the disobedience of athelstane and rowena to their
 sovereign; but surely, surely this cruelty might have been spared.
 gurth, who was lodge-keeper, was lying dreadfully wounded and expiring at
 the flaming and violated threshold of his lately picturesque home. a
 catapult and a couple of mangonels had done his business. the faithful
 fellow, recognizing his master, who had put up his visor and forgotten his
 wig and spectacles in the agitation of the moment, exclaimed, “sir
 wilfrid! my dear master—praised be st. waltheof—there may be
 yet time—my beloved mistr—master athelst . . .” he sank back,
 and never spoke again.
 ivanhoe spurred on his horse bavieca madly up the chestnut avenue. the
 castle was before him; the western tower was in flames; the besiegers were
 pressing at the southern gate; athelstane's banner, the bull rampant, was
 still on the northern bartizan. “an ivanhoe, an ivanhoe!” he bellowed out,
 with a shout that overcame all the din of battle: “nostre dame a la
 rescousse!” and to hurl his lance through the midriff of reginald de
 bracy, who was commanding the assault—who fell howling with anguish—to
 wave his battle-axe over his own head, and cut off those of thirteen
 men-at-arms, was the work of an instant. “an ivanhoe, an ivanhoe!” he
 still shouted, and down went a man as sure as he said “hoe!”
 “ivanhoe! ivanhoe!” a shrill voice cried from the top of the northern
 bartizan. ivanhoe knew it.
 “rowena my love, i come!” he roared on his part. “villains! touch but a
 hair of her head, and i . . .”
 here, with a sudden plunge and a squeal of agony, bavieca sprang forward
 wildly, and fell as wildly on her back, rolling over and over upon the
 knight. all was dark before him; his brain reeled; it whizzed; something
 came crashing down on his forehead. st. waltheof and all the saints of the
 saxon calendar protect the knight! . . .
 when he came to himself, wamba and the lieutenant of his lances were
 leaning over him with a bottle of the hermit's elixir. “we arrived here
 the day after the battle,” said the fool; “marry, i have a knack of that.”
 “your worship rode so deucedly quick, there was no keeping up with your
 worship,” said the lieutenant.
 “the day—after—the bat—” groaned ivanhoe. “where is the
 lady rowena?”
 “the castle has been taken and sacked,” the lieutenant said, and pointed
 to what once was rotherwood, but was now only a heap of smoking ruins. not
 a tower was left, not a roof, not a floor, not a single human being!
 everything was flame and ruin, smash and murther!
 of course ivanhoe fell back fainting again among the ninety-seven
 men-at-arms whom he had slain; and it was not until wamba had applied a
 second, and uncommonly strong dose of the elixir that he came to life
 again. the good knight was, however, from long practice, so accustomed to
 the severest wounds, that he bore them far more easily than common folk,
 and thus was enabled to reach york upon a litter, which his men
 constructed for him, with tolerable ease.
 rumor had as usual advanced before him; and he heard at the hotel where he
 stopped, what had been the issue of the affair at rotherwood. a minute or
 two after his horse was stabbed, and ivanhoe knocked down, the western
 bartizan was taken by the storming-party which invested it, and every soul
 slain, except rowena and her boy; who were tied upon horses and carried
 away, under a secure guard, to one of the king's castles—nobody knew
 whither: and ivanhoe was recommended by the hotel-keeper (whose house he
 had used in former times) to reassume his wig and spectacles, and not call
 himself by his own name any more, lest some of the king's people should
 lay hands on him. however, as he had killed everybody round about him,
 there was but little danger of his discovery; and the knight of the
 spectacles, as he was called, went about york quite unmolested, and at
 liberty to attend to his own affairs.
 we wish to be brief in narrating this part of the gallant hero's
 existence; for his life was one of feeling rather than affection, and the
 description of mere sentiment is considered by many well-informed persons
 to be tedious. what were his sentiments now, it may be asked, under the
 peculiar position in which he found himself? he had done his duty by
 rowena, certainly: no man could say otherwise. but as for being in love
 with her any more, after what had occurred, that was a different question.
 well, come what would, he was determined still to continue doing his duty
 by her;—but as she was whisked away the deuce knew whither, how
 could he do anything? so he resigned himself to the fact that she was thus
 whisked away.
 he, of course, sent emissaries about the country to endeavor to find out
 where rowena was: but these came back without any sort of intelligence;
 and it was remarked, that he still remained in a perfect state of
 resignation. he remained in this condition for a year, or more; and it was
 said that he was becoming more cheerful, and he certainly was growing
 rather fat. the knight of the spectacles was voted an agreeable man in a
 grave way; and gave some very elegant, though quiet, parties, and was
 received in the best society of york.
 it was just at assize-time, the lawyers and barristers had arrived, and
 the town was unusually gay; when, one morning, the attorney, whom we have
 mentioned as sir wilfrid's man of business, and a most respectable man,
 called upon his gallant client at his lodgings, and said he had a
 communication of importance to make. having to communicate with a client
 of rank, who was condemned to be hanged for forgery, sir roger de
 backbite, the attorney said, he had been to visit that party in the
 condemned cell; and on the way through the yard, and through the bars of
 another cell, had seen and recognized an old acquaintance of sir wilfrid
 of ivanhoe—and the lawyer held him out, with a particular look, a
 note, written on a piece of whity-brown paper.
 what were ivanhoe's sensations when he recognized the handwriting of
 rowena!—he tremblingly dashed open the billet, and read as follows:—
 “my dearest ivanhoe,—for i am thine now as erst, and my first love
 was ever—ever dear to me. have i been near thee dying for a whole
 year, and didst thou make no effort to rescue thy rowena? have ye given to
 others—i mention not their name nor their odious creed—the
 heart that ought to be mine? i send thee my forgiveness from my dying
 pallet of straw.—i forgive thee the insults i have received, the
 cold and hunger i have endured, the failing health of my boy, the
 bitterness of my prison, thy infatuation about that jewess, which made our
 married life miserable, and which caused thee, i am sure, to go abroad to
 look after her. i forgive thee all my wrongs, and fain would bid thee
 farewell. mr. smith hath gained over my gaoler—he will tell thee how
 i may see thee. come and console my last hour by promising that thou wilt
 care for my boy—his boy who fell like a hero (when thou wert absent)
 combating by the side of rowena.”
 the reader may consult his own feelings, and say whether ivanhoe was
 likely to be pleased or not by this letter: however, he inquired of mr.
 smith, the solicitor, what was the plan which that gentleman had devised
 for the introduction to lady rowena, and was informed that he was to get a
 barrister's gown and wig, when the gaoler would introduce him into the
 interior of the prison. these decorations, knowing several gentlemen of
 the northern circuit, sir wilfrid of ivanhoe easily procured, and with
 feelings of no small trepidation, reached the cell, where, for the space
 of a year, poor rowena had been immured.
 if any person have a doubt of the correctness, of the historical exactness
 of this narrative, i refer him to the “biographie universelle” (article
 jean sans terre), which says, “la femme d'un baron auquel on vint demander
 son fils, repondit, 'le roi pense-t-il que je confierai mon fils a un
 homme qui a egorge son neveu de sa propre main?' jean fit enlever la mere
 et l'enfant, et la laissa mourir de faim dans les cachots.”
 i picture to myself, with a painful sympathy, rowena undergoing this
 disagreeable sentence. all her virtues, her resolution, her chaste energy
 and perseverance, shine with redoubled lustre, and, for the first time
 since the commencement of the history, i feel that i am partially
 reconciled to her. the weary year passes—she grows weaker and more
 languid, thinner and thinner! at length ivanhoe, in the disguise of a
 barrister of the northern circuit, is introduced to her cell, and finds
 his lady in the last stage of exhaustion, on the straw of her dungeon,
 with her little boy in her arms. she has preserved his life at the expense
 of her own, giving him the whole of the pittance which her gaolers allowed
 her, and perishing herself of inanition.
 there is a scene! i feel as if i had made it up, as it were, with this
 lady, and that we part in peace, in consequence of my providing her with
 so sublime a death-bed. fancy ivanhoe's entrance—their recognition—the
 faint blush upon her worn features—the pathetic way in which she
 gives little cedric in charge to him, and his promises of protection.
 “wilfrid, my early loved,” slowly gasped she, removing her gray hair from
 her furrowed temples, and gazing on her boy fondly, as he nestled on
 ivanhoe's knee—“promise me, by st. waltheof of templestowe—promise
 me one boon!”
 “i do,” said ivanhoe, clasping the boy, and thinking it was to that little
 innocent the promise was intended to apply.
 “by st. waltheof?”
 “by st. waltheof!”
 “promise me, then,” gasped rowena, staring wildly at him, “that you never
 will marry a jewess?”
 “by st. waltheof,” cried ivanhoe, “this is too much, rowena!”—but he
 felt his hand grasped for a moment, the nerves then relaxed, the pale lips
 ceased to quiver—she was no more!
 having placed young cedric at school at the hall of dotheboyes, in
 yorkshire, and arranged his family affairs, sir wilfrid of ivanhoe quitted
 a country which had no longer any charms for him, and in which his stay
 was rendered the less agreeable by the notion that king john would hang
 him, if ever he could lay hands on the faithful follower of king richard
 and prince arthur.
 but there was always in those days a home and occupation for a brave and
 pious knight. a saddle on a gallant war-horse, a pitched field against the
 moors, a lance wherewith to spit a turbaned infidel, or a road to paradise
 carved out by his scimitar,—these were the height of the ambition of
 good and religious warriors; and so renowned a champion as sir wilfrid of
 ivanhoe was sure to be well received wherever blows were stricken for the
 cause of christendom. even among the dark templars, he who had twice
 overcome the most famous lance of their order was a respected though not a
 welcome guest: but among the opposition company of the knights of st.
 john, he was admired and courted beyond measure; and always affectioning
 that order, which offered him, indeed, its first rank and commanderies, he
 did much good service; fighting in their ranks for the glory of heaven and
 st. waltheof, and slaying many thousands of the heathen in prussia,
 poland, and those savage northern countries. the only fault that the great
 and gallant, though severe and ascetic folko of heydenbraten, the chief of
 the order of st. john, found with the melancholy warrior, whose lance did
 such good service to the cause, was, that he did not persecute the jews as
 so religious a knight should. he let off sundry captives of that
 persuasion whom he had taken with his sword and his spear, saved others
 from torture, and actually ransomed the two last grinders of a venerable
 rabbi (that roger de cartright, an english knight of the order, was about
 to extort from the elderly israelite,) with a hundred crowns and a gimmal
 ring, which were all the property he possessed. whenever he so ransomed or
 benefited one of this religion, he would moreover give them a little token
 or a message (were the good knight out of money), saying, “take this
 token, and remember this deed was done by wilfrid the disinherited, for
 the services whilome rendered to him by rebecca, the daughter of isaac of
 york!” so among themselves, and in their meetings and synagogues, and in
 their restless travels from land to land, when they of jewry cursed and
 reviled all christians, as such abominable heathens will, they
 nevertheless excepted the name of the desdichado, or the
 doubly-disinherited as he now was, the desdichado-doblado.
 the account of all the battles, storms, and scaladoes in which sir wilfrid
 took part, would only weary the reader; for the chopping off one heathen's
 head with an axe must be very like the decapitation of any other
 unbeliever. suffice it to say, that wherever this kind of work was to be
 done, and sir wilfrid was in the way, he was the man to perform it. it
 would astonish you were you to see the account that wamba kept of his
 master's achievements, and of the bulgarians, bohemians, croatians, slain
 or maimed by his hand. and as, in those days, a reputation for valor had
 an immense effect upon the soft hearts of women, and even the ugliest man,
 were he a stout warrior, was looked upon with favor by beauty: so ivanhoe,
 who was by no means ill-favored, though now becoming rather elderly, made
 conquests over female breasts as well as over saracens, and had more than
 one direct offer of marriage made to him by princesses, countesses, and
 noble ladies possessing both charms and money, which they were anxious to
 place at the disposal of a champion so renowned. it is related that the
 duchess regent of kartoffelberg offered him her hand, and the ducal crown
 of kartoffelberg, which he had rescued from the unbelieving prussians; but
 ivanhoe evaded the duchess's offer, by riding away from her capital
 secretly at midnight and hiding himself in a convent of knights
 hospitallers on the borders of poland. and it is a fact that the princess
 rosalia seraphina of pumpernickel, the most lovely woman of her time,
 became so frantically attached to him, that she followed him on a
 campaign, and was discovered with his baggage disguised as a horse-boy.
 but no princess, no beauty, no female blandishments had any charms for
 ivanhoe: no hermit practised a more austere celibacy. the severity of his
 morals contrasted so remarkably with the lax and dissolute manner of the
 young lords and nobles in the courts which he frequented, that these young
 springalds would sometimes sneer and call him monk and milksop; but his
 courage in the day of battle was so terrible and admirable, that i promise
 you the youthful libertines did not sneer then; and the most reckless of
 them often turned pale when they couched their lances to follow ivanhoe.
 holy waltheof! it was an awful sight to see him with his pale calm face,
 his shield upon his breast, his heavy lance before him, charging a
 squadron of heathen bohemians, or a regiment of cossacks! wherever he saw
 the enemy, ivanhoe assaulted him: and when people remonstrated with him,
 and said if he attacked such and such a post, breach, castle, or army, he
 would be slain, “and suppose i be?” he answered, giving them to understand
 that he would as lief the battle of life were over altogether.
 while he was thus making war against the northern infidels news was
 carried all over christendom of a catastrophe which had befallen the good
 cause in the south of europe, where the spanish christians had met with
 such a defeat and massacre at the hands of the moors as had never been
 known in the proudest day of saladin.
 thursday, the th of shaban, in the th year of the hejira, is known all
 over the west as the amun-al-ark, the year of the battle of alarcos,
 gained over the christians by the moslems of andaluz, on which fatal day
 christendom suffered a defeat so signal, that it was feared the spanish
 peninsula would be entirely wrested away from the dominion of the cross.
 on that day the franks lost , men and , prisoners. a man-slave
 sold among the unbelievers for a dirhem; a donkey for the same; a sword,
 half a dirhem; a horse, five dirhems. hundreds of thousands of these
 various sorts of booty were in the possession of the triumphant followers
 of yakoobal-mansoor. curses on his head! but he was a brave warrior, and
 the christians before him seemed to forget that they were the descendants
 of the brave cid, the kanbitoor, as the moorish hounds (in their jargon)
 denominated the famous campeador.
 a general move for the rescue of the faithful in spain—a crusade
 against the infidels triumphing there, was preached throughout europe by
 all the most eloquent clergy; and thousands and thousands of valorous
 knights and nobles, accompanied by well-meaning varlets and vassals of the
 lower sort, trooped from all sides to the rescue. the straits of
 gibel-al-tariff, at which spot the moor, passing from barbary, first
 planted his accursed foot on the christian soil, were crowded with the
 galleys of the templars and the knights of st. john, who flung succors
 into the menaced kingdoms of the peninsula; the inland sea swarmed with
 their ships hasting from their forts and islands, from rhodes and
 byzantium, from jaffa and ascalon. the pyrenean peaks beheld the pennons
 and glittered with the armor of the knights marching out of france into
 spain; and, finally, in a ship that set sail direct from bohemia, where
 sir wilfrid happened to be quartered at the time when the news of the
 defeat of alarcos came and alarmed all good christians, ivanhoe landed at
 barcelona, and proceeded to slaughter the moors forthwith.
 he brought letters of introduction from his friend folko of heydenbraten,
 the grand master of the knights of saint john, to the venerable baldomero
 de garbanzos, grand master of the renowned order of saint jago. the chief
 of saint jago's knights paid the greatest respect to a warrior whose fame
 was already so widely known in christendom; and ivanhoe had the pleasure
 of being appointed to all the posts of danger and forlorn hopes that could
 be devised in his honor. he would be called up twice or thrice in a night
 to fight the moors: he led ambushes, scaled breaches, was blown up by
 mines; was wounded many hundred times (recovering, thanks to the elixir,
 of which wamba always carried a supply); he was the terror of the
 saracens, and the admiration and wonder of the christians.
 to describe his deeds, would, i say, be tedious; one day's battle was like
 that of another. i am not writing in ten volumes like monsieur alexandre
 dumas, or even in three like other great authors. we have no room for the
 recounting of sir wilfrid's deeds of valor. whenever he took a moorish
 town, it was remarked, that he went anxiously into the jewish quarter, and
 inquired amongst the hebrews, who were in great numbers in spain, for
 rebecca, the daughter of isaac. many jews, according to his wont, he
 ransomed, and created so much scandal by this proceeding, and by the
 manifest favor which he showed to the people of that nation, that the
 master of saint jago remonstrated with him, and it is probable he would
 have been cast into the inquisition and roasted, but that his prodigious
 valor and success against the moors counterbalanced his heretical
 partiality for the children of jacob.
 it chanced that the good knight was present at the siege of xixona in
 andalusia, entering the breach first, according to his wont, and slaying,
 with his own hand, the moorish lieutenant of the town, and several hundred
 more of its unbelieving defenders. he had very nearly done for the
 alfaqui, or governor—a veteran warrior with a crooked scimitar and a
 beard as white as snow—but a couple of hundred of the alfaqui's
 bodyguard flung themselves between ivanhoe and their chief, and the old
 fellow escaped with his life, leaving a handful of his beard in the grasp
 of the english knight. the strictly military business being done, and such
 of the garrison as did not escape put, as by right, to the sword, the good
 knight, sir wilfrid of ivanhoe, took no further part in the proceedings of
 the conquerors of that ill-fated place. a scene of horrible massacre and
 frightful reprisals ensued, and the christian warriors, hot with victory
 and flushed with slaughter, were, it is to be feared, as savage in their
 hour of triumph as ever their heathen enemies had been.
 among the most violent and least scrupulous was the ferocious knight of
 saint jago, don beltran de cuchilla y trabuco y espada y espelon. raging
 through the vanquished city like a demon, he slaughtered indiscriminately
 all those infidels of both sexes whose wealth did not tempt him to a
 ransom, or whose beauty did not reserve them for more frightful calamities
 than death. the slaughter over, don beltran took up his quarters in the
 albaycen, where the alfaqui had lived who had so narrowly escaped the
 sword of ivanhoe; but the wealth, the treasure, the slaves, and the family
 of the fugitive chieftain, were left in possession of the conqueror of
 xixona. among the treasures, don beltran recognized with a savage joy the
 coat-armors and ornaments of many brave and unfortunate companions-in-arms
 who had fallen in the fatal battle of alarcos. the sight of those bloody
 relics added fury to his cruel disposition, and served to steel a heart
 already but little disposed to sentiments of mercy.
 three days after the sack and plunder of the place, don beltran was seated
 in the hall-court lately occupied by the proud alfaqui, lying in his
 divan, dressed in his rich robes, the fountains playing in the centre, the
 slaves of the moor ministering to his scarred and rugged christian
 conqueror. some fanned him with peacocks' pinions, some danced before him,
 some sang moor's melodies to the plaintive notes of a guzla, one—it
 was the only daughter of the moor's old age, the young zutulbe, a rosebud
 of beauty—sat weeping in a corner of the gilded hall: weeping for
 her slain brethren, the pride of moslem chivalry, whose heads were
 blackening in the blazing sunshine on the portals without, and for her
 father, whose home had been thus made desolate.
 he and his guest, the english knight sir wilfrid, were playing at chess, a
 favorite amusement with the chivalry of the period, when a messenger was
 announced from valencia, to treat, if possible, for the ransom of the
 remaining part of the alfaqui's family. a grim smile lighted up don
 beltran's features as he bade the black slave admit the messenger. he
 entered. by his costume it was at once seen that the bearer of the flag of
 truce was a jew—the people were employed continually then as
 ambassadors between the two races at war in spain.
 “i come,” said the old jew (in a voice which made sir wilfrid start),
 “from my lord the alfaqui to my noble senor, the invincible don beltran de
 cuchilla, to treat for the ransom of the moor's only daughter, the child
 of his old age and the pearl of his affection.”
 “a pearl is a valuable jewel, hebrew. what does the moorish dog bid for
 her?” asked don beltran, still smiling grimly.
 “the alfaqui offers , dinars, twenty-four horses with their
 caparisons, twenty-four suits of plate-armor, and diamonds and rubies to
 the amount of ,, dinars.”
 “ho, slaves!” roared don beltran, “show the jew my treasury of gold. how
 many hundred thousand pieces are there?” and ten enormous chests were
 produced in which the accountant counted , bags of , dirhems each,
 and displayed several caskets of jewels containing such a treasure of
 rubies, smaragds, diamonds, and jacinths, as made the eyes of the aged
 ambassador twinkle with avarice.
 “how many horses are there in my stable?” continued don beltran; and
 muley, the master of the horse, numbered three hundred fully caparisoned;
 and there was, likewise, armor of the richest sort for as many cavaliers,
 who followed the banner of this doughty captain.
 “i want neither money nor armor,” said the ferocious knight; “tell this to
 the alfaqui, jew. and i will keep the child, his daughter, to serve the
 messes for my dogs, and clean the platters for my scullions.”
 “deprive not the old man of his child,” here interposed the knight of
 ivanhoe; “bethink thee, brave don beltran, she is but an infant in years.”
 “she is my captive, sir knight,” replied the surly don beltran; “i will do
 with my own as becomes me.”
 “take , dirhems,” cried the jew; “more!—anything! the alfaqui
 will give his life for his child!”
 “come hither, zutulbe!—come hither, thou moorish pearl!” yelled the
 ferocious warrior; “come closer, my pretty black-eyed houri of
 heathenesse! hast heard the name of beltran de espada y trabuco?”
 “there were three brothers of that name at alarcos, and my brothers slew
 the christian dogs!” said the proud young girl, looking boldly at don
 beltran, who foamed with rage.
 “the moors butchered my mother and her little ones, at midnight, in our
 castle of murcia,” beltran said.
 “thy father fled like a craven, as thou didst, don beltran!” cried the
 high-spirited girl.
 “by saint jago, this is too much!” screamed the infuriated nobleman; and
 the next moment there was a shriek, and the maiden fell to the ground with
 don beltran's dagger in her side.
 “death is better than dishonor!” cried the child, rolling on the
 blood-stained marble pavement. “i—i spit upon thee, dog of a
 christian!” and with this, and with a savage laugh, she fell back and
 died.
 “bear back this news, jew, to the alfaqui,” howled the don, spurning the
 beauteous corpse with his foot. “i would not have ransomed her for all the
 gold in barbary!” and shuddering, the old jew left the apartment, which
 ivanhoe quitted likewise.
 when they were in the outer court, the knight said to the jew, “isaac of
 york, dost thou not know me?” and threw back his hood, and looked at the
 old man.
 the old jew stared wildly, rushed forward as if to seize his hand, then
 started back, trembling convulsively, and clutching his withered hands
 over his face, said, with a burst of grief, “sir wilfrid of ivanhoe!—no,
 no!—i do not know thee!”
 “holy mother! what has chanced?” said ivanhoe, in his turn becoming
 ghastly pale; “where is thy daughter—where is rebecca?”
 “away from me!” said the old jew, tottering. “away rebecca is—dead!”
 when the disinherited knight heard that fatal announcement, he fell to the
 ground senseless, and was for some days as one perfectly distraught with
 grief. he took no nourishment and uttered no word. for weeks he did not
 relapse out of his moody silence, and when he came partially to himself
 again, it was to bid his people to horse, in a hollow voice, and to make a
 foray against the moors. day after day he issued out against these
 infidels, and did nought but slay and slay. he took no plunder as other
 knights did, but left that to his followers; he uttered no war-cry, as was
 the manner of chivalry, and he gave no quarter, insomuch that the “silent
 knight” became the dread of all the paynims of granada and andalusia, and
 more fell by his lance than by that of any the most clamorous captains of
 the troops in arms against them. thus the tide of battle turned, and the
 arab historian, el makary, recounts how, at the great battle of al akab,
 called by the spaniards las navas, the christians retrieved their defeat
 at alarcos, and absolutely killed half a milllion of mahometans. fifty
 thousand of these, of course, don wilfrid took to his own lance; and it
 was remarked that the melancholy warrior seemed somewhat more easy in
 spirits after that famous feat of arms.
 in a short time the terrible sir wilfrid of ivanhoe had killed off so many
 of the moors, that though those unbelieving miscreants poured continual
 reinforcements into spain from barbary, they could make no head against
 the christian forces, and in fact came into battle quite discouraged at
 the notion of meeting the dreadful silent knight. it was commonly believed
 amongst them, that the famous malek ric, richard of england, the conqueror
 of saladin, had come to life again, and was battling in the spanish hosts—that
 this, his second life, was a charmed one, and his body inaccessible to
 blow of scimitar or thrust of spear—that after battle he ate the
 hearts and drank the blood of many young moors for his supper: a thousand
 wild legends were told of ivanhoe, indeed, so that the morisco warriors
 came half vanquished into the field, and fell an easy prey to the
 spaniards, who cut away among them without mercy. and although none of the
 spanish historians whom i have consulted make mention of sir wilfrid as
 the real author of the numerous triumphs which now graced the arms of the
 good cause, this is not in the least to be wondered at, in a nation that
 has always been notorious for bragging, and for the non-payment of their
 debts of gratitude as of their other obligations, and that writes
 histories of the peninsular war with the emperor napoleon, without making
 the slightest mention of his grace the duke of wellington, or of the part
 taken by british valor in that transaction. well, it must be confessed, on
 the other hand, that we brag enough of our fathers' feats in those
 campaigns: but this is not the subject at present under consideration.
 to be brief, ivanhoe made such short work with the unbelievers, that the
 monarch of aragon, king don jayme, saw himself speedily enabled to besiege
 the city of valencia, the last stronghold which the moors had in his
 dominions, and garrisoned by many thousands of those infidels under the
 command of their king aboo abdallah mahommed, son of yakoobal-mansoor. the
 arabian historian el makary gives a full account of the military
 precautions taken by aboo abdallah to defend his city; but as i do not
 wish to make a parade of my learning, or to write a costume novel, i shall
 pretermit any description of the city under its moorish governors.
 besides the turks who inhabited it, there dwelt within its walls great
 store of those of the hebrew nation, who were always protected by the
 moors during their unbelieving reign in spain; and who were, as we very
 well know, the chief physicians, the chief bankers, the chief statesmen,
 the chief artists and musicians, the chief everything, under the moorish
 kings. thus it is not surprising that the hebrews, having their money,
 their liberty, their teeth, their lives, secure under the mahometan
 domination, should infinitely prefer it to the christian sway; beneath
 which they were liable to be deprived of every one of these benefits.
 among these hebrews of valencia, lived a very ancient israelite—no
 other than isaac of york before mentioned, who came into spain with his
 daughter, soon after ivanhoe's marriage, in the third volume of the first
 part of this history. isaac was respected by his people for the money
 which he possessed, and his daughter for her admirable good qualities, her
 beauty, her charities, and her remarkable medical skill.
 the young emir aboo abdallah was so struck by her charms, that though she
 was considerably older than his highness, he offered to marry her, and
 install her as number  of his wives; and isaac of york would not have
 objected to the union, (for such mixed marriages were not uncommon between
 the hebrews and moors in those days,) but rebecca firmly yet respectfully
 declined the proposals of the prince, saying that it was impossible she
 should unite herself with a man of a creed different to her own.
 although isaac was, probably, not over-well pleased at losing this chance
 of being father-in-law to a royal highness, yet as he passed among his
 people for a very strict character, and there were in his family several
 rabbis of great reputation and severity of conduct, the old gentleman was
 silenced by this objection of rebecca's, and the young lady herself
 applauded by her relatives for her resolute behavior. she took their
 congratulations in a very frigid manner, and said that it was her wish not
 to marry at all, but to devote herself to the practice of medicine
 altogether, and to helping the sick and needy of her people. indeed,
 although she did not go to any public meetings, she was as benevolent a
 creature as the world ever saw: the poor blessed her wherever they knew
 her, and many benefited by her who guessed not whence her gentle bounty
 came.
 but there are men in jewry who admire beauty, and, as i have even heard,
 appreciate money too, and rebecca had such a quantity of both, that all
 the most desirable bachelors of the people were ready to bid for her.
 ambassadors came from all quarters to propose for her. her own uncle, the
 venerable ben solomons, with a beard as long as a cashmere goat's, and a
 reputation for learning and piety which still lives in his nation,
 quarrelled with his son moses, the red-haired diamond-merchant of
 trebizond, and his son simeon, the bald bill-broker of bagdad, each
 putting in a claim for their cousin. ben minories came from london and
 knelt at her feet; ben jochanan arrived from paris, and thought to dazzle
 her with the latest waistcoats from the palais royal; and ben jonah
 brought her a present of dutch herrings, and besought her to come back and
 be mrs. ben jonah at the hague.
 rebecca temporized as best she might. she thought her uncle was too old.
 she besought dear moses and dear simeon not to quarrel with each other,
 and offend their father by pressing their suit. ben minories from london,
 she said, was too young, and jochanan from paris, she pointed out to isaac
 of york, must be a spendthrift, or he would not wear those absurd
 waistcoats. as for ben jonah, she said, she could not bear the notion of
 tobacco and dutch herrings: she wished to stay with her papa, her dear
 papa. in fine, she invented a thousand excuses for delay, and it was plain
 that marriage was odious to her. the only man whom she received with
 anything like favor, was young bevis marks of london, with whom she was
 very familiar. but bevis had come to her with a certain token that had
 been given to him by an english knight, who saved him from a fagot to
 which the ferocious hospitaller folko of heydenbraten was about to condemn
 him. it was but a ring, with an emerald in it, that bevis knew to be sham,
 and not worth a groat. rebecca knew about the value of jewels too; but ah!
 she valued this one more than all the diamonds in prester john's turban.
 she kissed it; she cried over it; she wore it in her bosom always and when
 she knelt down at night and morning, she held it between her folded hands
 on her neck. . . . young bevis marks went away finally no better off than
 the others; the rascal sold to the king of france a handsome ruby, the
 very size of the bit of glass in rebecca's ring; but he always said he
 would rather have had her than ten thousand pounds: and very likely he
 would, for it was known she would at once have a plum to her fortune.
 these delays, however, could not continue for ever; and at a great family
 meeting held at passover-time, rebecca was solemnly ordered to choose a
 husband out of the gentlemen there present; her aunts pointing out the
 great kindness which had been shown to her by her father, in permitting
 her to choose for herself. one aunt was of the solomon faction, another
 aunt took simeon's side, a third most venerable old lady—the head of
 the family, and a hundred and forty-four years of age—was ready to
 pronounce a curse upon her, and cast her out, unless she married before
 the month was over. all the jewelled heads of all the old ladies in
 council, all the beards of all the family, wagged against her: it must
 have been an awful sight to witness.
 at last, then, rebecca was forced to speak. “kinsmen!” she said, turning
 pale, “when the prince abou abdil asked me in marriage, i told you i would
 not wed but with one of my own faith.”
 “she has turned turk,” screamed out the ladies. “she wants to be a
 princess, and has turned turk,” roared the rabbis.
 “well, well,” said isaac, in rather an appeased tone, “let us hear what
 the poor girl has got to say. do you want to marry his royal highness,
 rebecca? say the word, yes or no.”
 another groan burst from the rabbis—they cried, shrieked, chattered,
 gesticulated, furious to lose such a prize; as were the women, that she
 should reign over them a second esther.
 “silence,” cried out isaac; “let the girl speak. speak boldly, rebecca
 dear, there's a good girl.”
 rebecca was as pale as a stone. she folded her arms on her breast, and
 felt the ring there. she looked round all the assembly, and then at isaac.
 “father,” she said, in a thrilling low steady voice, “i am not of your
 religion—i am not of the prince boabdil's religion—i—i
 am of his religion.”
 “his! whose, in the name of moses, girl?” cried isaac.
 rebecca clasped her hands on her beating chest and looked round with
 dauntless eyes. “of his,” she said, “who saved my life and your honor: of
 my dear, dear champion's. i never can be his, but i will be no other's.
 give my money to my kinsmen; it is that they long for. take the dross,
 simeon and solomon, jonah and jochanan, and divide it among you, and leave
 me. i will never be yours, i tell you, never. do you think, after knowing
 him and hearing him speak,—after watching him wounded on his pillow,
 and glorious in battle” (her eyes melted and kindled again as she spoke
 these words), “i can mate with such as you? go. leave me to myself. i am
 none of yours. i love him—i love him. fate divides us—long,
 long miles separate us; and i know we may never meet again. but i love and
 bless him always. yes, always. my prayers are his; my faith is his. yes,
 my faith is your faith, wilfrid—wilfrid! i have no kindred more,—i
 am a christian!”
 at this last word there was such a row in the assembly, as my feeble pen
 would in vain endeavor to depict. old isaac staggered back in a fit, and
 nobody took the least notice of him. groans, curses, yells of men, shrieks
 of women, filled the room with such a furious jabbering, as might have
 appalled any heart less stout than rebecca's; but that brave woman was
 prepared for all; expecting, and perhaps hoping, that death would be her
 instant lot. there was but one creature who pitied her, and that was her
 cousin and father's clerk, little ben davids, who was but thirteen, and
 had only just begun to carry a bag, and whose crying and boo-hooing, as
 she finished speaking, was drowned in the screams and maledictions of the
 elder israelites. ben davids was madly in love with his cousin (as boys
 often are with ladies of twice their age), and he had presence of mind
 suddenly to knock over the large brazen lamp on the table, which
 illuminated the angry conclave; then, whispering to rebecca to go up to
 her own room and lock herself in, or they would kill her else, he took her
 hand and led her out.
 from that day she disappeared from among her people. the poor and the
 wretched missed her, and asked for her in vain. had any violence been done
 to her, the poorer jews would have risen and put all isaac's family to
 death; and besides, her old flame, prince boabdil, would have also been
 exceedingly wrathful. she was not killed then, but, so to speak, buried
 alive, and locked up in isaac's back-kitchen: an apartment into which
 scarcely any light entered, and where she was fed upon scanty portions of
 the most mouldy bread and water. little ben davids was the only person who
 visited her, and her sole consolation was to talk to him about ivanhoe,
 and how good and how gentle he was; how brave and how true; and how he
 slew the tremendous knight of the templars, and how he married a lady whom
 rebecca scarcely thought worthy of him, but with whom she prayed he might
 be happy; and of what color his eyes were, and what were the arms on his
 shield—viz, a tree with the word “desdichado” written underneath,
 &c. &c. &c.: all which talk would not have interested little
 davids, had it come from anybody else's mouth, but to which he never tired
 of listening as it fell from her sweet lips.
 so, in fact, when old isaac of york came to negotiate with don beltran de
 cuchilla for the ransom of the alfaqui's daughter of xixona, our dearest
 rebecca was no more dead than you and i; and it was in his rage and fury
 against ivanhoe that isaac told that cavalier the falsehood which caused
 the knight so much pain and such a prodigious deal of bloodshed to the
 moors: and who knows, trivial as it may seem, whether it was not that very
 circumstance which caused the destruction in spain of the moorish power?
 although isaac, we may be sure, never told his daughter that ivanhoe had
 cast up again, yet master ben davids did, who heard it from his employer;
 and he saved rebecca's life by communicating the intelligence, for the
 poor thing would have infallibly perished but for this good news. she had
 now been in prison four years three months and twenty-four days, during
 which time she had partaken of nothing but bread and water (except such
 occasional tit-bits as davids could bring her—and these were few
 indeed; for old isaac was always a curmudgeon, and seldom had more than a
 pair of eggs for his own and davids' dinner); and she was languishing
 away, when the news came suddenly to revive her. then, though in the
 darkness you could not see her cheeks, they began to bloom again: then her
 heart began to beat and her blood to flow, and she kissed the ring on her
 neck a thousand times a day at least; and her constant question was, “ben
 davids! ben davids! when is he coming to besiege valencia?” she knew he
 would come: and, indeed, the christians were encamped before the town ere
 a month was over.
 and now, my dear boys and girls, i think i perceive behind that dark scene
 of the back-kitchen (which is just a simple flat, painted stone-color,
 that shifts in a minute,) bright streaks of light flashing out, as though
 they were preparing a most brilliant, gorgeous, and altogether dazzling
 illumination, with effects never before attempted on any stage. yes, the
 fairy in the pretty pink tights and spangled muslin is getting into the
 brilliant revolving chariot of the realms of bliss.—yes, most of the
 fiddlers and trumpeters have gone round from the orchestra to join in the
 grand triumphal procession, where the whole strength of the company is
 already assembled, arrayed in costumes of moorish and christian chivalry,
 to celebrate the “terrible escalade,” the “rescue of virtuous innocence”—the
 “grand entry of the christians into valencia”—“appearance of the
 fairy day-star,” and “unexampled displays of pyrotechnic festivity.” do
 you not, i say, perceive that we are come to the end of our history; and,
 after a quantity of rapid and terrific fighting, brilliant change of
 scenery, and songs, appropriate or otherwise, are bringing our hero and
 heroine together? who wants a long scene at the last? mammas are putting
 the girls' cloaks and boas on; papas have gone out to look for the
 carriage, and left the box-door swinging open, and letting in the cold
 air: if there were any stage-conversation, you could not hear it, for the
 scuffling of the people who are leaving the pit. see, the orange-women are
 preparing to retire. to-morrow their play-bills will be as so much
 waste-paper—so will some of our masterpieces, woe is me: but lo!
 here we come to scene the last, and valencia is besieged and captured by
 the christians.
 who is the first on the wall, and who hurls down the green standard of the
 prophet? who chops off the head of the emir aboo what-d'ye-call'im, just
 as the latter has cut over the cruel don beltran de cuchillay &c.?
 who, attracted to the jewish quarter by the shrieks of the inhabitants who
 are being slain by the moorish soldiery, and by a little boy by the name
 of ben davids, who recognizes the knight by his shield, finds isaac of
 york egorge on a threshold, and clasping a large back-kitchen key? who but
 ivanhoe—who but wilfrid? “an ivanhoe to the rescue,” he bellows out;
 he has heard that news from little ben davids which makes him sing. and
 who is it that comes out of the house—trembling—panting—with
 her arms out—in a white dress—with her hair down—who is
 it but dear rebecca? look, they rush together, and master wamba is waving
 an immense banner over them, and knocks down a circumambient jew with a
 ham, which he happens to have in his pocket. . . . as for rebecca, now her
 head is laid upon ivanhoe's heart, i shall not ask to hear what she is
 whispering, or describe further that scene of meeting; though i declare i
 am quite affected when i think of it. indeed i have thought of it any time
 these five-and-twenty years—ever since, as a boy at school, i
 commenced the noble study of novels—ever since the day when, lying
 on sunny slopes of half-holidays, the fair chivalrous figures and
 beautiful shapes of knights and ladies were visible to me—ever since
 i grew to love rebecca, that sweetest creature of the poet's fancy, and
 longed to see her righted.
 that she and ivanhoe were married, follows of course; for rowena's promise
 extorted from him was, that he would never wed a jewess, and a better
 christian than rebecca now was never said her catechism. married i am sure
 they were, and adopted little cedric; but i don't think they had any other
 children, or were subsequently very boisterously happy. of some sort of
 happiness melancholy is a characteristic, and i think these were a solemn
 pair, and died rather early.
 it is seldom that the historian has to record events more singular than
 those which occurred during this year, when the crown of france was
 battled for by no less than four pretenders, with equal claims, merits,
 bravery, and popularity. first in the list we place—his royal
 highness louis anthony frederick samuel anna maria, duke of brittany, and
 son of louis xvi. the unhappy prince, when a prisoner with his unfortunate
 parents in the temple, was enabled to escape from that place of
 confinement, hidden (for the treatment of the ruffians who guarded him had
 caused the young prince to dwindle down astonishingly) in the cocked-hat
 of the representative, roederer. it is well known that, in the troublous
 revolutionary times, cocked-hats were worn of a considerable size.
 he passed a considerable part of his life in germany; was confined there
 for thirty years in the dungeons of spielberg; and, escaping thence to
 england, was, under pretence of debt, but in reality from political
 hatred, imprisoned there also in the tower of london. he must not be
 confounded with any other of the persons who laid claim to be children of
 the unfortunate victim of the first revolution.
 the next claimant, henri of bordeaux, is better known. in the year  he
 held his little fugitive court in furnished lodgings, in a forgotten
 district of london, called belgrave square. many of the nobles of france
 flocked thither to him, despising the persecutions of the occupant of the
 throne; and some of the chiefs of the british nobility—among whom
 may be reckoned the celebrated and chivalrous duke of jenkins—aided
 the adventurous young prince with their counsels, their wealth, and their
 valor.
 the third candidate was his imperial highness prince john thomas napoleon—a
 fourteenth cousin of the late emperor; and said by some to be a prince of
 the house of gomersal. he argued justly that, as the immediate relatives
 of the celebrated corsican had declined to compete for the crown which was
 their right, he, prince john thomas, being next in succession, was,
 undoubtedly, heir to the vacant imperial throne. and in support of his
 claim, he appealed to the fidelity of frenchmen and the strength of his
 good sword.
 his majesty louis philippe was, it need not be said, the illustrious
 wielder of the sceptre which the three above-named princes desired to
 wrest from him. it does not appear that the sagacious monarch was esteemed
 by his subjects, as such a prince should have been esteemed. the
 light-minded people, on the contrary, were rather weary than otherwise of
 his sway. they were not in the least attached to his amiable family, for
 whom his majesty with characteristic thrift had endeavored to procure
 satisfactory allowances. and the leading statesmen of the country, whom
 his majesty had disgusted, were suspected of entertaining any but feelings
 of loyalty towards his house and person.
 it was against the above-named pretenders that louis philippe (now nearly
 a hundred years old), a prince amongst sovereigns, was called upon to
 defend his crown.
 the city of paris was guarded, as we all know, by a hundred and
 twenty-four forts, of a thousand guns each—provisioned for a
 considerable time, and all so constructed as to fire, if need were, upon
 the palace of the tuileries. thus, should the mob attack it, as in august
 , and july , the building could be razed to the ground in an hour;
 thus, too, the capital was quite secure from foreign invasion. another
 defence against the foreigners was the state of the roads. since the
 english companies had retired, half a mile only of railroad had been
 completed in france, and thus any army accustomed, as those of europe now
 are, to move at sixty miles an hour, would have been ennuye'd to death
 before they could have marched from the rhenish, the maritime, the alpine,
 or the pyrenean frontier upon the capital of france. the french people,
 however, were indignant at this defect of communication in their
 territory, and said, without the least show of reason, that they would
 have preferred that the five hundred and seventy-five thousand billions of
 francs which had been expended upon the fortifications should have been
 laid out in a more peaceful manner. however, behind his forts, the king
 lay secure.
 as it is our aim to depict in as vivid a manner as possible the strange
 events of the period, the actions, the passions of individuals and parties
 engaged, we cannot better describe them than by referring to contemporary
 documents, of which there is no lack. it is amusing at the present day to
 read in the pages of the moniteur and the journal des debats the accounts
 of the strange scenes which took place.
 the year  had opened very tranquilly. the court of the tuileries had
 been extremely gay. the three-and-twenty youngest princes of england, sons
 of her majesty victoria, had enlivened the balls by their presence; the
 emperor of russia and family had paid their accustomed visit; and the king
 of the belgians had, as usual, made his visit to his royal father-in-law,
 under pretence of duty and pleasure, but really to demand payment of the
 queen of the belgians' dowry, which louis philippe of orleans still
 resolutely declined to pay. who would have thought that in the midst of
 such festivity danger was lurking rife, in the midst of such quiet,
 rebellion?
 charenton was the great lunatic asylum of paris, and it was to this
 repository that the scornful journalist consigned the pretender to the
 throne of louis xvi.
 but on the next day, viz. saturday, the th february, the same journal
 contained a paragraph of a much more startling and serious import; in
 which, although under a mask of carelessness, it was easy to see the
 government alarm.
 on friday, the th february, the journal des debats contained a
 paragraph, which did not occasion much sensation at the bourse, so absurd
 did its contents seem. it ran as follows:—
 “encore un louis xvii.! a letter from calais tells us that a strange
 personage lately landed from england (from bedlam we believe) has been
 giving himself out to be the son of the unfortunate louis xvi. this is the
 twenty-fourth pretender of the species who has asserted that his father
 was the august victim of the temple. beyond his pretensions, the poor
 creature is said to be pretty harmless; he is accompanied by one or two
 old women, who declare they recognize in him the dauphin; he does not make
 any attempt to seize upon his throne by force of arms, but waits until
 heaven shall conduct him to it.
 “if his majesty comes to paris, we presume he will take up his quarters in
 the palace of charenton.
 “we have not before alluded to certain rumors which have been afloat
 (among the lowest canaille and the vilest estaminets of the metropolis),
 that a notorious personage—why should we hesitate to mention the
 name of the prince john thomas napoleon?—has entered france with
 culpable intentions, and revolutionary views. the moniteur of this
 morning, however, confirms the disgraceful fact. a pretender is on our
 shores; an armed assassin is threatening our peaceful liberties; a
 wandering, homeless cut-throat is robbing on our highways; and the
 punishment of his crime awaits him. let no considerations of the past
 defer that just punishment; it is the duty of the legislator to provide
 for the future. let the full powers of the law be brought against him,
 aided by the stern justice of the public force. let him be tracked, like a
 wild beast, to his lair, and meet the fate of one. but the sentence has,
 ere this, been certainly executed. the brigand, we hear, has been
 distributing (without any effect) pamphlets among the low ale-houses and
 peasantry of the department of the upper rhine (in which he lurks); and
 the police have an easy means of tracking his footsteps.
 “corporal crane, of the gendarmerie, is on the track of the unfortunate
 young man. his attempt will only serve to show the folly of the
 pretenders, and the love, respect, regard, fidelity, admiration,
 reverence, and passionate personal attachment in which we hold our beloved
 sovereign.”
 “a courier has just arrived at the tuileries with a report that after a
 scuffle between corporal crane and the 'imperial army,' in a water-barrel,
 whither the latter had retreated, victory has remained with the former. a
 desperate combat ensued in the first place, in a hay-loft, whence the
 pretender was ejected with immense loss. he is now a prisoner—and we
 dread to think what his fate may be! it will warn future aspirants, and
 give europe a lesson which it is not likely to forget. above all, it will
 set beyond a doubt the regard, respect, admiration, reverence, and
 adoration which we all feel for our sovereign.”
 “a second courier has arrived. the infatuated crane has made common cause
 with the prince, and forever forfeited the respect of frenchmen. a
 detachment of the th leger has marched in pursuit of the pretender and
 his dupes. go, frenchmen, go and conquer! remember that it is our rights
 you guard, our homes which you march to defend; our laws which are
 confided to the points of your unsullied bayonets;—above all, our
 dear, dear sovereign, around whose throne you rally!
 “our feelings overpower us. men of the th, remember your watchword is
 gemappes,—your countersign, valmy.”
 “the emperor of russia and his distinguished family quitted the tuileries
 this day. his imperial majesty embraced his majesty the king of the french
 with tears in his eyes, and conferred upon their rr. hh. the princes of
 nemours and joinville, the grand cross of the order of the blue eagle.”
 “his majesty passed a review of the police force. the venerable monarch
 was received with deafening cheers by this admirable and disinterested
 body of men. those cheers were echoed in all french hearts. long, long may
 our beloved prince be among us to receive them!”
 sunday, february th.
 we resume our quotations from the debats, which thus introduces a third
 pretender to the throne:—
 “is this distracted country never to have peace? while on friday we
 recorded the pretensions of a maniac to the great throne of france; while
 on saturday we were compelled to register the culpable attempts of one
 whom we regard as a ruffian, murderer, swindler, forger, burglar, and
 common pickpocket, to gain over the allegiance of frenchmen—it is
 to-day our painful duty to announce a third invasion—yes, a third
 invasion. the wretched, superstitious, fanatic duke of bordeaux has landed
 at nantz, and has summoned the vendeans and the bretons to mount the white
 cockade.
 “grand dieu! are we not happy under the tricolor? do we not repose under
 the majestic shadow of the best of kings? is there any name prouder than
 that of frenchman; any subject more happy than that of our sovereign? does
 not the whole french family adore their father? yes. our lives, our
 hearts, our blood, our fortune, are at his disposal: it was not in vain
 that we raised, it is not the first time we have rallied round, the august
 throne of july. the unhappy duke is most likely a prisoner by this time;
 and the martial court which shall be called upon to judge one infamous
 traitor and pretender, may at the same moment judge another. away with
 both! let the ditch of vincennes (which has been already fatal to his
 race) receive his body, too, and with it the corpse of the other
 pretender. thus will a great crime be wiped out of history, and the manes
 of a slaughtered martyr avenged!
 “one word more. we hear that the duke of jenkins accompanies the
 descendant of caroline of naples. an english duke, entendez-vous! an
 english duke, great heaven! and the princes of england still dancing in
 our royal halls! where, where will the perfidy of albion end?”
 “the king reviewed the third and fourth battalions of police. the usual
 heart-rending cheers accompanied the monarch, who looked younger than ever
 we saw him—ay, as young as when he faced the austrian cannon at
 valmy and scattered their squadrons at gemappes.
 “rations of liquor, and crosses of the legion of honor, were distributed
 to all the men.
 “the english princes quitted the tuileries in twenty-three
 coaches-and-four. they were not rewarded with crosses of the legion of
 honor. this is significant.”
 “the dukes of joinville and nemours left the palace for the departments of
 the loire and upper rhine, where they will take the command of the troops.
 the joinville regiment—cavalerie de la marine—is one of the
 finest in the service.”
 “orders have been given to arrest the fanatic who calls himself duke of
 brittany, and who has been making some disturbances in the pas de calais.”
 “anecdote of his majesty.—at the review of troops (police)
 yesterday, his majesty, going up to one old grognard and pulling him by
 the ear, said, 'wilt thou have a cross or another ration of wine?' the old
 hero, smiling archly, answered, 'sire, a brave man can gain a cross any
 day of battle, but it is hard for him sometimes to get a drink of wine.'
 we need not say that he had his drink, and the generous sovereign sent him
 the cross and ribbon too.”
 on the next day, the government journals began to write in rather a
 despondent tone regarding the progress of the pretenders to the throne. in
 spite of their big talking, anxiety is clearly manifested, as appears from
 the following remarks of the debats:—
 “the courier from the rhine department,” says the debats, “brings us the
 following astounding proclamation:—
 “'strasburg, xxii. nivose: decadi. nd year of the republic, one and
 indivisible. we, john thomas napoleon, by the constitutions of the empire,
 emperor of the french republic, to our marshals, generals, officers, and
 soldiers, greeting:
 “'soldiers!
 “'from the summit of the pyramids forty centuries look down upon you. the
 sun of austerlitz has risen once more. the guard dies, but never
 surrenders. my eagles, flying from steeple to steeple, never shall droop
 till they perch on the towers of notre dame.
 “'soldiers! the child of your father has remained long in exile. i have
 seen the fields of europe where your laurels are now withering, and i have
 communed with the dead who repose beneath them. they ask where are our
 children? where is france? europe no longer glitters with the shine of its
 triumphant bayonets—echoes no more with the shouts of its victorious
 cannon. who could reply to such a question save with a blush?—and
 does a blush become the cheeks of frenchmen?
 “'no. let us wipe from our faces that degrading mark of shame. come, as of
 old, and rally round my eagles! you have been subject to fiddling prudence
 long enough. come, worship now at the shrine of glory! you have been
 promised liberty, but you have had none. i will endow you with the true,
 the real freedom. when your ancestors burst over the alps, were they not
 free? yes; free to conquer. let us imitate the example of those
 indomitable myriads; and, flinging a defiance to europe, once more trample
 over her; march in triumph into her prostrate capitals, and bring her
 kings with her treasures at our feet. this is the liberty worthy of
 frenchmen.
 “'frenchmen! i promise you that the rhine shall be restored to you; and
 that england shall rank no more among the nations. i will have a marine
 that shall drive her ships from the seas; a few of my brave regiments will
 do the rest. henceforth, the traveller in that desert island shall ask,
 “was it this wretched corner of the world that for a thousand years defied
 frenchmen?”
 “'frenchmen, up and rally!—i have flung my banner to the breezes;
 'tis surrounded by the faithful and the brave. up, and let our motto be,
 “'the marshal of the empire, haricot.'
 “such is the proclamation! such the hopes that a brutal-minded and bloody
 adventurer holds out to our country. 'war all over the world,' is the cry
 of the savage demon; and the fiends who have rallied round him echo it in
 concert. we were not, it appears, correct in stating that a corporal's
 guard had been sufficient to seize upon the marauder, when the first fire
 would have served to conclude his miserable life. but, like a hideous
 disease, the contagion has spread; the remedy must be dreadful. woe to
 those on whom it will fall!
 “his royal highness the prince of joinville, admiral of france, has
 hastened, as we before stated, to the disturbed districts, and takes with
 him his cavalerie de la marine. it is hard to think that the blades of
 those chivalrous heroes must be buried in the bosoms of frenchmen: but so
 be it: it is those monsters who have asked for blood, not we. it is those
 ruffians who have begun the quarrel, not we. we remain calm and hopeful,
 reposing under the protection of the dearest and best of sovereigns.
 “the wretched pretender, who called himself duke of brittany, has been
 seized, according to our prophecy: he was brought before the prefect of
 police yesterday, and his insanity being proved beyond a doubt, he has
 been consigned to a strait-waistcoat at charenton. so may all incendiary
 enemies of our government be overcome!
 “his royal highness the duke of nemours is gone into the department of the
 loire, where he will speedily put an end to the troubles in the disturbed
 districts of the bocage and la vendee. the foolish young prince, who has
 there raised his standard, is followed, we hear, by a small number of
 wretched persons, of whose massacre we expect every moment to receive the
 news. he too has issued his proclamation, and our readers will smile at
 its contents:
 “'we henry, fifth of the name, king of france and navarre, to all whom it
 may concern, greeting:
 “'after years of exile we have once more unfurled in france the banner of
 the lilies. once more the white plume of henri iv. floats in the crest of
 his little son (petit fils)! gallant nobles! worthy burgesses! honest
 commons of my realm, i call upon you to rally round the oriflamme of
 france, and summon the ban arriereban of my kingdoms. to my faithful
 bretons i need not appeal. the country of duguesclin has loyalty for an
 heirloom! to the rest of my subjects, my atheist misguided subjects, their
 father makes one last appeal. come to me, my children! your errors shall
 be forgiven. our holy father, the pope, shall intercede for you. he
 promised it when, before my departure on this expedition, i kissed his
 inviolable toe!
 “'our afflicted country cries aloud for reforms. the infamous universities
 shall be abolished. education shall no longer be permitted. a sacred and
 wholesome inquisition shall be established. my faithful nobles shall pay
 no more taxes. all the venerable institutions of our country shall be
 restored as they existed before . convents and monasteries again shall
 ornament our country, the calm nurseries of saints and holy women! heresy
 shall be extirpated with paternal severity, and our country shall be free
 once more.
 “'his majesty the king of ireland, my august ally, has sent, under the
 command of his royal highness prince daniel, his majesty's youngest son,
 an irresistible irish brigade, to co-operate in the good work. his grace
 the lion of judah, the canonized patriarch of tuam, blessed their green
 banner before they set forth. henceforth may the lilies and the harp be
 ever twined together. together we will make a crusade against the infidels
 of albion, and raze their heretic domes to the ground. let our cry be,
 vive la france! down with england! montjoie st. denis!
 “'the secretary of state and grand inquisitor. . . la roue. the marshal of
 france. . . pomadour de l'aile de pigeon. the general commander-in-chief
 of the irish brigade in the service of his most christian majesty. . .
 “his majesty reviewed the admirable police force, and held a council of
 ministers in the afternoon. measures were concerted for the instant
 putting down of the disturbances in the departments of the rhine and
 loire, and it is arranged that on the capture of the pretenders, they
 shall be lodged in separate cells in the prison of the luxembourg: the
 apartments are already prepared, and the officers at their posts.
 “the grand banquet that was to be given at the palace to-day to the
 diplomatic body, has been put off; all the ambassadors being attacked with
 illness, which compels them to stay at home.”
 “the ambassadors despatched couriers to their various governments.”
 “his majesty the king of the belgians left the palace of the tuileries.”
 we will now resume the narrative, and endeavor to compress, in a few
 comprehensive pages, the facts which are more diffusely described in the
 print from which we have quoted.
 it was manifest, then, that the troubles in the departments were of a
 serious nature, and that the forces gathered round the two pretenders to
 the crown were considerable. they had their supporters too in paris—as
 what party indeed has not? and the venerable occupant of the throne was in
 a state of considerable anxiety, and found his declining years by no means
 so comfortable as his virtues and great age might have warranted.
 his paternal heart was the more grieved when he thought of the fate
 reserved to his children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, now
 sprung up around him in vast numbers. the king's grandson, the prince
 royal, married to a princess of the house of schlippen-schloppen, was the
 father of fourteen children, all handsomely endowed with pensions by the
 state. his brother, the count d'eu, was similarly blessed with a
 multitudinous offspring. the duke of nemours had no children; but the
 princes of joinville, aumale, and montpensier (married to the princesses
 januaria and februaria, of brazil, and the princess of the united states
 of america, erected into a monarchy, th july, , under the emperor
 duff green i.) were the happy fathers of immense families—all
 liberally apportioned by the chambers, which had long been entirely
 subservient to his majesty louis philippe.
 the duke of aumale was king of algeria, having married (in the first
 instance) the princess badroulboudour, a daughter of his highness
 abd-el-kader. the prince of joinville was adored by the nation, on account
 of his famous victory over the english fleet under the command of admiral
 the prince of wales, whose ship, the “richard cobden,” of  guns, was
 taken by the “belle-poule” frigate of ; on which occasion forty-five
 other ships of war and  steam-frigates struck their colors to about
 one-fourth the number of the heroic french navy. the victory was mainly
 owing to the gallantry of the celebrated french horse-marines, who
 executed several brilliant charges under the orders of the intrepid
 joinville; and though the irish brigade, with their ordinary modesty,
 claimed the honors of the day, yet, as only three of that nation were
 present in the action, impartial history must award the palm to the
 intrepid sons of gaul.
 with so numerous a family quartered on the nation, the solicitude of the
 admirable king may be conceived, lest a revolution should ensue, and fling
 them on the world once more. how could he support so numerous a family?
 considerable as his wealth was (for he was known to have amassed about a
 hundred and thirteen billions, which were lying in the caves of the
 tuileries), yet such a sum was quite insignificant, when divided among his
 progeny; and, besides, he naturally preferred getting from the nation as
 much as his faithful people could possibly afford.
 seeing the imminency of the danger, and that money, well applied, is often
 more efficacious than the conqueror's sword, the king's ministers were
 anxious that he should devote a part of his savings to the carrying on of
 the war. but, with the cautiousness of age, the monarch declined this
 offer; he preferred, he said, throwing himself upon his faithful people,
 who, he was sure, would meet, as became them, the coming exigency. the
 chambers met his appeal with their usual devotion. at a solemn convocation
 of those legislative bodies, the king, surrounded by his family, explained
 the circumstances and the danger. his majesty, his family, his ministers,
 and the two chambers, then burst into tears, according to immemorial
 usage, and raising their hands to the ceiling, swore eternal fidelity to
 the dynasty and to france, and embraced each other affectingly all round.
 it need not be said that in the course of that evening two hundred
 deputies of the left left paris, and joined the prince john thomas
 napoleon, who was now advanced as far as dijon: two hundred and
 fifty-three (of the right, the centre, and round the corner,) similarly
 quitted the capital to pay their homage to the duke of bordeaux. they were
 followed, according to their several political predilections, by the
 various ministers and dignitaries of the state. the only minister who
 remained in paris was marshal thiers, prince of waterloo (he had defeated
 the english in the very field where they had obtained formerly a success,
 though the victory was as usual claimed by the irish brigade); but age had
 ruined the health and diminished the immense strength of that gigantic
 leader, and it is said his only reason for remaining in paris was because
 a fit of the gout kept him in bed.
 the capital was entirely tranquil. the theatres and cafes were open as
 usual, and the masked balls attended with great enthusiasm: confiding in
 their hundred and twenty-four forts, the light-minded people had nothing
 to fear.
 except in the way of money, the king left nothing undone to conciliate his
 people. he even went among them with his umbrella; but they were little
 touched with that mark of confidence. he shook hands with everybody; he
 distributed crosses of the legion of honor in such multitudes, that red
 ribbon rose two hundred per cent in the market (by which his majesty, who
 speculated in the article, cleared a tolerable sum of money). but these
 blandishments and honors had little effect upon an apathetic people; and
 the enemy of the orleans dynasty, the fashionable young nobles of the
 henriquinquiste party, wore gloves perpetually, for fear (they said) that
 they should be obliged to shake hands with the best of kings; while the
 republicans adopted coats without button-holes, lest they should be forced
 to hang red ribbons in them. the funds did not fluctuate in the least.
 the proclamations of the several pretenders had had their effect. the
 young men of the schools and the estaminets (celebrated places of public
 education) allured by the noble words of prince napoleon, “liberty,
 equality, war all over the world!” flocked to his standard in considerable
 numbers: while the noblesse naturally hastened to offer their allegiance
 to the legitimate descendant of saint louis.
 and truly, never was there seen a more brilliant chivalry than that
 collected round the gallant prince henry! there was not a man in his army
 but had lacquered boots and fresh white kid-gloves at morning and evening
 parade. the fantastic and effeminate but brave and faithful troops were
 numbered off into different legions: there was the fleur-d'orange
 regiment; the eau-de-rose battalion; the violet-pomatum volunteers; the
 eau-de-cologne cavalry—according to the different scents which they
 affected. most of the warriors wore lace ruffles; all powder and pigtails,
 as in the real days of chivalry. a band of heavy dragoons under the
 command of count alfred de horsay made themselves conspicuous for their
 discipline, cruelty, and the admirable cut of their coats; and with these
 celebrated horsemen came from england the illustrious duke of jenkins with
 his superb footmen. they were all six feet high. they all wore bouquets of
 the richest flowers: they wore bags, their hair slightly powdered,
 brilliant shoulder-knots, and cocked-hats laced with gold. they wore the
 tight knee-pantaloon of velveteen peculiar to this portion of the british
 infantry: and their legs were so superb, that the duke of bordeaux,
 embracing with tears their admirable leader on parade, said, “jenkins,
 france never saw such calves until now.” the weapon of this tremendous
 militia was an immense club or cane, reaching from the sole of the foot to
 the nose, and heavily mounted with gold. nothing could stand before this
 terrific weapon, and the breast-plates and plumed morions of the french
 cuirassiers would have been undoubtedly crushed beneath them, had they
 ever met in mortal combat. between this part of the prince's forces and
 the irish auxiliaries there was a deadly animosity. alas, there always is
 such in camps! the sons of albion had not forgotten the day when the
 children of erin had been subject to their devastating sway.
 the uniform of the latter was various—the rich stuff called
 corps-du-roy (worn by coeur de lion at agincourt) formed their lower
 habiliments for the most part: the national frieze* yielded them
 tail-coats. the latter was generally torn in a fantastic manner at the
 elbows, skirts, and collars, and fastened with every variety of button,
 tape, and string. their weapons were the caubeen, the alpeen, and the
 doodeen of the country—the latter a short but dreadful weapon of
 offence. at the demise of the venerable theobald mathew, the nation had
 laid aside its habit of temperance, and universal intoxication betokened
 their grief; it became afterwards their constant habit. thus do men ever
 return to the haunts of their childhood: such a power has fond memory over
 us! the leaders of this host seem to have been, however, an effeminate
 race; they are represented by contemporary historians as being
 passionately fond of flying kites. others say they went into battle armed
 with “bills,” no doubt rude weapons; for it is stated that foreigners
 could never be got to accept them in lieu of their own arms. the princes
 of mayo, donegal, and connemara, marched by the side of their young and
 royal chieftain, the prince of ballybunion, fourth son of daniel the
 first, king of the emerald isle.
 * were these in any way related to the chevaux-de-frise on
 which the french cavalry were mounted?
 two hosts then, one under the eagles, and surrounded by the republican
 imperialists, the other under the antique french lilies, were marching on
 the french capital. the duke of brittany, too, confined in the lunatic
 asylum of charenton, found means to issue a protest against his captivity,
 which caused only derision in the capital. such was the state of the
 empire, and such the clouds that were gathering round the sun of orleans!
 it was not the first time that the king had had to undergo misfortunes;
 and now, as then, he met them like a man. the prince of joinville was not
 successful in his campaign against the imperial pretender: and that
 bravery which had put the british fleet to flight, was found, as might be
 expected, insufficient against the irresistible courage of native
 frenchmen. the horse marines, not being on their own element, could not
 act with their usual effect. accustomed to the tumult of the swelling
 seas, they were easily unsaddled on terra firma and in the champagne
 country.
 it was literally in the champagne country that the meeting between the
 troops under joinville and prince napoleon took place! for both armies had
 reached rheims, and a terrific battle was fought underneath the walls. for
 some time nothing could dislodge the army of joinville, entrenched in the
 champagne cellars of messrs. ruinart, moet, and others; but making too
 free with the fascinating liquor, the army at length became entirely
 drunk: on which the imperialists, rushing into the cellars, had an easy
 victory over them; and, this done, proceeded to intoxicate themselves
 likewise.
 the prince of joinville, seeing the deroute of his troops, was compelled
 with a few faithful followers to fly towards paris, and prince napoleon
 remained master of the field of battle. it is needless to recapitulate the
 bulletin which he published the day after the occasion, so soon as he and
 his secretaries were in a condition to write: eagles, pyramids, rainbows,
 the sun of austerlitz, &c., figured in the proclamation, in close
 imitation of his illustrious uncle. but the great benefit of the action
 was this: on arousing from their intoxication, the late soldiers of
 joinville kissed and embraced their comrades of the imperial army, and
 made common cause with them.
 “soldiers!” said the prince, on reviewing them the second day after the
 action, “the cock is a gallant bird; but he makes way for the eagle! your
 colors are not changed. ours floated on the walls of moscow—yours on
 the ramparts of constantine; both are glorious. soldiers of joinville! we
 give you welcome, as we would welcome your illustrious leader, who
 destroyed the fleets of albion. let him join us! we will march together
 against that perfidious enemy.
 “but, soldiers! intoxication dimmed the laurels of yesterday's glorious
 day! let us drink no more of the fascinating liquors of our native
 champagne. let us remember hannibal and capua; and, before we plunge into
 dissipation, that we have rome still to conquer!
 “soldiers! seltzer-water is good after too much drink. wait awhile, and
 your emperor will lead you into a seltzer-water country. frenchmen! it
 lies beyond the rhine!”
 deafening shouts of “vive l'empereur!” saluted this allusion of the
 prince, and the army knew that their natural boundary should be restored
 to them. the compliments to the gallantry of the prince of joinville
 likewise won all hearts, and immensely advanced the prince's cause. the
 journal des debats did not know which way to turn. in one paragraph it
 called the emperor “a sanguinary tyrant, murderer, and pickpocket;” in a
 second it owned he was “a magnanimous rebel, and worthy of forgiveness;”
 and, after proclaiming “the brilliant victory of the prince of joinville,”
 presently denominated it a “funeste journee.”
 the next day the emperor, as we may now call him, was about to march on
 paris, when messrs. ruinart and moet were presented, and requested to be
 paid for , bottles of wine. “send three hundred thousand more to the
 tuileries,” said the prince, sternly: “our soldiers will be thirsty when
 they reach paris.” and taking moet with him as a hostage, and promising
 ruinart that he would have him shot unless he obeyed, with trumpets
 playing and eagles glancing in the sun, the gallant imperial army marched
 on their triumphant way.
 we have now to record the expedition of the prince of nemours against his
 advancing cousin, henry v. his royal highness could not march against the
 enemy with such a force as he would have desired to bring against them;
 for his royal father, wisely remembering the vast amount of property he
 had stowed away under the tuileries, refused to allow a single soldier to
 quit the forts round the capital, which thus was defended by one hundred
 and forty-four thousand guns (eighty-four-pounders), and four hundred and
 thirty-two thousand men:—little enough, when one considers that
 there were but three men to a gun. to provision this immense army, and a
 population of double the amount within the walls, his majesty caused the
 country to be scoured for fifty miles round, and left neither ox, nor ass,
 nor blade of grass. when appealed to by the inhabitants of the plundered
 district, the royal philip replied, with tears in his eyes, that his heart
 bled for them—that they were his children—that every cow taken
 from the meanest peasant was like a limb torn from his own body; but that
 duty must be done, that the interests of the country demanded the
 sacrifice, and that in fact, they might go to the deuce. this the
 unfortunate creatures certainly did.
 the theatres went on as usual within the walls. the journal des debats
 stated every day that the pretenders were taken; the chambers sat—such
 as remained—and talked immensely about honor, dignity, and the
 glorious revolution of july; and the king, as his power was now pretty
 nigh absolute over them, thought this a good opportunity to bring in a
 bill for doubling his children's allowances all round.
 meanwhile the duke of nemours proceeded on his march; and as there was
 nothing left within fifty miles of paris wherewith to support his famished
 troops, it may be imagined that he was forced to ransack the next fifty
 miles in order to maintain them. he did so. but the troops were not such
 as they should have been, considering the enemy with whom they had to
 engage.
 the fact is, that most of the duke's army consisted of the national guard;
 who, in a fit of enthusiasm, and at the cry of “la patrie en danger”
 having been induced to volunteer, had been eagerly accepted by his
 majesty, anxious to lessen as much as possible the number of
 food-consumers in his beleaguered capital. it is said even that he
 selected the most gormandizing battalions of the civic force to send forth
 against the enemy: viz, the grocers, the rich bankers, the lawyers, &c.
 their parting with their families was very affecting. they would have been
 very willing to recall their offer of marching, but companies of stern
 veterans closing round them, marched them to the city gates, which were
 closed upon them; and thus perforce they were compelled to move on. as
 long as he had a bottle of brandy and a couple of sausages in his
 holsters, the general of the national guard, odillon barrot, talked with
 tremendous courage. such was the power of his eloquence over the troops,
 that, could he have come up with the enemy while his victuals lasted, the
 issue of the combat might have been very different. but in the course of
 the first day's march he finished both the sausages and the brandy, and
 became quite uneasy, silent, and crest-fallen.
 it was on the fair plains of touraine, by the banks of silver loire, that
 the armies sat down before each other, and the battle was to take place
 which had such an effect upon the fortunes of france. 'twas a brisk day of
 march: the practised valor of nemours showed him at once what use to make
 of the army under his orders, and having enfiladed his national guard
 battalions, and placed his artillery in echelons, he formed his cavalry
 into hollow squares on the right and left of his line, flinging out a
 cloud of howitzers to fall back upon the main column. his veteran infantry
 he formed behind his national guard—politely hinting to odillon
 barrot, who wished to retire under pretence of being exceedingly unwell,
 that the regular troops would bayonet the national guard if they gave way
 an inch: on which their general, turning very pale, demurely went back to
 his post. his men were dreadfully discouraged; they had slept on the
 ground all night; they regretted their homes and their comfortable
 nightcaps in the rue st. honore: they had luckily fallen in with a flock
 of sheep and a drove of oxen at tours the day before; but what were these,
 compared to the delicacies of chevet's or three courses at vefour's? they
 mournfully cooked their steaks and cutlets on their ramrods, and passed a
 most wretched night.
 the army of henry was encamped opposite to them for the most part in
 better order. the noble cavalry regiments found a village in which they
 made themselves pretty comfortable, jenkins's foot taking possession of
 the kitchens and garrets of the buildings. the irish brigade, accustomed
 to lie abroad, were quartered in some potato fields, where they sang
 moore's melodies all night. there were, besides the troops regular and
 irregular, about three thousand priests and abbes with the army, armed
 with scourging-whips, and chanting the most lugubrious canticles: these
 reverend men were found to be a hindrance rather than otherwise to the
 operations of the regular forces.
 it was a touching sight, on the morning before the battle, to see the
 alacrity with which jenkins's regiment sprung up at the first reveille of
 the bell, and engaged (the honest fellows!) in offices almost menial for
 the benefit of their french allies. the duke himself set the example, and
 blacked to a nicety the boots of henri. at half-past ten, after coffee,
 the brilliant warriors of the cavalry were ready; their clarions rung to
 horse, their banners were given to the wind, their shirt-collars were
 exquisitely starched, and the whole air was scented with the odors of
 their pomatums and pocket-handkerchiefs.
 jenkins had the honor of holding the stirrup for henri. “my faithful
 duke!” said the prince, pulling him by the shoulder-knot, “thou art always
 at thy post.” “here, as in wellington street, sire,” said the hero,
 blushing. and the prince made an appropriate speech to his chivalry, in
 which allusions to the lilies, saint louis, bayard and henri quatre, were,
 as may be imagined, not spared. “ho! standard-bearer!” the prince
 concluded, “fling out my oriflamme. noble gents of france, your king is
 among you to-day!”
 then turning to the prince of ballybunion, who had been drinking
 whiskey-punch all night with the princes of donegal and connemara,
 “prince,” he said, “the irish brigade has won every battle in the french
 history—we will not deprive you of the honor of winning this. you
 will please to commence the attack with your brigade.” bending his head
 until the green plumes of his beaver mingled with the mane of the shetland
 pony which he rode, the prince of ireland trotted off with his
 aides-de-camp; who rode the same horses, powerful grays, with which a
 dealer at nantz had supplied them on their and the prince's joint bill at
 three months.
 the gallant sons of erin had wisely slept until the last minute in their
 potato-trenches, but rose at once at the summons of their beloved prince.
 their toilet was the work of a moment—a single shake and it was
 done. rapidly forming into a line, they advanced headed by their generals,—who,
 turning their steeds into a grass-field, wisely determined to fight on
 foot. behind them came the line of british foot under the illustrious
 jenkins, who marched in advance perfectly collected, and smoking a manilla
 cigar. the cavalry were on the right and left of the infantry, prepared to
 act in pontoon, in echelon, or in ricochet, as occasion might demand. the
 prince rode behind, supported by his staff, who were almost all of them
 bishops, archdeacons, or abbes; and the body of ecclesiastics followed,
 singing to the sound, or rather howl, of serpents and trombones, the latin
 canticles of the reverend franciscus o'mahony, lately canonized under the
 name of saint francis of cork.
 the advanced lines of the two contending armies were now in presence—the
 national guard of orleans and the irish brigade. the white belts and fat
 paunches of the guard presented a terrific appearance; but it might have
 been remarked by the close observer, that their faces were as white as
 their belts, and the long line of their bayonets might be seen to quiver.
 general odillon barrot, with a cockade as large as a pancake, endeavored
 to make a speech: the words honneur, patrie, francais, champ de bataille
 might be distinguished; but the general was dreadfully flustered, and was
 evidently more at home in the chamber of deputies than in the field of
 war.
 the prince of ballybunion, for a wonder, did not make a speech. “boys,”
 said he, “we've enough talking at the corn exchange; bating's the word
 now.” the green-islanders replied with a tremendous hurroo, which sent
 terror into the fat bosoms of the french.
 “gentlemen of the national guard,” said the prince, taking off his hat and
 bowing to odillon barrot, “will ye be so igsthramely obleeging as to fire
 first.” this he said because it had been said at fontenoy, but chiefly
 because his own men were only armed with shillelaghs, and therefore could
 not fire.
 but this proposal was very unpalatable to the national guardsmen: for
 though they understood the musket-exercise pretty well, firing was the
 thing of all others they detested—the noise, and the kick of the
 gun, and the smell of the powder being very unpleasant to them. “we won't
 fire,” said odillon barrot, turning round to colonel saugrenue and his
 regiment of the line—which, it may be remembered, was formed behind
 the national guard.
 “then give them the bayonet,” said the colonel, with a terrific oath.
 “charge, corbleu!”
 at this moment, and with the most dreadful howl that ever was heard, the
 national guard was seen to rush forwards wildly, and with immense
 velocity, towards the foe. the fact is, that the line regiment behind
 them, each selecting his man, gave a poke with his bayonet between the
 coat-tails of the nationals, and those troops bounded forward with an
 irresistible swiftness.
 nothing could withstand the tremendous impetus of that manoeuvre. the
 irish brigade was scattered before it, as chaff before the wind. the
 prince of ballybunion had barely time to run odillon barrot through the
 body, when he too was borne away in the swift rout. they scattered
 tumultuously, and fled for twenty miles without stopping. the princes of
 donegal and connemara were taken prisoners; but though they offered to
 give bills at three months, and for a hundred thousand pounds, for their
 ransom, the offer was refused, and they were sent to the rear; when the
 duke of nemours, hearing they were irish generals, and that they had been
 robbed of their ready money by his troops, who had taken them prisoners,
 caused a comfortable breakfast to be supplied to them, and lent them each
 a sum of money. how generous are men in success!—the prince of
 orleans was charmed with the conduct of his national guards, and thought
 his victory secure. he despatched a courier to paris with the brief words,
 “we met the enemy before tours. the national guard has done its duty. the
 troops of the pretender are routed. vive le roi!” the note, you may be
 sure, appeared in the journal des debats, and the editor, who only that
 morning had called henri v. “a great prince, an august exile,” denominated
 him instantly a murderer, slave, thief, cut-throat, pickpocket, and
 burglar.
 but the prince had not calculated that there was a line of british
 infantry behind the routed irish brigade. borne on with the hurry of the
 melee, flushed with triumph, puffing and blowing with running, and
 forgetting, in the intoxication of victory, the trifling bayonet-pricks
 which had impelled them to the charge, the conquering national guardsmen
 found themselves suddenly in presence of jenkins's foot.
 they halted all in a huddle, like a flock of sheep.
 “up, foot, and at them!” were the memorable words of the duke jenkins, as,
 waving his baton, he pointed towards the enemy, and with a tremendous
 shout the stalwart sons of england rushed on!—down went plume and
 cocked-hat, down went corporal and captain, down went grocer and tailor,
 under the long staves of the indomitable english footmen. “a jenkins! a
 jenkins!” roared the duke, planting a blow which broke the aquiline nose
 of major arago, the celebrated astronomer. “st. george for mayfair!”
 shouted his followers, strewing the plain with carcasses. not a man of the
 guard escaped; they fell like grass before the mower.
 “they are gallant troops, those yellow-plushed anglais,” said the duke of
 nemours, surveying them with his opera-glass. “'tis a pity they will all
 be cut up in half an hour. concombre! take your dragoons, and do it!”
 “remember waterloo, boys!” said colonel concombre, twirling his moustache,
 and a thousand sabres flashed in the sun, and the gallant hussars prepared
 to attack the englishmen.
 jenkins, his gigantic form leaning on his staff, and surveying the havoc
 of the field, was instantly aware of the enemy's manoeuvre. his people
 were employed rifling the pockets of the national guard, and had made a
 tolerable booty, when the great duke, taking a bell out of his pocket, (it
 was used for signals in his battalion in place of fife or bugle,) speedily
 called his scattered warriors together. “take the muskets of the
 nationals,” said he. they did so. “form in square, and prepare to receive
 cavalry!” by the time concombre's regiment arrived, he found a square of
 bristling bayonets with britons behind them!
 the colonel did not care to attempt to break that tremendous body. “halt!”
 said he to his men.
 “fire!” screamed jenkins, with eagle swiftness; but the guns of the
 national guard not being loaded, did not in consequence go off. the
 hussars gave a jeer of derision, but nevertheless did not return to the
 attack, and seeing some of the legitimist cavalry at hand, prepared to
 charge upon them.
 the fate of those carpet warriors was soon decided. the millefleur
 regiment broke before concombre's hussars instantaneously; the eau-de-rose
 dragoons stuck spurs into their blood horses, and galloped far out of
 reach of the opposing cavalry; the eau-de-cologne lancers fainted to a
 man, and the regiment of concombre, pursuing its course, had actually
 reached the prince and his aides-de-camp, when the clergymen coming up
 formed gallantly round the oriflamme, and the bassoons and serpents
 braying again, set up such a shout of canticles, and anathemas, and
 excommunications, that the horses of concombre's dragoons in turn took
 fright, and those warriors in their turn broke and fled. as soon as they
 turned, the vendean riflemen fired amongst them and finished them: the
 gallant concombre fell; the intrepid though diminutive cornichon, his
 major, was cut down; cardon was wounded a la moelle, and the wife of the
 fiery navet was that day a widow. peace to the souls of the brave! in
 defeat or in victory, where can the soldier find a more fitting
 resting-place than the glorious field of carnage? only a few disorderly
 and dispirited riders of concombre's regiment reached tours at night. they
 had left it but the day before, a thousand disciplined and high-spirited
 men!
 knowing how irresistible a weapon is the bayonet in british hands, the
 intrepid jenkins determined to carry on his advantage, and charged the
 saugrenue light infantry (now before him) with cold steel. the frenchmen
 delivered a volley, of which a shot took effect in jenkins's cockade, but
 did not abide the crossing of the weapons. “a frenchman dies, but never
 surrenders,” said saugrenue, yielding up his sword, and his whole regiment
 were stabbed, trampled down, or made prisoners. the blood of the
 englishmen rose in the hot encounter. their curses were horrible; their
 courage tremendous. “on! on!” hoarsely screamed they; and a second
 regiment met them and was crushed, pounded in the hurtling, grinding
 encounter. “a jenkins, a jenkins!” still roared the heroic duke: “st.
 george for mayfair!” the footmen of england still yelled their terrific
 battle-cry, “hurra, hurra!” on they went; regiment after regiment was
 annihilated, until, scared at the very trample of the advancing warriors,
 the dismayed troops of france screaming fled. gathering his last warriors
 round about him, nemours determined to make a last desperate effort. 'twas
 vain: the ranks met; the next moment the truncheon of the prince of
 orleans was dashed from his hand by the irresistible mace of the duke
 jenkins; his horse's shins were broken by the same weapon. screaming with
 agony the animal fell. jenkins's hand was at the duke's collar in a
 moment, and had he not gasped out, “je me rends!” he would have been
 throttled in that dreadful grasp!
 three hundred and forty-two standards, seventy-nine regiments, their
 baggage, ammunition, and treasure-chests, fell into the hands of the
 victorious duke. he had avenged the honor of old england; and himself
 presenting the sword of the conquered nemours to prince henri, who now
 came up, the prince bursting into tears, fell on his neck and said, “duke,
 i owe my crown to my patron saint and you.” it was indeed a glorious
 victory: but what will not british valor attain?
 the duke of nemours, having despatched a brief note to paris, saying,
 “sire, all is lost except honor!” was sent off in confinement; and in
 spite of the entreaties of his captor, was hardly treated with decent
 politeness. the priests and the noble regiments who rode back when the
 affair was over, were for having the prince shot at once, and murmured
 loudly against “cet anglais brutal” who interposed in behalf of the
 prisoner. henri v. granted the prince his life; but, no doubt misguided by
 the advice of his noble and ecclesiastical counsellors, treated the
 illustrious english duke with marked coldness, and did not even ask him to
 supper that night.
 “well!” said jenkins, “i and my merry men can sup alone.” and, indeed,
 having had the pick of the plunder of about , men, they had
 wherewithal to make themselves pretty comfortable. the prisoners (,)
 were all without difficulty induced to assume the white cockade. most of
 them had those marks of loyalty ready sewn in their flannel-waistcoats,
 where they swore they had worn them ever since . this we may believe,
 and we will; but the prince henri was too politic or too good-humored in
 the moment of victory, to doubt the sincerity of his new subjects'
 protestations, and received the colonels and generals affably at his
 table.
 the next morning a proclamation was issued to the united armies. “faithful
 soldiers of france and navarre,” said the prince, “the saints have won for
 us a great victory—the enemies of our religion have been overcome—the
 lilies are restored to their native soil. yesterday morning at eleven
 o'clock the army under my command engaged that which was led by his serene
 highness the duke de nemours. our forces were but a third in number when
 compared with those of the enemy. my faithful chivalry and nobles made the
 strength, however, equal.
 “the regiments of fleur-d'orange, millefleur, and eau-de-cologne covered
 themselves with glory: they sabred many thousands of the enemy's troops.
 their valor was ably seconded by the gallantry of my ecclesiastical
 friends: at a moment of danger they rallied round my banner, and forsaking
 the crosier for the sword, showed that they were of the church militant
 indeed.
 “my faithful irish auxiliaries conducted themselves with becoming heroism—but
 why particularize when all did their duty? how remember individual acts
 when all were heroes?” the marshal of france, sucre d'orgeville, commander
 of the army of h.m. christian majesty, recommended about three thousand
 persons for promotion; and the indignation of jenkins and his brave
 companions may be imagined when it is stated that they were not even
 mentioned in the despatch!
 as for the princes of ballybunion, donegal, and connemara, they wrote off
 despatches to their government, saying, “the duke of nemours is beaten,
 and a prisoner! the irish brigade has done it all!” on which his majesty
 the king of the irish, convoking his parliament at the corn exchange
 palace, dublin, made a speech, in which he called louis philippe an “old
 miscreant,” and paid the highest compliments to his son and his troops.
 the king on this occasion knighted sir henry sheehan, sir gavan duffy
 (whose journals had published the news), and was so delighted with the
 valor of his son, that he despatched him his order of the pig and whistle
 (st class), and a munificent present of five hundred thousand pounds—in
 a bill at three months. all dublin was illuminated; and at a ball at the
 castle the lord chancellor smith (earl of smithereens) getting extremely
 intoxicated, called out the lord bishop of galway (the dove), and they
 fought in the phoenix park. having shot the right reverend bishop through
 the body, smithereens apologized. he was the same practitioner who had
 rendered himself so celebrated in the memorable trial of the king—before
 the act of independence.
 meanwhile, the army of prince henri advanced with rapid strides towards
 paris, whither the history likewise must hasten; for extraordinary were
 the events preparing in that capital.
 by a singular coincidence, on the very same day when the armies of henri
 v. appeared before paris from the western road, those of the emperor john
 thomas napoleon arrived from the north. skirmishes took place between the
 advanced-guards of the two parties, and much slaughter ensued.
 “bon!” thought king louis philippe, who examined them from his tower;
 “they will kill each other. this is by far the most economical way of
 getting rid of them.” the astute monarch's calculations were admirably
 exposed by a clever remark of the prince of ballybunion. “faix, harry,”
 says he (with a familiarity which the punctilious son of saint louis
 resented), “you and him yandther—the emperor, i mane—are like
 the kilkenny cats, dear.”
 “et que font-ils ces chats de kilkigny, monsieur le prince de
 ballybunion?” asked the most christian king haughtily.
 prince daniel replied by narrating the well-known apologue of the animals
 “ating each other all up but their teels; and that's what you and imparial
 pop yondther will do, blazing away as ye are,” added the jocose and royal
 boy.
 “je prie votre altesse royale de vaguer a ses propres affaires,” answered
 prince henri sternly: for he was an enemy to anything like a joke; but
 there is always wisdom in real wit, and it would have been well for his
 most christian majesty had he followed the facetious counsels of his irish
 ally.
 the fact is, the king, henri, had an understanding with the garrisons of
 some of the forts, and expected all would declare for him. however, of the
 twenty-four forts which we have described, eight only—and by the
 means of marshal soult, who had grown extremely devout of late years—declared
 for henri, and raised the white flag: while eight others, seeing prince
 john thomas napoleon before them in the costume of his revered
 predecessor, at once flung open their gates to him, and mounted the
 tricolor with the eagle. the remaining eight, into which the princes of
 the blood of orleans had thrown themselves, remained constant to louis
 philippe. nothing could induce that prince to quit the tuileries. his
 money was there, and he swore he would remain by it. in vain his sons
 offered to bring him into one of the forts—he would not stir without
 his treasure. they said they would transport it thither; but no, no: the
 patriarchal monarch, putting his finger to his aged nose, and winking
 archly, said “he knew a trick worth two of that,” and resolved to abide by
 his bags.
 the theatres and cafes remained open as usual: the funds rose three
 centimes. the journal des debats published three editions of different
 tones of politics: one, the journal de l'empire, for the napoleonites; the
 journal de la legitimite another, very complimentary to the legitimate
 monarch; and finally, the original edition, bound heart and soul to the
 dynasty of july. the poor editor, who had to write all three, complained
 not a little that his salary was not raised: but the truth is, that, by
 altering the names, one article did indifferently for either paper. the
 duke of brittany, under the title of louis xvii., was always issuing
 manifestoes from charenton, but of these the parisians took little heed:
 the charivari proclaimed itself his gazette, and was allowed to be very
 witty at the expense of the three pretenders.
 as the country had been ravaged for a hundred miles round, the respective
 princes of course were for throwing themselves into the forts, where there
 was plenty of provision; and, when once there, they speedily began to turn
 out such of the garrison as were disagreeable to them, or had an
 inconvenient appetite, or were of a doubtful fidelity. these poor fellows
 turned into the road, had no choice but starvation; as to getting into
 paris, that was impossible: a mouse could not have got into the place, so
 admirably were the forts guarded, without having his head taken off by a
 cannon-ball. thus the three conflicting parties stood, close to each
 other, hating each other, “willing to wound and yet afraid to strike”—the
 victuals in the forts, from the prodigious increase of the garrisons,
 getting smaller every day. as for louis philippe in his palace, in the
 centre of the twenty-four forts, knowing that a spark from one might set
 them all blazing away, and that he and his money-bags might be blown into
 eternity in ten minutes, you may fancy his situation was not very
 comfortable.
 but his safety lay in his treasure. neither the imperialists nor the
 bourbonites were willing to relinquish the two hundred and fifty billions
 in gold; nor would the princes of orleans dare to fire upon that
 considerable sum of money, and its possessor, their revered father. how
 was this state of things to end? the emperor sent a note to his most
 christian majesty (for they always styled each other in this manner in
 their communications), proposing that they should turn out and decide the
 quarrel sword in hand; to which proposition henri would have acceded, but
 that the priests, his ghostly counsellors, threatened to excommunicate him
 should he do so. hence this simple way of settling the dispute was
 impossible.
 the presence of the holy fathers caused considerable annoyance in the
 forts. especially the poor english, as protestants, were subject to much
 petty persecution, to the no small anger of jenkins, their commander. and
 it must be confessed that these intrepid footmen were not so amenable to
 discipline as they might have been. remembering the usages of merry
 england, they clubbed together, and swore they would have four meals of
 meat a day, wax-candles in the casemates, and their porter. these demands
 were laughed at: the priests even called upon them to fast on fridays; on
 which a general mutiny broke out in the regiment; and they would have had
 a fourth standard raised before paris—viz., that of england—but
 the garrison proving too strong for them, they were compelled to lay down
 their sticks; and, in consideration of past services, were permitted to
 leave the forts. 'twas well for them! as you shall hear.
 the prince of ballybunion and the irish force were quartered in the fort
 which, in compliment to them, was called fort potato, and where they made
 themselves as comfortable as circumstances would admit. the princes had as
 much brandy as they liked, and passed their time on the ramparts playing
 at dice, or pitch-and-toss (with the halfpenny that one of them somehow
 had) for vast sums of money, for which they gave their notes-of-hand. the
 warriors of their legion would stand round delighted; and it was, “musha,
 master dan, but that's a good throw!” “good luck to you, misther pat, and
 throw thirteen this time!” and so forth. but this sort of inaction could
 not last long. they had heard of the treasures amassed in the palace of
 the tuileries: they sighed when they thought of the lack of bullion in
 their green and beautiful country. they panted for war! they formed their
 plan.
 on the morning of the th october, , as his majesty louis philippe
 was at breakfast reading the debats newspaper, and wishing that what the
 journal said about “cholera morbus in the camp of the pretender henri,”—“chicken-pox
 raging in the forts of the traitor bonaparte,”—might be true, what
 was his surprise to hear the report of a gun; and at the same instant—whiz!
 came an eighty-four-pound ball through the window and took off the head of
 the faithful monsieur de montalivet, who was coming in with a plate of
 muffins.
 “three francs for the window,” said the monarch; “and the muffins of
 course spoiled!” and he sat down to breakfast very peevishly. ah, king
 louis philippe, that shot cost thee more than a window-pane—more
 than a plate of muffins—it cost thee a fair kingdom and fifty
 millions of tax-payers.
 the shot had been fired from fort potato. “gracious heavens!” said the
 commander of the place to the irish prince, in a fury, “what has your
 highness done?” “faix,” replied the other, “donegal and i saw a sparrow on
 the tuileries, and we thought we'd have a shot at it, that's all.”
 “hurroo! look out for squalls,” here cried the intrepid hibernian; for at
 this moment one of paixhans' shells fell into the counterscarp of the
 demilune on which they were standing, and sent a ravelin and a couple of
 embrasures flying about their ears.
 fort twenty-three, which held out for louis philippe, seeing fort
 twenty-four, or potato, open a fire on the tuileries, instantly replied by
 its guns, with which it blazed away at the bourbonite fort. on seeing
 this, fort twenty-two, occupied by the imperialists, began pummelling
 twenty-three; twenty-one began at twenty-two; and in a quarter of an hour
 the whole of this vast line of fortification was in a blaze of flame,
 flashing, roaring, cannonading, rocketing, bombing, in the most tremendous
 manner. the world has never perhaps, before or since, heard such an
 uproar. fancy twenty-four thousand guns thundering at each other. fancy
 the sky red with the fires of hundreds of thousands of blazing, brazen
 meteors; the air thick with impenetrable smoke—the universe almost
 in a flame! for the noise of the cannonading was heard on the peaks of the
 andes, and broke three windows in the english factory at canton. boom,
 boom, boom! for three days incessantly the gigantic—i may say,
 cyclopean battle went on: boom, boom, boom, bong! the air was thick with
 cannon-balls: they hurtled, they jostled each other in the heavens, and
 fell whizzing, whirling, crashing, back into the very forts from which
 they came. boom, boom, boom, bong—brrwrrwrrr!
 on the second day a band might have been seen (had the smoke permitted it)
 assembling at the sally-port of fort potato, and have been heard (if the
 tremendous clang of the cannonading had allowed it) giving mysterious
 signs and countersigns. “tom,” was the word whispered, “steele” was the
 sibilated response. (it is astonishing how, in the roar of elements, the
 human whisper hisses above all!) it was the irish brigade assembling. “now
 or never, boys!” said their leaders; and sticking their doodeens into
 their mouths, they dropped stealthily into the trenches, heedless of the
 broken glass and sword-blades; rose from those trenches; formed in silent
 order; and marched to paris. they knew they could arrive there unobserved—nobody,
 indeed, remarked their absence.
 the frivolous parisians were, in the meanwhile, amusing themselves at
 their theatres and cafes as usual; and a new piece, in which arnal
 performed, was the universal talk of the foyers: while a new feuilleton by
 monsieur eugene sue, kept the attention of the reader so fascinated to the
 journal, that they did not care in the least for the vacarme without the
 walls.
 the tremendous cannonading, however, had a singular effect upon the
 inhabitants of the great public hospital of charenton, in which it may be
 remembered louis xvii. had been, as in mockery, confined. his majesty of
 demeanor, his calm deportment, the reasonableness of his pretensions, had
 not failed to strike with awe and respect his four thousand comrades of
 captivity. the emperor of china, the princess of the moon, julius caesar,
 saint genevieve, the patron saint of paris, the pope of rome, the cacique
 of mexico, and several singular and illustrious personages who happened to
 be confined there, all held a council with louis xvii.; and all agreed
 that now or never was the time to support his legitimate pretensions to
 the crown of france. as the cannons roared around them, they howled with
 furious delight in response. they took counsel together: dr. pinel and the
 infamous jailers, who, under the name of keepers, held them in horrible
 captivity, were pounced upon and overcome in a twinkling. the
 strait-waistcoats were taken off from the wretched captives languishing in
 the dungeons; the guardians were invested in these shameful garments, and
 with triumphant laughter plunged under the douches. the gates of the
 prison were flung open, and they marched forth in the blackness of the
 storm!
 on the third day, the cannonading was observed to decrease; only a gun
 went off fitfully now and then.
 on the fourth day, the parisians said to one another, “tiens! ils sont
 fatigues, les cannoniers des forts!”—and why? because there was no
 more powder?—ay, truly, there was no more powder.
 there was no more powder, no more guns, no more gunners, no more forts, no
 more nothing. the forts had blown each other up. the battle-roar ceased.
 the battle-clouds rolled off. the silver moon, the twinkling stars, looked
 blandly down from the serene azure,—and all was peace—stillness—the
 stillness of death. holy, holy silence!
 yes: the battle of paris was over. and where were the combatants? all gone—not
 one left!—and where was louis philippe? the venerable prince was a
 captive in the tuileries; the irish brigade was encamped around it: they
 had reached the palace a little too late; it was already occupied by the
 partisans of his majesty louis xvii.
 that respectable monarch and his followers better knew the way to the
 tuileries than the ignorant sons of erin. they burst through the feeble
 barriers of the guards; they rushed triumphant into the kingly halls of
 the palace; they seated the seventeenth louis on the throne of his
 ancestors; and the parisians read in the journal des debats, of the fifth
 of november; an important article, which proclaimed that the civil war was
 concluded:—
 “the troubles which distracted the greatest empire in the world are at an
 end. europe, which marked with sorrow the disturbances which agitated the
 bosom of the queen of nations, the great leader of civilization, may now
 rest in peace. that monarch whom we have long been sighing for; whose
 image has lain hidden, and yet oh! how passionately worshipped, in every
 french heart, is with us once more. blessings be on him; blessings—a
 thousand blessings upon the happy country which is at length restored to
 his beneficent, his legitimate, his reasonable sway!
 “his most christian majesty louis xvii. yesterday arrived at his palace of
 the tulleries, accompanied by his august allies. his royal highness the
 duke of orleans has resigned his post as lieutenant-general of the
 kingdom, and will return speedily to take up his abode at the palais
 royal. it is a great mercy that the children of his royal highness, who
 happened to be in the late forts round paris, (before the bombardment
 which has so happily ended in their destruction,) had returned to their
 father before the commencement of the cannonading. they will continue, as
 heretofore, to be the most loyal supporters of order and the throne.
 “none can read without tears in their eyes our august monarch's
 proclamation.
 “'louis, by &c.—
 “'my children! after nine hundred and ninety-nine years of captivity, i am
 restored to you. the cycle of events predicted by the ancient magi, and
 the planetary convolutions mentioned in the lost sibylline books, have
 fulfilled their respective idiosyncrasies, and ended (as always in the
 depths of my dungeons i confidently expected) in the triumph of the good
 angel, and the utter discomfiture of the abominable blue dragon.
 “'when the bombarding began, and the powers of darkness commenced their
 hellish gunpowder evolutions, i was close by—in my palace of
 charenton, three hundred and thirty-three thousand miles off, in the ring
 of saturn—i witnessed your misery. my heart was affected by it, and
 i said, “is the multiplication-table a fiction? are the signs of the
 zodiac mere astronomers' prattle?”
 “'i clapped chains, shrieking and darkness, on my physician, dr. pinel.
 the keepers i shall cause to be roasted alive. i summoned my allies round
 about me. the high contracting powers came to my bidding: monarchs from
 all parts of the earth; sovereigns from the moon and other illumined
 orbits; the white necromancers, and the pale imprisoned genii. i whispered
 the mystic sign, and the doors flew open. we entered paris in triumph, by
 the charenton bridge. our luggage was not examined at the octroi. the
 bottle-green ones were scared at our shouts, and retreated, howling: they
 knew us, and trembled.
 “'my faithful peers and deputies will rally around me. i have a friend in
 turkey—the grand vizier of the mussulmans: he was a protestant once—lord
 brougham by name. i have sent to him to legislate for us: he is wise in
 the law, and astrology, and all sciences; he shall aid my ministers in
 their councils. i have written to him by the post. there shall be no more
 infamous mad-houses in france, where poor souls shiver in
 strait-waistcoats.
 “'i recognized louis philippe, my good cousin. he was in his
 counting-house, counting out his money, as the old prophecy warned me. he
 gave me up the keys of his gold; i shall know well how to use it. taught
 by adversity, i am not a spendthrift, neither am i a miser. i will endow
 the land with noble institutions instead of diabolical forts. i will have
 no more cannon founded. they are a curse and shall be melted—the
 iron ones into railroads; the bronze ones into statues of beautiful
 saints, angels, and wise men; the copper ones into money, to be
 distributed among my poor. i was poor once, and i love them.
 “'there shall be no more poverty; no more wars; no more avarice; no more
 passports; no more custom-houses; no more lying: no more physic.
 “'my chambers will put the seal to these reforms. i will it. i am the
 king.
 (signed) 'louis.'”
 “some alarm was created yesterday by the arrival of a body of the english
 foot-guard under the duke of jenkins; they were at first about to sack the
 city, but on hearing that the banner of the lilies was once more raised in
 france, the duke hastened to the tuileries, and offered his allegiance to
 his majesty. it was accepted: and the plush guard has been established in
 place of the swiss, who waited on former sovereigns.”
 “the irish brigade quartered in the tuileries are to enter our service.
 their commander states that they took every one of the forts round paris,
 and having blown them up, were proceeding to release louis xvii., when
 they found that august monarch, happily, free. news of their glorious
 victory has been conveyed to dublin, to his majesty the king of the irish.
 it will be a new laurel to add to his green crown!”
 and thus have we brought to a conclusion our history of the great french
 revolution of . it records the actions of great and various
 characters; the deeds of various valor; it narrates wonderful reverses of
 fortune; it affords the moralist scope for his philosophy; perhaps it
 gives amusement to the merely idle reader. nor must the latter imagine,
 because there is not a precise moral affixed to the story, that its
 tendency is otherwise than good. he is a poor reader, for whom his author
 is obliged to supply a moral application. it is well in spelling-books and
 for children; it is needless for the reflecting spirit. the drama of punch
 himself is not moral: but that drama has had audiences all over the world.
 happy he, who in our dark times can cause a smile! let us laugh then, and
 gladden in the sunshine, though it be but as the ray upon the pool, that
 flickers only over the cold black depths below!
 on the st of january, , i was the master of a lovely shop in the
 neighborhood of oxford market; of a wife, mrs. cox; of a business, both in
 the shaving and cutting line, established three-and-thirty years; of a
 girl and boy respectively of the ages of eighteen and thirteen; of a
 three-windowed front, both to my first and second pair; of a young
 foreman, my present partner, mr. orlando crump; and of that celebrated
 mixture for the human hair, invented by my late uncle, and called cox's
 bohemian balsam of tokay, sold in pots at two-and-three and
 three-and-nine. the balsam, the lodgings, and the old-established cutting
 and shaving business brought me in a pretty genteel income. i had my girl,
 jemimarann, at hackney, to school; my dear boy, tuggeridge, plaited her
 hair beautifully; my wife at the counter (behind the tray of patent soaps,
 &c.) cut as handsome a figure as possible; and it was my hope that
 orlando and my girl, who were mighty soft upon one another, would one day
 be joined together in hyming, and, conjointly with my son tug, carry on
 the business of hairdressers when their father was either dead or a
 gentleman: for a gentleman me and mrs. c. determined i should be.
 jemima was, you see, a lady herself, and of very high connections: though
 her own family had met with crosses, and was rather low. mr. tuggeridge,
 her father, kept the famous tripe-shop near the “pigtail and sparrow,” in
 the whitechapel road; from which place i married her; being myself very
 fond of the article, and especially when she served it to me—the
 dear thing!
 jemima's father was not successful in business: and i married her, i am
 proud to confess it, without a shilling. i had my hands, my house, and my
 bohemian balsam to support her!—and we had hopes from her uncle, a
 mighty rich east india merchant, who, having left this country sixty years
 ago as a cabin-boy, had arrived to be the head of a great house in india,
 and was worth millions, we were told.
 three years after jemimarann's birth (and two after the death of my
 lamented father-in-law), tuggeridge (head of the great house of budgurow
 and co.) retired from the management of it; handed over his shares to his
 son, mr. john tuggeridge, and came to live in england, at portland place,
 and tuggeridgeville, surrey, and enjoy himself. soon after, my wife took
 her daughter in her hand and went, as in duty bound, to visit her uncle:
 but whether it was that he was proud and surly, or she somewhat sharp in
 her way, (the dear girl fears nobody, let me have you to know,) a
 desperate quarrel took place between them; and from that day to the day of
 his death, he never set eyes on her. all that he would condescend to do,
 was to take a few dozen of lavender-water from us in the course of the
 year, and to send his servants to be cut and shaved by us. all the
 neighbors laughed at this poor ending of our expectations, for jemmy had
 bragged not a little; however, we did not care, for the connection was
 always a good one, and we served mr. hock, the valet; mr. bar, the
 coachman; and mrs. breadbasket, the housekeeper, willingly enough. i used
 to powder the footman, too, on great days, but never in my life saw old
 tuggeridge, except once: when he said “oh, the barber!” tossed up his
 nose, and passed on.
 one day—one famous day last january—all our market was thrown
 into a high state of excitement by the appearance of no less than three
 vehicles at our establishment. as me, jemmy, my daughter, tug, and
 orlando, were sitting in the back-parlor over our dinner (it being
 christmas-time, mr. crump had treated the ladies to a bottle of port, and
 was longing that there should be a mistletoe-bough: at which proposal my
 little jemimarann looked as red as a glass of negus):—we had just, i
 say, finished the port, when, all of a sudden, tug bellows out, “la, pa,
 here's uncle tuggeridge's housekeeper in a cab!”
 and mrs. breadbasket it was, sure enough—mrs. breadbasket in deep
 mourning, who made her way, bowing and looking very sad, into the back
 shop. my wife, who respected mrs. b. more than anything else in the world,
 set her a chair, offered her a glass of wine, and vowed it was very kind
 of her to come. “la, mem,” says mrs. b., “i'm sure i'd do anything to
 serve your family, for the sake of that poor dear
 tuck-tuck-tug-guggeridge, that's gone.”
 “that's what?” cries my wife.
 “what, gone?” cried jemimarann, bursting out crying (as little girls will
 about anything or nothing); and orlando looking very rueful, and ready to
 cry too.
 “yes, gaw—” just as she was at this very “gaw” tug roars out, “la,
 pa! here's mr. bar, uncle tug's coachman!”
 it was mr. bar. when she saw him, mrs. breadbasket stepped suddenly back
 into the parlor with my ladies. “what is it, mr. bar?” says i; and as
 quick as thought, i had the towel under his chin, mr. bar in the chair,
 and the whole of his face in a beautiful foam of lather. mr. bar made some
 resistance.—“don't think of it, mr. cox,” says he; “don't trouble
 yourself, sir.” but i lathered away and never minded. “and what's this
 melancholy event, sir,” says i, “that has spread desolation in your
 family's bosoms? i can feel for your loss, sir—i can feel for your
 loss.”
 i said so out of politeness, because i served the family, not because
 tuggeridge was my uncle—no, as such i disown him.
 mr. bar was just about to speak. “yes, sir,” says he, “my master's gaw—”
 when at the “gaw” in walks mr. hock, the own man!—the finest
 gentleman i ever saw.
 “what, you here, mr. bar!” says he.
 “yes, i am, sir; and haven't i a right, sir?”
 “a mighty wet day, sir,” says i to mr. hock—stepping up and making
 my bow. “a sad circumstance too, sir! and is it a turn of the tongs that
 you want to-day, sir? ho, there, mr. crump!”
 “turn, mr. crump, if you please, sir,” said mr. hock, making a bow: “but
 from you, sir, never—no, never, split me!—and i wonder how
 some fellows can have the insolence to allow their masters to shave them!”
 with this, mr. hock flung himself down to be curled: mr. bar suddenly
 opened his mouth in order to reply; but seeing there was a tiff between
 the gentlemen, and wanting to prevent a quarrel, i rammed the advertiser
 into mr. hock's hands, and just popped my shaving-brush into mr. bar's
 mouth—a capital way to stop angry answers.
 mr. bar had hardly been in the chair one second, when whir comes a
 hackney-coach to the door, from which springs a gentleman in a black coat
 with a bag.
 “what, you here!” says the gentleman. i could not help smiling, for it seemed
 that everybody was to begin by saying, “what, you here!” “your name is
 cox, sir?” says he; smiling too, as the very pattern of mine. “my name,
 sir, is sharpus,—blunt, hone and sharpus, middle temple lane,—and
 i am proud to salute you, sir; happy,—that is to say, sorry to say
 that mr. tuggeridge, of portland place, is dead, and your lady is heiress,
 in consequence, to one of the handsomest properties in the kingdom.”
 at this i started, and might have sunk to the ground, but for my hold of
 mr. bar's nose; orlando seemed putrified to stone, with his irons fixed to
 mr. hock's head; our respective patients gave a wince out:—mrs. c.,
 jemimarann, and tug, rushed from the back shop, and we formed a splendid
 tableau such as the great cruikshank might have depicted.
 “and mr. john tuggeridge, sir?” says i.
 “why—hee, hee, hee!” says mr. sharpus. “surely you know that he was
 only the—hee, hee, hee!—the natural son!”
 you now can understand why the servants from portland place had been so
 eager to come to us. one of the house-maids heard mr. sharpus say there
 was no will, and that my wife was heir to the property, and not mr. john
 tuggeridge: this she told in the housekeeper's room; and off, as soon as
 they heard it, the whole party set, in order to be the first to bear the
 news.
 we kept them, every one in their old places; for, though my wife would
 have sent them about their business, my dear jemimarann just hinted,
 “mamma, you know they have been used to great houses, and we have not; had
 we not better keep them for a little?”—keep them, then, we did, to
 show us how to be gentlefolks.
 i handed over the business to mr. crump without a single farthing of
 premium, though jemmy would have made me take four hundred pounds for it;
 but this i was above: crump had served me faithfully, and have the shop he
 should.
 we were speedily installed in our fine house: but what's a house without
 friends? jemmy made me cut all my old acquaintances in the market, and i
 was a solitary being; when, luckily, an old acquaintance of ours, captain
 tagrag, was so kind as to promise to introduce us into distinguished
 society. tagrag was the son of a baronet, and had done us the honor of
 lodging with us for two years; when we lost sight of him, and of his
 little account, too, by the way. a fortnight after, hearing of our good
 fortune, he was among us again, however; and jemmy was not a little glad
 to see him, knowing him to be a baronet's son, and very fond of our
 jemimarann. indeed, orlando (who is as brave as a lion) had on one
 occasion absolutely beaten mr. tagrag for being rude to the poor girl: a
 clear proof, as tagrag said afterwards, that he was always fond of her.
 mr. crump, poor fellow, was not very much pleased by our good fortune,
 though he did all he could to try at first; and i told him to come and
 take his dinner regular, as if nothing had happened. but to this jemima
 very soon put a stop, for she came very justly to know her stature, and to
 look down on crump, which she bid her daughter to do; and, after a great
 scene, in which orlando showed himself very rude and angry, he was
 forbidden the house—for ever!
 so much for poor crump. the captain was now all in all with us. “you see,
 sir,” our jemmy would say, “we shall have our town and country mansion,
 and a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the funds, to leave between
 our two children; and, with such prospects, they ought surely to have the
 first society of england.” to this tagrag agreed, and promised to bring us
 acquainted with the very pink of the fashion; ay, and what's more, did.
 first, he made my wife get an opera-box, and give suppers on tuesdays and
 saturdays. as for me, he made me ride in the park: me and jemimarann, with
 two grooms behind us, who used to laugh all the way, and whose very beards
 i had shaved. as for little tug, he was sent straight off to the most
 fashionable school in the kingdom, the reverend doctor pigney's, at
 richmond.
 well, the horses, the suppers, the opera-box, the paragraphs in the papers
 about mr. coxe coxe (that's the way: double your name and stick an “e” to
 the end of it, and you are a gentleman at once), had an effect in a
 wonderfully short space of time, and we began to get a very pretty society
 about us. some of old tug's friends swore they would do anything for the
 family, and brought their wives and daughters to see dear mrs. coxe and
 her charming girl; and when, about the first week in february, we
 announced a grand dinner and ball for the evening of the twenty-eighth, i
 assure you there was no want of company: no, nor of titles neither; and it
 always does my heart good even to hear one mentioned.
 let me see. there was, first, my lord dunboozle, an irish peer, and his
 seven sons, the honorable messieurs trumper (two only to dinner): there
 was count mace, the celebrated french nobleman, and his excellency baron
 von punter from baden; there was lady blanche bluenose, the eminent
 literati, author of “the distrusted” “the distorted,” “the disgusted,”
 “the disreputable one,” and other poems; there was the dowager lady max
 and her daughter, the honorable miss adelaide blueruin; sir charles
 codshead, from the city; and field-marshal sir gorman o'gallagher, k.a.,
 k.b., k.c., k.w., k.x., in the service of the republic of guatemala: my
 friend tagrag and his fashionable acquaintance, little tom tufthunt, made
 up the party. and when the doors were flung open, and mr. hock, in black,
 with a white napkin, three footmen, coachman, and a lad whom mrs. c. had
 dressed in sugar-loaf buttons and called a page, were seen round the
 dinner-table, all in white gloves, i promise you i felt a thrill of
 elation, and thought to myself—sam cox, sam cox, who ever would have
 expected to see you here?
 after dinner, there was to be, as i said, an evening-party; and to this
 messieurs tagrag and tufthunt had invited many of the principal nobility
 that our metropolis had produced. when i mention, among the company to
 tea, her grace the duchess of zero, her son the marquis of fitzurse, and
 the ladies north pole her daughters; when i say that there were yet
 others, whose names may be found in the blue book, but shan't, out of
 modesty, be mentioned here, i think i've said enough to show that, in our
 time, no. , portland place, was the resort of the best of company.
 it was our first dinner, and dressed by our new cook, munseer cordongblew.
 i bore it very well; eating, for my share, a filly dysol allamater dotell,
 a cutlet soubeast, a pully bashymall, and other french dishes: and, for
 the frisky sweet wine, with tin tops to the bottles, called champang, i
 must say that me and mrs. coxe-tuggeridge coxe drank a very good share of
 it (but the claret and jonnysberger, being sour, we did not much relish).
 however, the feed, as i say, went off very well: lady blanche bluenose
 sitting next to me, and being so good as to put me down for six copies of
 all her poems; the count and baron von punter engaging jemimarann for
 several waltzes, and the field-marshal plying my dear jemmy with
 champagne, until, bless her! her dear nose became as red as her new
 crimson satin gown, which, with a blue turban and bird-of-paradise
 feathers, made her look like an empress, i warrant.
 well, dinner past, mrs. c. and the ladies went off:—thunder-under-under
 came the knocks at the door; squeedle-eedle-eedle, mr. wippert's fiddlers
 began to strike up; and, about half-past eleven, me and the gents thought
 it high time to make our appearance. i felt a little squeamish at the
 thought of meeting a couple of hundred great people; but count mace and
 sir gorman o'gallagher taking each an arm, we reached, at last, the
 drawing-room.
 the young ones in company were dancing, and the duchess and the great
 ladies were all seated, talking to themselves very stately, and working
 away at the ices and macaroons. i looked out for my pretty jemimarann
 amongst the dancers, and saw her tearing round the room along with baron
 punter, in what they call a gallypard; then i peeped into the circle of
 the duchesses, where, in course, i expected to find mrs. c.; but she
 wasn't there! she was seated at the further end of the room, looking very
 sulky; and i went up and took her arm, and brought her down to the place
 where the duchesses were. “oh, not there!” said jemmy, trying to break
 away. “nonsense, my dear,” says i: “you are missis, and this is your
 place.” then going up to her ladyship the duchess, says i, “me and my
 missis are most proud of the honor of seeing of you.”
 the duchess (a tall red-haired grenadier of a woman) did not speak.
 i went on: “the young ones are all at it, ma'am, you see; and so we
 thought we would come and sit down among the old ones. you and i, ma'am, i
 think, are too stiff to dance.”
 “sir!” says her grace.
 “ma'am,” says i, “don't you know me? my name's cox. nobody's introduced
 me; but, dash it, it's my own house, and i may present myself—so
 give us your hand, ma'am.”
 and i shook hers in the kindest way in the world; but—would you
 believe it?—the old cat screamed as if my hand had been a hot
 'tater. “fitzurse! fitzurse!” shouted she, “help! help!” up scuffled all
 the other dowagers—in rushed the dancers. “mamma! mamma!” squeaked
 lady julia north pole. “lead me to my mother,” howled lady aurorer: and
 both came up and flung themselves into her arms. “wawt's the raw?” said
 lord fitzurse, sauntering up quite stately.
 “protect me from the insults of this man,” says her grace. “where's
 tufthunt? he promised that not a soul in this house should speak to me.”
 “my dear duchess,” said tufthunt, very meek.
 “don't duchess me, sir. did you not promise they should not speak; and
 hasn't that horrid tipsy wretch offered to embrace me? didn't his
 monstrous wife sicken me with her odious familiarities? call my people,
 tufthunt! follow me, my children!”
 “and my carriage,” “and mine,” “and mine!” shouted twenty more voices. and
 down they all trooped to the hall: lady blanche bluenose and lady max
 among the very first; leaving only the field-marshal and one or two men,
 who roared with laughter ready to split.
 “oh, sam,” said my wife, sobbing, “why would you take me back to them?
 they had sent me away before! i only asked the duchess whether she didn't
 like rum-shrub better than all your maxarinos and curasosos: and—would
 you believe it?—all the company burst out laughing; and the duchess
 told me just to keep off, and not to speak till i was spoken to.
 imperence! i'd like to tear her eyes out.”
 and so i do believe my dearest jemmy would!
 our ball had failed so completely that jemmy, who was bent still upon
 fashion, caught eagerly at tagrag's suggestion, and went down to
 tuggeridgeville. if we had a difficulty to find friends in town, here
 there was none: for the whole county came about us, ate our dinners and
 suppers, danced at our balls—ay, and spoke to us too. we were great
 people in fact: i a regular country gentleman; and as such, jemmy insisted
 that i should be a sportsman, and join the county hunt. “but,” says i, “my
 love, i can't ride.” “pooh! mr. c.” said she, “you're always making
 difficulties: you thought you couldn't dance a quadrille; you thought you
 couldn't dine at seven o'clock; you thought you couldn't lie in bed after
 six; and haven't you done every one of these things? you must and you
 shall ride!” and when my jemmy said “must and shall,” i knew very well
 there was nothing for it: so i sent down fifty guineas to the hunt, and,
 out of compliment to me, the very next week, i received notice that the
 meet of the hounds would take place at squashtail common, just outside my
 lodge-gates.
 i didn't know what a meet was; and me and mrs. c. agreed that it was most
 probable the dogs were to be fed there. however, tagrag explained this
 matter to us, and very kindly promised to sell me a horse, a delightful
 animal of his own; which, being desperately pressed for money, he would
 let me have for a hundred guineas, he himself having given a hundred and
 fifty for it.
 well, the thursday came: the hounds met on squashtail common; mrs. c.
 turned out in her barouche to see us throw off; and, being helped up on my
 chestnut horse, trumpeter, by tagrag and my head groom, i came presently
 round to join them.
 tag mounted his own horse; and, as we walked down the avenue, “i thought,”
 he said, “you told me you knew how to ride; and that you had ridden once
 fifty miles on a stretch!”
 “and so i did,” says i, “to cambridge, and on the box too.”
 “on the box!” says he; “but did you ever mount a horse before?”
 “never,” says i, “but i find it mighty easy.”
 “well,” says he, “you're mighty bold for a barber; and i like you, coxe,
 for your spirit.” and so we came out of the gate.
 as for describing the hunt, i own, fairly, i can't. i've been at a hunt,
 but what a hunt is—why the horses will go among the dogs and ride
 them down—why the men cry out “yooooic”—why the dogs go
 snuffing about in threes and fours, and the huntsman says, “good towler—good
 betsy,” and we all of us after him say, “good towler—good betsy” in
 course: then, after hearing a yelp here and a howl there, tow, row, yow,
 yow, yow! burst out, all of a sudden, from three or four of them, and the
 chap in a velvet cap screeches out (with a number of oaths i shan't repeat
 here), “hark, to ringwood!” and then, “there he goes!” says some one; and
 all of a sudden, helter skelter, skurry hurry, slap bang, whooping,
 screeching and hurraing, blue-coats and red-coats, bays and grays, horses,
 dogs, donkeys, butchers, baro-knights, dustmen, and blackguard boys, go
 tearing all together over the common after two or three of the pack that
 yowl loudest. why all this is, i can't say; but it all took place the
 second thursday of last march, in my presence.
 up to this, i'd kept my seat as well as the best, for we'd only been
 trotting gently about the field until the dogs found; and i managed to
 stick on very well; but directly the tow-rowing began, off went trumpeter
 like a thunderbolt, and i found myself playing among the dogs like the
 donkey among the chickens. “back, mr. coxe,” holloas the huntsman; and so
 i pulled very hard, and cried out, “wo!” but he wouldn't; and on i went
 galloping for the dear life. how i kept on is a wonder; but i squeezed my
 knees in very tight, and shoved my feet very hard into the stirrups, and
 kept stiff hold of the scruff of trumpeter's neck, and looked betwixt his
 ears as well as ever i could, and trusted to luck: for i was in a mortal
 fright, sure enough, as many a better man would be in such a case, let
 alone a poor hairdresser.
 as for the hounds, after my first riding in among them, i tell you
 honestly, i never saw so much as the tip of one of their tails; nothing in
 this world did i see except trumpeter's dun-colored mane, and that i
 gripped firm: riding, by the blessing of luck, safe through the walking,
 the trotting, the galloping, and never so much as getting a tumble.
 there was a chap at croydon very well known as the “spicy dustman,” who,
 when he could get no horse to ride to the hounds, turned regularly out on
 his donkey; and on this occasion made one of us. he generally managed to
 keep up with the dogs by trotting quietly through the cross-roads, and
 knowing the country well. well, having a good guess where the hounds would
 find, and the line that sly reynolds (as they call the fox) would take,
 the spicy dustman turned his animal down the lane from squashtail to
 cutshins common; across which, sure enough, came the whole hunt. there's a
 small hedge and a remarkably fine ditch here: some of the leading chaps
 took both, in gallant style; others went round by a gate, and so would i,
 only i couldn't; for trumpeter would have the hedge, and be hanged to him,
 and went right for it.
 hoop! if ever you did try a leap! out go your legs, out fling your arms,
 off goes your hat; and the next thing you feel—that is, i did—is
 a most tremendous thwack across the chest, and my feet jerked out of the
 stirrups: me left in the branches of a tree; trumpeter gone clean from
 under me, and walloping and floundering in the ditch underneath. one of
 the stirrup-leathers had caught in a stake, and the horse couldn't get
 away: and neither of us, i thought, ever would have got away: but all of a
 sudden, who should come up the lane but the spicy dustman!
 “holloa!” says i, “you gent, just let us down from this here tree!”
 “lor'!” says he, “i'm blest if i didn't take you for a robin.”
 “let's down,” says i; but he was all the time employed in disengaging
 trumpeter, whom he got out of the ditch, trembling and as quiet as
 possible. “let's down,” says i. “presently,” says he; and taking off his
 coat, he begins whistling and swishing down trumpeter's sides and saddle;
 and when he had finished, what do you think the rascal did?—he just
 quietly mounted on trumpeter's back, and shouts out, “git down yourself,
 old bearsgrease; you've only to drop! i'll give your 'oss a hairing arter
 them 'ounds; and you—vy, you may ride back my pony to
 tuggeridgeweal!” and with this, i'm blest if he didn't ride away, leaving
 me holding, as for the dear life, and expecting every minute the branch
 would break.
 it did break too, and down i came into the slush; and when i got out of
 it, i can tell you i didn't look much like the venuses or the apollor
 belvidearis what i used to dress and titivate up for my shop window when i
 was in the hairdressing line, or smell quite so elegant as our rose-oil.
 faugh! what a figure i was!
 i had nothing for it but to mount the dustman's donkey (which was very
 quietly cropping grass in the hedge), and to make my way home; and after a
 weary, weary journey, i arrived at my own gate.
 a whole party was assembled there. tagrag, who had come back; their
 excellencies mace and punter, who were on a visit; and a number of horses
 walking up and down before the whole of the gentlemen of the hunt, who had
 come in after losing their fox! “here's squire coxe!” shouted the grooms.
 out rushed the servants, out poured the gents of the hunt, and on trotted
 poor me, digging into the donkey, and everybody dying with laughter at me.
 just as i got up to the door, a horse came galloping up, and passed me; a
 man jumped down, and taking off a fantail hat, came up, very gravely, to
 help me down.
 “squire,” says he, “how came you by that there hanimal? jist git down,
 will you, and give it to its howner?”
 “rascal!” says i, “didn't you ride off on my horse?”
 “was there ever sich ingratitude?” says the spicy. “i found this year 'oss
 in a pond, i saves him from drowning, i brings him back to his master, and
 he calls me a rascal!”
 the grooms, the gents, the ladies in the balcony, my own servants, all set
 up a roar at this; and so would i, only i was so deucedly ashamed, as not
 to be able to laugh just then.
 and so my first day's hunting ended. tagrag and the rest declared i showed
 great pluck, and wanted me to try again; but “no,” says i, “i have been.”
 i was always fond of billiards: and, in former days, at grogram's in greek
 street, where a few jolly lads of my acquaintance used to meet twice a
 week for a game, and a snug pipe and beer, i was generally voted the first
 man of the club; and could take five from john the marker himself. i had a
 genius, in fact, for the game; and now that i was placed in that station
 of life where i could cultivate my talents, i gave them full play, and
 improved amazingly. i do say that i think myself as good a hand as any
 chap in england.
 the count and his excellency baron von punter were, i can tell you,
 astonished by the smartness of my play: the first two or three rubbers
 punter beat me, but when i came to know his game, i used to knock him all
 to sticks; or, at least, win six games to his four: and such was the
 betting upon me; his excellency losing large sums to the count, who knew
 what play was, and used to back me. i did not play except for shillings,
 so my skill was of no great service to me.
 one day i entered the billiard-room where these three gentlemen were high
 in words. “the thing shall not be done,” i heard captain tagrag say: “i
 won't stand it.”
 “vat, begause you would have de bird all to yourzelf, hey?” said the
 baron.
 “you sall not have a single fezare of him, begar,” said the count: “ve
 vill blow you, m. de taguerague; parole d'honneur, ve vill.”
